
Dorothy U. Seyler
AN ARGUMENT TEXT AND READER
Read, Reason, Write
ELEVENTH EDITION

READ, REASON, WRITE: AN ARGUMENT TEXT AND READER, ELEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2015 by 
McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous 
 editions © 2012, 2010, and 2008. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any 
form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent 
of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or 
transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers out-
side the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4
ISBN: 978-0-07-803621-7
MHID: 0-07-803621-6
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Michael Ryan
Vice President, Content Production & Technology Services: Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: David S. Patterson
Director: Susan Gouijnstook
Brand Manager: Claire Brantley
Executive Director of Development: Lisa Pinto
Director, Content Production: Terri Schiesl
Lead Content Project Manager: Jane Mohr
Buyer: Jennifer Pickel
Cover Designer: Studio Montage, St. Louis, MO.
Cover Image: © Shaun Lowe/Getty Images
Media Project Manager: Jennifer Bartell
Compositor: Laserwords Private Limited
Typeface: 10/12 Palatino
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the 
 copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Seyler, Dorothy U.
 Read, reason, write : an argument text and reader / Dorothy U. Seyler.—Eleventh ed.
  pages cm
 ISBN 978-0-07-803621-7 (acid-free paper) — ISBN 0-07-803621-6 (acid-free paper)
 1. English language—Rhetoric. 2. Persuasion (Rhetoric) 3. College readers. 
4. Report writing. I. Title.
 PE1408.S464 2014
 808’.0427—dc23
                                                                                                                                                           2013040964
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a 
website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-
Hill Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
www.mhhe.com

iii
Brief Contents
 SECTION 1 
CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 1
 Chapter 1 
Writers and Their Sources 2
 Chapter 2 
Responding Critically to Sources 34
SECTION 2  
THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT 69
 Chapter 3 
Understanding the Basics of Argument 70
 Chapter 4 
Writing Effective Arguments 98
 Chapter 5 
Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals 
and Statistics in Argument 120
 Chapter 6 
Learning More about Argument: Induction, 
Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 150
SECTION 3  
STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE 179
 Chapter 7 
Definition Arguments 180
 Chapter 8 
Evaluation Arguments 194
 Chapter 9 
The Position Paper: Claims of Values 209
 Chapter 10 
Arguments about Cause 224
 Chapter 11 
Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 240
SECTION 4  
THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED 
ARGUMENT 261
 Chapter 12 
Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 262
 Chapter 13 
Writing the Researched Essay 280
 Chapter 14 
Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 312
SECTION 5  
A COLLECTION OF READINGS 347
 Chapter 15  
The Media: Image and Reality 349
 Chapter 16 
The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 379
 Chapter 17 
Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 398
 Chapter 18 
Sports Talk—Sports Battles 422
 Chapter 19 
America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 444
 Chapter 20 
The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 463
 Chapter 21 
Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 481
 Chapter 22 
America: Past, Present, Future 512


v
Contents
New to the Eleventh Edition xv
Features of Read, Reason, Write xvi
Let Connect Composition Help Your Students Achieve Their Goals xvii
Let the Customizable Resources of Create Help You to 
Achieve Your Course’s Goals xix
From the Author xx
About the Author xxi
Acknowledgments xxii
 SECTION 1 
CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 1
 Chapter 1 
WRITERS AND THEIR SOURCES 2
Reading, Writing, and the Contexts of Argument 3
Responding to Sources 4
Abraham Lincoln, “The Gettysburg Address” 4
The Response to Content 5
The Analytic Response 5
The Evaluation Response 6
The Research Response 7
Deborah Tannen, “Who Does the Talking Here?” 7
Writing Summaries 10
Guidelines for Writing Summaries 10
Active Reading: Use Your Mind! 13
Guidelines for Active Reading 13
Susan Cain, “The Rise of the New Groupthink” 14
Using Paraphrase 18
Acknowledging Sources Informally 20
Referring to People and Sources 20
Joel Achenbach, “The Future Is Now: It’s Heading Right at Us, 
but We Never See It Coming” 22
Presenting Direct Quotations: A Guide to Form and Style 25
Reasons for Using Quotation Marks 26
A Brief Guide to Quoting 26

vi 
CONTENTS
For Reading and Analysis 28
Alex Knapp, “Five Leadership Lessons from James T. Kirk” 28
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 33
 Chapter 2 
RESPONDING CRITICALLY TO SOURCES 34
Traits of the Critical Reader/Thinker 35
Examining the Rhetorical Context of a Source 35
Who Is the Author? 36
What Type—or Genre—of Source Is It? 36
What Kind of Audience Does the Author Anticipate? 36
What Is the Author’s Primary Purpose? 37
What Are the Author’s Sources of Information? 37
Analyzing the Style of a Source 38
Denotative and Connotative Word Choice 39
Tone 41
Level of Diction 42
Sentence Structure 42
Metaphors 44
Organization and Examples 45
Repetition 45
Hyperbole, Understatement, and Irony 45
Quotation Marks, Italics, and Capital Letters 46
Dave Barry, “Now That It’s All Over, Let’s Eat!” 47
Writing about Style 49
Understanding Purpose and Audience 49
Planning the Essay 49
Drafting the Style Analysis 50
A Checklist for Revision 51
Ellen Goodman, “In Praise of a Snail’s Pace” 51
Student Essay: James Goode, “A Convincing Style” 54
Analyzing Two or More Sources 56
Guidelines for Preparing a Contrast Essay 56
Arthur Bright, “Algerian Hostage Crisis Heightens as Scores Are 
Reported Dead” 58
Jamie Dettmer, “Hostages Reportedly Dead in Algerian Oil 
Field Siege” 59
For Reading and Analysis 61
Firoozeh Dumas, “The ‘F Word’” 61
Alexandra Petri, “Love to Read, Kids? Your Time Is Almost Up” 64
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 67

 
CONTENTS 
vii
 SECTION 2 
THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT 69
 Chapter 3 
UNDERSTANDING THE BASICS OF ARGUMENT 70
Characteristics of Argument 71
Argument Is Conversation with a Goal 71
Argument Takes a Stand on an Arguable Issue 71
Argument Uses Reasons and Evidence 71
Argument Incorporates Values 72
Argument Recognizes the Topic’s Complexity 72
The Shape of Argument: What We Can Learn from Aristotle 72
Ethos (about the Writer/Speaker) 72
Logos (about the Logic of the Argument) 73
Pathos (about Appeals to the Audience) 73
Kairos (about the Occasion or Situation) 74
The Language of Argument 75
Facts 76
Inferences 76
Judgments 77
Sam Wang and Sandra Aamodt, “Your Brain Lies to You” 79
The Shape of Argument: What We Can Learn from Toulmin 81
Claims 83
Grounds (or Data or Evidence) 84
Warrants 85
Backing 85
Qualifiers 86
Rebuttals 87
Using Toulmin’s Terms to Analyze Arguments 87
Greg Lukianoff, “The Threat to Free Speech at Universities” 88
For Analysis and Debate 90
Jeffrey Mateer and Erin Leu, “Cheering Free Speech” 90
William Saletan, “How Can We Ban Insults Against 
Jews but Not Muslims?” 93
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 97
 Chapter 4 
WRITING EFFECTIVE ARGUMENTS 98
Know Your Audience 99
Who Is My Audience? 99
What Will My Audience Know about My Topic? 99
Where Does My Audience Stand on the Issue? 100
How Should I Speak to My Audience? 100

viii 
CONTENTS
Understand Your Writing Purpose 101
What Type (Genre) of Argument Am I Preparing? 102
What Is My Goal? 102
Will the Rogerian or Conciliatory Approach Work for Me? 103
Move from Topic to Claim to Possible Support 103
Selecting a Topic 104
Drafting a Claim 104
Listing Possible Grounds 105
Listing Grounds for the Other Side or Another Perspective 105
Planning Your Approach 106
Draft Your Argument 107
Guidelines for Drafting 108
Revise Your Draft 108
Rewriting 108
Editing 109
A Few Words about Words and Tone 110
Proofreading 111
A Checklist for Revision 111
For Analysis and Debate 112
Darius Rejali, “Five Myths about Torture and Truth” 112
M. Gregg Bloche, “Torture Is Wrong—But It Might Work” 115
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 119
 Chapter 5 
READING, ANALYZING, AND USING VISUALS AND STATISTICS 
IN ARGUMENT 120
Responding to Visual Arguments 121
Guidelines for Reading Photographs 122
Guidelines for Reading Political Cartoons 122
Guidelines for Reading Advertisements 122
Reading Graphics 127
Understanding How Graphics Differ 127
Guidelines for Reading Graphics 128
The Uses of Authority and Statistics 132
Judging Authorities 132
Understanding and Evaluating Statistics 133
Guidelines for Evaluating Statistics 133
Writing the Investigative Argument 135
Gathering and Analyzing Evidence 136
Planning and Drafting the Essay 137
Guidelines for Writing an Investigative Argument 137
Analyzing Evidence: The Key to an Effective Argument 138
Preparing Graphics for Your Essay 138
A Checklist for Revision 139

 
CONTENTS 
ix
Student Essay: Garrett Berger, “Buying Time” 139
For Reading and Analysis 144
Joe Navarro, “Every Body’s Talking” 144
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 149
 Chapter 6 
LEARNING MORE ABOUT ARGUMENT: INDUCTION, 
DEDUCTION, ANALOGY, AND LOGICAL FALLACIES 150
Induction 151
Deduction 152
“The Declaration of Independence” 156
Analogy 160
Logical Fallacies 162
Causes of Illogic 162
Fallacies That Result from Oversimplifying 162
Fallacies That Result from Avoiding the Real Issue 166
Christian Brahmstedt, “Help Those Who Help, Not Hurt, Themselves” 168
For Reading and Analysis 169
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, “Declaration of Sentiments” 169
Neil deGrasse Tyson, “Things People Say” 172
 SECTION 3 
STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE 179
 Chapter 7 
DEFINITION ARGUMENTS 180
Defining as Part of an Argument 181
When Defining Is the Argument 182
Strategies for Developing an Extended Definition 182
Guidelines for Evaluating Definition Arguments 185
Preparing a Definition Argument 185
A Checklist for Revision 186
Student Essay: Laura Mullins, “Paragon or Parasite?” 187
For Analysis and Debate 189
Robin Givhan, “Glamour, That Certain Something” 189
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 193
 Chapter 8 
EVALUATION ARGUMENTS 194
Characteristics of Evaluation Arguments 195
Types of Evaluation Arguments 196
Guidelines for Analyzing an Evaluation Argument 197
Preparing an Evaluation Argument 198
A Checklist for Revision 199
Student Review: Ian Habel, “Winchester’s Alchemy: Two Men 
and a Book” 200

x 
CONTENTS
Evaluating an Argument: The Rebuttal or Refutation Essay 202
Guidelines for Preparing a Refutation or Rebuttal Argument 202
Steven Pinker, “Mind Over Mass Media” 203
For Analysis and Debate 205
Thomas Sowell, “Christmas-Tree Totalitarians” 205
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 208
 Chapter 9 
THE POSITION PAPER: CLAIMS OF VALUES 209
Characteristics of the Position Paper 210
Guidelines for Analyzing a Claim of Value 211
Preparing a Position Paper 211
A Checklist for Revision 213
Student Essay: Chris Brown, “Examining the Issue of Gun Control” 213
David Pogue, “To Track My Thief” 216
Gregory M. Kennedy, SJ, “Trash Talk: Reflections on Our Throwaway 
Society” 219
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 223
 Chapter 10 
ARGUMENTS ABOUT CAUSE 224
Characteristics of Causal Arguments 225
An Example of Causal Complexity: Lincoln’s Election and the Start of the 
Civil War 227
Mill’s Methods for Investigating Causes 228
Guidelines for Analyzing Causal Arguments 229
Preparing a Causal Argument 230
A Checklist for Revision 231
For Analysis and Debate 232
Emily Matchar, “Why Your Office Needs More Bratty Millennials” 232
Caroline Simard, “ ‘Daring to Discuss Women in Science’: A Response to 
John Tierney” 236
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 239
 Chapter 11 
PRESENTING PROPOSALS: THE PROBLEM/SOLUTION 
ARGUMENT 240
Characteristics of Problem/Solution Arguments 241
Guidelines for Analyzing Problem/Solution Arguments 242
Priya Natarajan, “Want More Scientists? Turn Grade Schools into 
Laboratories” 243
Preparing a Problem/Solution Argument 246
A Checklist for Revision 247
For Analysis and Debate 248
Peter Edelman, “Poverty in America: Why Can’t We End It?” 248
Jonathan Swift, “A Modest Proposal” 251
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 259

 
CONTENTS 
xi
 SECTION 4 
THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED 
ARGUMENT 261
 Chapter 12 
LOCATING, EVALUATING, AND PREPARING TO USE 
SOURCES 262
Selecting a Good Topic 263
What Type of Paper Am I Preparing? 263
Who Is My Audience? 263
How Can I Select a Good Topic? 264
What Kinds of Topics Should I Avoid? 265
Writing a Tentative Claim or Research Proposal 265
Preparing a Working Bibliography 266
Basic Form for Books 267
Basic Form for Articles 268
Locating Sources 269
The Book Catalog 269
The Reference Collection 270
Electronic Databases 271
Guidelines for Using Online Databases 272
The Internet 273
Guidelines for Searching the Web 273
Field Research 273
Federal, State, and Local Government Documents 273
Correspondence 274
Interviews 274
Lectures 275
Films, DVDs, Television 275
Surveys, Questionnaires, and Original Research 275
Evaluating Sources, Maintaining Credibility 276
Guidelines for Evaluating Sources 277
Preparing an Annotated Bibliography 278
Student Annotated Bibliography: David Donaldson, “Tell Us What You 
Really Are: The Debate over Labeling Genetically Modified Food” 279
 Chapter 13 
WRITING THE RESEARCHED ESSAY 280
Guidelines for Studying Sources 281
Avoiding Plagiarism 281
What Is Common Knowledge? 283
Using Signal Phrases to Avoid Confusion 283
Guidelines for Appropriately Using Sources 284
Organizing the Paper 287
Drafting the Essay 288
Plan Your Time 288
Handle In-Text Documentation as You Draft 288
Choose an Appropriate Writing Style 289
Write Effective Beginnings 290
Avoid Ineffective Openings 292
Compose Solid, Unified Paragraphs 292

xii 
CONTENTS
Write Effective Conclusions 296
Avoid Ineffective Conclusions 297
Choose an Effective Title 298
Revising the Paper: A Checklist 298
Rewriting 298
Editing 299
Proofreading 300
The Completed Paper 300
Sample Student Essay in MLA Style: David Donaldson, “Tell Us What You 
Really Are: The Debate over Labeling Genetically Modified Food” 300
 Chapter 14 
FORMAL DOCUMENTATION: ML A STYLE, APA STYLE 312
Guidelines for Using Parenthetical Documentation 313
The Simplest Patterns of Parenthetical Documentation 314
Placement of Parenthetical Documentation 315
Parenthetical Citations of Complex Sources 316
Preparing MLA Citations for a Works Cited List 318
Forms for Books: Citing the Complete Book 319
Forms for Books: Citing Part of a Book 322
Forms for Periodicals: Articles in Journals and Magazines Accessed in Print 323
Forms for Periodicals: Articles in Newspapers Accessed in Print 324
Forms for Web Sources 325
Forms for Other Print and Nonprint Sources 327
Author/Year or APA Style 330
APA Style: In-Text Citations 330
APA Style: Preparing a List of References 333
Form for Books 333
Form for Articles 334
Form for Electronic Sources 335
Sample Student Essay in APA Style: Carissa Ervine, “The Relationship Between 
Depression and Marital Status” 337
 SECTION 5 
A COLLECTION OF READINGS 347
 Chapter 15 
THE MEDIA: IMAGE AND REALITY 349
Derrick Speight, “Of Losers and Moles: You Think Reality 
TV Just Writes Itself?” 350
Ann Hornaday, “Zero Dark Thirty and the New Reality 
of Reported Filmmaking” 353
Katherine Ellison, “What’s Up Doc? A Bloody Outrage, That’s What” 358
Student Essay: Sienna Walker, “Big Pun’s Prophesy” 362
Frank Luntz, “Words We Remember” 366
 Chapter 16 
THE INTERNET AND SOCIAL MEDIA: 
THEIR IMPACT ON OUR LIVES 379
Peggy Orenstein, “I Tweet, Therefore I Am” 380
Susan B. Crawford, “The New Digital Divide” 383

 
CONTENTS 
xiii
Daniel M. Wegner, “Do Not Fear the Cybermind” 387
Evgeny Morozov, “The Death of the Cyberflâneur” 390
Lori B. Andrews, “Facebook Is Using You” 394
 Chapter 17 
MARRIAGE AND GENDER ISSUES: THE DEBATES CONTINUE 398
Michael Kinsley, “Abolish Marriage” 399
Andrew Sullivan, “My Big Fat Straight Wedding” 402
Stephanie Coontz, “The Myth of Male Decline” 406
Meg Jay, “The Downside of Living Together” 411
Kathleen Parker, “Un-hitching the Middle Class” 414
Gloria Steinem, “Supremacy Crimes” 417
 Chapter 18 
SPORTS TALK—SPORTS BATTLES 422
John Feinstein, “The Lesson of Penn State” 423
Donald H.Yee, “Show Them the Money” 426
Sally Jenkins, “Rather Than Pay Athletes, Show Them Respect” 431
Megan Greenwell, “Where Have All the Good Coaches Gone?” 434
Jonathan Vaughters, “How To Get Doping Out of Sports” 437
Braden Allenby, “After Armstrong’s Fall, the Case for Performance 
Enhancement” 440
 Chapter 19 
AMERICA’S COLLEGES: ISSUES AND CONCERNS 444
Richard D. Kahlenberg, “5 Myths about Who Gets into College” 446
Naomi Schaefer Riley, “What’s a College Education Really Worth? 
Not Enough” 449
Derek Thompson, “What’s More Expensive Than College? Not Going to 
College” 453
Danielle Allen, “Helping Students Find Their Place in the World” 456
Howard Gardner, “Why Kids Cheat at Harvard” 458
George Will, “The Closed American Mind” 460
 Chapter 20 
THE ENVIRONMENT: HOW DO WE SUSTAIN IT? 463
Michael Novacek, “The Sixth Extinction: It Happened to Him. 
It’s Happening to You.” 465
Daniel T. Willingham, “Trust Me, I’m a Scientist” 468
James R. Lee, “Global Warming Is Just the Tip of the Iceberg” 471
Art Carden, “On Climate Change, Government Is Not the Answer” 474
Kristen Sheeran and Mindy Lubber, “The Cost of Climate Inaction” 478
 Chapter 21 
LAWS AND RIGHTS: GUN CONTROL AND IMMIGRATION 
DEBATES 481
Katha Pollitt, “Gun Control? Dream On” 482
Petula Dvorak, “We Can’t Afford the True Cost of Gun Crime” 485
Jay Dickey and Mark Rosenberg, “ ‘Senseless’ Is Not Studying Gun 
Violence” 488
Amy Chua, “Immigrate, Assimilate” 491

xiv 
CONTENTS
Roberto Suro, “Legal, Illegal” 496
Patricia B. Strait, “When Societies Collide: Part Three: Finding 
the Best Fit Immigration Model” 500
 Chapter 22 
AMERICA: PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE 512
Abraham Lincoln, “Second Inaugural Address” 513
Zainab Chaudary, “Your Most Powerful Currency: Your Vote” 516
Thomas L. Friedman, “Do You Want the Good News First?” 518
Fareed Zakaria, “The Emerging America” 520
Colbert I. King, “We Still Aren’t Good Enough” 522
Kwame Anthony Appiah, “How the Future Will Judge Us” 525
Barack H. Obama, “We Made Ourselves Anew, and Vowed to Move 
Forward Together” 529
 Appendix 
UNDERSTANDING LITERATURE 534
Getting the Facts: Active Reading, Summary, and Paraphrase 535
Paul Lawrence Dunbar, “Promise” 535
Kate Chopin, “The Story of an Hour” 536
Summary of “The Story of an Hour” 538
William Shakespeare, “Sonnet 116” 539
Paraphrase of “Sonnet 116” 539
Seeing Connections: Analysis 541
Analysis of Narrative Structure 541
Analysis of Character 542
Analysis of Elements of Style and Tone 543
Drawing Conclusions: Interpretation 543
Writing about Literature 544
Andrew Marvell, “To His Coy Mistress” 545
Christopher Marlowe, “The Passionate Shepherd to His Love” 546
Sir Walter Raleigh, “The Nymph’s Reply to the Shepherd” 547
A. E. Housman, “Is My Team Ploughing” 548
Amy Lowell, “Taxi” 550
Ursula K. Le Guin, “The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas“ 550
Susan Glaspell, “Trifles” 556
Sample Student Literary Analysis: Alan Peterson, “Faulkner’s Realistic 
Initiation Theme” 573
Suggestions for Discussion and Writing 578
Photo Credits 579
Index 580

xv
New to the 
Eleventh Edition 
This new edition continues the key features of previous editions while adding 
new material that will make it even more helpful to both students and instruc-
tors. Significant changes include the following.
 • New essays. Both the student essay in MLA style and the student essay 
in APA are new. The first is longer and focuses on the interesting topic of 
genetically modified foods; the second, written for a sociology course, is 
presented in full.
 • New coverage. There is new material on paraphrasing in Chapter 1 and 
new material on preparing an annotated bibliography in Chapter 12.
 • More visuals. There are more visuals throughout the text, consistent with 
the increased use of visuals in all our media today.
 • Streamlined content. The new edition is more streamlined, without any 
loss of significant coverage or readings.
 • New readings. With thirty readings in the instructional chapters and forty-
six readings in the anthology chapters, this edition has a total of seventy-six 
readings. In addition there are now nine student essays and the literature 
in the Appendix. Fifty-one of the readings are new, and some readings from 
the tenth edition are in new places, paired with new readings, providing a 
fresh perspective.
 • Enhanced coverage of documentation. Two of the new readings are rather 
lengthy studies, complete with documentation, offering students further 
examples of documentation, supporting the four student essays that con-
tain documentation. 
 • Focus on current issues that are relevant to students. Of the eight chapters 
in the anthology section, all have new readings, and most have a new focus. 
For example, the chapter on education in this edition concentrates entirely 
on issues relating to colleges, issues of cost and value to students as well 
as the purpose of higher education. The sports chapter examines the Penn 
State scandal and doping in sports, especially in cycling. The final chapter 
is still about America, this time looking to the future through the prism of 
past and present problems and successes.

Features of 
Read, Reason, Write
These are among the features that have made Read, Reason, Write a best-selling 
text for so many editions.
 • An emphasis on good reading skills for effective arguing and writing.
 • Instruction, models, and practice in understanding reading context and 
analyzing elements of style.
 • Instruction, models, and practice in writing clear, accurate summaries.
 • Focus on argument as contextual: written (or spoken) to a specific audience 
with the expectation of counterarguments.
 • Explanations and models of various types of arguments that bridge the gap 
between an understanding of logical structures and the ways we actually 
write arguments.
 • Presentation of Aristotelian, Toulmin, and Rogerian models of argument as 
useful guides to analyzing the arguments of others and organizing one’s 
own arguments. 
 • In-depth coverage of induction, deduction, analogy, and logical fallacies.
 • Guidelines and revision boxes throughout the text that provide an easy 
 reference for students.
 • Instruction, models, and practice in finding and evaluating sources and in 
composing and documenting researched papers.
 • A rich collection of readings, both timely and classic, that provides  examples 
of the varied uses of language and strategies for argument.
 • A brief but comprehensive introduction to reading and analyzing  literature, 
found in the Appendix.
xvi

xvii
Let Connect 
Composition Help 
Your Students Achieve 
Their Goals
McGraw-Hill’s solutions are proven to improve student performance. Powered 
by a four-year student subscription to Connect Composition Plus Essentials 3.0, 
Read, Reason, Write offers LearnSmart Achieve, a groundbreaking adaptive learn-
ing resource that individualizes writing instruction and helps improve student 
writing.
LearnSmart Achieve combines a continuously adaptive learning plan with 
learning resources that focus students on building proficiency in the language 
and critical processes of composition. Learning resources include contextual-
ized grammar and writing lessons, videos, animations, and interactive exer-
cises. Students are also provided with immediate feedback on their work and 
progress. A built-in time-management tool keeps students on track to ensure 
they achieve their course goals.
LearnSmart Achieve represents the goals of individual instructors and writ-
ing programs and provides valuable reports related to progress, achievement, 
and students who may be at risk. With LearnSmart Achieve, instructors can 
have the confidence of knowing—and the data that demonstrates—that their 
students, however diverse, are moving toward their highest course expecta-
tions: better prepared, confident thinkers and writers with transferable skills. 
See the next page for more details on what you will find in LearnSmart Achieve.
McGraw-Hill’s Digital Success Academy offers a wealth of online 
training resources and course creation tips to help get you started. Go to 
connectsuccess academy.com. 

xviii 
UNIT
TOPIC
THE WRITING 
PROCESS
The Writing Process
Generating Ideas
Planning and Organizing
Writing a Rough Draft
Revising
Proofreading, Formatting, and 
Producing Texts
CRITICAL 
READING
Reading to Understand Literal Meaning
Evaluating Truth and Accuracy in a Text
Evaluating the Effectiveness and 
Appropriateness of a Text
THE RESEARCH 
PROCESS
Developing and Implementing a 
Research Plan 
Evaluating Information and Sources
Integrating Source Material into 
a Text
Using Information Ethically 
and Legally
REASONING 
AND ARGUMENT
Developing an Effective Thesis or Claim
Using Evidence and Reasoning to 
Support a Thesis or Claim
Using Ethos (Ethics) to Persuade 
Readers
Using Pathos (Emotion) to Persuade 
Readers
Using Logos (Logic) to Persuade 
Readers
MULTILINGUAL 
WRITERS
Helping Verbs, Gerunds and Infinitives, 
and Phrasal Verbs
Nouns, Verbs, and Objects
Articles
Count and Noncount Nouns
Sentence Structure and Word Order
Subject-Verb Agreement
Participles and Adverb Placement
GRAMMAR 
AND COMMON 
SENTENCE 
PROBLEMS
Parts of Speech 
Phrases and Clauses 
Sentence Types 
Fused (Run-on) Sentences 
Comma Splices 
Sentence Fragments 
Pronouns
Pronoun-Antecedent Agreement 
Pronoun Reference 
Subject-Verb Agreement 
Verbs and Verbals 
Adjectives and Adverbs 
Dangling and Misplaced Modifiers 
Mixed Constructions 
Verb Tense and Voice Shifts
PUNCTUATION 
AND 
MECHANICS
Commas 
Semicolons 
Colons 
End Punctuation 
Apostrophes 
Quotation Marks 
Dashes
Parentheses 
Hyphens 
Abbreviations 
Capitalization 
Italics 
Numbers 
Spelling
STYLE AND 
WORD CHOICE
Wordiness 
Eliminating Redundancies 
Sentence Variety 
Coordination and Subordination
Faulty Comparisons 
Word Choice
Clichés, Slang, and Jargon
Parallelism
LearnSmart Achieve can be assigned by units and/or topics.
LearnSmart Achieve provides instruction and practice for your students in the following areas.

xix
Let the Customizable 
Resources of Create 
Help You to Achieve Your 
Course’s Goals
Your courses evolve over time—shouldn’t your course material evolve as well? 
With McGraw-Hill CREATE, you can easily arrange and customize material 
from a variety of sources, including your own. You can choose your format 
(print or electronic) and what you want from:
 • Chapters of Read, Reason, Write—choose only those chapters that you cover.
 • A range of additional selections from other McGraw-Hill collections 
such as The Ideal Reader (800 readings by author, genre, mode, theme, and 
 discipline) and many more. 
 • Your own resources, such as syllabi, institutional information, study guides, 
assignments, diagrams, artwork, student writing, art, photos, and more.
Go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.com and register today.

From the Author
I have written in previous prefaces to Read, Reason, Write that being asked 
to prepare a new edition is much like being asked back to a friend’s home. 
Although you count on it, you are still delighted when the invitation comes. 
I am happy that the tenth edition kept old friends and made new ones as 
well and that once again I am writing a preface, this time to the eleventh edi-
tion. Read, Reason, Write is now almost 30 years old! Over all of these years, 
the text has grown in size—most books have—but also in stature within the 
teaching community and in its value to students. Of course, even though 
I have retired from full-time teaching, like fine wine neither this text nor I am 
getting older—only better.
Although some important new material strengthens the eleventh edition, 
the essential character of Read, Reason, Write remains the same. This text still 
unites instruction in critical reading and analysis, argument, and research 
strategies with a rich collection of readings that provide both practice for these 
skills and new ideas and insights for readers. A key purpose of Read, Reason, 
Write remains the same: to help students develop into better writers of the 
kinds of papers they are most often required to write, both in college and in the 
workplace, that is, summaries, analyses, reports, arguments, and documented 
essays. To fulfill this key purpose, the text must do more than offer instruction 
and opportunities for practice; it must also show students how these skills con-
nect in important ways. Through all of its years, this text has been committed 
to showing students how reading, analytic, argumentative, and research skills 
are interrelated and how these skills combine to develop each student’s critical 
thinking ability.
xx

xxi
Dorothy Seyler is Professor Emerita of English at Northern Virginia Commu-
nity College. A Phi Beta Kappa  graduate of the College of William and Mary, 
Dr. Seyler holds advanced degrees from Columbia University and the State 
University of New York at Albany. She taught at Ohio State University, the Uni-
versity of Kentucky, and Nassau Community College before moving with her 
family to Northern Virginia. 
She is the author of Introduction to Literature (second edition), Doing 
Research (second edition), The Reading Context and Steps to College Reading (both 
in their third editions), and Patterns of Reflection (seventh edition). In 2007 
Dr. Seyler was elected to membership in the Cosmos Club in Washington, DC for 
“excellence in education.”
Professor Seyler has published articles in professional  journals and popular 
magazines. She is currently working on a narrative nonfiction book about early-
nineteenth-century explorer William John Bankes. She enjoys tennis and golf, 
traveling, and writing about both sports and travel.
About the Author

Acknowledgments
No book of value is written alone. I am pleased to acknowledge the contribu-
tions of others in shaping this text. My thanks are due—as always—to the 
library staff at the Annandale Campus of Northern Virginia Community Col-
lege who over the years helped me find needed information. I would also like 
to thank all of the students whose essays grace this text. They should be proud 
of the skill and effort they put into their writing. And I am indebted to Erik 
Neilson of the University of Richmond and Michael Hughes of Virginia Tech 
University for providing me with the student essays from their colleges, giv-
ing me a nice “stack” from which to choose the new essays for this edition. I 
appreciate the input of many reviewers over the years.
My former editor Steve Pensinger needs to be remembered for steering me 
through four editions. I am also grateful to Tim Julet and Alexis Walker for 
guidance through the fifth edition and to Chris Narozny, developmental editor 
of the sixth edition. My hat’s off to Lisa Moore, executive editor for the sixth 
and seventh editions; to Christopher Bennem, sponsoring editor for the eighth, 
ninth, and tenth editions. Last, but not least, my thanks go to past developmen-
tal editors Joshua Feldman, Phil Butcher, Janice Wiggins-Clarke, and to my cur-
rent developmental editor Susan  Messer. I have been blessed with a chorus of 
voices enriching this text through my wonderful journey with this book: May 
you all live long and prosper!
I’ll close by once again dedicating Read, Reason, Write to my daughter Ruth 
who, in spite of her own career and interests, continues to give generously of 
her time, reading possible essays for each new edition and listening patiently to 
my endless debates about changes. And for all students who use my text: May 
you understand that it is the liberal education that makes continued growth of 
the human spirit both possible and pleasurable.
Dorothy U. Seyler
Professor Emerita
Northern Virginia Community College
xxii

 Critical Reading 
and Analysis 
1 
 SECTION

 READ: What is the situation in the photo? Who are the two figures, where 
are they, and how do they differ? 
 REASON: What ideas are suggested by the photo? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE: Why might this visual have been chosen for Chapter 1? 
 Writers and Their Sources 
 CHAPTER 1 

3
 “A
 re you happy with your new car?” Oscar asks. 
 “Oh, yes, I love my new car,” Rachel responds. 
 “Why?” queries Oscar. 
 “Oh, it’s just great—and dad paid for most of it,” Rachel exclaims. 
 “So you like it because it was cheap,” Oscar says. “But, wasn’t your father 
going to pay for whatever car you chose?” 
 “Well, yes—within reason.” 
 “Then why did you choose the Corolla? Why is it so great?” 
 Rachel ponders a moment and then replies: “It’s small enough for me to 
feel comfortable driving it, but not so small that I would be frightened by 
trucks. It gets good mileage, and Toyota cars have a good reputation.” 
 “Hmm. Maybe I should think about a Corolla. Then again, I wouldn’t part 
with my Miata!” Oscar proclaims. 
 A simple conversation, right? In fact, this dialogue represents an  argument. 
You may not recognize it as a “typical” argument. After all, there is no real dis-
pute between Oscar and Rachel—no yelling, no hurt feelings. But in its most 
basic form, an argument is a  claim (Rachel’s car is great) supported by  reasons (the 
car’s size, mileage, and brand). Similar arguments could be made in favor of this 
car in other contexts. For instance, Rachel might have seen (and been persuaded 
by) a television or online Toyota advertisement, or she might have read an article 
making similar claims in a magazine such as  Consumer Reports. In turn, she might 
decide to develop her argument into an essay or speech for one of her courses. 
 READING, WRITING, AND THE 
CONTEXTS OF ARGUMENT 
 Arguments, it seems, are everywhere. Well, what about this textbook, you counter. 
Its purpose is to inform, not to present an argument. True—to a degree. But text-
book authors also make choices about what is important to include and how stu-
dents should learn the material. Even writing primarily designed to inform says to 
readers: Do it my way! Well, what about novels, you “argue.” Surely they are not 
arguments. A good point—to a degree. The ideas about human life and experience 
we find in novels are more subtle, more indirect, than the points we meet head-on 
in many arguments. Still, expressive writing presents ideas, ways of seeing the 
world. It seems that arguments can be simple or profound, clearly stated or 
implied. And we can find them in much—if not most—of our uses of language. 
 You can accept this larger scope of argument and still expect that in your 
course on argument and critical thinking you probably will not be asked to 
write a textbook or a novel. You might, though, be asked to write a summary or 
a style analysis, so you should think about how those tasks might connect to 
the world of argument. Count on this: You will be asked to write! Why work on 
your writing skills? Here are good answers to this question:
 • Communication skills are the single most important skill sought by 
employers. 
 • The better writer you become, the better reader you will be. 

4 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 • The more confident a writer you become, the more efficiently you will 
 handle written assignments in all your courses. 
 • The more you write, the more you learn about who you are and what 
really matters to you.  
 You are about to face a variety of writing assignments. Always think about 
what role each assignment asks of you. Are you a student demonstrating 
knowledge? A citizen arguing for tougher drunk-driving laws? A scholar pre-
senting the results of research? A friend having a conversation about a new car? 
Any writer—including you—will take on different roles, writing for different 
audiences, using different strategies to reach each audience. There are many 
kinds of argument and many ways to be successful—or unsuccessful—in pre-
paring them. Your argument course will be challenging. This text will help you 
meet that challenge.  
 RESPONDING TO SOURCES 
 If this is a text about  writing arguments, why does it contain so many readings? 
(You noticed!) There are good reasons for the readings you find here:
 • College and the workplace demand that you learn complex information 
through reading. This text will give you lots of practice. 
 • You need to read to develop your critical thinking skills. 
 • Your reading will often serve as a basis for writing. In a course on argu-
ment, the focus of attention shifts from you to your subject, a subject  others 
have debated before you. You will need to understand the issue, think 
carefully about the views of others, and only then join in the conversation. 
 To understand how critical thinkers may respond to sources, let’s examine 
“The Gettysburg Address,” Abraham Lincoln’s famous speech dedicating the 
Gettysburg Civil War battlefield. We can use this document to see the various 
ways writers respond—in writing—to the writing of others. 
 THE GETTYSBURG ADDRESS  
 ABRAHAM   LINCOLN 
 Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a 
new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men 
are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether 
that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. 
We are met on a great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a 
portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives 
that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do 
this. But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate—we cannot consecrate—we 
cannot hallow—this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled 
here have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or to detract. 

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
5
The world will little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can never 
forget what they did here. It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to 
the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly 
advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining 
before us—that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that 
cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion; that we here highly 
resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, 
shall have a new birth of freedom; and that government of the people, by the 
people, for the people shall not perish from the earth.  
 What Does It Say?  
 THE RESPONSE TO CONTENT 
 Instructors often ask students to  summarize their reading of a complex chapter, 
a supplementary text, or a series of journal articles on library reserve. Frequently, 
book report assignments specify that summary and evaluation be combined. 
Your purpose in writing a summary is to show your understanding of the 
work’s main ideas and of the relationships among those ideas. If you can put 
what you have read into your own words and focus on the text’s chief points, 
then you have command of that material. Here is a sample restatement of 
Lincoln’s “Address”: 
 Our nation was initially built on a belief in liberty and equality, but its future 
is now being tested by civil war. It is appropriate for us to dedicate this battle-
field, but those who fought here have dedicated it better than we. We should 
dedicate ourselves to continue the fight to maintain this nation and its princi-
ples of government.  
 Sometimes it is easier to recite or quote famous or difficult works than to state, 
more simply and in your own words, what has been written. The ability to 
summarize reflects strong writing skills. For more coverage of writing summa-
ries, see pages 10–13. (For coverage of paraphrasing, a task similar to summary, 
see pp. 18–20.)  
 How Is It Written? 
How Does It Compare 
with Another Work?  
 THE ANALYTIC RESPONSE 
 Summary requirements are often combined with analysis or evaluation, as in a 
book report. Most of the time you will be expected to  do something with what 
you have read, and to summarize will be insufficient. Frequently you will be 
asked to analyze a work—that is, to explain the writer’s choice of style (or the 
work’s larger rhetorical context). This means examining sentence patterns, 
organization, metaphors, and other techniques selected by the writer to convey 
attitude and give force to ideas. Developing your skills in analysis will make 
you both a better reader and a better writer. 

6 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 Many writers have examined Lincoln’s word choice, sentence structure, 
and choice of metaphors to make clear the sources of power in this speech.  * 
Analyzing Lincoln’s style, you might examine, among other elements, his 
 effective use of  tricolon: the threefold repetition of a grammatical structure, with 
the three points placed in ascending order of significance.
 Lincoln uses two effective tricolons in his brief address. The first focuses on 
the occasion for his speech, the dedication of the battlefield: “we cannot 
 dedicate—we cannot consecrate—we cannot hallow. . . .” The best that the 
 living can do is formally dedicate; only those who died there for the principle 
of liberty are capable of making the battlefield “hallow.” The second tricolon 
presents Lincoln’s concept of democratic government, a government “of the 
people, by the people, for the people.” The purpose of government—“for the 
people”—resides in the position of greatest significance.  
 A second type of analysis, a comparison of styles of two writers, is a fre-
quent variation of the analytic assignment. By focusing on similarities and dif-
ferences in writing styles, you can see more clearly the role of choice in writing 
and may also examine the issue of the degree to which differences in purpose 
affect style. One student, for example, produced a thoughtful and interesting 
study of Lincoln’s style in contrast to that of Martin Luther King Jr.: 
 Although Lincoln’s sentence structure is tighter than King’s and King likes the 
rhythms created by repetition, both men reflect their familiarity with the King 
James Bible in their use of its cadences and expressions. Instead of saying 
eighty-seven years ago, Lincoln, seeking solemnity, selects the biblical 
 expression “Fourscore and seven years ago.” Similarly, King borrows from the 
Bible and echoes Lincoln when he writes “Five score years ago.”  
 Is It Logical? 
Is It Adequately Developed? 
Does It Achieve Its Purpose?  
 THE EVALUATION RESPONSE 
 Even when the stated purpose of an essay is “pure” analysis, the analysis 
implies a judgment. We analyze Lincoln’s style because we recognize that “The 
Gettysburg Address” is a great piece of writing and we want to see how it 
achieves its power. On other occasions, evaluation is the stated purpose for 
close reading and analysis. The columnist who challenges a previously pub-
lished editorial has analyzed the editorial and found it flawed. The columnist 
may fault the editor’s logic or lack of adequate or relevant support for the edi-
torial’s main idea. In each case the columnist makes a negative evaluation of 
the editorial, but that judgment is an informed one based on the columnist’s 
knowledge of language and the principles of good argument. 
 Part of the ability to judge wisely lies in recognizing each writer’s (or 
speaker’s) purpose, audience, and occasion. It would be inappropriate to assert 
* See, for example, Gilbert Highet’s essay, “The Gettysburg Address,” in  The Clerk of Oxenford: 
Essays on Literature and Life (New York: Oxford UP, 1954), to which I am indebted in the following 
analysis.

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
7
that Lincoln’s address is weakened by its lack of facts about the battle. The 
 historian’s purpose is to record the number killed or to analyze the generals’ 
military tactics. Lincoln’s purpose was different. 
 As Lincoln reflected upon this young country’s being torn apart by civil strife, 
he saw the dedication of the Gettysburg battlefield as an opportunity to chal-
lenge the country to fight for its survival and the principles upon which it was 
founded. The result was a brief but moving speech that appropriately exam-
ines the connection between the life and death of soldiers and the birth and 
survival of a nation.  
 These sentences begin an analysis of Lincoln’s train of thought and use of meta-
phors. The writer shows an understanding of Lincoln’s purpose and the con-
text in which he spoke. 
 How Does It Help Me to Understand 
Other Works, Ideas, Events?  
 THE RESEARCH RESPONSE 
 Frequently you will read not to analyze or evaluate but rather to use the source 
as part of learning about a particular subject. Lincoln’s address is significant for 
the Civil War historian both as an event of that war and as an influence on our 
thinking about that war. “The Gettysburg Address” is also vital to the biogra-
pher’s study of Lincoln’s life or to the literary critic’s study either of famous 
speeches or of the Bible’s influence on English writing styles. Thus Lincoln’s 
brief speech is a valuable source for students in a variety of disciplines. It 
becomes part of their research process. Able researchers study it carefully, ana-
lyze it thoroughly, place it in its proper historical, literary, and personal  contexts, 
and use it to develop their own arguments. 
 To practice reading and responding to sources, study the following article 
by Deborah Tannen. The exercises that follow will check your reading skills 
and your understanding of the various responses to reading just discussed. Use 
the prereading questions to become engaged with Tannen’s essay. 
 WHO DOES THE TALKING HERE?   
 DEBORAH   TANNEN  
 Professor of linguistics at Georgetown University, Deborah Tannen writes popular 
books on the uses of language by “ordinary” people. Among her many books are 
 Talking from 9 to 5  (1994) and  I Only Say This Because I Love You (2004). Here she 
responds to the debate over who talks more, men or women.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  What is the occasion for Tannen’s article—what is she 
responding to? Who does most of the talking in your family—and are you okay 
with the answer? 
 It’s no surprise that a one-page article published this month in the journal 
 Science inspired innumerable newspaper columns and articles. The study, by 
Matthias Mehl and four colleagues, claims to lay to rest, once and for all, the 
1

Who is the most passive figure in this group?
8 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
stereotype that women talk more than men, by proving—scientifically—that 
women and men talk equally. 
 The notion that women talk more was reinforced last year when Louann 
Brizendine’s “The Female Brain” cited the finding that women utter, on aver-
age, 20,000 words a day, men 7,000. (Brizendine later disavowed the statistic, 
as there was no study to back it up.) Mehl and his colleagues outfitted 396 
 college students with devices that recorded their speech. The female subjects 
spoke an average of 16,215 words a day, the men 15,669. The difference is 
insignificant. Case closed. 
 Or is it? Can we learn who talks more by counting words? No, according 
to a forthcoming article surveying 70 studies of gender differences in talk-
ativeness. (Imagine—70 studies published in scientific journals, and we’re still 
asking the question.) In their survey, Campbell Leaper and Melanie Ayres 
found that counting words yielded no consistent differences, though number 
of words per speaking turn did. (Men, on average, used more.) 
 This doesn’t surprise me. In my own research on gender and language, I 
quickly surmised that to understand who talks more, you have to ask: What’s 
the situation? What are the speakers using words for? 
 The following experience conveys the importance of situation. I was 
addressing a small group in a suburban Virginia living room. One man stood 
out because he talked a lot, 
while his wife, who was sitting 
beside him, said nothing at all. 
I described to the group a com-
plaint common among women 
about men they live with: At 
the end of a day she tells him 
what 
happened, 
what 
she 
thought and how she felt about 
it. Then she asks, “How was 
your 
day?”—and 
is 
disap-
pointed 
when 
he 
replies, 
“Fine,” “Nothing much” or 
“Same old rat race.” 
 The loquacious man spoke 
up. “You’re right,” he said. 
Pointing to his wife, he added, 
“She’s the talker in our family.” 
Everyone laughed. But he 
explained, “It’s true. When we 
come home, she does all the 
talking. If she didn’t, we’d 
spend the evening in silence.” 
 The “how was your day?” 
conversation typifies the kind 
of talk women tend to do more 
2
3
4
5
6
7

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
9
 QUESTIONS FOR READING AND REASONING 
 1. 
What was the conclusion of the researchers who presented their study in 
 Science ? 
 2. 
Why are their results not telling the whole story, according to Tannen? Instead 
of counting words, what should we study?  
of: spoken to intimates and focusing on  personal experience, your own or 
 others’. I call this “rapport-talk.” It contrasts with “report-talk”—giving or 
exchanging information about impersonal  topics, which men tend to do more. 
 Studies that find men talking more are usually carried out in formal experi-
ments or public contexts such as meetings. For example, Marjorie Swacker 
observed an academic conference where women presented 40 percent of 
the papers and were 42 percent of the audience but asked only 27 percent of 
the questions; their questions were, on average, also shorter by half than the 
men’s questions. And David and Myra Sadker showed that boys talk more in 
mixed-sex classrooms—a context common among college students, a factor 
skewing the results of Mehl’s new study. 
 Many men’s comfort with “public talking” explains why a man who tells his 
wife he has nothing to report about his day might later find a funny story to tell 
at dinner with two other couples (leaving his wife wondering, “Why didn’t he 
tell me first?”). 
 In addition to situation, you have to consider what speakers are doing with 
words. Campbell and Ayres note that many studies find women doing more 
“affiliative speech” such as showing support, agreeing or acknowledging 
 others’ comments. Drawing on studies of children at play as well as my own 
research of adults talking, I often put it this way: For women and girls, talk is 
the glue that holds a relationship together. Their best friend is the one they tell 
everything to. Spending an evening at home with a spouse is when this kind of 
talk comes into its own. Since this situation is uncommon among college stu-
dents, it’s another factor skewing the new study’s results. 
 Women’s rapport-talk probably explains why many people think women 
talk more. A man wants to read the paper, his wife wants to talk; his girlfriend 
or sister spends hours on the phone with her friend or her mother. He 
 concludes: Women talk more. 
 Yet Leaper and Ayres observed an overall pattern of men speaking more. 
That’s a conclusion women often come to when men hold forth at meetings, in 
social groups or when delivering one-on-one lectures. All of us—women and 
men—tend to notice others talking more in situations where we talk less. 
 Counting may be a start—or a stop along the way—to understanding gen-
der differences. But it’s understanding when we tend to talk and what we’re 
doing with words that yields insights we can count on.
 Source: Washington Post, July 15, 2007, copyright Deborah Tannen. Reprinted by  permission.
8
9
10
11
12
13

10 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 3. 
What two kinds of talk does Tannen label? Which gender does the most of each 
type of talking?  
 4. 
What is Tannen’s main idea or thesis? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 5. 
How do the details—and the style—in the opening and concluding paragraphs 
contribute to the author’s point? Write a paragraph answer to this question. 
Then consider: Which one of the different responses to reading does your para-
graph illustrate?  
 6. 
Do you agree with Tannen that understanding how words are used must be 
part of any study of men and women talking? If so, why? If not, how would 
you respond to her argument? 
 7. 
“The Gettysburg Address” is a valuable document for several kinds of research 
projects. For what kinds of research would Tannen’s essay be useful? List 
 several possibilities and be prepared to discuss your list with classmates. 
 WRITING SUMMARIES 
 Preparing a good summary is not easy.  A summary briefly restates, in your own 
words, the main points of a work in a way that does not misrepresent or distort the 
original. A good summary shows your grasp of main ideas and your ability to 
express them clearly. You need to condense the original while giving all key 
ideas appropriate attention. As a student you may be assigned a summary to
 • show that you have read and understood assigned works; 
 • complete a test question; 
 • have a record of what you have read for future study or to prepare for class 
discussion; or 
 • explain the main ideas in a work that you will also examine in some other 
way, such as in a book review.  
When assigned a summary, pay careful attention to word choice. Avoid judg-
ment words, such as “Brown then proceeds to develop the  silly idea that. . . .” 
Follow these guidelines for writing good summaries. 
GUIDELINES for
 1.  Write in a direct, objective style, using your own words.  Use few, if 
any, direct quotations, probably none in a one-paragraph summary.  
 2.  Begin with a reference to the writer (full name) and the title of the 
work, and then state the writer’s thesis. (You may also want to include 
where and when the work was published.)  
 Writing Summaries 

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
11
 3.  Complete the summary by providing other key ideas.  Show the reader 
how the main ideas connect and relate to one another.  
 4.  Do not include specific examples, illustrations, or background 
sections.  
 5.  Combine main ideas into fewer sentences than were used in the 
original.  
 6.  Keep the parts of your summary in the same balance as you find in 
the original.  If the author devotes about 30 percent of the essay to one 
idea, that idea should get about 30 percent of the space in your 
summary. 
 7.  Select precise, accurate verbs to show the author’s relationship to 
ideas.  Write Jones  argues, Jones  asserts,  Jones  believes. Do not use 
vague verbs that provide only a list of disconnected ideas. Do  not write 
Jones  talks about,  Jones  goes on to say.  
 8.  Do not make any judgments about the writer’s style or ideas.  Do  not 
include your personal reaction to the work. 
 EXERCISE: Summary 
 With these guidelines in mind, read the following two summaries of Deborah Tannen’s 
“Who Does the Talking Here?” (see pp. 8–9). Then answer the question: What is flawed 
or weak about each summary? To aid your analysis, (1) underline or highlight all 
words or phrases that are inappropriate in each summary, and (2) put the number of 
the guideline next to any passage that does not adhere to that guideline. 
 SUMMARY 1  
 I really thought that Deborah Tannen’s essay contained some interesting ideas 
about how men and women talk. Tannen mentioned a study in which men and 
women used almost the same number of words. She goes on to talk about a 
man who talked a lot at a meeting in Virginia. Tannen also says that women talk 
more to make others feel good. I’m a man, and I don’t like to make small talk.  
 SUMMARY 2  
 In Deborah Tannen’s “Who Does the Talking Here?” (published July 15, 2007), 
she talks about studies to test who talks more—men or women. Some peo-
ple think the case is closed—they both talk about the same number of words. 
Tannen goes on to say that she thinks people use words differently. Men talk a 
lot at events; they use “report-talk.” Women use “rapport-talk” to strengthen 
relationships; their language is a glue to maintain relationships. So just count-
ing words does not work. You have to know why someone is speaking.  
 Although we can agree that the writers of these summaries have read Tannen’s essay, 
we can also find weaknesses in each summary. Certainly the second summary is more 
■ ■

12 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
helpful than the first, but it can be strengthened by eliminating some details, 
 combining some ideas, and putting more focus on Tannen’s main idea. Here is a 
much-improved version: 
 REVISED SUMMARY  
 In Deborah Tannen’s essay “Who Does the Talking Here?” (published July 15, 
2007), Tannen asserts that recent studies to determine if men or women do 
the most talking are not helpful in answering that question. These studies 
focus on just counting the words that men and women use. Tannen argues 
that the only useful study of this issue is one that examines how each gender 
uses words and in which situations each gender does the most talking. She 
explains that men tend to use “report-talk” whereas women tend to use 
“rapport-talk.” That is, men will do much of the talking in meetings when they 
have something to report. Women, on the other hand, will do more of the 
talking when they are seeking to connect in a relationship, to make people 
feel good. So, if we want to really understand the differences, we need to stop 
counting words and listen to what each gender is actually doing with the 
words that are spoken.  
 At times you may need to write a summary of a page or two rather than one para-
graph. Frequently, long reports are preceded by a one-page summary. A longer sum-
mary may become part of an article-length review of an important book. Or instructors 
may want a longer summary of a lengthy or complicated article or text chapter. The 
following is an example of a summary of a lengthy article on cardiovascular health. 
 SAMPLE LONGER SUMMARY  
 In her article “The Good Heart,” Anne Underwood ( Newsweek, October 3, 
2005) explores recent studies regarding heart disease that, in various ways, 
reveal the important role that one’s attitudes have on physical health, 
 especially the health of the heart. She begins with the results of a study 
 published in the  New England Journal of Medicine that examined the dramatic 
increase in cardiovascular deaths after an earthquake in Los Angeles in 1994. 
People who were not hurt by the quake died as a result of the fear and 
stress brought on by the event.  As Underwood explains in detail, however, 
studies continue to show that psychological and social factors affect coronar-
ies even more than sudden shocks such as earthquakes. For example, accord-
ing to Dr. Michael Frenneaux, depression “at least doubles an otherwise 
healthy person’s  heart-attack risk.” A Duke University study showed that high 
levels of hostility also raised the risk of death by heart disease.  Another 
study showed that childhood traumas can increase heart disease risks by 
30 to 70 percent.  Adults currently living under work and family stress also 
increase their risks significantly. 
 How do attitudes make a difference? A number of studies demonstrate 
that negative attitudes, anger, and hostile feelings directly affect the chemistry 
of the body in ways that damage blood vessels. They also can raise blood 
 pressure. Less directly, people with these attitudes and under stress often eat 

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
13
more, exercise less, and are more likely to smoke. These behaviors add to 
one’s risk. Some physicians are seeking to use this information to increase 
the longevity of heart patients. They are advising weight loss and exercise, 
yoga and therapy, recognizing, as Underwood concludes, that “the heart does 
not beat in isolation, nor does the mind brood alone.”  
 Observe the differences between the longer summary of Anne Underwood’s article 
and the paragraph summary of Deborah Tannen’s essay:
 • 
Some key ideas or terms may be presented in direct quotation. 
 • 
Results of studies may be given in some detail. 
 • 
Appropriate transitional and connecting words are used to show how the parts 
of the summary connect.  
 • 
The author’s name is often repeated to keep the reader’s attention on the article 
summarized, not on the author of the summary. 
■ ■
 ACTIVE READING: USE YOUR MIND! 
 Reading is not about looking at black marks on a page—or turning the pages as 
quickly as we can. Reading means constructing meaning, getting a message. 
We read with our brains, not our eyes and hands! This concept is often under-
scored by the term  active reading. To help you always achieve active reading, not 
passive page turning, follow these guidelines. 
 1.  Understand your purpose in reading. Do not just start turning pages to 
complete an assignment. Think first about your purpose. Are you reading 
for knowledge on which you will be tested? Focus on your purpose as you 
read, asking yourself, “What do I need to learn from this work?”  
 2.  Reflect on the title before reading further.  Titles are the first words 
writers give us. Take time to look for clues in a title that may reveal the 
work’s subject and perhaps the writer’s approach or attitude as well. 
Henry Fairlie’s title “The Idiocy of Urban Life,” for example, tells you both 
Fairlie’s subject (urban or city living) and his position (urban living is 
idiotic).  
 3.  Become part of the writer’s audience.  Not all writers have you and me 
in mind when they write. As an active reader, you need to “join” a writer’s 
audience by learning about the writer, about the time in which the piece 
was written, and about the writer’s expected audience. For readings in 
this text you are aided by introductory notes; study them.  
 4.  Predict what is coming.  Look for a writer’s main idea or purpose  statement. 
Study the work’s organization. Then use this information to anticipate what 
GUIDELINES for  Active 
Reading 

14 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
is coming. When you read “There are three good reasons for requiring a 
dress code in schools,” you know the writer will list  three reasons.  
 5.  Concentrate. Slow down and give your full attention to reading. Watch 
for transition and connecting words that show you how the parts of a text 
connect. Read an entire article or chapter at one time—or you will need 
to start over to make sense of the piece.  
 6.  Annotate as you read.  The more senses you use, the more active your 
involvement. That means marking the text as you read (or taking notes if 
the material is not yours). Underline key sentences, such as the writer’s 
thesis. Then, in the margin, indicate that it is the thesis. With a series of 
examples (or reasons), label them and number them. When you look up a 
word’s definition, write the definition in the margin next to the word. 
Draw diagrams to illustrate concepts; draw arrows to connect example to 
idea. Studies have shown that students who annotate their texts get 
higher grades. Do what successful students do.  
 7.  Keep a reading journal. In addition to annotating what you read, you may 
want to develop the habit of writing regularly in a journal. A reading journal 
gives you a place to note impressions and reflections on your reading, your 
initial reactions to assignments, and ideas you may use in your next writing.  
 EXERCISE: Active Reading 
 Read the following essay, studying the annotations that are started for you. As you 
read, add your own notes. Then test your active reading by responding to the ques-
tions that follow the essay. 
■ ■
■ ■
 THE RISE OF THE NEW 
GROUPTHINK                   
 SUSAN  CAIN 
 A graduate of Princeton and Harvard Law and former corporate attorney, Susan Cain 
thought about her preference for reading and small groups over public speaking and 
decided to write on the subject. Her book  Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World 
That Can’t Stop Talking (2012) is the result. The following article, drawn from ideas for 
her book, appeared January 15, 2012. 
 Solitude is out of fashion. Our companies, our schools and our culture are 
in thrall to an idea I call the New Groupthink, which holds that creativity and 
achievement come from an oddly gregarious place. Most of us now work in 
teams, in offices without walls, for managers who prize people skills above all 
else. Lone geniuses are out. Collaboration is in.  
But there’s a problem with this view. Research strongly suggests that peo-
ple are more creative when they enjoy privacy and freedom from interruption. 
And the most spectacularly creative people in many fields are often introverted, 
according to studies by the psychologists Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Gregory 
Feist. They’re extroverted enough to exchange and advance ideas, but see 
themselves as independent and individualistic. They’re not joiners by nature.
1
Topic.
2
Author 
seems to 
disagree?

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
15
 One 
explanation 
for 
these findings is that intro-
verts are comfortable work-
ing alone—and solitude is a 
catalyst to innovation. As the 
influential psychologist Hans 
Eysenck observed, introver-
sion fosters creativity by 
“concentrating the mind on 
the tasks in hand, and pre-
venting the dissipation of 
energy on social and sexual 
matters unrelated to work.” 
In other words, a person sitting quietly under a tree in the backyard, while everyone 
else is clinking glasses on the patio, is more likely to have an apple land on his head. 
(Newton was one of the world’s great introverts: William Wordsworth described him 
as “A mind for ever/ Voyaging through strange seas of Thought, alone.”) 
 Solitude has long been associated with creativity and transcendence. 
“Without great solitude, no serious work is possible,” Picasso said. A central 
narrative of many religions is the seeker—Moses, Jesus, Buddha—who goes 
off by himself and brings profound insights back to the community. 
 Culturally, we’re often so dazzled by charisma that we overlook the quiet 
part of the creative process. Consider Apple. In the wake of Steve Jobs’s 
death, we’ve seen a profusion of myths about the company’s success. Most 
focus on Mr. Jobs’s supernatural magnetism and tend to ignore the other cru-
cial figure in Apple’s creation: a kindly, introverted engineering wizard, Steve 
Wozniak, who toiled alone on a beloved invention, the personal computer. 
 Rewind to March 1975: Mr. Wozniak believes the world would be a better 
place if everyone had a user-friendly computer. This seems a distant dream—
most computers are still the size of minivans, and many times as pricey. But 
Mr. Wozniak meets a simpatico band of engineers that call themselves the 
Homebrew Computer Club. The Homebrewers are excited about a primitive 
new machine called the Altair 8800. Mr. Wozniak is inspired, and immediately 
begins work on his own magical version of a computer. Three months later, he 
unveils his amazing creation for his friend, Steve Jobs. Mr. Wozniak wants to give 
his invention away free, but Mr. Jobs persuades him to co-found Apple Computer. 
 The story of Apple’s origin speaks to the power of collaboration. 
Mr. Wozniak wouldn’t have been catalyzed by the Altair but for the kindred 
spirits of Homebrew. And he’d never have started Apple without Mr. Jobs. 
 But it’s also a story of solo spirit. If you look at how Mr. Wozniak got the 
work done—the sheer hard work of creating something from nothing—he did 
it alone. Late at night, all by himself. 
 Intentionally so. In his memoir, Mr. Wozniak offers this guidance to aspir-
ing inventors: 
 “Most inventors and engineers I’ve met are like me . . . they live in their 
heads. They’re almost like artists. In fact, the very best of them are artists. And 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

16 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
artists work best alone. . . . I’m going to give you some advice that might be hard 
to take. That advice is: Work alone . . . Not on a committee. Not on a team.” 
 And yet The New Groupthink has overtaken our workplaces, our schools 
and our religious institutions. Anyone who has ever needed noise-canceling 
headphones in her own office or marked an online calendar with a fake meeting 
in order to escape yet another real one knows what I’m talking about. Virtually 
all American workers now spend time on teams and some 70 percent inhabit 
open-plan offices, in which no one has “a room of one’s own.” During the last 
decades, the average amount of space allotted to each employee shrank 
300 square feet, from 500 square feet in the 1970s to 200 square feet in 2010. 
 Our schools have also been transformed by the New Groupthink. Today, 
elementary school classrooms are commonly arranged in pods of desks, the 
better to foster group learning. Even subjects like math and creative writing 
are often taught as committee projects. In one fourth-grade classroom I vis-
ited in New York City, students engaged in group work were forbidden to ask 
a question unless every member of the group had the very same question. 
 The New Groupthink also shapes some of our most influential religious 
institutions. Many mega-churches feature extracurricular groups organized 
around every conceivable activity, from parenting to skateboarding to real 
estate, and expect worshipers to join in. They also emphasize a theatrical style 
of worship—loving Jesus out loud, for all the congregation to see. “Often the 
role of a pastor seems closer to that of church cruise director than to the tradi-
tional roles of spiritual friend and counselor,” said Adam McHugh, an evan-
gelical pastor and author of “Introverts in the Church.” 
 Some teamwork is fine and offers a fun, stimulating, useful way to 
exchange ideas, manage information and build trust. 
 But it’s one thing to associate with a group in which each member works 
autonomously on his piece of the puzzle; it’s another to be corralled into endless 
meetings or conference calls conducted in offices that afford no respite from the 
noise and gaze of co-workers. Studies show that open-plan offices make work-
ers hostile, insecure and distracted. They’re also more likely to suffer from high 
blood pressure, stress, the flu and exhaustion. And people whose work is inter-
rupted make 50 percent more mistakes and take twice as long to finish it. 
 Many introverts seem to know this instinctively, and resist being herded 
together. Backbone Entertainment, a video game development company in 
Emeryville, Calif., initially used an open-plan office, but found that its game 
developers, many of whom were introverts, were unhappy. “It was one big 
warehouse space, with just tables, no walls, and everyone could see each 
other,” recalled Mike Mika, the former creative director. “We switched over to 
cubicles and were worried about it—you’d think in a creative environment that 
people would hate that. But it turns out they prefer having nooks and crannies 
they can hide away in and just be away from everybody.” 
 Privacy also makes us productive. In a fascinating study known as the Coding 
War Games, consultants Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister compared the work 
of more than 600 computer programmers at 92 companies. They found that 
people from the same companies performed at roughly the same level—but 
that there was an enormous performance gap between organizations. What 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
17
distinguished programmers at the top-performing companies wasn’t greater 
experience or better pay. It was how much privacy, personal workspace and 
freedom from interruption they enjoyed. Sixty-two percent of the best perform-
ers said their workspace was sufficiently private compared with only 19 percent 
of the worst performers. Seventy-six percent of the worst programmers but only 
38 percent of the best said that they were often interrupted needlessly. 
 Solitude can even help us learn. According to research on expert perfor-
mance by the psychologist Anders Ericsson, the best way to master a field is 
to work on the task that’s most demanding for you personally. And often the 
best way to do this is alone. Only then, Mr. Ericsson told me, can you “go 
directly to the part that’s challenging to you. If you want to improve, you have 
to be the one who generates the move. Imagine a group class—you’re the 
one generating the move only a small percentage of the time.” 
 Conversely, brainstorming sessions are one of the worst possible ways to 
stimulate creativity. The brainchild of a charismatic advertising executive named 
Alex Osborn who believed that groups produced better ideas than individuals, 
workplace brainstorming sessions came into vogue in the 1950s. “The quantita-
tive results of group brainstorming are beyond question,” Mr. Osborn wrote. 
“One group produced 45 suggestions for a home appliance promotion, 56 ideas 
for a money-raising campaign, 124 ideas on how to sell more blankets.” 
 But decades of research show that individuals almost always perform better 
than groups in both quality and quantity, and group performance gets worse as 
group size increases. The “evidence from science suggests that business people 
must be insane to use brainstorming groups,” wrote the organizational psycholo-
gist Adrian Furnham. “If you have talented and motivated people, they should be 
encouraged to work alone when creativity or efficiency is the highest priority.” 
 The reasons brainstorming fails are instructive for other forms of group 
work, too. People in groups tend to sit back and let others do the work; they 
instinctively mimic others’ opinions and lose sight of their own; and, often suc-
cumb to peer pressure. The Emory University neuroscientist Gregory Berns 
found that when we take a stance different from the group’s, we activate the 
amygdala, a small organ in the brain associated with the fear of rejection. 
Professor Berns calls this “the pain of independence.” 
 The one important exception to this dismal record is electronic brain-
storming, where large groups outperform individuals; and the larger the group 
the better. The protection of the screen mitigates many problems of group 
work. This is why the Internet has yielded such wondrous collective creations. 
Marcel Proust called reading a “miracle of communication in the midst of soli-
tude,” and that’s what the Internet is, too. It’s a place where we can be alone 
together—and this is precisely what gives it power. 
 MY point is not that man is an island. Life is meaningless without love, 
trust and friendship. 
 And I’m not suggesting that we abolish teamwork. Indeed, recent studies 
suggest that influential academic work is increasingly conducted by teams 
rather than by individuals. (Although teams whose members collaborate 
remotely, from separate universities, appear to be the most influential of all.) 
The problems we face in science, economics and many other fields are more 
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

18 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
complex than ever before, and we’ll need to stand on one another’s shoulders 
if we can possibly hope to solve them. 
 But even if the problems are different, human nature remains the same. 
And most humans have two contradictory impulses: we love and need one 
another, yet we crave privacy and autonomy. 
 To harness the energy that fuels both these drives, we need to move beyond 
the New Groupthink and embrace a more nuanced approach to creativity and 
learning. Our offices should encourage casual, cafe-style interactions, but allow 
people to disappear into personalized, private spaces when they want to be 
alone. Our schools should teach children to work with others, but also to work 
on their own for sustained periods of time. And we must recognize that intro-
verts like Steve Wozniak need extra quiet and privacy to do their best work. 
 Before Mr. Wozniak started Apple, he designed calculators at Hewlett-
Packard, a job he loved partly because HP made it easy to chat with his col-
leagues. Every day at 10 a.m. and 2 p.m., management wheeled in doughnuts 
and coffee, and people could socialize and swap ideas. What distinguished 
these interactions was how low-key they were. For Mr. Wozniak, collaboration 
meant the ability to share a doughnut and a brainwave with his laid-back, 
poorly dressed colleagues—who minded not a whit when he disappeared into 
his cubicle to get the real work done. 
Source: New York Times, January 15, 2012. © 2012 The New York Times. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or 
retransmission of this Content without express written permission is prohibited. www.nytimes.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING AND REASONING 
 1. 
What does Cain mean by the “new groupthink”? Where do we find this phe-
nomenon and how do we recognize it?  
 2. 
According to research, what kinds of people are most creative? What environ-
ment is most conducive to productivity and creativity? 
 3. 
What is Cain’s thesis—the claim of her argument? 
 4. 
How does she support her claim? List specific details of her support. 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 5. 
How does Cain qualify her claim in the final five paragraphs? What makes this 
an effective conclusion to her essay?  
 6. 
What is the most interesting piece of information or concept, for you, in Cain’s 
argument? Why? Write a journal entry—four or five sentences at least—in 
response to this question. 
 USING PARAPHRASE  
 Paraphrasing’s goal is the same as summary’s: An accurate presentation of the 
information and ideas of someone else. Unlike summary, we paraphrase an 
entire short work. This can be a poem (see p. 539 for a paraphrase of a poem) or 
25
26
27

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
19
a complex section of prose that needs a simpler (but often longer than the origi-
nal) restatement so that we are clear about its meaning. We paraphrase short 
but complex pieces; we summarize an entire essay or chapter or book. 
 Writers also use paraphrasing to restate  some of the information or ideas 
from a source as part of developing their own work. They do this extensively in 
a researched essay, but they may also paraphrase parts of a source to add sup-
port to their discussion—or to be clear about another writer’s ideas that they 
will evaluate or challenge in some way. 
 Think, for a moment, about the writing process. Writers use many kinds of 
experiences to develop their work. Formal researched essays contain precise docu-
mentation and may use summary, paraphrase, and direct quotations, but they 
rarely include personal references. Today, however, writers may blend styles and 
strategies—in personal essays and researched essays, for example—rather than 
keeping them distinct. And some scholars today also write books for nonspecial-
ists. In these books—or articles—documentation is placed only at the back, a more 
informal style is used, and personal experiences may be included to engage read-
ers. Journalists, too, often blend personal experience and informal styles while 
drawing on one or more sources to develop and support their ideas. Among the 
readings in this text you will find a few personal essays and scholarly essays as 
well as works demonstrating a blending of styles and strategies. This blending can 
be confusing for college students. Make sure that you always understand what 
kind of work you are expected to produce in each class, for every assignment. 
 Now, to illustrate paraphrase, suppose you don’t want to summarize 
Lincoln’s entire speech, but you do want to use his opening point as a lead-in to 
commenting on our own times. You might write: 
 Lincoln’s famous speech at the dedication of the Gettysburg battlefield begins 
with the observation that our nation was initially built on a belief in liberty 
and equality, but the country’s future had come to a point of being tested. We 
are not actually facing a civil war today, but we are facing a culture war, a war 
of opposing values and beliefs, that seems to be tearing our country apart.  
 Paraphrasing—putting Lincoln’s idea into your own words—is a much more 
effective opening than quoting Lincoln’s first two sentences. It’s his idea that 
you want to use, not his language. Observe three key points:
 1. 
The idea is Lincoln’s but the word choice is entirely different. Resist the 
urge to borrow any of Lincoln’s phrases—that would be quoting and would 
require quotation marks—and that does not serve your purpose. 
 2. 
You still give credit to Lincoln for the idea. 
 3. 
Summary, paraphrasing, and quoting all share this one characteristic: You 
let readers know that you are using someone else’s information or ideas. 
 EXERCISE:   Paraphrase 
 1. 
Find several examples of paraphrasing in Cain’s essay. 
 2. Assume that you are writing an essay on the disadvantages of brainstorming. 
Paraphrase the ideas in Cain’s paragraph 20 to use in this assumed essay. 
■ ■

20 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 3. For an essay on the value of solitude in our too-bustling world, evaluate the 
 following two paragraphs that use some of the material from Cain’s paragraphs 
3 and 4.
 PARAPHRASE 1 
 Introverts have no trouble with solitude. Most adults are socialized to want 
close friends and family connections, but introverts are also content to have 
time alone to read, think, and create. What extroverts must learn is that no 
serious work is possible without solitude. Newton and other insightful peo-
ple use their solitude as a catalyst for innovation, even, as Susan Cain notes, 
for transcendence. 
 PARAPHRASE 2 
 Introverts have no trouble with solitude. Most adults are socialized to want close 
friends and family connections, but introverts are also content to have time 
alone to read, think, and create. In her essay “The Rise of the New Groupthink,” 
Susan Cain worries that today’s emphasis on group projects fostered in open 
office spaces will not provide the solitude that can lead to new ideas. Yet, as Cain 
observes, it is often those who are given opportunities to think and work by 
themselves who provide us with new insights and new inventions.  
 
■ ■
 ACKNOWLEDGING SOURCES INFORMALLY 
 As you have seen in the summaries and paraphrases above, even when you are 
not writing a formally documented paper, you must identify each source by 
author. What follows are some of the conventions of writing to use when writing 
about sources.  
 Referring to People and Sources 
 Readers in academic, professional, and business contexts expect writers to fol-
low specific conventions of style when referring to authors and to various kinds 
of sources. Study the following guidelines and examples and then mark the 
next few pages for easy reference—perhaps by turning down a corner of the 
first and last pages. 
 References to People 
 • In a first reference, give the person’s full name (both the given name and 
the surname):  Ellen Goodman, Robert J. Samuelson. In second and subsequent 
references, use only the last name (surname):  Goodman, Samuelson. 
 • Do not use Mr., Mrs., or Ms. Special titles such as President, Chief Justice, 
or Doctor may be used in the first reference with the person’s full name. 
 • Never refer to an author by her or his first name. Write  Tannen, not  Deborah; 
Lincoln, not  Abraham. 

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
21
 References to Titles of Works  
Titles of works must  always be written as titles. Titles are indicated by 
 capitalization and by either quotation marks or italics. 
 Guidelines for Capitalizing Titles 
 • The first and last words are capitalized. 
 • The first word of a subtitle is capitalized. 
 • All other words in titles are capitalized except
   — Articles ( a, an, the ). 
   — Coordinating conjunctions ( and, or, but, for, nor, yet, so ). 
   — Prepositions ( in, for, about ). 
 Titles Requiring Quotation Marks  
Titles of works published within other works—within a book, magazine, or 
newspaper—are indicated by quotation marks.
essays 
“Who Does the Talking Here?”
short stories 
“The Story of an Hour”
poems 
“To Daffodils”
articles 
“Choose Your Utopia”
chapters 
“Writers and Their Sources”
lectures 
“Crazy Mixed-Up Families”
tv episodes 
 “Pride and Prejudice” (one drama on the television 
show Masterpiece Theatre) 
 Titles Requiring Italics  
Titles of works that are separate publications and, by extension, titles of items 
such as works of art and websites are in italics.
plays 
A Raisin in the Sun
novels 
War and Peace
nonfiction books 
Read, Reason, Write
book-length poems 
The Odyssey
magazines and journals 
Wired
newspapers 
Wall Street Journal
films 
The Wizard of Oz
paintings 
The Birth of Venus
television programs 
Star Trek
websites 
worldwildlife.org
databases 
ProQuest 
 Read the following article and respond by answering the questions that fol-
low. Observe, as you read, how the author refers to the various sources he uses 

22 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
to develop his article and how he presents material from those sources. We will 
use this article as a guide to handling quotations. 
 THE FUTURE IS NOW: IT’S HEADING RIGHT
AT US, BUT WE NEVER SEE IT COMING   
    JOEL  ACHENBACH  
 A former humor columnist and currently a staff writer for the  Washington Post, Joel 
Achenbach also has a regular blog on   washingtonpost.com. His books include 
 anthologies of his columns and  Captured by Aliens: The Search for Life and Truth in a 
Very Large Universe (2003). The following article was published April 13, 2008.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  What is nanotechnology? What do you think will be the 
next big change—and what field will it come from? 
 The most important things happening in the world today won’t make 
tomorrow’s front page. They won’t get mentioned by presidential candidates 
or Chris Matthews  1 or Bill O’Reilly  2 or any of the other folks yammering and 
snorting on cable television.
 They’ll be happening in laboratories—out of sight, inscrutable and 
unhyped until the very moment when they change life as we know it. 
 Science and technology form a two-headed, unstoppable change agent. 
Problem is, most of us are mystified and intimidated by such things as biotech-
nology, or nanotechnology, or the various other -ologies that seem to be threat-
ening to merge into a single unspeakable and incomprehensible thing called 
biotechnonanogenomicology. We vaguely understand that this stuff is changing 
our lives, but we feel as though it’s all out of our control. We’re just hanging on 
tight, like Kirk and Spock when the Enterprise starts vibrating at Warp 8. 
 What’s unnerving is the velocity at which the future sometimes arrives. 
Consider the Internet. This powerful but highly disruptive technology crept 
out of the lab (a Pentagon think tank, actually) and all but devoured modern 
civilization—with almost no advance warning. The first use of the word “inter-
net” to refer to a computer network seems to have appeared in this newspa-
per on Sept. 26, 1988, in the Financial section, on page F30—about as deep 
into the paper as you can go without hitting the bedrock of the classified ads. 
 The entire reference: “SMS Data Products Group Inc. in McLean won a 
$1,005,048 contract from the Air Force to supply a defense data network 
internet protocol router.” Perhaps the unmellifluous compound noun “data 
network internet protocol router” is one reason more of us didn’t pay atten-
tion. A couple of months later, “Internet”—still lacking the “the” before its 
name—finally elbowed its way to the front page when a virus shut down thou-
sands of computers. The story referred to “a research network called Internet,” 
which “links as many as 50,000 computers, allowing users to send a variety of 
information to each other.” The scientists knew that computer networks could 
1
2
3
4
5
1 Political talk-show host on MSNBC.—Ed.
 2  Radio and television talk-show host on the FOX News Channel.—Ed.  

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
23
be powerful. But how many knew that this Internet thing would change the 
way we communicate, publish, sell, shop, conduct research, find old friends, 
do homework, plan trips and on and on? 
 Joe Lykken, a theoretical physicist at the Fermilab research center in 
Illinois, tells a story about something that happened in 1990. A Fermilab visi-
tor, an English fellow by the name of Tim Berners-Lee, had a new trick he 
wanted to demonstrate to the physicists. He typed some code into a little 
blank box on the computer screen. Up popped a page of data. 
 Lykken’s reaction:  Eh. 
 He could already see someone else’s data on a computer. He could have 
the colleague e-mail it to him and open it as a document. Why view it on a 
separate page on some computer network? 
 But of course, this unimpressive piece of software was the precursor to 
what is known today as the World Wide Web. “We had no idea that we were 
seeing not only a revolution, but a trillion-dollar idea,” Lykken says. 
 Now let us pause to reflect upon the fact that Joe Lykken is a very smart 
guy—you don’t get to be a theoretical physicist unless you have the kind of 
brain that can practically bend silverware at a distance—and even he, with that 
giant cerebral cortex and the billions of neurons flashing and winking, saw the 
proto-Web and harrumphed. It’s not just us mortals, even scientists don’t always 
grasp the significance of innovations. Tomorrow’s revolutionary technology 
may be in plain sight, but everyone’s eyes, clouded by conventional thinking, 
just can’t detect it. “Even smart people are really pretty incapable of envision-
ing a situation that’s substantially different from what they’re in,” says Christine 
Peterson, vice president of Foresight Nanotech Institute in Menlo Park, Calif. 
 So where does that leave the rest of us? 
 In technological Palookaville. 
 Science is becoming ever more specialized; technology is increasingly a 
series of black boxes, impenetrable to but a few. Americans’ poor science lit-
eracy means that science and technology exist in a walled garden, a geek 
ghetto. We are a technocracy in which most of us don’t really understand 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
SPEED BUMP. By permission of Dave Coverly and Creators Syndicate, Inc.

24 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
what’s happening around us. We stagger through a world of technological and 
medical miracles. We’re zombified by progress. 
 Peterson has one recommendation: Read science fiction, especially “hard 
science fiction” that sticks rigorously to the scientifically possible. “If you look out 
into the long-term future and what you see looks like science fiction, it might be 
wrong,” she says. “But if it doesn’t look like science fiction, it’s definitely wrong.” 
 That’s exciting—and a little scary. We want the blessings of science (say, 
cheaper energy sources) but not the terrors (monsters spawned by atomic 
radiation that destroy entire cities with their fiery breath). 
 Eric Horvitz, one of the sharpest minds at Microsoft, spends a lot of time 
thinking about the Next Big Thing. Among his other duties, he’s president of 
the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. He thinks that, 
sometime in the decades ahead, artificial systems will be modeled on living 
things. In the Horvitz view, life is marked by robustness, flexibility, adaptability. 
That’s where computers need to go. Life, he says, shows scientists “what we 
can do as engineers—better, potentially.” 
 Our ability to monkey around with life itself is a reminder that ethics, reli-
gion and old-fashioned common sense will be needed in abundance in 
decades to come. . . . How smart and flexible and rambunctious do we want 
our computers to be? Let’s not mess around with that Matrix business. 
 Every forward-thinking person almost ritually brings up the mortality issue. 
What’ll happen to society if one day people can stop the aging process? Or if 
only rich people can stop getting old? 
 It’s interesting that politicians rarely address such matters. The future in 
general is something of a suspect topic . . . a little goofy. Right now we’re all 
focused on the next primary, the summer conventions, the Olympics and their 
political implications, the fall election. The political cycle enforces an emphasis 
on the immediate rather than the important. 
 And in fact, any prediction of what the world will be like more than, say, a 
year from now is a matter of hubris. The professional visionaries don’t even 
talk about predictions or forecasts but prefer the word “scenarios.” When 
Sen. John McCain, for example, declares that radical Islam is the transcendent 
challenge of the 21st century, he’s being sincere, but he’s also being a bit of a 
soothsayer. Environmental problems and resource scarcity could easily be the 
dominant global dilemma. Or a virus with which we’ve yet to make our 
acquaintance. Or some other “wild card.” 
 Says Lykken, “Our ability to predict is incredibly poor. What we all thought 
when I was a kid was that by now we’d all be flying around in anti-gravity cars 
on Mars.” 
 Futurists didn’t completely miss on space travel—it’s just that the things 
flying around Mars are robotic and take neat pictures and sometimes land and 
sniff the soil. 
 Some predictions are bang-on, such as sci-fi writer Arthur C. Clarke’s dec-
laration in 1945 that there would someday be communications satellites orbit-
ing the Earth. But Clarke’s satellites had to be occupied by repairmen who 
would maintain the huge computers required for space communications. Even 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
25
in the late 1960s, when Clarke collaborated with Stanley Kubrick on the screen-
play to  2001: A Space Odyssey, he assumed that computers would, over time, 
get bigger. “The HAL 9000 computer fills half the spaceship,” Lykken notes. 
 Says science-fiction writer Ben Bova, “We have built into us an idea that 
tomorrow is going to be pretty much like today, which is very wrong.” 
 The future is often viewed as an endless resource of innovation that will 
make problems go away—even though, if the past is any judge, innovations 
create their own set of new problems. Climate change is at least in part a con-
sequence of the invention of the steam engine in the early 1700s and all the 
industrial advances that followed. 
 Look again at the Internet. It’s a fantastic tool, but it also threatens to dis-
perse information we’d rather keep under wraps, such as our personal medical 
data, or even the instructions for making a fission bomb. 
 We need to keep our eyes open. The future is going to be here sooner 
than we think. It’ll surprise us. We’ll try to figure out why we missed so many 
clues. And we’ll go back and search the archives, and see that thing we should 
have noticed on page F30.  
 Source: Washington Post, April 13, 2008. © 2008 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
www.washingtonpost.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING AND REASONING 
 1. 
What is Achenbach’s subject? What is his thesis? Where does he state it? 
 2. 
What two agents together are likely to produce the next big change? 
 3. 
Summarize the evidence Achenbach provides to support the idea that we don’t 
recognize the next big change until it is here. 
 4. 
If we want to try to anticipate the next big change, what should we do? 
 5. 
What prediction did Arthur C. Clarke get right? In what way was his imagina-
tion incorrect? What can readers infer from this example?  
 6. 
Are big changes always good? Explain. 
 7. 
How does Achenbach identify most of his sources? He does not identify Chris 
Matthews or Bill O’Reilly in paragraph 1. What does this tell you about his 
expected audience?  
 PRESENTING DIRECT QUOTATIONS: A GUIDE 
TO FORM AND STYLE 
 Although most of your papers will be written in your own words and style, 
you will sometimes use direct quotations. Just as there is a correct form for ref-
erences to people and to works, there is a correct form for presenting borrowed 
material in direct quotations. Study the guidelines and examples and then mark 
these pages, as you did the others, for easy reference. 
24
25
26
27

26 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 Reasons for Using Quotation Marks 
 We use quotation marks in four ways:
 • To indicate dialogue in works of fiction and drama 
 • To indicate the titles of some kinds of works 
 • To indicate the words that others have spoken or written 
 • To separate ourselves from or call into question particular uses of words  
 The following guidelines apply to all four uses of quotation marks, but the 
focus will be on the third use. 
 A Brief Guide to Quoting 
 1. 
 Quote accurately. Do not misrepresent what someone else has written. 
Take time to compare what you have written with the original. 
 2. 
 Put all words taken from a source within quotation marks. (To take words 
from a source without using quotation marks is to plagiarize, a form of 
stealing punished in academic and professional communities.) 
 3. 
 Never change any of the words within your quotation marks.  Indicate any 
deleted words with ellipses [spaced periods (. . .)]. If you need to add words 
to make the meaning clear, place the added words in [square brackets], not 
(parentheses). 
 4. 
 Always make the source of the quoted words clear. If you do not provide 
the author of the quoted material, readers will have to assume that you are 
calling those words into question—the fourth reason for quoting. Observe 
that Achenbach introduces Joe Lykken in paragraph 6 and then uses his last 
name or “he” through the next three paragraphs so that readers always 
know to whom he is referring and quoting.  
 5. 
 When quoting an author who is quoted by the author of the source you are 
using, you must make clear that you are getting that author’s words from 
your source, not directly from that author. 
  
 For example: 
ORIGINAL: 
“We had no idea that we were seeing not only a revolution, but 
a trillion-dollar idea.”
INCORRECT: 
Referring to his first experience with the World Wide Web, 
Lykken observed:  “We had no idea that we were seeing . . . a 
revolution.”
CORRECT: 
To make his point about our failure to recognize big changes 
when they first appear, Achenbach quotes theoretical physicist 
Joe Lykken’s response to first seeing the World Wide Web:  “We 
had no idea that we were seeing . . . a revolution.” 
 6. 
 Place commas and periods inside the closing quotation mark—even when 
only one word is quoted: Unable to anticipate big changes coming from 
modern science, we are, Achenbach observes, in “technological Palookaville.” 

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
27
 7.  Place colons and semicolons outside the closing quotation mark: Achenbach 
jokingly explains our reaction to the complexities of modern technologies in 
his essay “The Future Is Now”: “We’re zombified by progress.”  
 8.  Do not quote unnecessary punctuation.  When you place quoted material at 
the end of a sentence you have written, use only the punctuation needed to 
complete your sentence. 
ORIGINAL: 
The next big change will be “happening in laboratories—out of 
sight, inscrutable, and unhyped.”
INCORRECT: 
Achenbach explains that we will be surprised by the next big 
change because it will, initially, be hidden, “happening in 
laboratories—.”
CORRECT: 
Achenbach explains that we will be surprised by the next big 
change because it will, initially, be hidden, “happening in 
laboratories.” 
 9.  When the words you quote are only a part of your sentence, do not capital-
ize the first quoted word, even if it was capitalized in the source.  Exception: 
You introduce the quoted material with a colon. 
INCORRECT: 
 
 Achenbach observes that  “The future is often viewed as an 
endless resource of innovation.”
CORRECT: 
 
 Achenbach observes that  “the future is often viewed as an 
 endless resource of innovation.”
ALSO CORRECT:  
 Achenbach argues that we count too much on modern sci-
ence to solve problems:  “The future is often viewed as an 
endless resource of innovation.” 
 10.  Use single quotation marks (the apostrophe key on your keyboard) to 
 identify quoted material within quoted material:  Achenbach explains that 
futurists “prefer the word ‘scenarios.’” 
 11.  Depending on the structure of your sentence, use a colon, a comma, or no 
punctuation before a quoted passage. A colon provides a formal introduc-
tion to a quoted passage. (See the example in item 9.) Use a comma only 
when your sentence requires it. Quoted words presented in a “that” clause 
are not preceded by a comma. 
ORIGINAL: 
 
 “What’s unnerving is the velocity at which the future 
 sometimes arrives.”
CORRECT: 
 
 “What’s unnerving,” Achenbach notes, “is the velocity at 
which the future sometimes arrives.”
ALSO CORRECT:  
 Achenbach observes that we are often unnerved by   “the 
 velocity at which the future sometimes arrives.” 
 12.  To keep quotations brief, omit irrelevant portions. Indicate missing words 
with ellipses. For example: Achenbach explains that “we want the blessings 
of science . . . but not the terrors.” Some instructors want the ellipses placed 

28 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
in square brackets—[. . .]—to show that you have added them to the origi-
nal. Modern Language Association (MLA) style does not require the square 
brackets unless you are quoting a passage that already has ellipses as part 
of that passage. The better choice would be not to quote that passage.  
 13.  Consider the poor reader. 
 • Always give enough context to make the quoted material clear. 
 • Do not put so many bits and pieces of quoted passages into one sentence 
that your reader struggles to follow the ideas. 
 • Make sure that your sentences are complete and correctly constructed. 
Quoting is never an excuse for a sentence fragment or distorted 
construction.  
NOTE: All examples of quoting given above are in the present tense. We 
write that “Achenbach notes,” “Achenbach believes,” “Achenbach 
asserts.” Even though his article was written in the past, we use the present 
tense to describe his ongoing ideas.
 FOR READING AND ANALYSIS 
 As you read the following article, practice active reading, including annotating 
each essay. Concentrate first on what the author has to say, but also observe the 
organization of the essay and the author’s use of quotations and references to 
other authors and works. 
 FIVE LEADERSHIP LESSONS 
FROM JAMES T. KIRK  
     ALEX KNAPP  
 Currently Social Media editor at  Forbes magazine and popular blogger, Alex Knapp 
has been a freelance writer and editor for many years. He holds a law degree from 
the University of Kansas and focuses, in his writing, on the future of technology 
and culture. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    What lessons might Captain Kirk have to offer to 
businesspeople who read  Forbes magazine? How might these lessons have value 
to you as a college student?  
 Captain James T. Kirk is one of the most famous Captains in the history of 
Starfleet. There’s a good reason for that. He saved the planet Earth several 
times, stopped the Doomsday Machine, helped negotiate peace with the 
Klingon Empire, kept the balance of power between the Federation and the 
Romulan Empire, and even managed to fight Nazis. On his five-year mission 
commanding the U.S.S. Enterprise, as well as subsequent commands, 
1

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
29
James T. Kirk was a quint-
essential leader, who led 
his crew into the unknown 
and continued to succeed 
time and time again. 
 Kirk’s success was no 
fluke, either. His style of 
command demonstrates a 
keen understanding of lead-
ership and how to maintain 
a team that succeeds time 
and time again, regardless 
of the dangers faced. Here 
are five of the key leadership lessons that you can take away from Captain Kirk as 
you pilot your own organization into unknown futures. 
 1. NEVER STOP LEARNING  
 “You know the greatest danger facing us is ourselves, an irrational fear of 
the unknown. But there’s no such thing as the unknown— only things tempo-
rarily hidden, temporarily not understood.” 
 Captain Kirk may have a reputation as a suave ladies man, but don’t let 
that exterior cool fool you. Kirk’s reputation at the Academy was that of a 
“walking stack of books,” in the words of his former first officer, Gary Mitchell. 
And a passion for learning helped him through several missions. Perhaps the 
best demonstration of this is in the episode “Arena,” where Kirk is forced to 
fight a Gorn Captain in single combat by advanced beings. Using his own 
knowledge and materials at hand, Kirk is able to build a rudimentary shotgun, 
which he uses to defeat the Gorn. 
 If you think about it, there’s no need for a 23rd Century Starship Captain 
to know how to mix and prepare gunpowder if the occasion called for it. After 
all, Starfleet officers fight with phasers and photon torpedoes. To them, gun-
powder is obsolete. But the same drive for knowledge that drove Kirk to the 
stars also caused him to learn that bit of information, and it paid off several 
years later. 
 In the same way, no matter what your organization does, it helps to never 
stop learning. The more knowledge you have, the more creative you can be. 
The more you’re able to do, the more solutions you have for problems at your 
disposal. Sure, you might never have to face down a reptilian alien on a desert 
planet, but you never know what the future holds. Knowledge is your best key 
to overcoming whatever obstacles are in your way.  
 2. HAVE ADVISORS WITH DIFFERENT WORLDVIEWS  
 “One of the advantages of being a captain, Doctor, is being able to ask for 
advice without necessarily having to take it.” 
 Kirk’s closest two advisors are Commander Spock, a Vulcan committed to 
a philosophy of logic, and Dr. Leonard McCoy, a human driven by compassion 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

30 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
and scientific curiosity. Both Spock and McCoy are frequently at odds with 
each other, recommend different courses of action and bringing very different 
types of arguments to bear in defense of those points of view. Kirk sometimes 
goes with one, or the other, or sometimes takes their advice as a springboard 
to developing an entirely different course of action. 
 However, the very fact that Kirk has advisors who have a different world-
view not only from each other, but also from himself, is a clear demonstration 
of Kirk’s confidence in himself as a leader. Weak leaders surround themselves 
with yes men who are afraid to argue with them. That fosters an organizational 
culture that stifles creativity and innovation, and leaves members of the orga-
nization afraid to speak up. That can leave the organization unable to solve 
problems or change course. Historically, this has led to some serious disasters, 
such as  Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace. 
 Organizations that allow for differences of opinion are better at develop-
ing innovation, better at solving problems, and better at avoiding groupthink. 
We all need a McCoy and a Spock in our lives and organizations.  
 3. BE PART OF THE AWAY TEAM  
 “Risk is our business. That’s what this starship is all about. That’s why we’re 
aboard her.” 
 Whenever an interesting or challenging mission came up, Kirk was always 
willing to put himself in harm’s way by joining the Away Team. With his boots 
on the ground, he was always able to make quick assessments of the situation, 
leading to superior results. At least, superior for everyone with a name and not 
wearing a red shirt. Kirk was very much a hands-on leader, leading the van-
guard of his crew as they explored interesting and dangerous situations. 
 When you’re in a leadership role, it’s sometimes easy to let yourself get 
away from leading Away Team missions. After all, with leadership comes 
perks, right? You get the nice office on the higher floor. You finally get an 
assistant to help you with day to day activities, and your days are filled with 
meetings and decisions to be made, and many of these things are absolutely 
necessary. But it’s sometimes easy to trap yourself in the corner office and 
forget what life is like on the front lines. When you lose that perspective, it’s 
that much harder to understand what your team is doing, and the best way to 
get out of the problem. What’s more, when you’re not involved with your 
team, it’s easy to lose their trust and have them gripe about how you don’t 
understand what the job is like. 
 This is a lesson that was actually imprinted on me in one of my first jobs, 
making pizzas for a franchise that doesn’t exist anymore. Our general man-
ager spent a lot of time in his office, focused on the paperwork and making 
sure that we could stay afloat on the razor-thin margins we were running. But 
one thing he made sure to do, every day, was to come out during peak times 
and help make pizza. He didn’t have to do that, but he did. The fact that he 
did so made me like him a lot more. It also meant that I trusted his decisions a 
lot more. In much the same way, I’m sure, as Kirk’s crew trusted his decisions, 
because he knew the risks of command personally.  
9
10
11
12
13
14

 
CHAPTER 1 Writers and Their Sources 
31
 4. PLAY POKER, NOT CHESS  
 “Not chess, Mr. Spock. Poker. Do you know the game?” 
 In one of my all-time favorite  Star Trek episodes, Kirk and his crew face 
down an unknown vessel from a group calling themselves the “First 
Federation.” Threats from the vessel escalate until it seems that the destruc-
tion of the  Enterprise is imminent. Kirk asks Spock for options, who replies 
that the  Enterprise has been playing a game of chess, and now there are no 
winning moves left. Kirk counters that they shouldn’t play chess they should 
play poker. He then bluffs the ship by telling them that the Enterprise has a 
substance in its hull called “corbomite” which will reflect the energy of any 
weapon back against an attacker. This begins a series of actions that enables 
the  Enterprise crew to establish peaceful relations with the First Federation. 
 I love chess as much as the next geek, but chess is often taken too seri-
ously as a metaphor for leadership strategy. For all of its intricacies, chess is a 
game of defined rules that can be mathematically determined. It’s ultimately a 
game of boxes and limitations. A far better analogy to strategy is poker, not 
chess. Life is a game of probabilities, not defined rules. And often understand-
ing your opponents is a much greater advantage than the cards you have in 
your hand. It was knowledge of his opponent that allowed Kirk to defeat Khan 
in  Star Trek II by exploiting Khan’s two-dimensional thinking. Bluffs, tells, and 
bets are all a big part of real-life strategy. Playing that strategy with an eye to 
the psychology of our competitors, not just the rules and circumstances of the 
game, can often lead to better outcomes than following the rigid lines of chess.  
 5. BLOW UP THE ENTERPRISE  
 “‘All I ask is a tall ship and a star to steer her by.’ You could feel the wind 
at your back in those days. The sounds of the sea beneath you, and even if you 
take away the wind and the water it’s still the same. The ship is yours. You can 
feel her. And the stars are still there, Bones.” 
 One recurring theme in the original  Star Trek series is that Kirk’s first love is 
the Enterprise. That love kept him from succumbing to the mind-controlling 
spores in “This Side of Paradise,” and it’s hinted that his love for the ship kept 
him from forming any real relationships or starting a family. Despite that love, 
though, there came a point in  Star Trek III: The Search For Spock, where Captain 
Kirk made a decision that must have pained him enormously—in order to defeat 
the Klingons attacking him and save his crew, James Kirk destroyed the  Enterprise. 
The occasion, in the film, was treated with the solemnity of a funeral, which no 
doubt matched Kirk’s mood. The film ends with the crew returning to Vulcan on a 
stolen Klingon vessel, rather than the  Enterprise. But they returned victorious. 
 We are often, in our roles as leaders, driven by a passion. It might be a 
product or service, it might be a way of doing things. But no matter how much 
that passion burns within us, the reality is that times change. Different prod-
ucts are created. Different ways of doing things are developed. And there will 
come times in your life when that passion isn’t viable anymore. A time when it 
no longer makes sense to pursue your passion. When that happens, no matter 
how painful it is, you need to blow up the  Enterprise. That is, change what isn’t 
15
16
17
18
19
20

32 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
working and embark on a new path, even if that means having to live in a 
Klingon ship for awhile.  
 FINAL TAKEAWAY:  
 In his many years of service to the Federation, James Kirk embodied sev-
eral leadership lessons that we can use in our own lives. We need to keep 
exploring and learning. We need to ensure that we encourage creativity and 
innovation by listening to the advice of people with vastly different opinions. 
We need to occasionally get down in the trenches with the members of our 
teams so we understand their needs and earn their trust and loyalty. We need 
to understand the psychology of our competitors and also learn to radically 
change course when circumstances dictate. By following these lessons, we can 
lead our organizations into places where none have gone before.  
Source: Forbes, March 5, 2012. © 2012 Forbes. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected 
by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of 
this Content without express written permission is prohibited. www.forbes.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What is Knapp’s subject? 
 2. What does the first point—never stop learning—reveal about Kirk’s academy 
behavior? 
 3. What does having advisors with differing views reveal about a leader? 
 4. Explain what the author means by destroying the  Enterprise as a leadership 
strategy. 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. Knapp appears to use just a simple list as his structure. What other structure 
does the author use?  
 6. Knapp clearly loved the  Star Trek TV series. How does he guide readers who 
may not have grown up watching Captain Kirk?  
 7. The author argues that leaders should play poker, not chess. Explain his view 
of life and the point of his game analogy. 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. The  Star Trek  series has been one of the most popular and long running. If you 
have not watched this series, has Knapp’s essay piqued your interest in Captain 
Kirk and encouraged you to seek out the reruns? Why or why not? 
 9. Which of the five lessons seems most easily applied to college students? Why? 
Explain your choice.  
 10. Which of the five lessons seems least applicable to college students? Why? 
Now, you are one of Captain Kirk’s advisors. What good advice can you find in 
the lesson that has been put at the bottom of the list?  
21

33
Select one futuristic idea that interests you—robots in the home, cars that don’t 
need drivers, artificial intelligence, a moon colony, or whatever else captures 
your imagination—and see what you can learn about it online. Be prepared to 
share your information in a class discussion, or consider exploring your topic 
in an essay.  
 GOING ONLINE 
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
Write a one-paragraph summary of Alex Knapp’s essay. Be sure that your summary 
clearly states the author’s main idea, the claim of his argument. Take your time and 
polish your word choice. 
   2. 
Read actively and then prepare a one-and-a-half-page summary of Patricia B. 
Strait’s “When Societies Collide,” (pp. 500–11). Your readers want an accurate and 
balanced but much shorter version of the original because they will not be reading 
the original article. Explain not only what the writer’s main ideas are but also how 
the writer develops her essay. That is, what kind of research supports the article’s 
thesis? Pay close attention to your word choice. 
 3. 
A number of years ago, before the first Kindle, Bill Gates argued that e-books will 
replace paper books. What are the advantages of e-books? What are the advantages 
of paper books? Are there any disadvantages to either type of book? Which do you 
prefer? How would you argue for your preference?

 READ: What is the situation? Who is hiding under the bed? 
 REASON: Whom do we expect to be under the bed? What strategy 
has been used? 
 REFLECT/WRITE: What makes this cartoon clever? 
 Responding Critically to Sources 
 CHAPTER 2 
Copyright © Terry C. Wise. Reprinted with permission.

35
 I
 n some contexts, the word  critical carries the idea of harsh judgment: “The 
manager was critical of her secretary’s long phone conversations.” In other 
contexts, the term means to evaluate carefully. When we speak of the critical 
reader or critical thinker, we have in mind someone who reads actively, who 
thinks about issues, and who makes informed judgments. Here is a profile of 
the critical reader or thinker: 
 TRAITS OF THE CRITICAL READER/THINKER 
 •  Focused on the facts. 
   Give me the facts and show me that they are relevant to the issue. 
 •  Analytic. 
   What strategies has the writer/speaker used to develop the argument? 
 •  Open-minded. 
   Prepared to listen to different points of view, to learn from others. 
 •  Questioning/skeptical. 
   What other conclusions could be supported by the evidence presented? 
   How thorough has the writer/speaker been? 
   What persuasive strategies are used? 
 •  Creative. 
   What are some entirely different ways of looking at the issue or problem? 
 •  Intellectually active, not passive. 
   Willing to analyze logic and evidence. 
   Willing to consider many possibilities. 
   Willing, after careful evaluation, to reach a judgment, to take a stand on 
issues. 
 EXAMINING THE RHETORICAL 
CONTEXT OF A SOURCE 
 Reading critically requires preparation. Instead of “jumping into reading,” 
begin by asking questions about the work’s rhetorical context. Rhetoric is about 
the  art of writing  (or  speaking ). Someone has chosen to shape a text in a particular 
way at this time for an imagined audience to accomplish a specific goal. The 
better you understand all of the decisions shaping a particular text, the better 
you will understand that work. And, then, the better you will be able to judge 
the significance of that work. So, try to answer the following five questions 
before reading. Then complete your answers while you read—or by doing 
research and thinking critically after you finish reading.  

36 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 Who Is the Author? 
 Key questions to answer include:
 •  Does the author have a reputation for honesty, thoroughness, and fairness? Read 
the biographical note, if there is one. Ask your instructor about the author 
or learn about the author in a biographical dictionary or online. Try  Book 
Review Digest (in your library or online) for reviews of the author’s books. 
 •  Is the author writing within his or her area of expertise? People can voice opin-
ions on any subject, but they cannot transfer expertise from one subject area 
to another. A football player endorsing a political candidate is a citizen with 
an opinion, not an expert on politics.  
 •  Is the author identified with a particular group or set of beliefs? Does the biogra-
phy place the writer or speaker in a particular institution or organization? For 
example, a member of a Republican administration may be expected to 
favor a Republican president’s policies. A Roman Catholic priest may be 
expected to take a stand against abortion. These kinds of details provide 
hints, but you should not decide, absolutely, what a writer’s position is 
until you have read the work with care. Be alert to reasonable expectations 
but avoid stereotyping.  
 What Type—or Genre—of Source Is It? 
 Are you reading a researched and documented essay by a specialist—or the 
text of a speech delivered the previous week to a specific audience? Is the work 
an editorial—or a letter to the editor? Does the syndicated columnist (such as 
Dave Barry, who appears later in this chapter) write humorous columns? Is the 
cartoon a comic strip or a political cartoon from the editorial page of a news-
paper? (You will see both kinds of cartoons in this text.) Know what kind of text 
you are reading before you start. That’s the only way to give yourself the con-
text you need to be a good critical reader. 
 What Kind of Audience Does the Author Anticipate? 
 Understanding the intended audience helps you answer questions about the 
depth and sophistication of the work and a possible bias or slant.
 •  Does the author expect a popular audience, a general but educated audience, or a 
specialist audience of shared expertise? Does the author anticipate an audience that 
shares cultural, political, or religious values? Often you can judge the expected 
audience by noting the kind of publication in which the article appears, the 
publisher of the book, or the venue for the speech. For example,  Reader’s 
Digest is written for a mass audience, and  Psychology Today  for a general but 
more knowledgeable reader. By contrast, articles in the  Journal of the American 
Medical Association are written by physicians and research scientists for a spe-
cialized reader. (It would be inappropriate, then, for a general reader to com-
plain that an article in  JAMA is not well written because it is too difficult.)  

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
37
NOTE: None of the readings in this textbook were written for publication 
in this textbook. They have all come from some other context. To read 
them with understanding you must identify the original context and think 
about how that should guide your reading.
 •  Does the author expect an audience favorable to his or her views? Or with a 
“wait and see” attitude? Or even hostile? Some newspapers and television 
news organizations are consistently liberal whereas others are noticeably 
 conservative. (Do you know the political leanings of your local paper? Of 
the TV news that you watch? Of the blogs you choose?) Remember: All 
arguments are “slanted” or “biased”—that is, they take a stand. That’s as it 
should be. Just be sure to read or listen with an awareness of the author’s 
particular background, interests, and possible stands on issues. 
 What Is the Author’s Primary Purpose? 
 Is the work primarily informative or persuasive in intent? Designed to enter-
tain or be inspiring? Think about the title. Read a book’s preface to learn of the 
author’s goals. Pay attention to tone as you read. 
 What Are the Author’s Sources of Information? 
 Much of our judgment of an author and a work is based on the quality of the 
author’s choice of sources. So always ask yourself: Where was the information 
obtained? Are sources clearly identified? Be suspicious of those who want us to 
believe that their unnamed “sources” are “reliable.” Pay close attention to 
dates. A biography of King George III published in 1940 may still be the best 
source. An article urging more development based on county population 
 statistics from the 1990s is no longer reliable. 
 EXERCISES: Examining the Context 
 1. For each of the following works, comment on what you might expect to find. 
Consider author, occasion, audience, and reliability.
 a. An article on the Republican administration, written by a former campaign 
worker for a Democratic presidential candidate. 
 b. A discussion, published in the Boston  Globe, of the New England Patriots’ hope 
for the next Super Bowl. 
 c. A letter to the editor about conservation, written by a member of the Sierra 
Club. (What is the Sierra Club? Check out its website.) 
 d. A column in  Newsweek on economics. (Look at the business section of this 
magazine. Your library has it.) 
 e. A 1988 article in  Nutrition Today on the best diets. 
■ ■

38 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 f. 
A biography of Benjamin Franklin published by Oxford University Press. 
 g. A  Family Circle article about a special vegetarian diet written by a physician. 
(Who is the audience for this magazine? Where is it sold?) 
 h. A  New York Times editorial written after the Supreme Court’s striking down of 
Washington, DC’s handgun restrictions. 
 i. 
A speech on new handgun technology delivered at a convention of the 
National Rifle Association. 
 j. 
An editorial in your local newspaper titled “Stop the Highway Killing.” 
 2. Analyze an issue of your favorite magazine. Look first at the editorial pages and 
the articles written by staff, then at articles contributed by other writers. Answer 
these questions for both staff writers and contributors:
 a. Who is the audience? 
 b. What is the purpose of the articles and of the entire magazine? 
 c. What type of article dominates the issue? 
 3. Select one environmental website and study what is offered. The EnviroLink 
Network ( www.envirolink.org ) will lead you to many sites. Write down the 
name of the site you chose and its address (URL). Then answer these questions:
 a. Who is the intended audience? 
 b. What seems to be the primary purpose or goal of the site? 
 c. What type of material dominates the site? 
 d. For what kinds of writing assignments might you use material from the site? 
■ ■
 ANALYZING THE STYLE OF A SOURCE 
 Critical readers read for implication and are alert to tone or nuance. When you 
read, think not only about  what is said but also about  how it is said. Consider the 
following passage: 
 Bush’s stupid “war”—so much for the Congress declaring war—drags on, 
costing unhappy taxpayers billions, while the “greatest army in the world” 
cannot find the real villain hiding somewhere in a cave.  
 This passage observes that the Iraq War continues, costing much money, while 
the United States still has not found the perpetrator of 9/11. But, it actually says 
more than that, doesn’t it? Note the writer’s attitude toward Bush, the war, and 
the U.S. military. 
 How can we rewrite this passage to make it more favorable? Here is one 
version produced by students in a group exercise: 
 President Bush continues to defend the war in Iraq—which Congress never 
declared but continues to fund—in spite of the considerable cost to stabilize 
that country and the region. Meanwhile more troops will be needed to finally 
capture bin Laden and bring him to justice.  
 The writers have not changed their view that the Iraq War is costing a lot and 
that so far we have failed to capture bin Laden. But, in this version neither Bush 
nor the military is ridiculed. What is the difference in the two passages? Only 
the word choice. 

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
39
 NOTE:  Writers make choices; their choices reflect and convey their 
 attitudes.  Studying the context in which a writer uses emotionally charged 
words is the only way to be sure that we understand the writer’s attitude. 
 Denotative and Connotative Word Choice 
 The students’ ability to rewrite the passage on the war in Iraq to give it a posi-
tive attitude tells us that, although some words may have similar meanings, 
they cannot always be substituted for one another without changing the 
 message. Words with similar meanings have similar  denotations.  Often, though, 
words with similar denotations do not have the same connotations. A word’s 
 connotation  is what the word suggests, what we associate the word with. The 
words  house  and  home,  for example, both refer to a building in which people 
live, but the word  home  suggests ideas—and feelings—of family and security. 
Thus the word  home  has a strong positive connotation.  House  by contrast brings 
to mind a picture of a physical structure only because the word doesn’t carry 
any “emotional baggage.” 
 We learn the connotations of words the same way we learn their 
 denotations—in context. Most of us, living in the same culture, share the same 
connotative associations of words. At times, the context in which a word is 
used will affect the word’s connotation. For example, the word  buddy usually 
has positive connotations. We may think of an old or trusted friend. But when 
an unfriendly person who thinks a man may have pushed in front of him says, 
“Better watch it,  buddy, ” the word has a negative connotation. Social, physical, 
and language contexts control the connotative significance of words. Become 
more alert to the connotative power of words by asking what words the writers 
could have used instead. 
 EXERCISES: Connotation 
   1. For each of the following words or phrases, list at least two synonyms that have 
a more negative connotation than the given word.
 a. child 
 
e. scholarly 
 b. persistent 
 
f. trusting 
 c. thin 
 
g. underachiever 
 d. a large group 
 
h. quiet 
 2. For each of the following words, list at least two synonyms that have a more 
positive connotation than the given word.
 a. notorious 
 
e. fanatic 
 b. fat 
 
f. reckless 
 c. politician 
 
g. drunkard 
 d. old (people) 
 
h. cheap
■ ■

40 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 3. Read the following paragraph and decide how the writer feels about the  activity 
described. Note the choice of details and the connotative language that make 
you aware of the writer’s attitude.
 Needing to complete a missed assignment for my physical education class, 
I dragged myself down to the tennis courts on a gloomy afternoon. My 
task was to serve five balls in a row into the service box.  Although I 
thought I had learned the correct service movements, I couldn’t seem to 
translate that  knowledge into a decent serve. I tossed up the first ball, 
jerked back my racket, swung up on the ball—clunk—I hit the ball on the 
frame. I threw up the second ball, brought back my racket, swung up on 
the ball—ping—I made contact with the strings, but the ball dribbled 
down on my side of the net. I trudged around the court, collecting my 
tennis balls; I had only two of them.  
 4. Write a paragraph describing an activity that you liked or disliked without say-
ing how you felt. From your choice of details and use of connotative language, 
convey your attitude toward the activity. (The paragraph in exercise 3 is your 
model.) 
 5. Select one of the words listed below and explain, in a paragraph, what the word 
connotes to you personally. Be precise; illustrate your thoughts with details and 
examples.
 a. nature 
 
d. geek
 b. mother 
 
e. playboy 
 c. romantic 
 
f. artist 
■ ■
   COLLABORATIVE EXERCISES: On Connotation 
 1. List all of the words you know for  human female and for  human male. Then clas-
sify them by connotation (positive, negative, neutral) and by level of usage 
 (formal, informal, slang). Is there any connection between type of connotation 
and level of usage? Why are some words more appropriate in some social 
 contexts than in others? Can you easily list more negative words used for one 
sex than for the other? Why?  
 2. Some words can be given a different connotation in different contexts. First, for 
each of the following words, label its connotation as positive, negative, or neu-
tral. Then, for each word with a positive connotation, write a sentence in which 
the word would convey a more negative connotation. For each word with a 
negative connotation, write a sentence in which the word would suggest a more 
positive connotation.
 a. natural 
 
d. free 
 b. old 
 
e. chemical 
 c. committed 
 
f. 
lazy 
 3. Each of the following groups of words might appear together in a thesaurus, 
but the words actually vary in connotation. After looking up any words whose 
connotation you are unsure of, write a sentence in which each word is used 
■ ■

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
41
 correctly. Briefly explain why one of the other words in the group should not be 
substituted.
 a. brittle, hard, fragile 
 d. strange, remarkable, bizarre 
 b. quiet, withdrawn, glum 
 e. thrifty, miserly, economical 
 c. shrewd, clever, cunning 
■ ■
 Tone 
 We can describe a writer’s attitude toward the subject as positive, negative, or 
(rarely) neutral. Attitude is the writer’s position on, or feelings about, his or her 
subject. The way that attitude is expressed—the voice we hear and the feelings 
conveyed through that voice—is the writer’s  tone.  Writers can choose to express 
attitude through a wide variety of tones. We may reinforce a negative attitude 
through an angry, somber, sad, mocking, peevish, sarcastic, or scornful tone. A 
positive attitude may be revealed through an enthusiastic, serious, sympa-
thetic, jovial, light, or admiring tone. We cannot be sure that just because a 
writer selects a light tone, for example, the attitude must be positive. Humor 
columnists such as Dave Barry often choose a light tone to examine serious 
social and political issues. Given their subjects, we recognize that the light and 
amusing tone actually conveys a negative attitude toward the topic. 
 COLLABORATIVE EXERCISES: On Tone 
 With your class partner or in small groups, examine the following three paragraphs, 
which are different responses to the same event. First, decide on each writer’s attitude. 
Then describe, as precisely as possible, the tone of each paragraph. 
    1. It is tragically inexcusable that this young athlete was not examined fully before 
he was allowed to join the varsity team. The physical examinations given were 
unbelievably sloppy. What were the coach and trainer thinking of not to insist 
that each youngster be examined while undergoing physical stress? Apparently 
they were not thinking about our boys at all. We can no longer trust our sons 
and our daughters to this inhumane system so bent on victory that it ignores the 
health—indeed the very lives—of our children. 
   2. It was learned last night, following the death of varsity fullback Jim Bresnick, 
that none of the players was given a stress test as part of his physical examina-
tion. The oversight was attributed to laxness by the coach and trainer, who are 
described today as being “distraught.” It is the judgment of many that the entire 
physical education program must be reexamined with an eye to the safety and 
health of all students. 
   3. How can I express the loss I feel over the death of my son? I want to blame 
someone, but who is to blame? The coaches, for not administering more rigor-
ous physical checkups? Why should they have done more than other coaches 
have done before or than other coaches are doing at other schools? My son, for 
not telling me that he felt funny after practice? His teammates, for not telling 
the coaches that my son said he did not feel well? Myself, for not knowing that 
■ ■

42 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
something was wrong with my only child? Who is to blame? All of us and none 
of us. But placing blame will not return my son to me; I can only pray that other 
parents will not have to suffer so. Jimmy, we loved you. 
■ ■
 Level of Diction 
 In addition to responding to a writer’s choice of connotative language, observe 
the  level of diction used. Are the writer’s words primarily typical of conversa-
tional language or of a more formal style? Does the writer use slang words or 
technical words? Is the word choice concrete and vivid or abstract and intellec-
tual? These differences help to shape tone and affect our response to what we 
read. Lincoln’s word choice in “The Gettysburg Address” (see pp. 4–5) is for-
mal and abstract. Lincoln writes “on this continent” rather than “in this land,” 
“we take increased devotion” rather than “we become more committed.” 
Another style, the technical, will be found in some articles in this text. The social 
scientist may write that “the child . . . is subjected to extremely punitive disci-
pline,” whereas a nonspecialist, more informally, might write that “the child is 
controlled by beatings or other forms of punishment.” 
 One way to create an informal style is to choose simple words:  land instead 
of  continent. To create greater informality, a writer can use contractions:  we’ll for 
 we will. There are no contractions in “The Gettysburg Address.” 
 Sentence Structure 
 Attitude is conveyed and tone created primarily through word choice, but 
 sentence structure and other rhetorical strategies are also important. Studying a 
writer’s sentence patterns will reveal how they affect style and tone. When 
 analyzing these features, consider the following questions:
 1. 
 Are the sentences generally long or short, or varied in length? 
 Are the structures primarily:
 •  Simple (one independent clause) 
   In 1900 empires dotted the world. 
 •  Compound (two or more independent clauses) 
   Women make up only 37 percent of television characters, yet women make 
up more than half of the population. 
 •  Complex (at least one independent and one dependent clause) 
   As nations grew wealthier, traditional freedom wasn’t enough. 
 Sentences that are both long and complex create a more formal style. 
Compound sentences joined by  and do not increase formality much because such 
sentences are really only two or more short, simple patterns hooked together. 
NOTE: In your academic and professional writing, you should aim for a 
style informal enough to be inviting to readers but one that, in most cases, 
avoids contractions or slang words.

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
43
On the other hand, a long “simple” sentence with many modifiers will create a 
more formal style. The following example, from an essay on leadership by 
Michael Korda, is more complicated than the sample compound sentence above:  
 •  Expanded simple sentence 
  [A] leader is like a mirror, reflecting back to us our own sense of purpose, 
putting into words our own dreams and hopes, transforming our needs 
and fears into coherent policies and programs. 
 In “The Gettysburg Address” three sentences range from 10 to 16 words, 
six sentences from 21 to 29 words, and the final sentence is an incredible 
82 words. All but two of Lincoln’s sentences are either complex or compound-
complex sentences. By contrast, in “The Future Is Now,” Joel Achenbach 
includes a paragraph with five sentences. These sentences are composed of 7, 
11, 3, 11, and 19 words each. All five are simple sentences. 
 2. 
 Does the writer use sentence fragments (incomplete sentences)? 
 Although many instructors struggle to rid student writing of fragments, profes-
sional writers know that the occasional fragment can be used effectively for 
emphasis. Science fiction writer Bruce Sterling, thinking about the “melancholic 
beauty” of a gadget no longer serving any purpose, writes:
 • Like Duchamp’s bottle-rack, it becomes a found objet d’art. A metallic fossil 
of some lost human desire. A kind of involuntary poem. 
 The second and third sentences are, technically, fragments, but because they 
build on the structure of the first sentence, readers can add the missing words  It 
becomes to complete each sentence. The brevity, repetition of structure, and 
involvement of the reader to “complete” the fragments all contribute to a strong 
conclusion to Sterling’s paragraph.  
 3. 
 Does the writer seem to be using an overly simplistic style? If so, why? 
 Overly simplistic sentence patterns, just like an overly simplistic choice of words, 
can be used to show that the writer thinks the subject is silly or childish or insult-
ing. In one of her columns, Ellen Goodman objects to society’s over-simplifying 
of addictions and its need to believe in quick and lasting cures. She makes her 
point with reference to two well-known examples—but notice her technique:
 • Hi, my name is Jane and I was once bulimic but now I am an exercise 
guru . . .  
 • Hi, my name is Oprah and I was a food addict but now I am a size 10.  
 4. 
 Does the writer use parallelism (coordination) or antithesis (contrast)? 
 When two phrases or clauses are parallel in structure, the message is that they 
are equally important. Look back at Korda’s expanded simple sentence. He coor-
dinates three phrases, asserting that a leader is like a mirror in these three ways:
 • Reflects back our purpose 
 • Puts into words our dreams  
 • Transforms our needs and fears 

44 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
REMEMBER: Pay attention to each writer’s choice of metaphors. Metaphors 
reveal much about feelings and perceptions of life. And, like connotative 
words, they affect us emotionally even if we are not aware of their use. Become 
aware. Be able to “open up”—explain—metaphors you find in your reading.
 Antithesis creates tension. A sentence using this structure says “not this” but 
“that.” Lincoln uses both parallelism and antithesis in one striking sentence:  
 • The world will little note nor long remember
 
 what we say here, 
   but it [the world] can never forget
 
 what they did here. 
 Metaphors 
 When Korda writes that a leader is like a mirror, he is using a  simile. When Lincoln 
writes that the world will not remember, he is using a  metaphor —actually  personi-
fication. Metaphors, whatever their form, all make a comparison between two 
items that are not really alike. The writer is making a  figurative comparison, not a 
literal one. The writer wants us to think about some ways in which the items are 
similar. Metaphors state directly or imply the comparison; similes express the 
comparison using a connecting word; personification always compares a nonhu-
man item to humans. The exact label for a metaphor is not as important as
 • recognizing the use of a figure of speech, 
 • identifying the two items being compared, 
 • understanding the point of the comparison, and  
 • grasping the emotional impact of the figurative comparison.  
 EXERCISE: Opening Up Metaphors 
 During World War II, E. B. White, the essayist and writer of children’s books, defined 
the word  democracy in one of his  New Yorker columns. His definition contains a series 
of metaphors. One is: Democracy “is the hole in the stuffed shirt through which the 
 sawdust slowly trickles.” We can open up or explain the metaphor this way: 
 Just as one can punch a hole in a scarecrow’s shirt and discover that there is 
only sawdust inside, nothing to be impressed by, so the idea of equality in a 
democracy “punches” a hole in the notion of an aristocratic ruling class and 
reveals that aristocrats, underneath, are ordinary people, just like you and me.  
 Here are two more of White’s metaphors on democracy. Open up each one in a few sentences. 
 Democracy is “the dent in the high hat.”
Democracy is “the score at the  beginning of the ninth.”  
■ ■
■ ■

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
45
 Organization and Examples 
 Two other elements of writing, organization and choice of examples, also reveal 
attitude and help to shape the reader’s response. When you study a work’s orga-
nization, ask yourself questions about both placement and volume. Where are 
these ideas placed? At the beginning or end—the places of greatest  emphasis—
or in the middle, suggesting that they are less important? With regard to volume, 
ask yourself, “What parts of the discussion are developed at length? What points 
are treated only briefly?”  Note: Sometimes simply counting the number of para-
graphs devoted to the different parts of the writer’s subject will give you a good 
understanding of the writer’s main idea and purpose in writing.  
 Repetition 
 Well-written, unified essays will contain some repetition of key words and 
phrases. Some writers go beyond this basic strategy and use repetition to pro-
duce an effective cadence, like a drum beating in the background, keeping 
time to the speaker’s fist pounding the lectern. In his repetition of the now-
famous phrase “I have a dream,” Martin Luther King Jr. gives emphasis to his 
vision of an ideal America. In the following paragraph, a student tried her 
hand at repetition to give emphasis to her definition of liberty: 
 Liberty is having the right to vote and not having other laws which restrict 
that right; it is having the right to apply to the university of your choice 
without being rejected because of race. Liberty exists when a gay man has 
the right to a teaching position and is not released from the position when 
the news of his orientation is disclosed. Liberty exists when a woman who 
has been offered a job does not have to decline for lack of access to day 
care for her children, or when a 16-year-old boy from a ghetto can get an 
education and is not instead compelled to go to work to support his 
needy family.  
 These examples suggest that repetition generally gives weight and seriousness 
to writing and thus is appropriate when serious issues are being discussed in a 
forceful style. 
 Hyperbole, Understatement, and Irony 
 These three strategies create some form of tension to gain emphasis. Hyperbole 
overstates:
 • “I will love you through all eternity!”  
 Understatement says less than is meant:
 • Coming in soaking wet, you say, “It’s a bit damp outside.”  
 Irony creates tension by stating the opposite of what is meant:
 • To a teen dressed in torn jeans and a baggy sweatshirt, the parent says, 
“Dressed for dinner, I see.” 

46 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 Quotation Marks, Italics, and Capital Letters 
 Several visual techniques can also be used to give special attention to certain 
words. A writer can place a word or phrase within quotation marks to ques-
tion its validity or meaning in that context. Ellen Goodman writes, for 
example:
 • I wonder about this when I hear the word “family” added to some 
 politician’s speech. 
 Goodman does not agree with the politician’s meaning of the word  family. The 
expression  so-called has the same effect:
 • There have been restrictions on the Tibetans’ so-called liberty. 
 Italicizing a key word or phrase or using all caps also gives additional emphasis. 
Dave Barry, in an essay satirizing “smart” technology, uses all caps for emphasis:
 • Do you want appliances that are smarter than you? Of course not. Your 
appliances should be DUMBER than you, just like your furniture, your pets 
and your representatives in Congress. 
 Capitalizing words not normally capitalized has the same effect of giving 
emphasis. As with exclamation points, writers need to use these strategies 
 sparingly, or the emphasis sought will be lost. 
 EXERCISES: Recognizing Elements of Style 
    1. Name the technique or techniques used in each of the following passages. Then 
briefly explain the idea of each passage.
 a. We are becoming the tools of our tools. (Henry David Thoreau) 
   b. The bias and therefore the business of television is to  move  information, not 
collect it. (Neil Postman) 
   c. If guns are outlawed, only the government will have guns. Only the police, the 
secret police, the military. The hired servants of our rulers. Only the 
 government—and a few outlaws. (Edward Abbey) 
   d. Having read all the advice on how to live 900 years, what I think is that eating 
a tasty meal once again will surely doom me long before I reach 900 while not 
eating that same meal could very well kill me. It’s enough to make you reach 
for a cigarette! (Russell Baker) 
   e. If you are desperate for a quick fix, either legalize drugs or repress the user. If 
you want a civilized approach, mount a propaganda campaign against drugs. 
(Charles Krauthammer) 
   f. 
Oddly enough, the greatest scoffers at the traditions of American etiquette, 
who scorn the rituals of their own society as stupid and stultifying, voice 
respect for the customs and folklore of Native Americans, less industrialized 
people, and other societies they find more “authentic” than their own. 
(Judith Martin) 
■ ■

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
47
 g. Text is story. Text is event, performance, special effect. Subtext is ideas. It’s 
motive, suggestions, visual implications, subtle comparisons. (Stephen Hunter) 
 h. This flashy vehicle [the school bus] was as punctual as death: seeing us wait-
ing at the cold curb, it would sweep to a halt, open its mouth, suck the boy in, 
and spring away with an angry growl. (E. B. White) 
 2. Read the following essay by Dave Barry. Use the questions that precede and 
 follow the essay to help you determine Barry’s attitude toward his subject and 
to characterize his style.  
■ ■
   NOW THAT IT’S ALL OVER, 
LET’S EAT!  
           DAVE  BARRY  
 A humor columnist for the  Miami Herald for many years, Dave Barry is syndicated in 
more than 150 newspapers. He is a Pulitzer Prize winner for his humor columns and is 
the author of a number of books, including  Dave Barry’s Complete Guide to Guys 
(2000), a laugh-out-loud look at what guys are thinking, and not thinking, and, with 
Ridley Pearson, a series of illustrated books for young readers 10 and up. The follow-
ing column appeared September 6, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    What is Barry’s purpose in writing? What does he want 
to accomplish—besides being funny?  
 After many standing ovations and much shouting of “whoo,” the 
Democrats have wrapped up their convention and are heading home, except 
for Bill Clinton, who is expected to conclude his remarks sometime around 
Halloween. 
 So now both major political parties have presented their visions for 
America’s future, which can be summarized as follows: 
 THE DEMOCRATIC VISION: If we elect Mitt Romney and Paul Ryan, the 
nation is going straight down the toilet. 
 THE REPUBLICAN VISION: If we reelect Barack Obama and Joe Biden, 
the nation is going straight down the toilet. 
 And now, at last, the time has come for us, the American people—having 
been presented with these two starkly contrasting philosophies of govern-
ment at a critical time in our nation’s history—to watch football. But first let’s 
take a few minutes to look back on the two conventions, and see what obser-
vations we can make. 
 OBSERVATION ONE: The atmosphere sometimes produces weather. 
 You’d think that two political parties teeming with highly informed 
geniuses eager to run the country would already be aware of this fact, but 
apparently they are not, since the Republicans scheduled their convention in 
Florida during hurricane season, and the Democrats scheduled their big night 
for an outdoor stadium in North Carolina in the summer. I am not suggesting 
here that these geniuses are stupid. 
 No, wait, I am suggesting that. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

48 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 OBSERVATION TWO: Street protests are ineffective, by which I mean stupid. 
 For two weeks now, I have watched protesters shouting. They never talk; 
they always shout, often through bullhorns—at the police, at the media, at 
each other, at civilian passersby, and sometimes at nothing. I do not believe 
any of these protesters changed anybody’s mind about anything, because—
follow me closely—normal people do not like to be shouted at. 
 Normal people also are not inclined to listen receptively to arguments 
presented by anybody dressed as a giant vagina, or a giant anything else. One 
night in Tampa, as I was walking to my rental car, a convertible pulled up, and 
in the back seat, riding parade style, were two people wearing full-body furry 
pink pig costumes. They told me that they were riding around Tampa at night 
dressed as pigs to persuade people to stop eating meat. As they explained 
their views, my reaction was not to think, “They’re right! I shall become a 
 vegetarian”! My reaction was a combination of, “These people are insane,” 
and “I could go for some barbecue.” 
 OBSERVATION THREE: Political conventions are not as much fun as they 
used to be. 
 By “fun,” I mean, yet again, stupid, but this time in a good way. I’m talking 
about the days when almost all the delegates wore giant ridiculous hats, and 
people got off-message, and unscripted things happened, including the occa-
sional fistfight, and the schedule got so screwed up that the presidential nomi-
nee had to deliver his acceptance speech at 3:30 a.m. in a haze of cigarette 
smoke and tear gas. 
 I’m talking about the days when every convention featured “favorite 
son” candidates—politicians who had absolutely no chance to win, but their 
state delegations nominated them anyway, purely so they could have big 
pointless fun celebrations on the convention floor. I still vividly remember 
watching, on TV, the 1968 Republican convention, during which the Hawaii 
delegation nominated Sen. Hiram Fong, thereby setting off a wondrously 
entertaining 20- minute demonstration—a joyful conga line of people weav-
ing around the floor wearing leis and waving signs that said “HI HI Hiram!” 
 That could never happen today. For one thing, Hiram is dead. (Although I 
would still vote for him.) But the main reason is that nothing remotely frivolous 
or spontaneous is allowed to happen at conventions anymore. This means that 
almost all the “excitement” comes from judging how well or poorly a given 
speaker executed a given speech. Inside the convention bubble, everybody 
gets very worked up about this; much of what passes for journalism consists of 
journalists declaring, with journalistic certainty, how a given speaker made 
them feel. 
 Anyway, the conventions are over. We won’t go through this again for 
another four years. And we have no way of knowing where the nation will be then. 
 No, wait, we do: the toilet. 
 I don’t know about you, but I’m ready for some football. 
Source: Miami Herald, September 6, 2012. Reprinted by permission of Tribune Media Services.
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
49
 QUESTIONS FOR READING AND REASONING 
 1. 
Humor is not a subject; it may be a purpose or a strategy. What is Barry’s 
subject? 
 2. 
What is his claim—that is, what point does he want to make about his subject? 
 3. 
How would you describe the essay’s tone? Does a nonserious tone exclude the 
possibility of a degree of serious purpose? Explain your answer. 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 4. 
What passage in Barry’s column do you find the funniest? Why? 
 5. 
What specific strategies does Barry use to create tone and convey attitude? List, 
with examples, as many as you can.  
 WRITING ABOUT STYLE 
 What does it mean to “do a style analysis”? A style analysis answers the ques-
tion “How is it written?” Let’s think through the steps in preparing a study of a 
writer’s choice and arrangement of language.  
 Understanding Purpose and Audience 
 A style analysis is not the place for challenging the ideas of the writer. A style 
analysis requires the discipline to see how a work has been put together  even if 
you disagree with the writer’s views.  You do not have to agree with a writer to 
appreciate his or her skill in writing. 
 If you think about audience in the context of your purpose, you should 
conclude that a summary of content does not belong in a style analysis. Why? 
Because we write style analyses for people who have already read the work. 
Remember, though, that your reader may not know the work in detail, so give 
examples to illustrate the points of your analysis.  
 Planning the Essay 
 First, organize your analysis according to elements of style, not according to the 
organization of the work. Scrap any thoughts of “hacking” your way through the 
essay, commenting on the work paragraph by paragraph. This approach invites 
summary and means that you have not selected an organization that supports 
your purpose in writing. Think of an essay as like the pie in  Figure 2.1. We could 
divide the pie according to key ideas—if we were summarizing. But we can also 
carve the pie according to elements of style, the techniques we have discussed in 
this chapter. This is the general plan you want to follow for your essay. 
 Choose those techniques you think are most important in creating the writ-
er’s attitude and discuss them one at a time. Do not try to include the entire pie; 
instead, select three or four elements to examine in detail. If you were asked to 
write an analysis of the Dave Barry column, for example, you might select his 

50 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
Word choice
Metaphors
Irony,
hyperbole,
understatement
Organization
Repetition
Caps,
quotations,
italics
Sentence
structure
FIGURE 2.1  Analyzing Style 
use of quotation marks, hyperbole, and irony. These are three  techniques that 
stand out in Barry’s writing. 
 Drafting the Style Analysis 
 If you were to select three elements of style, as in the Dave Barry example 
above, your essay might look something like this:
Paragraph 1: Introduction 
1. Attention-getter
 
 2.  Author, title, publication 
 information of article/book
 
3.  Brief explanation of author’s subject
 
4.  Your thesis—that you will be 
 looking at style
Paragraph 2: First body paragraph 
 Analysis of quotation marks. (See 
below for  more details on body 
paragraphs.)
Paragraph 3: Second body paragraph 
 1.  Topic sentence that introduces 
 analysis of hyperbole
 
2.  Three or more examples of 
hyperbole
 
 3.  Explanation of how each example 
connects to the author’s thesis—that 
is, how the example of hyperbole 
works to convey attitude. This is 
your analysis; don’t forget it!

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
51
Paragraph 4: Third body paragraph 
 Analysis of irony—with same three 
parts as listed above.
Paragraph 5: Conclusion 
 Restate your thesis: We can understand 
Barry’s point through a study of these 
three elements of his style. 
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION   
 When revising and polishing your draft, use these questions to complete your 
essay.
 u   Have I handled all titles correctly? 
 u   Have I correctly referred to the author? 
 u   Have I used quotation marks correctly when presenting examples of style? 
(Use the guidelines in Chapter 1 for these first three questions.) 
 u   Do I have an accurate, clear presentation of the author’s subject and thesis? 
 u   Do I have enough examples of each element of style to show my readers 
that these elements are important? 
 u   Have I connected examples to the author’s thesis? That is, have I shown my 
readers how these techniques work to develop the author’s attitude? 
 To reinforce your understanding of style analysis, read the following essay by 
Ellen Goodman, answer the questions that follow, and then study the student 
essay that analyzes Goodman’s style. 
 IN PRAISE OF A SNAIL’S PACE   
 ELLEN   GOODMAN  
 Author of  Close to Home  (1979),  At Large (1981), and  Keeping Touch (1985), 
 collections of her essays, Ellen Goodman began as a feature writer for the Boston 
 Globe in 1967 and was a syndicated columnist from 1976 until her retirement in 2009. 
The following column was published August 13, 2005.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Why might someone write in praise of snail mail? What 
does Goodman mean by “hyperactive technology”? 
 CASCO BAY, Maine—I arrive at the island post office carrying an artifact 
from another age. It’s a square envelope, handwritten, with a return address 
that can be found on a map. Inside is a condolence note, a few words of 
memory and sympathy to a wife who has become a widow. I could have sent 
these words far more efficiently through e-mail than through this “snail mail.” 
But I am among those who still believe that sympathy is diluted by two-thirds 
when it arrives over the Internet transom. 
1

 Are we having fun yet? 
52 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 I would no more send an e-condolence than an e-thank you or an  e-wedding 
invitation. There are rituals you cannot speed up without destroying them. It 
would be like serving Thanksgiving dinner at a fast-food restaurant. 
 My note goes into the old blue mailbox and I walk home wondering if 
slowness isn’t the only way we pay attention now in a world of hyperactive 
technology. 
 Weeks ago, a friend lamented the trouble she had communicating with 
her grown son. It wasn’t that her son was out of touch. Hardly. They were con-
nected across miles through e-mail and cell phone, instant-messaging and 
text-messaging. But she had something serious to say and feared that an 
e-mail would elicit a reply that said: I M GR8. Was there no way to get 
 undivided attention in the full in-box of his life? She finally chose a letter, a 
pen on paper, a stamp on envelope. 
 How do you describe the times we live in, so connected and yet frac-
tured? Linda Stone, a former Microsoft techie, characterizes ours as an era 
of “continuous partial attention.” At the extreme end are teenagers 
instant-messaging while they are talking on the cell phone, downloading 
music and doing homework. But adults too live with all systems go, inter-
rupted and distracted, scanning everything, multi-technological-tasking 
everywhere.
2
3
4
5

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
53
 We suffer from the illusion, Stone says, that we can expand our personal 
bandwidth, connecting to more and more. Instead, we end up overstimulated, 
overwhelmed and, she adds, unfulfilled. Continuous partial attention inevita-
bly feels like a lack of full attention. 
 But there are signs of people searching for ways to slow down and listen 
up. We are told that experienced e-mail users are taking longer to answer, 
freeing themselves from the tyranny of the reply button. Caller ID is used to 
find out who we don’t have to talk to. And the next “killer ap,” they say, will be 
e-mail software that can triage the important from the trivial. 
 Meanwhile, at companies where technology interrupts creativity and 
online contact prevents face-to-face contact, there are no e-mail-free Fridays. 
At others, there are bosses who require that you check your BlackBerry at the 
meeting door. 
 If a ringing cell phone once signaled your importance to a client, now that 
client is impressed when you turn off the cell phone. People who stayed con-
nected 10 ways, 24-7, now pride themselves on “going dark.” 
 “People hunger for more attention,” says Stone, whose message has been 
welcomed even at a conference of bloggers. “Full attention will be the aphro-
disiac of the future.” 
 Indeed, at the height of our romance with e-mail, “You’ve Got Mail” was 
the cinematic love story. Now e-mail brings less thrill—“who will be there?” 
And more dread—“how many are out there?” Today’s romantics are couples 
who leave their laptops behind on the honeymoon. 
 As for text-message flirtation, a young woman ended hers with a man who 
wrote, “C U L8R.” He didn’t have enough time to spell out Y-O-U? 
 Slowness guru Carl Honore began “In Praise of Slowness” after he found 
himself seduced by a book of condensed classic fairy tales to read to his son. 
One-minute bedtime stories? We are relearning that paying attention briefly is 
as impossible as painting a landscape from a speeding car. 
 It is not just my trip to the mailbox that has brought this to mind. I come 
here each summer to stop hurrying. My island is no Brigadoon: WiFi is on the 
way, and some people roam the island with their cell phones, looking for a hot 
spot. But I exchange the Internet for the country road. 
 Georgia O’Keeffe once said that it takes a long time to see a flower. No 
technology can rush the growth of the leeks in the garden. All the speed in the 
Internet cannot hurry the healing of a friend’s loss. Paying attention is the coin 
of this realm. 
 Sometimes, a letter becomes the icon of an old-fashioned new fashion. 
And sometimes, in this technological whirlwind, it takes a piece of snail mail to 
carry the stamp of authenticity.  
Source: Washington Post, August 13, 2005 © 2005 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
www.washingtonpost.com
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

54 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING AND REASONING 
 1. 
What has Goodman just done? How does this action serve the author as a lead-
in to her subject?  
 2. 
What is Goodman’s main idea or thesis? 
 3. 
What examples illustrate the problem the author sees in our times? What evi-
dence does Goodman present to suggest that people want to change the times? 
 4. 
What general solutions does Goodman suggest? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 5. 
How do the details at the beginning and end of the essay contribute to 
Goodman’s point? Write a paragraph answer to this question. Then consider: 
Which one of the different responses to reading does your paragraph 
illustrate?  
  6. 
The author describes our time as one of “continuous partial attention.” Does 
this phrase sum up our era? Why or why not? If you agree, do you think this is 
a problem? Why or why not?  
 7. 
For what kinds of research projects would this essay be useful? List several pos-
sibilities to discuss with classmates.  
 STUDENT ESSAY 
 A Convincing Style
James Goode
Ellen Goodman’s essay,  “In Praise of a Snail’s Pace,” is not, of course, 
about snails. It is about a way of communicating that our society has largely 
lost or ignored: the capability to pay full attention in communications and 
relationships. Her prime example of this is the “snail mail” letter, used for 
cards, invitations, and condolences.  Anything really worth saying,  she argues, 
must be written fully and sent by mail to make us pay attention. Goodman’s 
easy,  winning style of word choice and metaphor persuades us to agree with 
her point, a point also backed up by the logic of her examples.
“In Praise of a Snail’s Pace” starts innocently.  The author is merely taking 
a walk to the post office with a letter, surely nothing unusual. But as Goodman 
describes her letter, she reveals her belief that  “snail mail” is a much more 
authentic way of sharing serious tidings than a message that  “arrives over the 

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
55
Internet transom.”  The letter, with its “square” envelope and  “handwritten” 
address, immediately sounds more personal than the ultramodern electronic 
message.  The words have guided the reader’s thinking. Goodman also describes 
our times as “connected yet fractured” and us as living in a world of 
“continuous partial attention.” “Being connected” becomes synonymous by the 
end of the essay with “not paying attention.”  Word choice is crucial here. The 
author creates in the reader’s mind a dichotomy: be fast and false, or slow down 
and mean it.
Goodman’s metaphors make a point, too. “A picture is worth a 
thousand words” and the pictures created by the words here further the 
fast/slow debate.  The idea that sending an e-condolence would be “like 
serving  Thanksgiving dinner at a fast-food restaurant” gives an instant image 
of the worthlessness of an e-mail condolence note.  The mother trying to 
get attention in the “full in-box” of her son’s life shows us that a divided and 
distracted brain answering five hundred e-mails cannot be expected to 
concentrate on any of them.  Again, trying to pay attention briefly is just as 
impossible as “painting a landscape from a speeding car.” The “tyranny” of 
the reply button must be overcome by our “going dark.” Getting away from 
our electronic world, Goodman reasons, helps us restore meaning to 
what we do.
But while the reader listens to clever words and paints memorable mind 
pictures, any resistance is worn away with a steady stream of examples. From 
the author mailing an envelope to Georgia O’Keeffe’s remark that it takes a 
long time to see a flower, example after example supports her view.  The 
mother wishing for the total attention of her son and the office workers’ 
turning off cell phones and computers have already been mentioned. Linda 
Stone, a former Microsoft techie and a credible authority on modern 
communications and their effects on users, is quoted several times. Goodman 
notes with excellent effect that Stone’s message has been received even at a 
conference of bloggers—if the most connected group out there supports this, 

GUIDELINES for
 •  Work with sources that have something in common.  Think about the 
context for each, that is, each source’s subject and purpose. (There is 
 little sense in contrasting a textbook chapter, for example, with a TV talk 
show because their contexts are so different.)  
 •  Read actively to understand the content of the two sources.  Tape 
films, radio, or TV shows so that you can listen/view them several times, 
just as you would read a written source more than once.  
 Preparing a Contrast Essay 
56 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 ANALYZING TWO OR MORE SOURCES 
 Scientists examining the same set of facts do not always draw the same conclu-
sions; neither do historians and biographers agree on the significance of the 
same documents. How do we recognize and cope with these disparities? As 
critical readers we analyze what we read, pose questions, and refuse to believe 
everything we find in print or online. To develop these skills in recognizing dif-
ferences, instructors frequently ask students to contrast the views of two or 
more writers. In psychology class, for example, you may be asked to contrast 
the views of Sigmund Freud and John B. Watson on child development. In a 
communications course, you may be asked to contrast the moderator styles of 
two talk-show hosts. We can examine differences in content or presentation, or 
both. Here are guidelines for preparing a contrast of sources. 
why shouldn’t everyone else?  The author herself comes to an island every 
year to escape the mad hurry of the business world by wandering country 
roads.  These examples build until the reader is convinced that snail mail is the 
mark of authenticity and connectedness.
“In Praise of a Snail’s Pace” is a thoughtful essay that takes aim at the 
notion that one person can do it all and still find meaning.  The “connected” 
person is in so much of a hurry that he or she must not be really interested in 
much of anything. By showing “interrupted and distracted” readers that “no 
technology can rush the growth of the leeks in the garden,” the author makes 
a convincing case for the real effectiveness of written mail.  Whether through 
word choice, metaphor, or example, Ellen Goodman’s message comes through: 
Slow down and send some “snail mail” and be really connected for once.

 •  Analyze for differences, focusing on your purpose in contrasting.  If 
you are contrasting the ideas of two writers, for example, then your analy-
sis will focus on ideas, not on writing style. To explore differences in two 
news accounts, you may want to consider all of the following: the impact 
of placement in the newspaper/magazine, accompanying photographs or 
graphics, length of each article, what is covered in each article, and writ-
ing styles. Prepare a list of specific differences.  
 •  Organize your contrast.  It is usually best to organize by points of differ-
ence. If you write first about one source and then about the other, the 
ways that the sources differ may not be clear for readers. Take the time to 
plan an organization that clearly reveals your contrast purpose in writing. 
To illustrate, a paper contrasting the writing styles of two authors can be 
organized according to the following pattern: 
 Introduction: Introduce your topic and establish your purpose to  contrast 
styles of writer A and writer B.
A1
Sentence structures of writer A and writer B
B1
A2
Word choices of writer A and writer B
B2
A3
Metaphors used by writer A and writer B
B3
 Conclusion: Explain the effect of the differences in style of the writers. 
 •  Illustrate and discuss each of the points of difference for each of the 
sources.  Provide examples and explain the impact of the differences.  
 •  Always write for an audience who may be familiar with your general 
topic but not with the specific sources you are discussing.  Be sure to 
provide adequate context (names, titles of works, etc.).  
 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
57
 EXERCISE: Analyzing Two Sources 
 Whenever two people choose to write on the same topic, there are bound to be differ-
ences in choice of specifics and emphasis—as well as differences in political, social, or 
philosophical perspective. So, we need to read widely and not settle for only one 
source for our information. When reading newspapers, journals of opinion, and blogs, 
we need to become aware of the  “leaning”  or  “slant”  of each source. 
 Read the following two articles on the taking of hostages at an Algerian oil field by 
jihadists and the death of some hostages and some kidnappers when Algerian armed 
forces sought to free the hostages, an event that was covered by all news outlets as the 
■ ■

58 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
story unfolded. Analyze each article for possible differences on the following points: 
impact of any visuals, length of treatment, differences in key points about the story, 
differences in how the issue is framed—in the context provided—and differences in 
style and tone.  
 Bring detailed notes to class for discussion, or write an analysis that contrasts the 
two articles on several key points of difference. 
■ ■
  
ALGERIAN HOSTAGE CRISIS HEIGHTENS 
AS SCORES ARE REPORTED DEAD  
     ARTHUR  BRIGHT 
 This article was posted January 17, 2013, by the  Christian Science Monitor at 
 CSMonitor.com . 
 Dozens of hostages, both Algerian and foreign, have reportedly escaped 
the natural gas field in eastern Algeria that Islamic militants seized on Monday, 
but as the hostage situation enters its second day, an estimated 35 hostages 
and 15 hostage-takers were killed in an airstrike as they tried to move from 
one plant location to another, reports Al Jazeera and Reuters. 
 Reuters reports that according to Algerian news sources, some 30 
Algerians and 15 foreigners have escaped the natural gas field in the Sahara 
Desert near the Algerian-Libyan border. But scores of Algerians and dozens of 
foreigners remain hostages of the “Battalion of Blood” militant group, accord-
ing to statements that the hostages were allowed to make in phone calls to 
news outlets. 
 An unidentified hostage who spoke to France 24 television said prison-
ers were being forced to wear explosive belts. Their captors were heavily 
armed and had threatened to blow up the plant if the Algerian army tried to 
storm it. 
 Two hostages, identified as British and Irish, spoke to Al Jazeera television 
and called on the Algerian army to withdraw from the area to avoid 
casualties. 
 “We are receiving care and good treatment from the kidnappers. The 
(Algerian) army did not withdraw and they are firing at the camp,” the British 
man said. “There are around 150 Algerian hostages. We say to everybody that 
negotiations is a sign of strength and will spare many any loss of life.” 
 Reuters adds that US, French, and British officials did not confirm the num-
bers of their respective citizens who were being held by the terrorist group. 
 Although the raid on the field comes just days after the start of France’s 
intervention in Mali, it is unlikely the attack was a spur-of-the-moment response 
to events in Mali. Helima Croft, a Barclays Capital senior geopolitical strate-
gist, told the  New York Times  that “this type of attack had to have advanced 
planning. It’s not an easy target of opportunity.” 
Source: Reprinted with permission from the January 17, 2013 issue of The Christian Science Monitor. 
© 2013 The Christian Science Monitor (www.CSMonitor.com).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
59
 HOSTAGES REPORTEDLY DEAD 
IN ALGERIAN OIL FIELD SIEGE   
 JAMIE DETTMER
 The kidnapping of oil workers—including several Americans—on Algerian 
soil by jihadists has apparently ended in tragedy.   
 This article also appeared on January 17, 2013, posted at  The Daily Beast. 
 At least half-a-dozen Western oil workers including Americans held hos-
tage since Wednesday by heavily armed al-Qaeda-linked Islamists at a natural 
gas complex in eastern Algeria died today when Algerian government forces 
mounted an attack to free them, say the militants holding them. 
 Amid confusing reports, the casualties at the sprawling Amenas gas com-
plex 800 miles southeast of Algiers are being put at anything from six hostages 
to 34, including Algerian workers. Several captors, including the kidnappers’ 
ground leader, Abou El Baraa, are said to have died, too, in the mission 
mounted by Algerian security forces that involved low-flying helicopter assaults. 
 A private security source working for oil companies in Algeria told  The Daily 
Beast the operation to retake the facility was “messy.” He added: “The Algerian 
soldiers were firing pretty indiscriminately. This wasn’t a surgical operation.” 
 A spokesman for the British Foreign Office confirmed an “ongoing military 
operation” against the hostage takers but couldn’t verify whether there’d 
been casualties. Nor would he comment on reports that about 15 foreign hos-
tages had escaped earlier from the gas field near the Libyan border that’s run 
by BP, the Norwegian company Statoil, and Algeria’s state oil agency. 
 The Algerian operation mounted to break the Sahara Desert siege came 
as security experts started to pin down the motives behind the seizing of the 
gas field by militants loyal to the notorious one-eyed Jihadist warlord, Mokhtar 
Belmokhtar, who is nicknamed variously “The Uncatchable”—he has been 
reported killed several times—or “Mr. Marlboro” for his involvement in 
 cigarette smuggling that has helped to finance his operations. 
 Militants seized the facility on Wednesday, saying the attack was in 
response to France’s military intervention in neighboring Mali, where French 
Foreign legionnaires have joined Malian government troops in halting 
advances by Islamists who have taken over much of northern Mali. 
 But terrorism analysts say Belmokhtar had more than one objective in mind 
when he ordered his fighters in a well-planned operation to seize the facility 
and secure Western hostages, including boosting his own standing among 
jihadists after he was recently passed over for promotion within al-Qaeda. 
 An Algerian native with a storied two-decade history of armed militancy, 
Belmokhtar was one of the leading figures of al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb 
(AQIM) and commanded a highly effective cell of fighters in north Mali until 
October, when Yahya Abou El Hamame was appointed over him as AQIM’s 
“Emir of the Sahel.” 
 “He has a reputation as an autonomous operator,” says Stephen Ellis of 
the African Studies Center at the University of Leiden in The Netherlands. “He 
is well known as going his own way both when it comes to his criminal and 
smuggling activities and his militancy. In the Sahel the various jihadist groups 
are very fissiparous. They split and re-form regularly only to split again.” 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

60 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 Some of the differences that cause division are not only connected to dis-
putes over terrorism strategy or ideology. Leaders clash over the spoils that 
can be made—from ransoms paid for the release of Western hostages to the 
distribution of profits from smuggling guns, drugs, and tobacco. 
 Following his being passed over for promotion, Belmokhtar left the 
 al-Qaeda franchise to set up his own jihadi outfit, naming it Khaled Abu-al-
Abbas Brigaed or al-Muwaqqu’un bil-Dima (Those Who Sign in Blood). 
. . .
 One of his associates, Oumar Ould Hamaha, told the Associated Press in 
the autumn that they were leaving al-Qaeda “so that we can better operate in 
the field. . . . We want to enlarge our zone of operation throughout the entire 
Sahara, going from Niger through to Chad and Burkina Faso.” 
 Born in Ghardaia, Algeria, in 1972, Belmokhtar traveled to Afghanistan as a 
19-year-old to join training camps run by jihadists, returning in 1992 to his homeland, 
joining first Algeria’s Islamic Armed Group (GIA) then helping to set up the Salafist 
Group for Preaching and combat (GSPC) that subsequently merged with al-Qaeda. 
 Belmokhtar is reported to be in alliance now with another former AQIM 
fighter Hamadou Ould Khairou, a Mauritanian that U.S. security sources say is 
involved in the drug trade. 
. . .
 “In my opinion, even if Belmokhtar uses the slogan of the French attack in 
Mali, this is not his real intention,” said Ely Karmon, a Senior Research Scholar 
at the Institute for Counter-Terrorism at the Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya, 
Israel. “It is motivated by money.” 
 Last month, the Signed-in-Blood brigade warned against the West trying 
to halt the Islamist takeover of northern Mali. “We will respond forcefully; we 
promise we will follow you to your homes and you will feel pain and we will 
attack your interests,” warned the group.  
Source: Daily Beast, January 17, 2013. © 2013 The Newsweek/Daily Beast Company LLC. All rights 
reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, 
copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek.html
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Mokhtar Belmokhtar

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
61
 FOR READING AND ANALYSIS 
 THE “F WORD”   
 FIROOZEH   DUMAS  
 Born in Iran, Firoozeh Dumas moved to California when she was seven, returned to 
Iran with her family for two years, and then came back to California. She attended the 
University of California at Berkeley, married, and has three children. Initially she 
started to write stories for her children. These were developed into  Funny in Farsi: A 
Memoir of Growing Up Iranian in America (2003), from which the following excerpt is 
taken.  Laughing Without an Accent  was followed in 2008.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Based on her title, what did you first think this work would 
be about? How does the information above help you to adjust your thinking? 
 My cousin’s name, Farbod, means “Greatness.” 
 When he moved to America, all the kids called him “Farthead.” My brother 
Farshid (“He Who Enlightens”) became “Fartshit.” The name of my friend 
Neggar means “Beloved,” although it can be more accurately translated as 
“She Whose Name Almost Incites Riots.” Her brother Arash (“Giver”) initially 
couldn’t understand why every time he’d say his name, people would laugh 
and ask him if it itched. 
 All of us immigrants knew that moving to America would be fraught with 
challenges, but none of us thought that our names would be such an obstacle. 
How could our parents have ever imagined that someday we would end up in a 
country where monosyllabic names reign supreme, a land where “William” is 
shortened to “Bill,” where “Susan” becomes “Sue,” and “Richard” somehow 
evolves into “Dick”? America is a great country, but nobody without a mask and 
a cape has a  z  in his name. And have Americans ever realized the great scope of 
the guttural sounds they’re missing? Okay, so it has to do with linguistic roots, 
but I do believe this would be a richer country if all Americans could do a little 
tongue aerobics and learn to pronounce “kh,” a sound more commonly associ-
ated in this culture with phlegm, or “gh,” the sound usually made by actors in the 
final moments of a choking scene. It’s like adding a few new spices to the kitchen 
pantry. Move over, cinnamon and nutmeg, make way for cardamom and sumac. 
 Exotic analogies aside, having a foreign name in this land of Joes and Marys 
is a pain in the spice cabinet. When I was twelve, I decided to simplify my life by 
adding an American middle name. This decision serves as proof that some-
times simplifying one’s life in the short run only complicates it in the long run. 
 My name, Firoozeh, chosen by my mother, means “Turquoise” in Persian. 
In America, it means “Unpronounceable” or “I’m Not Going to Talk to You 
Because I Cannot Possibly Learn Your Name and I Just Don’t Want to Have to 
Ask You Again and Again Because You’ll Think I’m Dumb or You Might Get 
Upset or Something.” My father, incidentally, had wanted to name me Sara. I 
do wish he had won that argument. 
 To strengthen my decision to add an American name, I had just finished 
fifth grade in Whittier, where all the kids incessantly called me “Ferocious.” 
That summer, my family moved to Newport Beach, where I looked forward to 
1
2
3
4
5
6

62 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
starting a new life. I wanted to be a kid with a name that didn’t draw so much 
attention, a name that didn’t come with a built-in inquisition as to when and 
why I had moved to America and how was it that I spoke English without an 
accent and was I planning on going back and what did I think of America? 
 My last name didn’t help any. I can’t mention my maiden name, because: 
 “Dad, I’m writing a memoir.” 
 “Great! Just don’t mention our name.” 
 Suffice it to say that, with eight letters, including a  z, and four syllables, my 
last name is as difficult and foreign as my first. My first and last name together 
generally served the same purpose as a high brick wall. There was one excep-
tion to this rule. In Berkeley, and only in Berkeley, my name drew people like 
flies to baklava. These were usually people named Amaryllis or Chrysanthemum, 
types who vacationed in Costa Rica and to whom lentils described a type of 
burger. These folks were probably not the pride of Poughkeepsie, but they 
were refreshingly nonjudgmental. 
 When I announced to my family that I wanted to add an American name, 
they reacted with their usual laughter. Never one to let mockery or good 
judgment stand in my way, I proceeded to ask for suggestions. My father 
suggested “Fifi.” Had I had a special affinity for French poodles or been 
considering a career in prostitution, I would’ve gone with that one. My mom 
suggested “Farah,” a name easier than “Firoozeh” yet still Iranian. Her rea-
soning made sense, except that Farrah Fawcett was at the height of her 
popularity and I didn’t want to be associated with somebody whose poster 
hung in every postpubescent boy’s bedroom. We couldn’t think of any 
American names beginning with  F, so we moved on to  J, the first letter of 
our last name. I don’t know why we limited ourselves to names beginning 
with my initials, but it made sense at that moment, perhaps by the logic 
employed moments before bungee jumping. I finally chose the name “Julie” 
mainly for its simplicity. My brothers, Farid and Farshid, thought that adding 
an American name was totally stupid. They later became Fred and Sean. 
 That same afternoon, our doorbell rang. It was our new next-door neigh-
bor, a friendly girl my age named Julie. She asked me my name and after a 
moment of hesitation, I introduced myself as Julie. “What a  coincidence!” she 
said. I didn’t mention that I had been Julie for only half an hour. 
 Thus I started sixth grade with my new, easy name and life became infinitely 
simpler. People actually remembered my name, which was an entirely refreshing 
new sensation. All was well until the Iranian Revolution, when I found myself with 
a new set of problems. Because I spoke English without an accent and was known 
as Julie, people assumed I was American. This meant that I was often privy to their 
real feelings about those “damn I-raynians.” It was like having those X-ray glasses 
that let you see people naked, except that what I was seeing was far uglier than 
people’s underwear. It dawned on me that these people would have probably 
never invited me to their house had they known me as Firoozeh. I felt like a fake. 
 When I went to college, I eventually went back to using my real name. All 
was well until I graduated and started looking for a job. Even though I had grad-
uated with honors from UC–Berkeley, I couldn’t get a single interview. I was 
guilty of being a humanities major, but I began to suspect that there was more to 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
63
my problems. After three months of rejections, I added “Julie” to my résumé. 
Call it coincidence, but the job offers started coming in. Perhaps it’s the same 
kind of coincidence that keeps African Americans from getting cabs in New York. 
 Once I got married, my name became Julie Dumas. I went from having an 
identifiably “ethnic” name to having ancestors who wore clogs. My family and non-
American friends continued calling me Firoozeh, while my coworkers and American 
friends called me Julie. My life became one big knot, especially when friends who 
knew me as Julie met friends who knew me as Firoozeh. I felt like those characters 
in soap operas who have an evil twin. The two, of course, can never be in the same 
room, since they’re played by the same person, a struggling actress who wears a 
wig to play one of the twins and dreams of moving on to bigger and better roles. I 
couldn’t blame my mess on a screen writer; it was my own doing. 
 I decided to untangle the knot once and for all by going back to my real 
name. By then, I was a stay-at-home mom, so I really didn’t care whether people 
remembered my name or gave me job interviews. Besides, most of the people 
I dealt with were in diapers and were in no position to judge. I was also living in 
Silicon Valley, an area filled with people named Rajeev, Avishai, and Insook. 
 Every once in a while, though, somebody comes up with a new permutation 
and I am once again reminded that I am an immigrant with a foreign name. I 
recently went to have blood drawn for a physical exam. The waiting room for 
blood work at our local medical clinic is in the basement of the building, and no 
matter how early one arrives for an appointment, forty coughing, wheezing 
people have gotten there first. Apart from reading  Golf Digest  and  Popular 
Mechanics,  there isn’t much to do except guess the number of contagious dis-
eases represented in the windowless room. Every ten minutes, a name is called 
and everyone looks to see which cough matches that name. As I waited 
patiently, the receptionist called out, “Fritzy, Fritzy!” Everyone looked around, 
but no one stood up. Usually, if I’m waiting to be called by someone who 
doesn’t know me, I will respond to just about any name starting with an  F.  
Having been called Froozy, Frizzy, Fiorucci, and Frooz and just plain “Uhhhh . . . ,” 
I am highly accommodating. I did not, however, respond to “Fritzy” because 
there is, as far as I know, no  t in my name. The receptionist tried again, “Fritzy, 
Fritzy DumbAss.” As I stood up to this most linguistically original version of my 
name, I could feel all eyes upon me. The room was momentarily silent as all of 
these sick people sat united in a moment of  gratitude for their own names. 
 Despite a few exceptions, I have found that Americans are now far more 
willing to learn new names, just as they’re far more willing to try new ethnic 
foods. Of course, some people just don’t like to learn. One mom at my chil-
dren’s school adamantly refused to learn my “impossible” name and instead 
settled on calling me “F Word.” She was recently transferred to New York 
where, from what I’ve heard, she might meet an immigrant or two and, who 
knows, she just might have to make some room in her spice cabinet.  
Source: “The ‘F Word’” from Funny in Farsi: A Memoir of Growing Up Iranian in America by Firoozeh 
Dumas, copyright © 2003 by Firoozeh Dumas. Used by permission of Villard Books, a division of Random 
House, Inc. Any third party use of this material, outside of this publication, is prohibited. Interested 
parties must apply directly to Random House, Inc. for permission.
15
16
17
18

64 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What happened when the author changed her name to Julie? 
 2. What happened when she sought a job after college, using her original name? 
 3. When did she decide to use only her original name? 
 4. When Dumas is called at the medical clinic, what does she think the other 
patients are feeling?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. Although this essay may not have the “feel” of an argument, it nonetheless 
makes a point. What is Dumas’s claim?  
 6. What has changed in America since her arrival as a young girl? Is the change 
complete? What would she like to see Americans learn to do?  
 7. What writing strategies are noteworthy in creating her style? Illustrate with 
examples. 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  8. How much effort do you make to pronounce names correctly? Why is it impor-
tant to get a person’s name right?  
     9. Have you had the experience of Americans impatient with the pronunciation 
of your name—or just refusing to get it right? If so, what has been your 
response?  
 10. What might be some of the reasons Americans have trouble with the pronun-
ciation of ethnic names—whether the names belong to foreign nationals or to 
ethnic Americans? Reflect on possible causes.  
 11. What are the advantages of facing the world with humor? 
LOVE TO READ, KIDS? 
YOUR TIME IS ALMOST UP  
 ALEXANDRA  PETRI 
 A graduate of Harvard University, Alexandra Petri writes the ComPost blog, a “lighter 
take” on current issues, and is an op-ed columnist for the  Washington Post. She wrote 
for the  Harvard Crimson while at college and has appeared on Boston’s Comedy Studio 
and Comedy Connection. The following column was published December 8, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Does the author’s title make you curious about her 
subject? What do you expect her to be writing about?  
 Forget  The Catcher in the Rye. 
 New Common Core standards (which affect 46 states and the District) will 
require that, by 2014, 70 percent of high school seniors’ reading assignments 
be nonfiction. Some suggested texts include “FedViews” by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the EPA’s “Recommended Levels of Insulation” 
and “Invasive Plant Inventory” by California’s Invasive Plant Council. 
1
2

 
CHAPTER 2 Responding Critically to Sources 
65
 Forget  Huckleberry Finn  and  Moby Dick.  Bring out the woodchipping 
manuals! 
 I like reading. I love reading. I always have. I read recreationally still. I read 
on buses, in planes, while crossing streets. My entire apartment is covered in 
books. And now, through some strange concatenation of circumstances, I 
write for a living. 
 And it’s all because, as a child, my parents took the time to read me 
“Recommended Levels of Insulation.” 
 Oh. “Recommended Levels of Insulation.” That was always my favorite, 
although “Invasive Plant Inventory” was a close second. (What phrases in lit-
erature or life will ever top the rich resonance of its opening line? “The 
Inventory categorizes plants as High, Moderate, or Limited, reflecting the level 
of each species’ negative ecological impact in California. Other factors, such 
as economic impact or difficulty of management, are not included in this 
assessment.” “Call me Ishmael” has nothing on it!) 
 “It is important to note that even Limited species are invasive and should 
be of concern to land managers,” I frequently tell myself in moments of crisis. 
“Although the impact of each plant varies regionally, its rating represents 
cumulative impacts statewide.” How true that is, even today. 
 My dog-eared copy of “Recommended Levels of Insulation” still sits on 
my desk. That was where I first learned the magic of literature. 
 “Insulation levels are specified by R-Value. R-Value is a measure of insula-
tion’s ability to resist heat traveling through it.” What authority in that 
sentence! 
 And then came the table of insulation values. I shudder every time that 
table appears. It is one of the great villains in the history of the English lan-
guage. Uriah Heep and Captain Ahab can’t hold a candle to it. In fact, I do not 
know who these people are. I have never read about them. 
 I do remember curling up with “Recommended Levels of Insulation” and 
reading it over and over again. It was this that drove me to pursue writing as a 
career—the hope one day of crafting a sentence that sang the way “Drill holes 
in the sheathing and blow insulation into the empty wall cavity before install-
ing the new siding” sings. 
 Look, I was an English major, so I may be biased. But life is full of enough 
instruction manuals. 
 The best way to understand what words can do is to see them in their 
natural habitat, not constrained in the dull straitjackets of legalese and regula-
tionish and manualect. It’s like saying the proper way of encountering puppies 
is in puppy mills. Words in regulations and manuals have been mangled and 
tortured and bent into unnatural positions, and the later you have to discover 
such cruelty, the better. 
 The people behind the core have sought to defend it, saying that this 
change is not meant to supplant literature. This increased emphasis on nonfic-
tion would not be a concern if the core worked the way it was supposed to, 
with teachers in other disciplines like math and science assigning the hard 
technical texts that went along with their subjects. 
3
4
4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

66 
SECTION 1  CRITICAL READING AND ANALYSIS 
 But teachers worry that this will not happen. Principals seem to be having 
trouble comprehending the requirement themselves. Besides, the other teach-
ers are too busy, well, teaching their subjects, to inflict technical manuals on 
their students, and they may expect the English department to pick up the 
slack. Hence the feared great Purge of Literature. 
 The core has good intentions, but it will be vital to make sure the execu-
tion is as good, or we will head down the road usually paved with good inten-
tions. There, in the ninth circle, students who would otherwise have been 
tearing through Milton and Shakespeare with great excitement are forced to 
come home hugging manuals of Exotic Plants. 
 All in all, this is a great way to make the kids who like reading hate reading. 
Source: Washington Post, December 8, 2012. © 2012 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used 
by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. www.
washingtonpost.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What event has prompted Petri to write? 
 2. 
How does the author describe the language of manuals? 
 3. 
How do the Core creators defend the new requirements? 
 4. 
What does Petri think will happen? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Petri’s thesis—that is, the claim of her argument? 
 6. 
How would you describe the essay’s tone? Is it appropriate to say that there is 
more than one? Explain.  
 7. 
Analyze the author’s style: What strategies does she use? Are they effective? 
Why or why not?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTING AND WRITING 
 8. 
What is your reaction to the new Core standards? Is it important for students to 
know how to read nonfiction? Are manuals a good choice to develop this skill? 
Explain your views.  
 9. 
Should students read great works of literature throughout middle and high 
school? If yes, why? If no, why not?
15
16
17

67
   SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
    1. 
Analyze the style of one of the essays from Section 5 of this text. Do not comment on 
every element of style; select several elements that seem to characterize the writer’s 
style and examine them in detail. Remember that style analyses are written for an 
audience familiar with the work, so summary is not necessary. 
   2. 
Many of the authors included in this text have written books that you will find in 
your library. Select one that interests you, read it, and prepare a review of it that 
synthesizes summary, analysis, and evaluation. Prepare a review of about 300 
words; assume that the book has just been published. 
 3. 
Choose two newspaper and/or magazine articles that differ in their discussion of 
the same person, event, or product. You may select two different articles on a per-
son in the news, two different accounts of a news event, an advertisement and a 
 Consumer Reports analysis of the same product, or two reviews of a book or movie. 
Analyze differences in both content and presentation and then consider why the 
two accounts differ. Organize by points of difference and write to an audience not 
necessarily familiar with the articles. 
   4. 
Choose a recently scheduled public event (the Super Bowl, the Olympics, a presi-
dential election, the Academy Award presentations, the premiere of a new televi-
sion series) and find several articles written before and several after the event. First 
compare articles written after the event to see if they agree factually. If not, decide 
which article appears to be more accurate and why. Then examine the earlier mate-
rial and decide which was the most and which the least accurate. Write an essay in 
which you explain the differences in speculation before the event and why you 
think these differences exist. Your audience will be aware of the event but not neces-
sarily aware of the articles you are studying.  


 The World of Argument 
2 
 SECTION

 CHAPTER 3 
 READ: What is the situation? What is the reaction of the younger children? 
What does the older boy try to do? 
 REASON: Why is the older boy frustrated? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE: What can happen to those who lack scientific knowledge? 
 Understanding the Basics 
of Argument 
CUL DE SAC © 2008 Richard Thompson. Dist. by 
UNIVERSAL UCLICK. Reprinted with permission. 
All rights reserved.

71
 I
 n this section we will explore the processes of thinking logically and analyz-
ing issues to reach informed judgments. Remember: Mature people do not 
need to agree on all issues to respect one another’s good sense, but they do 
have little patience with uninformed or illogical statements masquerading as 
argument. 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF ARGUMENT 
 Argument Is Conversation with a Goal 
 When you enter into an argument (as speaker, writer, or reader), you become a 
participant in an ongoing debate about an issue. Since you are probably not the 
first to address the issue, you need to be aware of the ways that the issue has 
been debated by others and then seek to advance the conversation, just as you 
would if you were having a more casual conversation with friends. If the time 
of the movie is set, the discussion now turns to whose car to take or where to 
meet. If you were to just repeat the time of the movie, you would add nothing 
useful to the conversation. Also, if you were to change the subject to a movie 
you saw last week, you would annoy your friends by not offering useful 
 information or showing that you valued the current conversation. Just as with 
your conversation about the movie, you want your argument to stay focused 
on the issue, to respect what others have already contributed, and to make a 
useful addition to our understanding of the topic.  
 Argument Takes a Stand on an Arguable Issue 
 A meaningful argument focuses on a debatable issue. We usually do not argue 
about facts. “Professor Jones’s American literature class meets at 10:00 on 
Mondays” is not arguable. It is either true or false. We can check the schedule of 
classes to find out. (Sometimes the facts change; new facts replace old ones.) We 
also do not debate personal preferences for the simple reason that they are just 
that—personal. If the debate is about the appropriateness of boxing as a sport, 
for you to declare that you would rather play tennis is to fail to advance the 
conversation. You have expressed a personal preference, interesting  perhaps, 
but not relevant to the debate. 
 Argument Uses Reasons and Evidence 
 Some arguments merely “look right.” That is, conclusions are drawn from facts, 
but the facts are not those that actually support the assertion, or the conclusion 
is not the only or the best explanation of those facts. To shape convincing argu-
ments, we need more than an array of facts. We need to think critically, to ana-
lyze the issue, to see relationships, to weigh evidence. We need to avoid the 
temptation to “argue” from emotion only, or to believe that just stating our 
opinion is the same thing as building a sound argument. 

72 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 Argument Incorporates Values 
 Arguments are based not just on reason and evidence but also on the beliefs 
and values we hold and think that our audience may hold as well. In a rea-
soned debate, you want to make clear the values that you consider relevant to 
the argument. In an editorial defending the sport of boxing, one editor wrote 
that boxing “is a sport because the world has not yet become a place in which 
the qualities that go into excellence in boxing [endurance, agility, courage] have 
no value” ( Washington Post, February 5, 1983). But James J. Kilpatrick also 
appeals to values when he argues, in an editorial critical of boxing, that we 
should not want to live in a society “in which deliberate brutality is legally 
authorized and publicly applauded” ( Washington Post, December 7, 1982). 
Observe, however, the high level of seriousness in the appeal to values. Neither 
writer settles for a simplistic personal preference: “Boxing is exciting,” or 
“Boxing is too violent.” 
 Argument Recognizes the Topic’s Complexity 
 Much false reasoning (the logical fallacies discussed in Chapter 6) results from 
a writer’s oversimplifying an issue. A sound argument begins with an under-
standing that most issues are terribly complicated. The wise person approaches 
such ethical concerns as abortion or euthanasia or such public policy issues as 
tax cuts or trade agreements with the understanding that there are many philo-
sophical, moral, and political issues that complicate discussions of these topics. 
Recognizing an argument’s complexity may also lead us to an understanding 
that there can be more than one “right” position. The thoughtful arguer respects 
the views of others, seeks common ground when possible, and often chooses a 
conciliatory approach.  
 THE SHAPE OF ARGUMENT: WHAT WE CAN 
LEARN FROM ARISTOTLE 
 Still one of the best ways to understand the basics of argument is to reflect on 
what the Greek philosopher Aristotle describes as the three “players” in any 
argument: the  writer (or  speaker ), the  argument itself, and the  reader (or  audience ). 
Aristotle also reminds us that the occasion or “situation” ( kairos ) is important in 
understanding and evaluating an argument. Let’s examine each part of this 
model of argument.  
 Ethos (about the Writer/Speaker) 
 It seems logical to begin with  ethos because without this player we have no 
argument. We could, though, end with the writer because Aristotle asserts that 
this player in any argument is the most important. No argument, no matter 
how logical, no matter how appealing to one’s audience, can succeed if the 
audience rejects the arguer’s credibility, his or her  ethical qualities. 

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
73
 Think how often in political contests those running attack their opponent’s 
character rather than the candidate’s programs. Remember the smear campaign 
against Obama—he is (or was) a Muslim and therefore unfit to be president, the 
first point an error of fact, the second point an emotional appeal to voters’ fears. 
Candidates try these smear tactics, even without evidence, because they under-
stand that every voter they can convince of an opponent’s failure of  ethos is a 
citizen who will vote for them. 
Many American voters want to be assured that a candidate is patriotic, reli-
gious (but of course not fanatic!), a loyal spouse, and a loving parent. At times, 
we even lose sight of important differences in positions as we focus on the per-
son instead. But, this tells us how much an audience values their sense of the 
arguer’s credibility. During his campaign for reelection, after the Watergate 
break-in, Nixon was attacked with the line “Would you buy a used car from this 
guy?” (In defense of used-car salespeople, not all are untrustworthy!)  
 Logos (about the Logic of the Argument) 
 Logos refers to the argument itself—to the assertion and the support for it. 
Aristotle maintains that part of an arguer’s appeal to his or her audience lies in 
the logic of the argument and the quality of the support provided. Even the 
most credible of writers will not move thoughtful audiences with inadequate 
evidence or sloppy reasoning. Yes, “arguments” that appeal to emotions, to our 
needs and fantasies, will work for some audiences—look at the success of 
advertising, for example. But, if you want to present a serious claim to critical 
readers, then you must pay attention to your argument. Paying attention means 
not only having good reasons but also organizing them clearly. Your audience 
needs to see  how your evidence supports your point. Consider the following 
argument in opposition to the war on Iraq. 
 War can be justified only as a form of self-defense. To initiate a war, we need to 
be able to show that our first strike was necessary as a form of self-defense. The 
Bush administration argued that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and 
intended to use them against us. Responding to someone’s “intent” to do harm 
is always a difficult judgment call. But, in this case, there were no  weapons of 
mass destruction so there could not have been any intent to harm the United 
States, or at least none that was obvious and immediate. Thus we must 
 conclude that this war was not the right course of action for the United States.  
 You may disagree (many will) with this argument’s assertion, but you can 
respect the writer’s logic, the clear connecting of one reason to the next. One 
good way to strengthen your credibility is to get respect for clear reasoning. 
 Pathos (about Appeals to the Audience) 
 Argument implies an audience, those whose views we want to influence in 
some way. Aristotle labels this player  pathos, the Greek word for both passion 
and suffering (hence  pathology, the study of disease). Arguers need to be aware 

  Personal 
confrontation at a 
business meeting: 
Not cool. 
74 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
of their audience’s feelings on the issue, the attitudes and values that will affect 
their response to the argument. There are really two questions arguers must 
answer: “How can I engage my audience’s interest?” and “How can I engage 
their sympathy for my position?” 
 Some educators and health experts believe that childhood obesity is a major 
problem in the United States. Other Americans are much more focused on the 
economy—or their own careers. Al Gore is passionately concerned about the 
harmful effects of global warming; others, though increasingly fewer, think he 
lacks sufficient evidence of environmental degradation. How does a physician 
raise reader interest in childhood obesity? How does Gore convince doubters 
that we need to reduce carbon emissions? To prepare an effective argument, we 
need always to plan our approach with a clear vision of how best to connect to 
a specific audience—one which may or may not agree with our interests or our 
position. 
Kairos (about the Occasion or Situation) 
 While  ethos, logos, and  pathos create the traditional three-part communication 
model, Aristotle adds another term to enhance our understanding of any argu-
ment “moment.” The term  kairos  refers to the occasion for the argument, the 
situation that we are in. What does this moment call for from us? Is the lunch 
table the appropriate time and place for an argument with your coworker over 
her failure to meet a deadline that is part of a joint project? You have just received 
a 65 on your history test; is this the best time to e-mail your professor to protest 

 FIGURE 3.1   Aristotelian Structure of Argument 
Writer/speaker
Logos
Pathos
Ethos
Argument and
its support
Readers/listeners
Creates
argument
To affect
audience
Judges argument
and arguers
 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
75
the grade? Would the professor’s office be the better place for your discussion 
than an e-mail sent from your BlackBerry minutes after you have left class? 
 The concept of  kairos asks us to consider what is most appropriate for the 
occasion, to think through the best time, place, and genre (type of argument) to 
make a successful argument. This concept has special meaning for students in a 
writing class who sometimes have difficulty thinking about audience at all. 
When practicing writing for the academic community, you may need to modify 
the language or tone that you use in other situations. 
 We argue in a specific context of three interrelated parts, as illustrated in 
 Figure 3.1 . 
 We present support for an assertion to a specific audience whose expecta-
tions and character we have given thought to when shaping our argument. 
And we present ourselves as informed, competent, and reliable so that our 
audience will give us their attention.  
 THE LANGUAGE OF ARGUMENT 
 We could title this section the  languages of argument because arguments come 
in visual language as well as in words. But visual arguments—cartoons, pho-
tos, ads—are almost always accompanied by some words: figures speaking in 
bubbles, a caption, a slogan (Nike’s “Just Do It!”). So we need to think about the 
kinds of statements that make up arguments, whether those arguments are 
legal briefs or cartoons, casual conversations or scholarly essays. To build an 
argument we need some statements that support other statements that present 
the main idea or claim of the argument.
 • Claims: usually either inferences or judgments, for these are debatable 
assertions. 
 • Support: facts, opinions based on facts (inferences), or opinions based on 
values, beliefs, or ideas (judgments) or some combination of the three.  
 Let’s consider what kinds of statements each of these terms describes. 

76 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 Facts 
 Facts are statements that are verifiable. Factual statements refer to what can be 
counted or measured or confirmed by reasonable observers or trusted experts.
 There are twenty-six desks in Room 110. 
 In the United States about 400,000 people die each year as a result of 
smoking.    
 These are factual statements. We can verify the first by observation—by 
 counting. The second fact comes from medical records. We rely on trusted 
record-keeping sources and medical experts for verification. By definition, we 
do not argue about the facts. Usually. Sometimes “facts” change, as we learn 
more about our world. For example, only in the last thirty years has convincing 
evidence been gathered to demonstrate the relationship between smoking and 
various illnesses of the heart and lungs. And sometimes “facts” are false facts. 
These are statements that sound like facts but are incorrect. For example: Nadel 
has won more Wimbledon titles than Federer. Not so. 
 Inferences 
 Inferences are opinions based on facts. Inferences are the conclusions we draw from 
an analysis of facts.
 There will not be enough desks in Room 110 for upcoming fall-semester 
classes.  
 Smoking is a serious health hazard. 
 Predictions of an increase in student enrollment for the coming fall semester 
lead to the inference that most English classes scheduled in Room 110 will run 
with several more students per class than last year. The dean should order new 
desks. Similarly, we infer from the number of deaths that smoking is a health 
problem; statistics show more people dying from tobacco than from AIDS, or 
murder, or car accidents, causes of death that get media coverage but do not 
produce nearly as many deaths. 
 Inferences vary in their closeness to the facts supporting them. That the sun 
will “rise” tomorrow is an inference, but we count on its happening, acting as if 
it is a fact. However, the first inference stated above is based not just on the fact 
of twenty-six desks but on another inference—a projected increase in student 
enrollment—and two assumptions. The argument looks like this:
 FACT: 
 
 There are twenty-six desks in Room 110. 
 INFERENCE: 
 
 There will be more first-year students next year. 
 ASSUMPTIONS: 
 
 1. English will remain a required course. 
 
 
 2. No additional classrooms are available for 
English classes.  
 CLAIM: 
 
 There will not be enough desks in Room 110 for upcoming 
 fall-semester classes. 

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
77
 This inference could be challenged by a different analysis of the facts  supporting 
enrollment projections. Or, if additional rooms can be found, the dean will not 
need to order new desks. Inferences can be part of the support of an argument, 
or they can be the claim of an argument. 
 Judgments 
 Judgments are opinions based on values, beliefs, or philosophical concepts. (Judgments 
also include opinions based on personal preferences, but we have already 
excluded these from argument.) Judgments concern right and wrong, good and 
bad, better or worse, should and should not: 
 No more than twenty-six students should be enrolled in any English 
class.  
 Cigarette advertising should be eliminated, and the federal government 
should develop an antismoking campaign. 
 NOTE:  Placing such qualifiers as “I believe,” “I think,” or “I feel” in an 
assertion does not free you from the need to support that claim. The state-
ment “I believe that President Bush was a great president” calls for an 
argument based on evidence and reasons.
 To support the first judgment, we need to explain what constitutes overcrowd-
ing, or what constitutes the best class size for effective teaching. If we can sup-
port our views on effective teaching, we may be able to convince the college 
president that ordering more desks for Room 110 is not the best solution to an 
increasing enrollment in English classes. The second judgment also offers a 
solution to a problem, in this case a national health problem. To reduce the 
number of deaths, we need to reduce the number of smokers, either by encour-
aging smokers to quit or nonsmokers not to start. The underlying assumption: 
Advertising does affect behavior. 
 EXERCISE: Facts, Inferences, and Judgments 
 Compile a list of three statements of fact, three inferences, and three judgments. Try to 
organize them into three related sets, as illustrated here:
 • 
Smoking is prohibited in some restaurants. 
 • 
Secondhand smoke is a health hazard. 
 • 
Smoking should be prohibited in all restaurants. 
■ ■
 We can classify judgments to see better what kind of assertion we are 
 making and, therefore, what kind of support we need to argue effectively. 
■ ■

78 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 FUNCTIONAL JUDGMENTS  (guidelines for judging how something 
or someone works or could work) 
 Tiger Woods is the best golfer to play the game. 
 Antismoking advertising will reduce the number of smokers. 
 AESTHETIC JUDGMENTS  (guidelines for judging art, literature, 
music, or natural scenes) 
 The sunrise was beautiful. 
 The Great Gatsby ’s structure, characters, and symbols are perfectly wedded 
to create the novel’s vision of the American dream. 
  ETHICAL JUDGMENTS (guidelines for group or social behavior) 
 Lawyers should not advertise. 
 It is discourteous to talk during a film or lecture. 
 MORAL JUDGMENTS  (guidelines of right and wrong for judging 
 individuals and for establishing legal principles) 
 Taking another person’s life is wrong. 
 Equal rights under the law should not be denied on the basis of race or 
gender. 
Functional and aesthetic judgments generally require defining key terms and 
establishing criteria for the judging or ranking made by the assertion. How, for 
example, do we compare golfers? On the amount of money won? The number 
of tournaments won? Or the consistency of winning throughout one’s career? 
What about the golfer’s quality and range of shots? Ethical and moral judg-
ments may be more difficult to support because they depend not just on how 
terms are defined and criteria established but on values and beliefs as well. If 
taking another person’s life is wrong, why isn’t it wrong in war? Or is it? These 
are difficult questions that require thoughtful debate. 
 EXERCISES: Understanding Assumptions, Facts, 
False Facts, Inferences, and Judgments 
 1. Categorize the judgments you wrote for the previous exercise (p. 77) as either 
aesthetic, moral, ethical, or functional. Alternatively, compile a list of three judg-
ments that you then categorize.  
 2. For each judgment listed for exercise 1, generate one statement of support, 
either a fact or an inference or another judgment. Then state any underlying 
assumptions that are part of each argument. 
 3. Read the following article and then complete the exercise that follows. This 
exercise tests both careful reading and your understanding of the differences 
among facts, inferences, and judgments.  
■ ■

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
79
 YOUR BRAIN LIES TO YOU   
 SAM   WANG and   SANDRA   AAMODT  
 Dr. Samuel S. H. Wang is a professor of molecular biology and neuroscience at 
Princeton, where he manages a research lab. Dr. Sandra Aamodt, former editor of 
 Nature Neuroscience, is a freelance science writer. Drs. Wang and Aamodt are the 
authors of  Welcome to Your Brain: Why You Lose Your Car Keys but Never Forget 
How to Drive and Other Puzzles of Everyday Life (2008). The following article 
appeared on June 27, 2008, in the  New York Times. 
 False beliefs are everywhere. Eighteen percent of Americans think the sun 
revolves around the earth, one poll has found. Thus it seems slightly less egre-
gious that, according to another poll, 10 percent of us think that Senator 
Barack Obama, a Christian, is instead a Muslim. The Obama campaign 
has created a Web site to dispel misinformation. But this effort may be 
more difficult than it seems, thanks to the quirky way in which our brains 
store  memories—and mislead us along the way. 
 The brain does not simply gather and stockpile information as a comput-
er’s hard drive does. Current research suggests that facts may be stored first in 
the hippocampus, a structure deep in the brain about the size and shape of a 
fat man’s curled pinkie finger. But the information does not rest there. Every 
time we recall it, our brain writes it down again, and during this re-storage, it 
is also reprocessed. In time, the fact is gradually transferred to the cerebral 
cortex and is separated from the context in which it was originally learned. For 
example, you know that the capital of California is Sacramento, but you prob-
ably don’t remember how you learned it. 
 This phenomenon, known as source amnesia, can also lead people to for-
get whether a statement is true. Even when a lie is presented with a  disclaimer, 
people often later remember it as true. 
 With time, this misremembering only gets worse. A false statement from a 
non-credible source that is at first not believed can gain credibility during the 
months it takes to reprocess memories from short-term hippocampal storage to 
longer-term cortical storage. As the source is forgotten, the message and its 
implications gain strength. This could explain why, during the 2004 presidential 
campaign, it took some weeks for the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth campaign 
against Senator John Kerry to have an effect on his standing in the polls. 
 Even if they do not understand the neuroscience behind source amnesia, 
campaign strategists can exploit it to spread misinformation. They know that if 
their message is initially memorable, its impression will persist long after it is 
debunked. In repeating a falsehood, someone may back it up with an opening 
line like “I think I read somewhere” or even with a reference to a specific 
source. 
 In one study, a group of Stanford students was exposed repeatedly to an 
unsubstantiated claim taken from a Web site that Coca-Cola is an effective 
paint thinner. Students who read the statement five times were nearly one-
third more likely than those who read it only twice to attribute it to  Consumer 
Reports (rather than  The National Enquirer, their other choice), giving it a 
gloss of credibility. 
1
2
3
4
5
6

80 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 Adding to this innate tendency to mold information we recall is the way our 
brains fit facts into established mental frameworks. We tend to remember news 
that accords with our worldview, and discount statements that contradict it. 
 In another Stanford study, 48 students, half of whom said they favored 
capital punishment and half of whom said they opposed it, were presented 
with two pieces of evidence, one supporting and one contradicting the claim 
that capital punishment deters crime. Both groups were more convinced by 
the evidence that supported their initial position. 
 Psychologists have suggested that legends propagate by striking an emo-
tional chord. In the same way, ideas can spread by emotional selection, rather 
than by their factual merits, encouraging the persistence of falsehoods about 
Coke—or about a presidential candidate. 
 Journalists and campaign workers may think they are acting to counter 
misinformation by pointing out that it is not true. But by repeating a false 
rumor, they may inadvertently make it stronger. In its concerted effort to “stop 
the smears,” the Obama campaign may want to keep this in mind. Rather than 
emphasize that Mr. Obama is not a Muslim, for instance, it may be more effec-
tive to stress that he embraced Christianity as a young man. 
 Consumers of news, for their part, are prone to selectively accept and 
remember statements that reinforce beliefs they already hold. In a replication 
of the study of students’ impressions of evidence about the death penalty, 
researchers found that even when subjects were given a specific instruction to 
be objective, they were still inclined to reject evidence that disagreed with 
their beliefs. 
 In the same study, however, when subjects were asked to imagine their 
reaction if the evidence had pointed to the opposite conclusion, they were 
more open-minded to information that contradicted their beliefs. Apparently, 
it pays for consumers of controversial news to take a moment and consider 
that the opposite interpretation may be true. 
 In 1919, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes of the Supreme Court wrote that 
“the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the 
competition of the market.” Holmes erroneously assumed that ideas are more 
likely to spread if they are honest. Our brains do not naturally obey this admi-
rable dictum, but by better understanding the mechanisms of memory  perhaps 
we can move closer to Holmes’s ideal.  
Source: Originally appeared in the New York Times, June 27, 2008. Reprinted by permission of the authors.
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
 Label each of the following sentences as F (fact), FF (false fact), I (inference), or J 
(judgment). 
  
 1. Campaigns have trouble getting rid of misinformation about their 
candidate.  
  
 2. When we reprocess information we may get the information wrong, but 
we always remember the source.  

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
81
 
  3. The Obama campaign should stress that he became a Christian as a 
young man. 
 
  4. Most of us remember information that matches our view of the world. 
 
 5. When students were told to be objective in evaluating evidence, they 
continued to reject evidence they disagreed with.  
 
  6. Coke is an effective paint thinner. 
 
  7. True statements should be accepted and false statements rejected. 
 
  8. Justice Holmes was wrong about the power of truth to spread more 
widely than falsehood.  
 
 9. The more we understand about the way the world works, the better our 
chances of separating truth from falsehood.  
 
 10. Americans do not seem to understand basic science. 
■ ■
 THE SHAPE OF ARGUMENT: WHAT WE 
CAN LEARN FROM TOULMIN 
  British philosopher Stephen Toulmin adds to what we have learned from Aristotle 
by focusing our attention on the basics of the argument itself. First, consider this 
definition of argument:  An argument consists of evidence and/or reasons presented in 
support of an assertion or claim that is either stated or implied. For example:
 CLAIM: 
 We should not go skiing today 
 GROUNDS: 
 because it is too cold. 
 GROUNDS: 
 Because some laws are unjust, 
 CLAIM: 
 civil disobedience is sometimes justified. 
 GROUNDS: 
 It’s only fair and right for academic institutions to 
 CLAIM: 
 accept students only on academic merit. 
 The parts of an argument, Toulmin asserts, are actually a bit more complex 
than these examples suggest. Each argument has a third part that is not stated 
in the preceding examples. This third part is the “glue” that connects the 
 support—the evidence and reasons—to the argument’s claim and thus fulfills 
the logic of the argument. Toulmin calls this glue an argument’s  warrants. These 
are the principles or assumptions that allow us to assert that our evidence or 
reasons—what Toulmin calls the  grounds —do indeed support our claim. 
( Figure 3.2 illustrates these basics of the Toulmin model of argument.) 
 FIGURE 3.2   The Toulmin Structure of Argument  
CLAIM: 
Academic institutions should accept students only on academic 
merit.
GROUNDS: 
It is only fair and right.
WARRANT: 
(1) Fair and right are important values. (2) Academic institutions 
are only about academics.

82 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 Look again at the sample arguments to see what warrants must be accepted 
to make each argument work:
 CLAIM: 
  We should not go skiing today. 
 GROUNDS: 
  It is too cold. 
 WARRANTS: 
  When it is too cold, skiing is not fun; the activity is not 
 
  sufficient to keep one from becoming uncomfortable. AND: 
Too cold is what is too cold for me. 
 CLAIM: 
  Civil disobedience is sometimes justified. 
 EVIDENCE: 
  Some laws are unjust. 
 WARRANTS: 
  To get unjust laws changed, people need to be made 
  
  aware of the injustice. Acts of civil disobedience will get  people’s 
attention and make them aware that the laws need changing.  
 CLAIM: 
  Academic institutions should accept students only on 
 academic merit. 
 EVIDENCE: 
  It is fair and right. 
 WARRANTS: 
  Fair and right are important values. AND: Academic 
 institutions are only about academics. 
 Warrants play an important role in any argument, so we need to be sure to under-
stand what they are. Note, for instance, the second warrant operating in the first 
argument: The temperature considered uncomfortable for the speaker will also 
be uncomfortable for her companions—an uncertain assumption. In the second 
argument, the warrant is less debatable, for acts of civil disobedience usually get 
media coverage and thus dramatize the issue. The underlying assumptions in the 
third example stress the need to know one’s warrants. Both warrants will need to 
be defended in the debate over selection by academic merit only. 
 COLLABORATIVE EXERCISE: Building Arguments 
 With your class partner or in small groups, examine each of the following claims. 
Select two, think of one statement that could serve as evidence for each claim, and 
then think of the underlying assumption(s) that complete each of the arguments. 
 1. 
Professor X is not a good instructor. 
 2. Americans need to reduce the fat in their diets. 
 3. Tiger Woods is a great golfer. 
 4. Military women should be allowed to serve in combat zones. 
 5. College newspapers should be free of supervision by faculty or administrators. 
 
■ ■
 Toulmin was particularly interested in the great range or strength or prob-
ability of various arguments. Some kinds of arguments are stronger than others 
because of the language or logic they use. Other arguments must, necessarily, 
be heavily qualified for the claim to be supportable. Toulmin developed his 
language to provide a strategy for analyzing the degree of probability in a given 
■ ■

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
83
argument and to remind us of the need to qualify some kinds of claims. You 
have already seen how the idea of warrants, or assumptions, helps us think 
about the “glue” that presumably makes a given argument work. Taken 
together, Toulmin terms and concepts help us analyze the arguments of others 
and prepare more convincing arguments of our own. 
 Claims 
 A claim is what the argument asserts or seeks to prove. It answers the question 
“What is your point?” In an argumentative speech or essay, the claim is the 
speaker’s or writer’s main idea or thesis. Although an argument’s claim “fol-
lows” from reasons and evidence, we often present an argument—whether 
written or spoken—with the claim stated near the beginning of the presenta-
tion. We can better understand an argument’s claim by recognizing that we can 
have claims of fact, claims of value, and claims of policy. 
 Claims of Fact  
Although facts usually support claims, we do argue over some facts. Historians 
and biographers may argue over what happened in the past, although they are 
more likely to argue over the significance of what happened. Scientists also 
argue over the facts, over how to classify an unearthed fossil, or whether the 
fossil indicates that the animal had feathers. For example:
 CLAIM: 
 The small, predatory dinosaur  Deinonychus hunted its prey 
in packs. 
 This claim is supported by the discovery of several fossils of  Deinonychus close 
together and with the fossil bones of a much larger dinosaur. Their teeth have 
also been found in or near the bones of dinosaurs that have died in a struggle. 
 Assertions about what will happen are sometimes classified as claims of 
fact, but they can also be labeled as inferences supported by facts. Predictions 
about a future event may be classified as claims of fact:
 CLAIM: 
 The United States will win the most gold medals at the 2012 
Olympics. 
 CLAIM: 
 I will get an A on tomorrow’s psychology test. 
 What evidence would you use to support each of these claims? (And, did the 
first one turn out to be correct?)  
 Claims of Value  
These include moral, ethical, and aesthetic judgments. Assertions that use such 
words as  good or  bad, better or  worse, and  right or  wrong will be claims of value. 
The following are all claims of value:
 CLAIM: 
 Roger Federer is a better tennis player than Andy Roddick. 
 CLAIM: 
 Adventures of Huckleberry Finn is one of the most significant 
American novels. 

84 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 CLAIM: 
 Cheating hurts others and the cheater too. 
 CLAIM: 
 Abortion is wrong. 
 Arguments in support of judgments demand relevant evidence, careful rea-
soning, and an awareness of the assumptions one is making. Support for 
claims of value often include other value statements. For example, to support 
the claim that censorship is bad, arguers often assert that the free exchange of 
ideas is good and necessary in a democracy. The support is itself a value 
statement.  
 Claims of Policy  
Finally, claims of policy are assertions about what should or should not  happen, 
what the government ought or ought not to do, how to best solve social 
 problems. Claims of policy debate, for example, college rules, state gun laws, or 
federal aid to Africans suffering from AIDS. The following are claims 
of policy:
 CLAIM: 
 College newspapers should not be controlled in any way by 
college authorities. 
 CLAIM: 
 States should not have laws allowing people to carry concealed 
weapons. 
 CLAIM: 
 The United States must provide more aid to African countries 
where 25 percent or more of the citizens have tested positive 
for HIV. 
 Claims of policy are often closely tied to judgments of morality or political phi-
losophy, but they also need to be grounded in feasibility. That is, your claim 
needs to be doable, to be based on a thoughtful consideration of the real world 
and the complexities of public policy issues.  
 Grounds (or Data or Evidence) 
 The term  grounds refers to the reasons and evidence provided in support of a 
claim. Although the words  data and  evidence can also be used, note that  grounds 
is the most general term because it includes reasons or logic as well as examples 
or statistics. We determine the grounds of an argument by asking the question 
“Why do you think that?” or “How do you know that?” When writing your 
own arguments, you can ask yourself these questions and answer by using a 
 because clause:
 CLAIM: 
 Smoking should be banned in restaurants because 
 GROUNDS: 
 secondhand smoke is a serious health hazard. 
 CLAIM: 
 Federer is a better tennis player than Roddick 
because 

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
85
 GROUNDS: 
 1. he was ranked number one longer, 
 
 2. he won more tournaments than Roddick, and 
 
 3. he won more major tournaments than Roddick. 
 Warrants 
 Why should we believe that your grounds do indeed support your claim? 
Your argument’s warrants answer this question. They explain why your evi-
dence really is evidence. Sometimes warrants reside in language itself, in the 
meanings of the words we are using. If I am  younger than my brother, then my 
brother must be  older than I am. In a court case attempting to prove that Jones 
murdered Smith, the relation of evidence to claim is less assured. If the police 
investigation has been properly managed and the physical evidence is sub-
stantial, then Smith may be Jones’s murderer. The prosecution has— 
presumably beyond a reasonable doubt—established motive, means, and 
opportunity for Smith to commit the murder. In many arguments based on 
statistical data, the argument’s warrant rests on complex analyses of the 
 statistics—and on the conviction that the statistics have been developed with-
out error. 
Still, without taking courses in statistics and logic, you can develop an 
alertness to the “good sense” of some arguments and the “dubious sense” of 
others. You know, for example, that good SAT scores are a predictor of success 
in college. Can you argue that you will do well in college because you have 
good SATs? No. We can determine only a statistical probability. We cannot turn 
probabilities about a group of people into a warrant about one person in the 
group. (In addition, SAT scores are only one predictor. Another key variable is 
motivation.) 
 What is the warrant for the Federer claim?
 CLAIM: 
 Federer is a better tennis player than Roddick. 
 GROUNDS: 
 The three facts listed above. 
 WARRANT: 
 It is appropriate to judge and rank tennis players on these 
kinds of statistics. That is, the better player is one who has 
held the number-one ranking for the longest time, has won 
the most tournaments, and also has won the most major 
tournaments. 
 Backing 
 Standing behind an argument’s warrant may be additional  backing. Backing 
answers the question “How do we know that your evidence is good evidence?” 
You may answer this question by providing authoritative sources for the data 
used (for example, the Census Bureau or the U.S. Tennis Association). Or, you 
may explain in detail the methodology of the experiments performed or the 
 surveys taken. When scientists and social scientists present the results of their 

86 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
research, they anticipate the question of backing and automatically provide a 
detailed explanation of the process by which they acquired their evidence. In 
criminal trials, defense attorneys challenge the backing of the prosecution’s argu-
ment. They question the handling of blood samples sent to labs for DNA testing, 
for instance. The defense attorneys want jury members to doubt the  quality of the 
evidence. 
 This discussion of backing returns us to the point that one part of any argu-
ment is the audience. To create an effective argument, ask yourself: Will my 
warrants and backing be accepted? Is my audience likely to share my values, 
religious beliefs, or scientific approach? If you are speaking to a group at your 
church, then backing based on the religious beliefs of that church may be effec-
tive. If you are preparing an argument for a general audience, then using spe-
cific religious assertions as warrants or backing probably will not result in an 
effective argument. 
 Qualifiers 
 Some arguments are absolute; they can be stated without qualification.  If I am 
younger than my brother, then he must be older than I am. Most arguments need 
some qualification; many need precise limitations. If, when playing bridge, I 
am dealt eight spades, then my opponents and partner together must have five 
spade cards—because there are thirteen cards of each suit in a deck. My partner 
 probably has one spade but  could be void of spades. My partner  possibly has two 
or more spades, but I would be foolish to count on it. When bidding my hand, I 
must be controlled by the laws of probability. Look again at the smoking-ban 
claim. Observe the absolute nature of both the claim and its support. If second-
hand smoke is indeed a health hazard, it will be that in  all restaurants, not just 
in some. With each argument ask what qualification is needed for a successful 
argument. 
 Sweeping generalizations often come to us in the heat of a debate or when 
we first start to think about an issue. For example:  Gun control is wrong because it 
restricts individual rights. But on reflection surely you would not want to argue 
against all forms of gun control. (Remember: An unqualified assertion is under-
stood by your audience to be absolute.) Would you sell guns to felons in jail or 
to children on the way to school? Obviously not. So, let’s try the claim again, 
this time with two important qualifiers:
 QUALIFIED 
 Adults without a criminal record should not be restricted 
in the   
 CLAIM: 
 purchase of guns. 
 Others may want this claim further qualified to eliminate particular types 
of guns or to control the number purchased or the process for purchasing. 
The gun-control debate is not about absolutes; it is all about which qualified 
claim is best. 

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
87
 Rebuttals 
 Arguments can be challenged. Smart debaters assume that there are people 
who will disagree with them. They anticipate the ways that opponents can 
challenge their arguments. When you are planning an argument, you need to 
think about how you can counter or rebut the challenges you anticipate. Think 
of yourself as an attorney in a court case preparing your argument  and a defense 
of the other attorney’s challenges to your argument. If you ignore the important 
role of rebuttals, you may not win the jury to your side. 
 USING TOULMIN’S TERMS 
TO ANALYZE ARGUMENTS 
 Terms are never an end in themselves; we learn them when we recognize that 
they help us to organize our thinking about a subject. Toulmin’s terms can aid 
your reading of the arguments of others. You can “see what’s going on” in an 
argument if you analyze it, applying Toulmin’s language to its parts. Not all 
terms will be useful for every analysis because, for example, some arguments 
will not have qualifiers or rebuttals. But to recognize that an argument is  without 
qualifiers is to learn something important about that argument. 
 First, here is a simple argument broken down into its parts using Toulmin’s 
terms:
 GROUNDS: 
 Because Dr. Bradshaw has an attendance policy, 
 CLAIM: 
 students who miss more than seven classes will 
 QUALIFIER: 
 most likely (last year, Dr. Bradshaw did allow one student, in 
unusual circumstances, to continue in the class) be dropped 
from the course. 
 WARRANT: 
 Dr. Bradshaw’s syllabus explains her attendance policy, a 
 BACKING: 
 policy consistent with the concept of a discussion class that 
depends on student participation and consistent with the 
attendance policies of most of her colleagues. 
 REBUTTAL:  
 Although some students complain about an attendance policy 
of any kind, Dr. Bradshaw does explain her policy and her rea-
sons for it the first day of class. She then reminds students that 
the syllabus is a contract between them; if they choose to stay, 
they agree to abide by the guidelines explained on the 
syllabus.       
 This argument is brief and fairly simple. Let’s see how Toulmin’s terms can 
help us analyze a longer, more complex argument. Read actively and annotate 
the following essay while noting the existing annotations using Toulmin’s 
terms. Then answer the questions that follow the article. 

88 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 THE THREAT TO FREE 
SPEECH AT UNIVERSITIES  
 GREG   LUKIANOFF  
 An attorney, Greg Lukianoff holds degrees from American University and Stanford 
Law School. He is the president of the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education 
(FIRE), a regular columnist at  Huffington Post, and the author of  Unlearning Liberty: 
Campus Censorship and the End of the American Debate (2012). The following 
 argument was published January 6, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Are there good reasons to have campus speech codes? 
Are there problems with speech codes?  
 A ctivists embarked on a campaign in the 1980s to eradicate hurtful, big-
oted and politically incorrect speech by enacting speech codes at universities 
across the country. Although the movement presented itself as a forward- 
thinking way to make campuses welcoming, the initiative stood in stark contrast 
to the celebrated “free speech movement” of the 1960s, whose proponents 
understood that vague exceptions to free speech were inevitably used by those 
in power to punish opinions they dislike or disagree with. And unfortunately the 
effort gained momentum as prestigious institutions passed speech codes. 
 The legal fig leaf upon which the speech-codes movement relied was the 
concept of “hostile work environment” harassment. Because civil rights laws, 
chief among them Title IX, banned sexual discrimination on campuses, harass-
ment jurisprudence—sometimes combined with other tenuous rationales—
became the primary legal tool universities used to formulate speech codes.  
 Courts, however, understood that merely naming a restriction a “harass-
ment” code did not inoculate it from First Amendment scrutiny. In nearly a 
dozen courtroom losses between 1989 and 2010, harassment-based speech 
codes have been defeated at campuses from the University of Michigan to 
Stanford. Amazingly, these defeats have not slowed the spread of these codes. 
The Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (FIRE), of which I am presi-
dent, conducts an extensive annual study of campus speech codes; our 2012 
report found that 65 percent of nearly 400 top colleges maintain codes that 
prohibit substantial amounts of clearly protected speech. 
 Overly broad harassment codes remain the weapon of choice on campus 
to punish speech that administrators dislike. In a decade fighting campus cen-
sorship, I have seen harassment defined as expressions as mild as “inappropri-
ately directed laughter” and used to police students for references to a 
student government candidate as a “jerk and a fool” (at the University of 
Central Florida in 2006) and a factually verifiable if unflattering piece on Islamic 
extremism in a conservative student magazine (at Tufts University in 2007). 
Other examples abound. Worryingly, such broad codes and heavy-handed 
enforcement are teaching a generation of students that it may be safer to 
keep their mouths shut when important or controversial issues arise. Such illib-
eral lessons on how to live in a free society are poison to freewheeling debate 
and thought experimentation and, therefore, to the innovative thinking that 
both higher education and our democracy need.  
1
 Toulmin’s Term s
 Rebutted—
universities 
wrongly 
motivated 
2
Claim implied 
in word choice
3
Grounds
4
Warrant

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
89
 The Education Department’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR), which enforces 
Title IX on college campuses, tried in 2003 to put a stop to the “government 
made me do it” excuse for speech codes. It issued a letter to every college 
receiving federal funds—so, virtually all—making clear that harassment 
requires a serious pattern of discriminatory behavior, not just mere offense. 
Since then, the number of campus speech codes has slowly begun to decline.  
 But last year the OCR backpedaled. The agency issued a 19-page letter in 
April dictating to colleges the procedures they must follow in sexual harassment 
and assault cases. Among its many troubling points, including a requirement 
that sexual harassment cases be adjudicated using the lowest possible standard 
of evidence allowable in court, is the fact that the letter makes no mention of 
the First Amendment or free speech. This ignores the role that vague and broad 
definitions of harassment have played in justifying campus speech codes and 
censorship over the past few decades. By mandating so many procedural steps 
colleges must take to respond to allegations of sexual harassment while simulta-
neously failing to mandate a consistent, limited and constitutional definition of 
harassment, the OCR encourages those on campus who are already inclined to 
use such codes to punish speech they simply dislike.  
 Rather than proffer shifting rules, the OCR should end the threat of 
 harassment-based campus speech codes once and for all. The Supreme Court 
offered its only guidance on the thorny issue of student-on-student harassment in 
the 1999 case  Davis v. Monroe County Board of Education. The justices recog-
nized the necessity of carefully defining what constitutes “harassment” in the edu-
cational context, lest everyday interactions be rendered a federal offense. The 
court defined harassment as discriminatory conduct, directed at an individual, that 
is “so severe, pervasive, and objectively offensive” that “victim-students are effec-
tively denied equal access to an institution’s resources and opportunities.” 
 This definition, if applied fairly, poses little threat to free speech and effec-
tively prohibits real harassment  
 This week, FIRE and a broad coalition of organizations (the Tully Center for 
Free Speech at Syracuse University, National Coalition Against Censorship, 
the Heartland Institute, National Association of Scholars, Alliance Defense 
Fund Center for Academic Freedom, Feminists for Free Expression, Woodhull 
Sexual Freedom Alliance, American Booksellers Foundation for Free 
Expression, Accuracy in Academia, and the American Council of Trustees and 
Alumni) are writing to the OCR to request that it publicly affirm the  Davis stan-
dard as the controlling definition for harassment on campus.  
By simply following the Supreme Courts guidance, the OCR would assure 
that serious harassment is punished on campus while free speech is robustly 
protected. In one move, OCR could rid campuses of a substantial portion of all 
speech codes while protecting institutions from losing still more First 
Amendment lawsuits. Most important, by recognizing the  Davis standard, the 
OCR would send a message that free speech and free minds are essential to—
not incompatible with—the development of creative, critical and innovative 
thinkers on our nations campuses.
Source: Washington Post, January 6, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
5
Grounds
6
Rebuttal
7
Backing, 
with claim in 
paragraph 8
8
9
Backing-support 
for claim
10
Claim restated
Warrant

90 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 CHEERING FREE SPEECH  
 JEFFREY  MATEER   AND   ERIN   LEU  
 Jeff Mateer is General Counsel of Liberty Institute, overseeing the legal team in the 
organization’s commitment to the support of religious liberty. His law degree is from 
Southern Methodist University, and he is admitted to the bar in Texas. Erin Leu, a 
graduate of Harvard Law School, was an attorney at Liberty and represented the 
Kountze cheerleaders. She is now an associate with a law firm in the Dallas area. Their 
article was published November 5, 2012. 
QUESTIONS FOR READING
    1. 
What is Lukianoff’s subject? (Free speech is not sufficiently precise as an answer.) 
 2. 
What is the legal basis for colleges’ speech codes? How has this law been chal-
lenged in the past?  
 3. 
Explain the shifting positions of the Office of Civil Rights; what does the author 
want this office to do now?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
What is Lukianoff’s claim? 
 5. 
What is his primary support? (Add a “because” clause to his claim to find his 
grounds.) 
 6. 
Review the author’s comments about college authorities—those he holds respon-
sible for speech codes. What, in Lukianoff’s view, is their reason for wanting speech 
codes? Does the author provide evidence for this warrant? Is support needed?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
Reflect on the author’s position that codes let colleges punish views they don’t 
like. Is this the only reason for speech codes? Do you agree that it is the primary 
motivation of college officials?  
  8. 
Lukianoff asserts that it is possible to punish “serious harassment” on campus 
without restricting free speech. How should colleges do this? (One student’s free 
speech is often another’s perceived insult.) What suggestions do you have for writ-
ing clear guidelines for students that will define the author’s desired balance?  
 9. 
How can colleges create a sense of community with mutual respect while still 
embracing the free exchange of ideas?  
 Toulmin’s terms can help you to see what writers are actually “doing” in their 
arguments. Just remember that writers do not usually follow the terms in precise 
order. Indeed, you can find both grounds and backing in the same sentence, or 
claim and qualifiers in the same paragraph, and so on. Still, the terms can help 
you to sort out your thinking about a claim you want to support. Now use your 
knowledge of argument as you read and analyze the following arguments.  
 FOR ANALYSIS AND DEBATE 

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
91
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Once you read the opening sentence, can you appreciate 
the title’s clever play with words? What do you expect the essay to be about?  
 Cheerleaders in Kountze, Tex., recently learned an invaluable lesson about the 
Constitution and the importance of individual expression without government cen-
sorship. Ironically, it’s a lesson they had to watch a court teach their school district. 
 Controversy arose this fall when the cheerleaders at Kountze High School 
decided to model good sportsmanship by replacing the often-violent mes-
sages on their banners, such as “Scalp the Indians,” with encouraging reli-
gious messages. The only complaints came from an antireligion advocacy 
group more than 1,000 miles away. In response, the Kountze superintendent 
issued an unlawful directive banning all such religious speech. 
 The cheerleaders sued their school district to preserve their rights to free 
speech and religious expression. Their cause gained international support, from 
tens of thousands of individuals across six continents. Texas Gov. Rick Perry and 
state Attorney General Greg Abbott spoke out, applauding the students for 
standing up for their rights and denouncing government hostility toward religion. 
 Two weeks ago a Texas court issued a temporary injunction allowing the 
cheerleaders to display their banners for at least the remainder of the season. 
Free speech prevailed, reminding us of the well-established principle that stu-
dents do not shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expres-
sion at the schoolhouse gate. 
 People from all political persuasions should be celebrating this decision. 
Many are mistakenly arguing, however, that the outcome is incorrect because 
the Supreme Court struck down school-sponsored prayer at football games in 
the 2000 case  Santa Fe v. Doe. But  Santa Fe recognized that “there is a crucial 
difference between  government speech endorsing religion, which the 
Establishment Clause forbids, and  private speech endorsing religion, which 
the Free Speech and Free Exercise Clauses protect.” 
 In  Santa Fe, the court held that a school policy that created a majoritarian 
election on religion and explicitly encouraged prayer created government 
speech. Conversely, in this case, both Texas law and the school’s policies affirm 
that when students speak at school events, including football games, they are 
engaging in private speech and their views do not reflect the position of the 
school. Indeed, the policies at issue in  Kountze create a forum for student 
speech and require the school district to remain neutral toward all viewpoints. 
 Santa Fe involved government speech; Kountze involves private student speech. 
 The Kountze cheerleaders alone decide what message to place on their 
banners. The team is student-run, with school officials present only to monitor 
safety. Each week two cheerleaders take turns leading the team, including 
choosing whether to create banners and, if so, what messages they should bear. 
The supplies to create the banners are paid for with private funds, as are the 
cheerleaders’ uniforms, further demonstrating the private nature of their speech. 
 In  Santa Fe, the court stated that: “By no means do [the Religion Clauses] 
impose a prohibition on all religious activity in our public schools. . . . Indeed, the 
common purpose of the Religion Clauses is to secure religious liberty.” When 
football players or cheerleaders are on the field in uniform, they do not become 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

92 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
agents of the state. No one would argue that high school football players are 
prohibited from praying together. In the same manner, just because cheerlead-
ers wear uniforms and are on school property does not mean that they become 
instruments of the school or that they must surrender their right to free speech. 
 High school students’ rights to free speech should be robustly protected. 
These students are nearly adults; they are about to enter college, military ser-
vice or the workforce. Schools should be teaching students about the First 
Amendment and the free marketplace of ideas, including that other individu-
als may advocate for messages with which they disagree, instead of censoring 
speech that some might find offensive. As the Supreme Court has stated: 
“The vigilant protection of constitutional freedoms is nowhere more vital than 
in the community of American schools.” 
 This is because “[t]he Nation’s future depends upon leaders trained through 
wide exposure to that robust exchange of ideas which discovers truth out of a 
multitude of tongues, [rather] than through any kind of authoritative selection.” 
 We better serve our students by educating them about our country’s com-
mitment to free expression rather than shutting out certain views. Otherwise, 
our schools do a great disservice to students and fail to prepare them to be 
citizens of our free society. 
 Nonetheless, the character of the Kountze cheerleaders should give us 
hope for the future. With young adults like these ready to respectfully stand 
for our Constitution, our freedoms are more secure. 
Source: Washington Post, November 5, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the authors.
9
10
11
12
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What is the situation that led to this essay? What did the cheerleaders do? 
   2. 
What was the court’s ruling? The authors write that Texas law has supported 
the cheerleaders, but is this case closed?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 3. 
What is the authors’ claim? What grounds (reasons/evidence) do they provide? 
   4. 
Mateer and Leu agree with the court’s ruling that football players can pray on 
the field. They argue that the cheerleaders’ religious signs are not the same. 
How do they defend the similarity? 
   5. 
Study the final four paragraphs; what makes them an effective conclusion? 
How are the authors “defining” the issue in these paragraphs?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
    6. 
The core of this argument is that the cheerleaders’ signs are private speech 
because they do not represent the school. Do you agree with their position? If 
you agree, how would you add to their discussion? If you disagree, how would 
you challenge it? 
   7. 
If you were the judge making the final ruling on this case, how would you rule? Why?    

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
93
HOW CAN WE BAN INSULTS 
AGAINST JEWS BUT NOT MUSLIMS?  
 WILLIAM   SALETAN  
 A graduate of Swarthmore College, William Saletan writes about science, technology, 
and politics for the online magazine  Slate. He has published several books, including 
 Bearing Right: How Conservatives Won the Abortion War (2004). The following article 
was posted September 28, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Does your college have rules against hate speech? Are 
such rules consistent with First Amendment rights? 
 How can we ban hate speech against Jews while defending mockery of 
Muslims? Jews have too much influence over U.S. foreign policy. Gay men are too 
promiscuous. Muslims commit too much terrorism. Blacks commit too much crime. 
   Each of those claims is poorly stated. Each, in its clumsy way, addresses a 
real problem or concern. And each violates laws against hate speech. In much 
of what we call the free world, for writing that paragraph, I could be jailed. 
 Libertarians, cultural conservatives, and racists have complained about 
these laws for years. But now the problem has turned global. Islamic govern-
ments, angered by an anti-Muslim video that provoked protests and riots in 
their countries, are demanding to know why insulting the Prophet Mohammed 
is free speech but vilifying Jews and denying the Holocaust isn’t. And we don’t 
have a good answer. 
 If we’re going to preach freedom of expression around the world, we have 
to practice it. We have to scrap our hate-speech laws. 
 Muslim leaders want us to extend these laws. At this week’s meeting of the 
U.N. General Assembly, they lobbied for tighter censorship. Egypt’s president 
said freedom of expression shouldn’t include speech that is “used to incite 
hatred” or “directed towards one specific religion.” Pakistan’s president urged 
the “international community” to “criminalize” acts that “endanger world secu-
rity by misusing freedom of expression.” Yemen’s president called for “interna-
tional legislation” to suppress speech that “blasphemes the beliefs of nations and 
defames their figures.” The Arab League’s secretary-general proposed a binding 
“international legal framework” to “criminalize psychological and spiritual harm” 
caused by expressions that “insult the beliefs,  culture and civilization of others.” 
 President Obama, while condemning the video, met these proposals with 
a stout defense of free speech. Switzerland’s president agreed: “Freedom of 
opinion and of expression are core values guaranteed universally which must 
be protected.” And when a French magazine published cartoons poking fun at 
Mohammed, the country’s prime minister insisted that French laws protecting 
free speech extend to caricatures. 
 This debate between East and West, between respect and pluralism, isn’t 
a crisis. It’s a stage of global progress. The Arab spring has freed hundreds of 
millions of Muslims from the political retardation of dictatorship. They’re 
 taking responsibility for governing themselves and their relations with other 
countries. They’re debating one another and challenging us. And they should, 
because we’re hypocrites. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

94 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 From Pakistan to Iran to Saudi Arabia to Egypt to Nigeria to the United 
Kingdom, Muslims scoff at our rhetoric about free speech. They point to 
European laws against questioning the Holocaust. Monday on CNN, Iranian 
President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad needled British interviewer Piers Morgan: 
“Why in Europe has it been forbidden for anyone to conduct any research 
about this event? Why are researchers in prison? . . . Do you believe in the 
freedom of thought and ideas, or no?” On Tuesday, Pakistan’s U.N. ambassa-
dor, speaking for the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, told the U.N. 
Human Rights Council: 
 We are all aware of the fact that laws exist in Europe and other countries which 
impose curbs, for instance, on anti-Semitic speech, Holocaust denial, or racial 
slurs. We need to acknowledge, once and for all, that Islamophobia in particular 
and discrimination on the basis of religion and belief are contemporary forms of 
racism and must be dealt with as such. Not to do so would be a clear example of 
double standards. Islamophobia has to be treated in law and practice equal to the 
treatment given to anti-Semitism. 
 He’s right. Laws throughout Europe forbid any expression that “mini-
mizes,” “trivializes,” “belittles,” “plays down,” “contests,” or “puts in doubt” 
Nazi crimes. Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic extend this prohibition 
to communist atrocities. These laws carry jail sentences of up to five years. 
Germany adds two years for anyone who “disparages the memory of a 
deceased person.” 
8
9
10
Pakistani activists of the hard line Sunni party Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) 
burn a U.S. flag during a protest against an anti-Islam movie in 
Peshawar on September 18, 2012. Police used tear gas to disperse a 
crowd of more than 2,000 protesters trying to reach the US consulate 
in northwest Pakistan as fresh demonstrations erupted against an 
anti-Islam film.

 
CHAPTER 3 Understanding the Basics of Argument 
95
 Hate speech laws go further. Germany punishes anyone found guilty of 
“insulting” or “defaming segments of the population.” The Netherlands bans 
anything that “verbally or in writing or image, deliberately offends a group of 
people because of their race, their religion or beliefs, their hetero- or homo-
sexual orientation or their physical, psychological or mental handicap.” It’s ille-
gal to “insult” such a group in France, to “defame” them in Portugal, to 
“degrade” them in Denmark, or to “expresses contempt” for them in Sweden. 
In Switzerland, it’s illegal to “demean” them even with a “gesture.” Canada 
punishes anyone who “willfully promotes hatred.” The United Kingdom out-
laws “insulting words or behavior” that arouse “racial hatred.” Romania for-
bids the possession of xenophobic “symbols.” 
 What have these laws produced? Look at the convictions upheld or accepted 
by the European Court of Human Rights. Four Swedes who distributed leaflets 
that called homosexuality “deviant” and “morally destructive” and blamed it for 
AIDS. An Englishman who displayed in his window a 9/11 poster proclaiming, 
“Islam out of Britain.” A Turk who published two letters from readers angry at 
the government’s treatment of Kurds. A Frenchman who wrote an article disput-
ing the plausibility of poison gas technology at a Nazi concentration camp. 
 Look at the defendants rescued by the court. A Dane “convicted of aiding 
and abetting the dissemination of racist remarks” for making a documentary in 
which three people “made abusive and derogatory remarks about immigrants 
and ethnic groups.” A man “convicted of openly inciting the population to hatred” 
in Turkey by “criticizing secular and democratic principles and openly calling for 
the introduction of Sharia law.” Another Turkish resident “convicted of disseminat-
ing propaganda” after he “criticized the United States’ intervention in Iraq and the 
solitary confinement of the leader of a terrorist organization.” Two Frenchmen 
who wrote a newspaper article that “portrayed Marshal Pétain in a favorable light, 
drawing a veil over his policy of collaboration with the Nazi regime.” 
 Beyond the court’s docket, you’ll find more prosecutions of dissent. A 
Swedish pastor convicted of violating hate-speech laws by preaching against 
homosexuality. A Serb convicted of discrimination for saying, “We are against 
every gathering where homosexuals are demonstrating in the streets of 
Belgrade and want to show something, which is a disease, like it is normal.” An 
Australian columnist convicted of violating the Racial Discrimination Act by sug-
gesting that “there are fair-skinned people in Australia with essentially European 
ancestry . . . who, motivated by career opportunities available to Aboriginal 
people or by political activism, have chosen to falsely identify as Aboriginal.” 
 My favorite case involves a Frenchman who sought free-speech protection 
under Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights: 
 Denis Leroy is a cartoonist. One of his drawings representing the attack on 
the World Trade Centre was published in a Basque weekly newspaper . . . with 
a caption which read: “We have all dreamt of it . . . Hamas did it.” Having been 
sentenced to payment of a fine for “condoning terrorism,” Mr Leroy argued 
that his freedom of expression had been infringed. 
 The Court considered that, through his work, the applicant had glorified the 
violent destruction of American imperialism, expressed moral support for the 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

96 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
perpetrators of the attacks of 11 September, commented approvingly on the 
violence perpetrated against thousands of civilians and diminished the dignity of 
the victims. Despite the newspaper’s limited circulation, the Court observed that 
the drawing’s publication had provoked a certain public reaction, capable of stir-
ring up violence and of having a demonstrable impact on public order in the 
Basque Country. The Court held that there had been no violation of Article 10. 
 How can you justify prosecuting cases like these while defending cartoon-
ists and video makers who ridicule Mohammed? You can’t. Either you censor 
both, or you censor neither. Given the choice, I’ll stand with Obama. “Efforts 
to restrict speech,” he warned the U. N., “can quickly become a tool to silence 
critics and oppress minorities.” 
 That principle, borne out by the wretched record of hate-speech prosecu-
tions, is worth defending. But first, we have to live up to it. 
Source: Slate, September 28, 2012. © 2012 The Slate Group. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
www.slate.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What event has led to Saletan’s article? 
 2. 
Which groups/countries want to extend hate speech laws? Which countries 
have defended free speech? 
 3. 
What is the Muslim world’s view of the West’s “commitment” to free speech? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
What is Saletan’s claim? (Be precise; he isn’t just taking a position on hate 
speech laws.) 
 5. 
What evidence does the author provide? What is especially significant about 
the ruling on the cartoonist Leroy? 
 6. 
Examine Saletan’s opening paragraphs; what makes his opening effective? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
Were you aware of the extent of hate speech laws in the West? Are you sur-
prised? Should you be more surprised by the inconsistency in rulings? Reflect 
on these questions.  
 8. 
Has Saletan convinced you that we do not practice what we preach? Why or 
why not? If you disagree, how would you refute Saletan? 
 9. 
Is it possible to understand hate speech restrictions in Western Europe relative 
to the Holocaust? Is it possible to understand and still oppose prosecution of 
someone who wants to argue that there was no Holocaust? Is it possible to leg-
islate against ignorance or stupidity? Reflect on these questions.  
  
18
19

97
 Another issue on college campuses is student drinking.  Should colleges find 
ways to crack down on underage student alcohol use and binge drinking? You 
may be able to offer some answers to this question based on your knowledge 
and experience. You may also want to go online for some statistics about college 
drinking and health and safety risks. Drawing on both experience and data, 
what claim can you support? 
 GOING ONLINE 
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
 Compare the style and tone of Mateer/Leu’s and Saletan’s essays. Has each one 
written in a way that works for the author’s approach to this issue? Be prepared to 
explain your views or develop them into a comparative analysis of style.  
 2. 
 Reread and study the essay “Your Brain Lies to You” (pp. 79–80) and then analyze 
the argument’s parts, using Toulmin’s terms.

  READ: Who are the figures in the 
painting? What are they doing? 
 REASON: What details in the 
painting help to date the scene? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE: What is 
significant about the moment 
captured in this painting? 
 Writing Effective Arguments 
 CHAPTER 4 

99
 T
 he basics of good writing remain much the same for works as seemingly 
 different as the personal essay, the argument, and the researched essay. 
Good writing is focused, organized, and concrete. Effective essays are written 
in a style and tone that are suited to both the audience and the writer’s pur-
pose. These are sound principles, all well known to you. But how, exactly, do 
you achieve them when writing argument? This chapter will help you answer 
that question. 
 KNOW YOUR AUDIENCE 
 Too often students plunge into writing without thinking much about audience, 
for, after all, their “audience” is only the instructor who has given the assign-
ment, and their purpose is to complete the assignment and get a grade. These 
views of audience and purpose are likely to lead to badly written arguments. 
First, if you are not thinking about readers who may disagree with you, you may 
not develop the best defense of your claim. Second, you may ignore your essay’s 
needed introductory material on the assumption that the instructor, knowing 
the assignment, has a context for understanding your writing. To avoid these 
pitfalls, use the following questions to sharpen your understanding of 
audience.  
 Who Is My Audience? 
 If you are writing an essay for the student newspaper, your audience consists—
primarily—of students, but do not forget that faculty and administrators also 
read the student newspaper. If you are preparing a letter-to-the-editor refuta-
tion of a recent column in your town’s newspaper, your audience will be the 
readers of that newspaper—that is, adults in your town. Some instructors give 
assignments that create an audience such as those just described so that you 
will practice writing with a specific audience in mind. 
 If you are not assigned a specific audience, imagine your classmates, as 
well as your instructor, as part of your audience. In other words, you are writ-
ing to readers in the academic community. These readers are intelligent and 
thoughtful, expecting sound reasoning and convincing evidence. From diverse 
cultures and experiences, these readers also represent varied values and beliefs. 
Do not confuse the shared expectations of writing conventions with shared 
beliefs.  
 What Will My Audience Know about My Topic? 
 What can you expect a diverse group of readers to know? Whether you are 
writing on a current issue or a centuries-old debate, you must expect most 
readers to have some knowledge of the issues. Their knowledge does not free 
you from the responsibility of developing your support fully, though. In fact, 
their knowledge creates further demands. For example, most readers know 

100 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
the main arguments on both sides of the abortion issue. For you to write as if 
they do not—and thus to ignore the arguments of the opposition—is 
to produce an argument that probably adds little to the debate on the 
subject. 
 On the other hand, what some readers “know” may be little more than an 
overview of the issues from TV news—or the emotional outbursts of a family 
member. Some readers may be misinformed or prejudiced, but they embrace 
their views enthusiastically nonetheless. So, as you think about the ways to 
develop and support your argument, you will have to assess your readers’ 
knowledge and sophistication. This assessment will help you decide how much 
background information to provide or what false facts need to be revealed and 
dismissed. 
 Where Does My Audience Stand on the Issue? 
 Expect readers to hold a range of views, even if you are writing to students on 
your campus or to an organization of which you are a member. It is not true, for 
instance, that all students want coed dorms or pass/fail grading. And, if every-
one already agrees with you, you have no reason to write. An argument needs 
to be about a topic that is open to debate. So:
 • Assume that some of your audience will probably never agree with you but 
may offer you grudging respect if you compose an effective argument.  
 • Assume that some readers do not hold strong views on your topic and may 
be open to convincing, if you present a good case.  
 • Assume that those who share your views will still be looking for a strong 
argument in support of their position. 
 • Assume that if you hold an unpopular position your best strategy will be 
a conciliatory approach. (See p. 103 for a discussion of the conciliatory 
argument.)  
 How Should I Speak to My Audience? 
 Your audience will form an opinion of you based on how you write and how 
you reason. The image of argument—and the arguer—that we have been creat-
ing in this text’s discussion is of thoughtful claims defended with logic and 
evidence. However, the heated debate at yesterday’s lunch does not resemble 
this image of argument. Sometimes the word  persuasion is used to separate the 
emotionally charged debate from the calm, intellectual tone of the academic 
argument. Unfortunately, this neat division between argument and persuasion 
does not describe the real world of debate. The thoughtful arguer also wants to 
be persuasive, and highly emotional presentations can contain relevant facts 
in support of a sound idea. Instead of thinking of two separate  categories—
argument and persuasion—think instead of a continuum from the most rigor-
ous logic to extreme flights of fantasy.  Figure 4.1 suggests this continuum with 
some kinds of arguments placed along it. 

Rigorously
objective
language
Thoughtful
restrained
language
A combination
of reason and
various clever
strategies with
language
Strong appeals
to emotion
Mathematical
proofs
Presentation of
scientific findings
Many arguments in
the academic community
Family arguments (?)
Many editorial
op-ed columns
Persuasive arguments in
some magazines or speeches
Speeches or articles
designed to move to action
Some advertising,
letters to the editor
FIGURE 4.1  A Continuum of Argumentative Language 
 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
101
 Where should you place yourself along this continuum of language? You will 
have to answer this question with each specific writing context. Much of the time 
you will choose “thoughtful, restrained language” as expected by the academic 
community, but there may be times that you will use various persuasive strate-
gies. Probably you will not select “strong appeals to emotion” for your college or 
workplace writing. Remember that you have different roles in your life, and you 
use different  voices as appropriate to each role. Most of the time, you will want 
to use the serious voice you normally select for serious conversations with other 
adults. This is the voice that will help you establish your credibility, your  ethos.  
 As you learned in Chapter 2, irony is a useful rhetorical strategy for giv-
ing one’s words greater emphasis by actually writing the opposite of what you 
mean. Many writers use irony effectively. Irony catches our attention, makes 
us think, and engages us with the text. Sarcasm is not quite the same as irony. 
Irony can cleverly focus on life’s complexities. Sarcasm is more often vicious 
than insightful, relying on harsh, negative word choice. Probably in most of your 
academic work, you will want to avoid sarcasm and think carefully about using 
any strongly worded appeal to your readers’ emotions. Better to persuade your 
audience with the force of your reasons and evidence than to lose them because 
of the static of nasty language. But the key, always, is to know your audience and 
understand how best to present a convincing argument to that specific group.  
 UNDERSTAND YOUR WRITING PURPOSE 
 There are many types or genres of argument and different reasons for writing—
beyond wanting to write convincingly in defense of your views. Different types 
of arguments require different approaches, or different kinds of evidence. It 
helps to be able to recognize the kind of argument you are contemplating. 

102 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
  What Type (Genre) of Argument Am I Preparing? 
 Here are some useful ways to classify arguments and think about their support.
 •  Investigative paper similar to those in the social sciences. If you are asked 
to collect evidence in an organized way to support a claim about adver-
tising strategies or violence in children’s TV programming, then you will 
be writing an investigative essay. You will present evidence that you have 
gathered and analyzed to support your claim. 
 •  Evaluation. If your assignment is to explain why others should read a 
particular book or take a particular professor’s class, then you will be pre-
paring an evaluation argument. Be sure to think about your criteria: What 
makes a book or a professor good? Why do you dislike Lady Gaga? Is it her 
music—or her lifestyle? 
 •  Definition. If you are asked to explain the meaning of a general or contro-
versial term, you will be writing a definition argument. What do we mean 
by wisdom? What are the characteristics of cool? A definition argument usu-
ally requires both specific details to illustrate the term and general ideas to 
express its meaning. 
 •  Claim of values. If you are given the assignment to argue for your posi-
tion on euthanasia, trying juveniles as adults, or the use of national iden-
tification cards, recognize that your assignment calls for a position paper, 
a claim based heavily on values. Pay close attention to your warrants or 
assumptions in any philosophical debate. 
 •  Claim of policy. If you are given a broad topic: “What should we do about 
 
?” and you have to fill in the blank, your task is to offer solutions 
to a current problem. What should we do about childhood obesity? About 
home foreclosures? These kinds of questions are less philosophical and 
more practical. Your solutions must be workable. 
 •  Refutation or rebuttal. If you are given the assignment to find a letter to 
the editor, a newspaper editorial, or an essay in this text with which you 
disagree, your job is to write a refutation essay, a specific challenge to a spe-
cific argument. You know, then, that you will repeatedly refer to the work 
you are rebutting, so you will need to know it thoroughly. 
 What Is My Goal? 
 It is also helpful to consider your goal in writing. Does your topic call for a 
strong statement of views (i.e., “These are the steps we must take to reduce 
childhood obesity”)? Or, is your goal an exploratory one, a thinking through 
of possible answers to a more philosophical question (“Why is it often diffi-
cult to separate performance from personality when we evaluate a star?”)? 
Thinking about your goal as well as the argument’s genre will help to decide 
on the kinds of evidence needed and on the approach to take and tone to 
select.  

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
103
 Will the Rogerian or Conciliatory Approach Work for Me? 
 Psychologist Carl Rogers asserts that the most successful arguments take a 
 conciliatory approach. The characteristics of this approach include
 • showing respect for the opposition in the language and tone of the 
argument, 
 • seeking common ground by indicating specific facts and values that both 
sides share, and 
 • qualifying the claim to bring opposing sides more closely together.  
In their essay “Euthanasia—A Critique,” authors Peter A. Singer and Mark 
Siegler provide a good example of a conciliatory approach. They begin their 
essay by explaining and then rebutting the two main arguments in favor of 
euthanasia. After stating the two arguments in clear and neutral language, they 
write this in response to the first argument: 
 We agree that the relief of pain and suffering is a crucial goal of medicine. We 
question, however, whether the care of dying patients cannot be improved 
without resorting to the drastic measure of euthanasia. Most physical pain can 
be relieved with the appropriate use of analgesic agents. Unfortunately, 
despite widespread agreement that dying patients must be provided with 
 necessary analgesia, physicians continue to underuse analgesia in the care of 
dying patients because of the concern about depressing respiratory drive or 
creating addiction. Such situations demand better management of pain, not 
euthanasia.  
 In this paragraph the authors accept the value of pain management for dying 
patients. They go even further and offer a solution to the problem of suffering 
among the terminally ill—better pain management by doctors. They remain 
thoughtful in their approach and tone throughout, while sticking to their 
 position that legalizing euthanasia is not the solution. 
 Consider how you can use the conciliatory approach to write more effec-
tive arguments. It will help you avoid “overheated” language and maintain 
your focus on what is doable in a world of differing points of view. There is the 
expression that “you can catch more flies with honey than with vinegar.” Using 
“honey” instead of “vinegar” might also make you feel better about yourself. 
 MOVE FROM TOPIC TO CLAIM 
TO POSSIBLE SUPPORT 
 When you write a letter to the editor of a newspaper, you have chosen to 
respond to someone else’s argument that has bothered you. In this writing con-
text, you already know your topic and, probably, your claim as well. You also 
know that your purpose will be to refute the article you have read. In composi-
tion classes, the context is not always so clearly established, but you will  usually 
be given some guidelines with which to get started.  

104 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
  Selecting a Topic 
 Suppose that you are asked to write an argument that is in some way connected 
to First Amendment rights. Your instructor has limited and focused your topic 
choice and purpose. Start thinking about possible topics that relate to freedom 
of speech and censorship issues. To aid your topic search and selection, use one 
or more invention strategies:
 • Brainstorm (make a list). 
 • Freewrite (write without stopping for ten minutes). 
 • Map or cluster (connect ideas to the general topic in various spokes, a kind 
of visual brainstorming). 
 • Read through this text for ideas.  
 Your invention strategies lead, let us suppose, to the following list of 
 possible topics:
 Administrative restrictions on the college newspaper 
 Hate speech restrictions or codes 
 Deleting certain books from high school reading lists 
 Controls and limits on alcohol and cigarette advertising 
 Restrictions on violent TV programming 
 Dress codes/uniforms 
Looking over your list, you realize that the last item, dress codes/uniforms, may 
be about freedom but not freedom of speech, so you drop it from  consideration. 
All of the other topics have promise. Which one do you select? Two consider-
ations should guide you: interest and knowledge. First, your argument is likely 
to be more thoughtful and lively if you choose an issue that matters to you. But, 
unless you have time for study, you are wise to choose a topic about which you 
already have some information and ideas. Suppose that you decide to write 
about television violence because you are concerned about violence in American 
society and have given this issue some thought. It is time to phrase your topic as 
a tentative thesis or claim.  
 Drafting a Claim 
 Good claim statements will keep you focused in your writing—in addition to 
establishing your main idea for readers. Give thought both to your  position on 
the issue and to the wording of your claim.  Claim statements to avoid: 
 • Claims using vague words such as  good or  bad. 
 VAGUE:   
 TV violence is bad for us. 
 BETTER:  
 We need more restrictions on violent TV programming. 
 • Claims in loosely worded “two-part” sentences.
 UNFOCUSED: 
 Campus rape is a serious problem, and we need to do 
 something about it. 

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
105
 BETTER:  
 College administrators and students need to work together to 
reduce both the number of campus rapes and the fear of rape. 
 • Claims that are not appropriately qualified.
 OVERSTATED:  
 Violence on television is making us a violent society. 
 BETTER:  
 TV violence is contributing to viewers’ increased fear of 
violence and insensitivity to violence. 
 • Claims that do not help you focus on your purpose in writing.
 UNCLEAR 
  Not everyone agrees on what is meant by violent TV
PURPOSE: 
programming. 
 (Perhaps this is true, but more important, this claim suggests that you will define violent 
programming. Such an approach would not keep you focused on a First Amendment issue.) 
 BETTER:  
 Restrictions on violent TV programs can be justified. 
 (Now your claim directs you to the debate over restrictions of content.) 
 Listing Possible Grounds 
 As you learned in Chapter 3, you can generate grounds to support a claim by 
adding a “because” clause after a claim statement. We can start a list of grounds 
for the topic on violent TV programming in this way: 
 We need more restrictions on violent television programming  because 
 • Many people, including children and teens, watch many hours of TV 
(get stats). 
 • People are affected by the dominant activities/experiences in their lives.  
 • There is a connection between violent programming and desensitizing and 
fear of violence and possibly more aggressive behavior in heavy viewers 
(get detail of studies).  
 • Society needs to protect young people.  
You have four good points to work on, a combination of reasons and inferences 
drawn from evidence.  
 Listing Grounds for the Other Side or Another Perspective 
 Remember that arguments generate counterarguments. Continue your explora-
tion of this topic by considering possible rebuttals to your proposed grounds. How 
might someone who does not want to see restrictions placed on television pro-
gramming respond to each of your points? Let’s think about them one at a time:
 We need more restrictions on violent television programming because 
 1. 
 Many people, including children and teens, watch many hours of TV. 
 Your opposition cannot really challenge your first point on the facts, only its 
relevance to restricting programming. The opposition might argue that if 

106 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
parents think their children are watching too much TV, they should turn it off. 
The restriction needs to be a family decision.  
 2. 
 People are affected by the dominant activities/experiences in their lives. 
 It seems common sense to expect people to be influenced by dominant forces 
in their lives. Your opposition might argue, though, that many people have 
the TV on for many hours but often are not watching it intently for all of that 
time. The more dominant forces in our lives are parents and teachers and 
peers, not the TV. The opposition might also argue that people seem to be 
influenced to such different degrees by television that it is not fair or logical to 
restrict everyone when perhaps only a few are truly influenced by their TV 
viewing to a harmful degree.  
 3.  There is a connection between violent programming and desensitizing and fear 
of violence and possibly more aggressive behavior in heavy viewers.  
 Some people are entirely convinced by studies showing these negative effects 
of violent TV programming, but others point to the less convincing studies or 
make the argument that if violence on TV were really so powerful an influence, 
most people would be violent or fearful or desensitized. 
 4. 
 Society needs to protect young people. 
 Your opposition might choose to agree with you in theory on this point—and 
then turn again to the argument that parents should be doing the protecting. 
Government controls on programming restrict adults, as well as children, 
whereas it may only be some children who should watch fewer hours of TV 
and not watch adult “cop” shows at all.  
 Working through this process of considering opposing views can help 
you see
 • where you may want to do some research for facts to provide backing for 
your grounds,  
 • how you can best develop your reasons to take account of typical counter-
arguments, and 
 • if you should qualify your claim in some ways. 
 Planning Your Approach 
 Now that you have thought about arguments on the other side, you decide that 
you want to argue for a qualified claim that is also more precise: 
 To protect young viewers, we need restrictions on violence in children’s pro-
grams and ratings for prime-time adult shows that clearly establish the degree 
of violence in those shows.  
 This qualified claim responds to two points of the rebuttals. Our student hasn’t 
given in to the other side but has chosen to narrow the argument to emphasize 
the protection of children, an area of common ground. 
 Next, it’s time to check some of the articles in this text or go online to get 
some data to develop points 1 and 3. You need to know that 99 percent of homes 

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
107
have at least one TV; you need to know that by the time young people gradu-
ate from high school, they have spent more time in front of the TV than in the 
 classroom. Also, you can find the average number of violent acts by hour of TV 
in children’s programs. Then, too, there are the various studies of fearfulness 
and aggressive behavior that will give you some statistics to use to develop the 
third point. Be sure to select reliable sources and then cite the sources you use. 
 Citing sources is not only required and right; it is also part of the process of establishing 
your credibility and thus strengthening your argument. 
 Finally, how are you going to answer the point about parents control-
ling their children? You might counter that in theory this is the way it should 
be—but in fact not all parents are at home watching what their children are 
watching, and not all parents care enough to pay attention. However, all of us 
suffer from the consequences of those children who are influenced by their TV 
watching to become more aggressive or fearful or desensitized. These children 
grow up to become the adults the rest of us have to interact with, so the prob-
lem becomes one for the society as a whole to solve. If you had not disciplined 
yourself to go through the process of listing possible rebuttals, you may not 
have thought through this part of the debate. 
 DRAFT YOUR ARGUMENT 
  Many of us can benefit from a step-by-step process of invention—such as we 
have been exploring in the last few pages. In addition, the more notes you have 
from working through the Toulmin structure, the easier it will be to get started 
on your draft. Students report that they can control their writing anxiety 
when they generate detailed notes. A page of notes that also suggests 
an organizational strategy can remove that awful feeling of staring at a blank 
computer screen. 
 In the following chapters on argument, you will find specific suggestions 
for organizing the various kinds of arguments. But you can always rely on one 
of these two basic organizations, regardless of the specific genre:
PLAN 1: ORGANIZING AN ARGUMENT
Attention-getting opening (why the issue is important, or current, etc.)
Claim statement
Reasons and evidence in order from least important to most important
Challenge to potential rebuttals or counterarguments
Conclusion that reemphasizes claim
PLAN 2: ORGANIZING AN ARGUMENT
Attention-getting opening
Claim statement (or possibly leave to the conclusion)
Order by arguments of opposing position, with your challenge to each
Conclusion that reemphasizes (or states for the first time) your claim

108 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 REVISE YOUR DRAFT 
 If you have drafted at the computer, begin revising by printing a copy of your 
draft. Most of us cannot do an adequate job of revision by looking at a  computer 
screen. Then remind yourself that revision is a three-step process: rewriting, 
editing, and proofreading. 
  Rewriting 
 You are not ready to polish the writing until you are satisfied with the argument. 
Look first at the total piece. Do you have all the necessary parts: a claim, support, 
some response to possible counterarguments? Examine the order of your rea-
sons and evidence. Do some of your points belong, logically, in a different place? 
Does the order make the most powerful defense of your claim? Be willing to 
move whole paragraphs around to test the best organization. Also reflect on the 
argument itself. Have you avoided logical fallacies? Have you qualified state-
ments when appropriate? Do you have enough support? The best support? 
 Consider development: Is your essay long enough to meet assignment 
requirements? Are points fully developed to satisfy the demands of readers? 
One key to development is the length of your paragraphs. If most of your 
paragraphs are only two or three sentences, you have not developed the point 
of each paragraph satisfactorily. It is possible that some paragraphs need to 
be combined because they are really on the same topic. More typically, short 
 paragraphs need further explanation of ideas or examples to illustrate ideas. 
Compare the following paragraphs for effectiveness: 
 First Draft of a Paragraph from an Essay on Gun Control 
 One popular argument used against the regulation of gun ownership is the 
need of citizens, especially in urban areas where the crime rate is higher, 
 GUIDELINES for
 •  Try to get a complete draft in one sitting so that you can “see” the 
whole piece.  
 •  If you can’t think of a clever opening, state your claim and move on to 
the body of your essay.  After you draft your reasons and evidence, a 
good opening may occur to you.  
 •  If you find that you need something more in some parts of your essay, 
leave space there as a reminder that you will need to return to that 
paragraph later.  
 •  Try to avoid using either a dictionary or thesaurus while drafting.  Your 
goal is to get the ideas down. You will polish later.  
 •  Learn to draft at your computer.  Revising is so much easier that you will 
be more willing to make significant changes if you work at your PC. If you 
are handwriting your draft, leave plenty of margin space for additions or 
for directions to shift parts around.  
Drafting  

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
109
to possess a handgun for personal protection, either carried or kept in the 
home. Some citizens may not be aware of the dangers to themselves or their 
families when they purchase a gun. Others, more aware, may embrace the 
myth that “bad things only happen to other people.”  
 Revised Version of the Paragraph with Statistics Added 
 One popular argument used against the regulation of gun ownership is the 
need of citizens, especially in urban areas where the crime rate is higher, to 
possess a handgun for personal protection, whether it is carried or kept in 
the home.  Although some citizens may not be aware of the dangers to them-
selves or their families when they purchase a gun, they should be.  According 
to the Center to Prevent Handgun Violence, from their web page “Firearm 
Facts,” “guns that are kept in the home for self-protection are 22 times 
more likely to kill a family member or friend than to kill in self-defense.” The 
Center also reports that guns in the home make homicide three times more 
likely and  suicide five times more likely.  We are not thinking straight if we 
believe that these dangers apply only to others.  
 A quick trip to the Internet has provided this student with some facts to  support 
his argument. Observe how he has referred informally but fully to the source of 
his information. (If your instructor requires formal MLA documentation in all 
essays, then you will need to add a Works Cited page and give a full reference 
to the website. See pp. 318–329.) 
 Editing 
 Make your changes, print another copy, and begin the second phase of revision: 
editing. As you read through this time, pay close attention to unity and 
 coherence, to sentence patterns, and to word choice. Read each paragraph as a 
separate unit to be certain that everything is on the same subtopic. Then look at 
your use of transition and connecting words, both within and between para-
graphs. Ask yourself: Have you guided the reader through the argument using 
appropriate connectors such as  therefore, in addition, as a consequence, also, and 
so forth? 
 Read again, focusing on each sentence, checking to see that you have var-
ied sentence patterns and length. Read sentences aloud to let your ear help you 
find awkward constructions or unfinished thoughts. Strive as well for word 
choice that is concrete and specific, avoiding wordiness, clichés, trite expres-
sions, or incorrect use of specialized terms. Observe how Samantha edited one 
paragraph in her essay “Balancing Work and Family”: 
 Draft Version of Paragraph 
 Women have come a long way  in equalizing themselves,  but  inequality  within 
marriages  do  exist. One reason for this can be found in the media.  Just last 
week  America turned on their televisions  to watch a grotesque dramatiza-
tion of skewed priorities. On  Who Wants to Marry a Millionaire, a panel of 
? 
agr
 Vague reference. 
 Wordy. 

110 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
women vied for the affections of a millionaire who would choose one of 
them to be his wife.  This show said that women can be purchased.  Also that 
men must  provide and that money is worth the sacrifice of one’s individuality. 
The show also suggests that physical attraction is more important than the 
building of a complete relationship. Finally, the show says that women’s true 
value lies in their appearance. This is a dangerous message to send to both 
men and women viewers.  
 Edited Version of Paragraph 
 Although women have come a long way toward equality in the workplace, 
inequality within marriages can still be found.  The media may be partly to 
blame for this continued inequality.  Just last week  Americans watched a 
 grotesque dramatization of skewed priorities. On  Who Wants to Marry a 
 Millionaire,  a panel of women vied for the affections of a millionaire who 
would choose one of them to be his wife. Such displays teach us that women 
can be purchased, that men must be the providers, that the desire for money 
is worth the sacrifice of one’s individuality, that physical attraction is more 
important than a complete relationship, and that women’s true value lies in 
their  appearance. These messages discourage marriages based on equality 
and mutual support.  
 Samantha’s editing has eliminated wordiness and vague references and has 
combined ideas into one forceful sentence. Support your good argument by 
taking the time to polish your writing. 
 A Few Words about Words and Tone 
 You have just been advised to check your word choice to eliminate wordiness, 
vagueness, clichés, and so on. Here is a specific checklist of problems often 
found in student papers with some ways to fix the problems:
 •  Eliminate clichés.  Do not write about “the fast-paced world we live in today” 
or the “rat race.” First, do you know for sure that the pace of life for some-
one who has a demanding job is any faster than it was in the past? Using 
time effectively has always mattered. Also, clichés suggest that you are too 
lazy to find your own words.  
 •  Avoid jargon. In the negative sense of this word, jargon refers to non-
specialists who fill their writing with “heavy-sounding terms” to give the 
appearance of significance. Watch for any overuse of “scientific” terms 
such as  factor or  aspect, or other vague, awkward language. 
 •  Avoid language that is too informal for most of your writing contexts. What do you 
mean when you write: “ Kids today watch too much TV”? Alternatives include 
 children, teens, adolescents. These words are less slangy and more precise.  
 •  Avoid nasty attacks on the opposition. Change “those jerks who are foolish 
enough to believe that TV violence has no impact on children” to lan-
guage that explains your counterargument without attacking those who 
 Short sentences. 
 Vague reference. 

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
111
may  disagree with you. After all, you want to change the thinking of your 
 audience, not make them resent you for name-calling. 
 •  Avoid all discriminatory language. In the academic community and the adult 
workplace, most people are bothered by language that belittles any one 
group. This includes language that is racist or sexist or reflects negatively 
on older or disabled persons or those who do not share your sexual orienta-
tion or religious beliefs. Just don’t do it! 
 Proofreading 
 You also do not want to lose the respect of readers because you submit a paper 
filled with “little” errors—errors in punctuation, mechanics, and incorrect word 
choice. Most readers will forgive one or two little errors but will become 
annoyed if they begin to pile up. So, after you are finished rewriting and edit-
ing, print a copy of your paper and read it slowly, looking specifically at punc-
tuation, at the handling of quotations and references to writers and to titles, and 
at those pesky words that come in two or more “versions”:  to, too, and  two; here 
and  hear; their, there, and  they’re; and so forth. If instructors have found any of 
these kinds of errors in your papers over the years, then focus your attention on 
the kinds of errors you have been known to make. 
 Refer to Chapter 1 for handling references to authors and titles and for 
handling direct quotations. Use a glossary of usage in a handbook for 
 homonyms (words that sound alike but have different meanings), and check a 
handbook for punctuation rules. Take pride in your work and present a paper 
that will be treated with respect. What follows is a checklist of the key points 
for writing good arguments that we have just examined. 
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION  
 u   Have I selected an issue and purpose consistent with assignment 
guidelines? 
 u   Have I stated a claim that is focused, appropriately qualified, and precise? 
 u   Have I developed sound reasons and evidence in support of my claim? 
 u   Have I used Toulmin’s terms to help me study the parts of my argument, 
including rebuttals to counterarguments?  
 u   Have I taken advantage of a conciliatory approach and emphasized  common 
ground with opponents?  
 u   Have I found a clear and effective organization for presenting my 
argument? 
 u   Have I edited my draft thoughtfully, concentrating on producing unified 
and coherent paragraphs and polished sentences? 
 u   Have I eliminated wordiness, clichés, jargon? 
 u   Have I selected an appropriate tone for my purpose and audience? 
 u   Have I used my word processor’s spell-check and proofread a printed copy 
with great care? 

112 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 FOR ANALYSIS AND DEBATE 
 FIVE MYTHS ABOUT TORTURE AND TRUTH  
 
 DARIUS   REJALI 
 A professor of political science at Reed College, Iranian-born Darius Rejali is a 
 recognized expert on the causes and meaning of violence, especially on torture, in 
our world. His book  Torture and Democracy (2007) has won acclaim and resulted in 
frequent interview sessions for Rejali. His latest book is  Spirituality and the Ethics of 
Torture (2009). The following essay appeared on December 16, 2007, in the 
 Washington Post. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Can you think of five myths about torture? What do you 
expect Rejali to cover in this essay?  
 So the CIA did indeed torture Abu Zubaida, the first al-Qaeda terrorist 
suspect to have been waterboarded. So says John Kiriakou, the first former 
CIA employee directly involved in the questioning of “high-value” al-Qaeda 
detainees to speak out publicly. He minced no words last week in calling the 
CIA’s “enhanced interrogation techniques” what they are.  
 But did they work? Torture’s defenders, including the wannabe tough guys 
who write Fox’s “24,” insist that the rough stuff gets results. “It was like flip-
ping a switch,” said Kiriakou about Abu Zubaida’s response to being water-
boarded. But the al-Qaeda operative’s confessions—descriptions of fantastic 
plots from a man who intelligence analysts were convinced was mentally ill—
probably didn’t give the CIA any actionable intelligence. Of course, we may 
never know the whole truth, since the CIA destroyed the videotapes of Abu 
Zubaida’s interrogation. But here are some other myths that are bound to 
come up as the debate over torture rages on.  
 1. Torture worked for the Gestapo. Actually, no. Even Hitler’s notorious 
secret police got most of their information from public tips, informers and 
interagency cooperation. That was still more than enough to let the Gestapo 
decimate anti-Nazi resistance in Austria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Denmark, 
Norway, France, Russia and the concentration camps. 
 Yes, the Gestapo did torture people for intelligence, especially in later 
years. But this reflected not torture’s efficacy but the loss of many seasoned 
professionals to World War II, increasingly desperate competition for intelli-
gence among Gestapo units and an influx of less disciplined younger mem-
bers. (Why do serious, tedious police work when you have a uniform and a 
whip?) It’s surprising how unsuccessful the Gestapo’s brutal efforts were. They 
failed to break senior leaders of the French, Danish, Polish and German resis-
tance. I’ve spent more than a decade collecting all the cases of Gestapo tor-
ture “successes” in multiple languages; the number is small and the results 
pathetic, especially compared with the devastating effects of public coopera-
tion and informers. 
 2. Everyone talks sooner or later under torture. Truth is, it’s surprisingly 
hard to get anything under torture, true or false. For example, between 1500 
1
2
3
4
5

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
113
and 1750, French prosecutors tried to torture confessions out of 785 individu-
als. Torture was legal back then, and the records document such practices as 
the bone-crushing use of splints, pumping stomachs with water until they 
swelled and pouring boiling oil on the feet. But the number of prisoners who 
said anything was low, from 3 percent in Paris to 14 percent in Toulouse (an 
exceptional high). Most of the time, the torturers were unable to get any state-
ment whatsoever. 
 And such examples could be multiplied. The Japanese fascists, no strang-
ers to torture, said it best in their field manual, which was found in Burma dur-
ing World War II: They described torture as the clumsiest possible method of 
gathering intelligence. Like most sensible torturers, they preferred to use tor-
ture for intimidation, not information. 
 3. People will say anything under torture. Well, no, although this is a 
favorite chestnut of torture’s foes. Think about it: Sure, someone would lie 
under torture, but wouldn’t they also lie if they were being interrogated with-
out coercion? 
 In fact, the problem of torture does not stem from the prisoner who  has 
information; it stems from the prisoner who doesn’t. Such a person is also 
likely to lie, to say anything, often convincingly. The torture of the informed 
may generate no more lies than normal interrogation, but the torture of the 
ignorant and innocent overwhelms investigators with misleading informa-
tion. In these cases, nothing is indeed preferable to anything. Anything 
needs to be verified, and the CIA’s own 1963 interrogation manual explains 
that “a time-consuming delay results”—hardly useful when every moment 
matters. 
 Intelligence gathering is especially vulnerable to this problem. When 
police officers torture, they know what the crime is, and all they want is the 
confession. When intelligence officers torture, they must gather information 
about what they don’t know. 
 4. Most people can tell when someone is lying under torture. Not 
so—and we know quite a bit about this. For about 40 years, psychologists 
have been testing police officers as well as normal people to see whether 
they can spot lies, and the results aren’t encouraging. Ordinary folk have 
an accuracy rate of about 57 percent, which is pretty poor considering that 
50 percent is the flip of a coin. Likewise, the cops’ accuracy rates fall 
between 45 percent and 65 percent—that is, sometimes less accurate than 
a coin toss. 
 Why does this matter? Because even if torturers break a person, they have 
to recognize it, and most of the time they can’t. Torturers assume too much 
and reject what doesn’t fit their assumptions. For instance, Sheila Cassidy, a 
British physician, cracked under electric-shock torture by the Chilean secret 
service in the 1970s and identified priests who had helped the country’s social-
ist opposition. But her devout interrogators couldn’t believe that priests would 
ever help the socialists, so they tortured her for another week until they finally 
became convinced. By that time, she was so damaged that she couldn’t 
remember the location of the safe house. 
6
7
8
9
10
11

114 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 In fact, most torturers are nowhere near as well trained for interrogation as 
police are. Torturers are usually chosen because they’ve endured hardship and 
pain, fought with courage, kept secrets, held the right beliefs and earned a 
reputation as trustworthy and loyal. They often rely on folklore about what 
lying behavior looks like—shifty eyes, sweaty palms and so on. And, not sur-
prisingly, they make a lot of mistakes. 
 5. You can train people to resist torture. Supposedly, this is why we can’t 
know what the CIA’s “enhanced interrogation techniques” are: If Washington 
admits that it waterboards suspected terrorists, al-Qaeda will set up 
“ waterboarding-resistance camps” across the world. Be that as it may, the 
truth is that no training will help the bad guys. 
 Simply put, nothing predicts the outcome of one’s resistance to pain bet-
ter than one’s own personality. Against some personalities, nothing works; 
against others, practically anything does. Studies of hundreds of detainees 
who broke under Soviet and Chinese torture, including Army-funded studies 
of U.S. prisoners of war, conclude that during, before and after torture, each 
prisoner displayed strengths and weaknesses dependent on his or her own 
character. The CIA’s own “Human Resources Exploitation Manual” from 1983 
and its so-called Kubark manual from 1963 agree. In all matters relating to 
pain, says Kubark, the “individual remains the determinant.” 
 The thing that’s most clear from torture-victim studies is that you can’t 
train for the ordeal. There is no secret knowledge out there about how to 
resist torture. Yes, there are manuals, such as the IRA’s “Green Book,” the anti-
Soviet “Manual for Psychiatry for Dissidents” and “Torture and the Interrogation 
Experience,” an Iranian guerrilla manual from the 1970s. But none of these 
volumes contains specific techniques of resistance, just general encourage-
ment to hang tough. Even al-Qaeda’s vaunted terrorist-training manual offers 
no tips on how to resist torture, and al-Qaeda was no stranger to the brutal 
methods of the Saudi police. 
 And yet these myths persist. “The larger problem here, I think,” one active 
CIA officer observed in 2005, “is that this kind of stuff just makes people feel 
better, even if it doesn’t work.” 
 Source:  Washington Post, June 28, 2008. Reprinted by permission of the author. 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What context for his discussion does the author provide in the opening two 
paragraphs? 
   2. What worked better than torture for the Gestapo? What led to an increase in 
torture in the Gestapo? 
 3. What do the data show about getting people to speak by torturing them? 
 4. Who are the people most likely to lie under torture? 
   5. Why are interrogators not very good at recognizing when the tortured are lying?  
12
13
14
15
16

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
115
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What structure does the author use? What kind of argument is this?
 7. What is Rejali’s position on torture, the claim of his argument?
 8. What grounds does he present in support of his claim?
 9. Describe Rejali’s style; how does his style of writing help his argument?
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. Which of the five discussions has surprised you the most? Why? 
 11. Has the author convinced you that all five myths lack substance? Why or why 
not? If you disagree, how would you refute Rejali?
 12. Why do intelligence and military personnel continue to use harsh interrogation 
strategies even though the evidence suggests that what, if anything, they learn 
will not be useful? Ponder this question.  
 TORTURE IS WRONG—BUT IT MIGHT WORK  
 M. GREGG   BLOCHE  
 A law professor at Georgetown University, Gregg Bloche is also a physician. His MD 
and JD degrees are both from Yale University. Bloche specializes in medical ethics, 
health care law, and human rights law. Widely published, he is the author of  The 
Hippocratic Myth (2011). His essay on torture appeared on May 29, 2011. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Has Bloche intrigued you with his title? What do you 
expect his position to be?  
 T orture, liberals like me often insist, isn’t just immoral, it’s ineffective. We 
like this proposition because it portrays us as protectors of the nation, not 
wusses willing to risk American lives to protect terrorists. And we love to quote 
seasoned interrogators’ assurances that building rapport with the bad guys 
will get them to talk. 
 But the killing of Osama bin Laden four weeks ago has revived the old 
debate about whether torture works. Could it be that “enhanced interroga-
tion techniques” employed during the George W. Bush administration helped 
find bin Laden’s now-famous courier and track him to the terrorist in chief’s 
now-infamous lair? 
 Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) and current administration officials say no. 
Former attorney general Michael Mukasey and former vice president Dick 
Cheney say yes. 
 The idea that waterboarding and other abuses may have been effective in 
getting information from detainees is repellant to many, including me. It’s 
1
2
3
4

116 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
contrary to the meme many 
have embraced: that tor-
ture doesn’t work because 
people being abused to the 
breaking point will say any-
thing to get the brutality to 
stop—anything they think 
their accusers want to hear. 
 But this position is at 
odds with some behavioral 
science, I’ve learned. The 
architects of enhanced inter-
rogation are doctors who 
built on a still-classified, 
research-based model that 
suggests how abuse can 
indeed work. 
 I’ve examined the sci-
ence, studied the available 
paper trail and interviewed 
key actors, including several who helped develop the enhanced interrogation 
program and who haven’t spoken publicly before. This inquiry has made it pos-
sible to piece together the model that under-girds enhanced interrogation. 
 This model holds that harsh methods can’t, by themselves, force terrorists 
to tell the truth. Brute force, it suggests, stiffens resistance. Rather, the role of 
abuse is to induce hopelessness and despair. That’s what sleep deprivation, 
stress positions and prolonged isolation were designed to do. Small gestures 
of contempt—facial slaps and frequent insults—drive home the message of 
futility. Even the rough stuff, such as “walling” and waterboarding, is meant to 
dispirit, not to coerce. 
 Once a sense of hopelessness is instilled, the model holds, interrogators 
can shape behavior through small rewards. Bathroom breaks, reprieves from 
foul-tasting food and even the occasional kind word can coax broken men to 
comply with their abusers’ expectations. 
 Certainly, interrogators using this approach have obtained false confes-
sions. Chinese interrogators did so intentionally, for propaganda purposes, 
with American prisoners during the Korean War. McCain and other critics of 
“torture-lite” cite this precedent to argue that it can’t yield reliable informa-
tion. But the same psychological sequence—induction of hopelessness, 
 followed by rewards to shape compliance—can be used to get terrorism 
 suspects to tell the truth, or so the architects of enhanced interrogation 
hypothesize. 
 Critical to this model is the ability to assess suspects’ truthfulness in real 
time. To this end, CIA interrogators stressed speedy integration of intelligence 
from all sources. The idea was to frame questions to detect falsehoods; inter-
rogators could then reward honesty and punish deceit. 
5
6
7
8
9
10

 
CHAPTER 4 Writing Effective Arguments 
117
 It’s been widely reported that the program was conceived by a former Air 
Force psychologist, James Mitchell, who had helped oversee the Pentagon’s 
program for training soldiers and airmen to resist torture if captured. That 
Mitchell became the CIA’s maestro of enhanced interrogation and personally 
water-boarded several prisoners was confirmed in 2009 through the release of 
previously classified documents. But how Mitchell got involved and why the 
agency embraced his methods remained a mystery. 
 The key player was a clinical psychologist turned CIA official, Kirk Hubbard, 
I learned through interviews with him and others. On the day 19 hijackers bent 
on mass murder made their place in history, Hubbard’s responsibilities at the 
agency included tracking developments in the behavioral sciences with an eye 
toward their tactical use. He and Mitchell knew each other through the net-
work of psychologists who do national security work. Just retired from the Air 
Force, Mitchell figured he could translate what he knew about teaching resis-
tance into a methodology for breaking it. He convinced Hubbard, who 
 introduced him to CIA leaders and coached him through the agency’s 
bureaucratic rivalries. 
 Journalistic accounts have cast Mitchell as a rogue who won a CIA con-
tract by dint of charisma. What’s gone unappreciated is his reliance on a 
research base. He had studied the medical and psychological literature on 
how Chinese interrogators extracted false confessions. And he was an admirer 
of Martin Seligman, the University of Pennsylvania psychologist who had 
developed the concept of “learned helplessness” and invoked it to explain 
depression. 
 Mitchell, it appears, saw connections and seized upon them. The despair 
that Chinese interrogators tried to instill was akin to learned helplessness. 
Seligman’s induction of learned helplessness in laboratory animals, there-
fore, could point the way to prison regimens capable of inducing it in  people. 
And—this was Mitchell’s biggest conceptual jump—the Chinese way of shap-
ing behavior in prisoners who were reduced to learned helplessness held a 
broader lesson. 
 To motivate a captive to comply, a Chinese interrogator established an 
aura of omnipotence. For weeks or months, the interrogator was his prisoner’s 
sole human connection, with monopoly power to praise, punish and reward. 
Rapport with the interrogator offered the only escape from despair. This 
opened possibilities for the sculpting of behavior and belief. For propaganda 
purposes, the Chinese sought sham confessions. But Mitchell saw that behav-
ioral shaping could be used to pursue other goals, including the extraction 
of truth. 
 Did the methods Mitchell devised help end the hunt for bin Laden? Have 
they prevented terrorist attacks? We’ll never know. Not only are counterterror-
ism operations shrouded in secrecy, but it’s impossible to prove or disprove 
claims that enhanced interrogation works better than other methods when 
prisoners are intent on saying nothing. 
 Scientific study of this question would require random sorting of suspects 
into groups that receive either torture-lite or conventional forms of 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

118 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
interrogation. To frame this inquiry is to show why it can’t be carried out: It 
would violate international law and research ethics. The CIA, Hubbard told 
me, conducted no such study for this reason. 
 So we’re left with the unsavory possibility that torture-lite works—and that 
it may have helped find bin Laden. It does no good to point out, as some 
human rights advocates have, that the detainees who yielded information 
about his courier did so after the abuse stopped. The model on which 
enhanced interrogation is based can account for this. The detainees’ coopera-
tion could have ensued from hopelessness and despair, followed by interroga-
tors’ adroit use of their power to punish and reward. 
 This possibility poses the question of torture in a more unsettling fashion, 
by denying us the easy out that torture is both ineffective and wrong. We must 
choose between its repugnance to our values and its potential efficacy. To me, 
the choice is almost always obvious: Contempt for the law of nations would put 
us on a path toward a more brutish world. Conservatives are fond of saying, on 
behalf of martial sacrifice, that freedom isn’t free. Neither is basic decency.  
Source: Washington Post, May 29, 2011. Reprinted by permission of the author.
18
19
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What argument is embraced by those who are opposed to the use of torture? 
 2. What did Bloche learn about the purpose of “enhanced interrogation”? How is 
it used as part of a process for getting information?  
 3. What must interrogators assess for this model to work? How do they try to do 
this? 
 4. Why can we not know for certain if torture works? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What is Bloche’s claim? (Be careful; it is not a simple statement.) 
 6. What grounds does he present in support of his claim? 
 7. Study the author’s introduction; what does he gain by announcing his position 
on torture in his opening paragraph?  
 8. Study Bloche’s conclusion: Why is deciding on one’s position more difficult 
now? What does Bloche mean by his final sentence?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. Has Bloche convinced you that the issue of using enhanced interrogation has 
become more complex? Why or why not? If you disagree with the author, how 
would you refute him?  
 10. Both Bloche and Rejali discuss the issue of interrogators needing to assess what, 
if any, good information they may be getting from interrogation. What does 
this tell you about the task of intelligence gathering? Ponder this issue for class 
discussion or writing.  

119
The debate over the use of enhanced interrogation techniques and of hidden 
sites abroad continues.  Bloche mentions several studies in his discussion. Go 
online and see what more you can learn about this debate. Ponder this 
question: Why do some continue these strategies when studies fail to confirm 
that they work? 
 GOING ONLINE 
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
Do Rejali and Bloche hold opposing viewpoints on the use of torture—or are their 
differences more that of approach and focus? Read each author again and then 
write an analysis of their differences in style, approach to the issue, and position on 
the issue.  
 2. 
Reflect on what you have learned about torture from Rejali and Bloche and then 
consider: What may be the greatest “unknown” part of the equation in the use of 
interrogation as a strategy for finding people who have broken the law? Or, put 
another way, what do you see as the biggest problem to assuring success from ques-
tioning people under pressure to get intelligence from them? 
 3. 
Should the debate over enhanced interrogation procedures be about effectiveness 
or ethics? And, if it should be about effectiveness, then how much evidence is 
needed to defend torture on the grounds that it works? Ponder these questions.  

READ: This photo is of Princess Cottage, built in 1855 on Union Beach, NJ, 
as it looked after Hurricane Sandy (Fall 2012). The cottage has since been 
torn down.
REASON: What is your initial reaction to this photo?  How does it make 
you feel?  What does it make you think about?
REFLECT/WRITE: There are many images of the hurricane’s destruction; 
why would someone select this image for publication? 
 Reading, Analyzing, and Using 
Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
 CHAPTER 5 

121
 W
 e live in a visual age. Many of us go to movies to appreciate and judge 
the film’s visual effects. The Internet is awash in pictures and colorful 
icons. Perhaps the best symbol of our visual age is  USA Today, a paper filled 
with color photos and many tables and other graphics as a primary way of 
presenting information.  USA Today has forced the more traditional papers to 
add color to compete. We also live in a numerical age. We refer to the events 
of September 11, 2001, as 9/11—without any disrespect. This chapter brings 
together these  markers of our times as they are used in argument—and as 
argument. Finding  statistics and visuals used as part of argument, we also 
need to remember that cartoons and advertisements are arguments in and of 
themselves. 
 RESPONDING TO VISUAL ARGUMENTS 
 Many arguments bombard us today in visual forms. These include photos, 
political cartoons, and advertising. Most major newspapers have a political 
 cartoonist whose drawings appear regularly on the editorial page. (Some comic 
strips are also political in nature, at least some of the time.) These cartoons are 
designed to make a political point in a visually clever and amusing way. (That 
is why they are both “cartoons” and “political” at the same time.) Their uses of 
irony and caricatures of known politicians make them among the most 
 emotionally powerful, indeed stinging, of arguments. 
 Photographs accompany many newspaper and magazine articles, and they 
often tell a story. Indeed some photographers are famous for their ability to 
capture a personality or a newsworthy moment. So accustomed to these visuals 
today, we sometimes forget to study photographs. Be sure to examine each 
photo, remembering that authors and editors have selected each one for a 
reason. 
 Advertisements are among the most creative and powerful forms of argu-
ment today. Remember that ads are designed to take your time (for shopping) 
and your money. Their messages need to be powerful to motivate you to action. 
With some products (what most of us consider necessities), ads are designed to 
influence product choice, to get us to buy brand A instead of brand B. With 
other products, ones we really do not need or which may actually be harmful to 
us, ads need to be especially clever. Some ads do provide information (car X 
gets better gas mileage than car Y). Other ads (perfume ads, for example) take 
us into a fantasy land so that we will spend $50 on a small but pretty bottle. 
Another type of ad is the “image advertisement,” an ad that assures us that a 
particular company is top-notch. If we admire the company, we will buy its 
goods or services. 
 Here are guidelines for reading visual arguments. You can practice these 
steps with the exercises that follow. 

GUIDELINES for
 •  Is a scene or situation depicted? If so, study the details to identify the 
situation.  
 •  Identify each figure in the photo. 
 •  What details of scene or person(s) carry significance? 
 •  How does the photograph make you feel? 
 Reading Photographs 
GUIDELINES for
 •  What scene is depicted? Identify the situation.  
 •  Identify each of the figures in the cartoon. Are they current politicians, 
figures from history or literature, the “person in the street,” or symbolic 
representations?  
 •  Who speaks the lines in the cartoon? 
 •  What is the cartoon’s general subject? What is the point of the cartoon, 
the claim of the cartoonist?  
 Reading Political Cartoons 
GUIDELINES for
 •  What product or service is being advertised? 
 •  Who seems to be the targeted audience? 
 •  What is the ad’s primary strategy? To provide information? To reinforce 
the product’s or company’s image? To appeal to particular needs or 
desires? For example, if an ad shows a group of young people having fun 
and drinking a particular beer, to what needs/desires is the ad appealing?  
 •  Does the ad use specific rhetorical strategies such as humor, under-
statement, or irony? 
 •  What is the relation between the visual part of the ad (photo,  drawing, 
typeface, etc.) and the print part (the text, or copy)? Does the ad use 
a slogan or catchy phrase? Is there a company logo? Is the slogan or logo 
clever? Is it well known as a marker of the company? What may be the 
effect of these strategies on readers?  
 •  What is the ad’s overall visual impression? Consider both images and 
colors used.  
 Reading Advertisements 
122 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 EXERCISES: Analyzing Photos, Cartoons, and Ads 
 1. Analyze the photo on page 123, using the guidelines previously listed. 
 2. Review the photos that open Chapters 1, 4, 5, 8, 10, 19, and 22. Select the one 
you find most effective. Analyze it in detail to show why you think it is the best. 
■ ■

FRANK & ERNEST © 2005 Thaves. Reprinted by permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK for UFS. All rights reserved.
 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
123
 3. Analyze the cartoon below using the guidelines listed previously. You may 
want to jot down your answers to the questions to be well prepared for class 
discussion.  
 4. Review the cartoons that open Chapters 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 15, 16, 17, 20, and 21. Select 
the one you find most effective. Analyze it in detail to show why you think it is 
the cleverest.
 5. Analyze the ads on pages 124–26, again using the  guidelines listed above. After 
answering the guideline questions, consider these as well: Will each ad appeal 
effectively to its intended audience? If so, why? If not, why not? 
■ ■

In 1858, Scottish missionary David Livingstone
embarked on a historic journey along the Zambezi
River in southern Africa. On that trip, malaria
claimed the life of Livingstone’s wife, Mary.
Livingstone himself also later died from the disease.
Today, 150 years later, malaria remains a
threat. Over one million people, mostly chil-
dren and pregnant women, die from
malaria each year. About 40 per-
cent of the global population is
vulnerable to the disease. 
But an unprecedented
global action—by govern-
ments and corporations,
NGOs and health organi-
zations—has been mobi-
lized against malaria. And
this combined effort is
yielding results:
• Across Africa, people
are receiving anti-malarial med-
ications, as well as bed nets and
insecticides that protect against the
mosquitoes that transmit the disease.
• In Rwanda, malaria cases are down by 64
percent, and deaths by 66 percent. Similar results
are seen in Ethiopia and Zambia. And in
Mozambique, where 9 out of 10 children had
been infected, that number is now 2 in 10.
• Scientists are expanding the pipeline of
affordable, effective anti-malarial medicines, while
also making progress on discovering a vaccine.
April 25 is World Malaria Day.  As part of that
event, a team of medical experts will retrace
Livingstone’s journey along the Zambezi, the “River
of Life.”  As part of the Roll Back Malaria Zambezi
Expedition, they will travel 1,500 miles in inﬂatable
boats through Angola, Namibia, Botswana,
Zambia, Zimbabwe and Mozambique.
By exposing the difﬁculties of delivering
supplies to remote areas, the expedi-
tion will demonstrate that only 
a coordinated, cross-border
action can beat back the dis-
ease, and turn the lifeline of
southern Africa into a
“River of Life” for those
threatened by malaria.
ExxonMobil is the
largest non-pharmaceutical
private-sector contributor to
the ﬁght against malaria. But
our support is more than ﬁnan-
cial. We are actively partnering
with governments and agencies in
affected countries, enabling them to
combat malaria with the same disciplined,
results-based business practices that ExxonMobil
employs in its global operations.
Livingstone once said, “I am prepared to go
anywhere, provided it be forward.”  The communi-
ties burdened by this disease cannot move forward
until malaria is controlled and, someday, eradicated.
We urge everyone to join in this global effort.
For more information, visit www.zambezi-
expedition.org and www.rollbackmalaria.org. 
the river of life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Retracing a historic journey to help ﬁght malaria.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Photo by Helge Bendl
124 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
125

© 2008 Avid Technology, Inc. All rights reserved. Avid is a registered trademark of Avid Technology, Inc. or its subsidiaries in the United States and/or other countries.
Your business side. Your creative side.  
Inspire both. Introducing Avid’s new editing lineup. 
Quality, performance and value. A new way of thinking. A new way of doing business. 
Take a closer look at Avid.com/NewThinkingScript.
126 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT

 FIGURE 5.1   Differences in Suicide Rate According to Race, Gender, and Age 
 (Source: Data from the U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1994) 
Suicide Rate per 100,000
Age Group (years)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
White males
Black males
White females
Black females
10–14
15–19
20–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
851
 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
127
 READING GRAPHICS 
 Graphics—photographs, diagrams, tables, charts, and graphs—present a good 
bit of information in a condensed but also visually engaging format. Graphics 
are everywhere: in textbooks, magazines, newspapers, and the Internet. It’s a 
rare training session or board meeting that is conducted without the use of 
graphics to display information. So, you want to be able to read graphics and 
create them, when appropriate, in your own writing. First, study the chart 
below that illustrates the different uses of various visuals. General guidelines 
for reading graphics follow. The guidelines will use  Figure  5.1 to illustrate 
points. Study the figure repeatedly as you read through the guidelines. 
 Understanding How Graphics Differ 
 Each type of visual serves specific purposes. You can’t use a pie chart, for exam-
ple, to explain a process; you need a diagram or a flowchart. So, when reading 
graphics, understand what each type can show you. When preparing your own 
visuals, select the graphic that will most clearly and effectively present the 
 particular information you want to display.
TYPE
PURPOSE
EXAMPLE
Diagram
show details 
demonstrate process
drawing of knee tendons 
photosynthesis
Table
list numerical information
income of U.S. households
Bar chart
comparative amounts of 
related numbers
differences in suicide rates by 
age and race
Pie chart
relative portions of a whole
percentages of Americans by 
educational level
Flowchart
steps in a process
purification of water
Graph
relationship of two items
income increases over time
Map
information relative to a 
geographical area
locations of world’s rain forests

128 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 Graphics provide information, raise questions, explain processes, engage 
us emotionally, make us think. Study the various graphics in the exercises that 
follow to become more expert in reading and responding critically to visuals. 
GUIDELINES for
 1.  Locate the particular graphic referred to in the text and study it at 
that point in your reading.  Graphics may not always be placed on the 
same page as the text reference. Stop your reading to find and study the 
graphic; that’s what the writer wants you to do. Find  Figure  5.1  on 
the previous page. 
 2.  Read the title or heading of the graphic.  Every graphic is given a title. 
What is the subject of the graphic? What kind of information is provided? 
 Figure 5.1 shows differences in suicide rates by race, gender, and age. 
 3.  Read any notes, description, and the source information at the bottom 
of the graphic.   Figure 5.1  came from the U.S. Bureau of the Census for 
1994. Critical questions: What is this figure showing me? Is the information 
coming from a reliable source? Is it current enough to still be meaningful?  
 4.  Study the labels—and other words—that appear as part of the graphic. 
You cannot draw useful conclusions unless you understand exactly what is 
being shown. Observe in  Figure 5.1  that the four bars for each age group 
(shown along the horizontal axis) represent white males, black males, white 
females, and black females, in that order, for each age category.  
 5.  Study the information, making certain that you understand what the 
numbers represent.  Are the numerals whole numbers, numbers in 
 hundreds or thousands, or percentages? In  Figure 5.1  we are looking at 
suicide  rates per 100,000 people  for four identified groups of people at 
different ages. So, to know exactly how many white males between 15 
and 19 commit suicide, we need to know how many white males between 
15 and 19 there are (or were in 1994) in the United States population. The 
chart does not give us this information. It gives us  comparative rates  per 
100,000 people in each category and tells us that almost 20 in every 
100,000 white males between 15 and 19 commit suicide. 
 6.  Draw conclusions.  Think about the information in different ways. Critical 
questions: What does the author want to accomplish by including these 
figures? How are they significant? What conclusions can you draw from 
 Figure 5.1 ? Answer these questions to guide your thinking:
 
  a.  Which of the four compared groups faces the greatest risk from 
 suicide over his or her lifetime? Would you have guessed this group? 
Why or why not? What might be some of the causes for the greatest 
risk to this group? 
 
  b.  What is the greatest risk factor for increased suicide rate—race, 
 gender, age, or a combination? Does this surprise you? Would you 
have guessed a different factor? Why? 
 
  c.  Which group, as young teens, is at greatest risk? Are you surprised? 
Why or why not? What might be some of the causes for this? 
 Reading Graphics 

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
129
   EXERCISES: Reading and Analyzing Graphics 
 1. Study the pie charts in  Figure 5.2 and then answer the following questions.
 a. What is the subject of the charts? 
 b. In addition to the information within the pie charts, what other information is 
provided?  
 c. Which group increases by the greatest relative amount? How would you 
account for that increase?  
 d. Which figure surprises you the most? Why? 
 2. Study the line graph in  Figure 5.3 and then answer the following questions.
 a. What two subjects are treated by the graph? 
 b. In 2000 what percentage of men’s income did women earn? 
 c. During which five-year period did men’s incomes increase by the greatest 
amount?  
 d. Does the author’s prediction for the year 2005 suggest that income equality for 
women will have taken place? 
 e. Are you bothered by the facts on this graph? Why or why not?
 3. Study the table in  Figure 5.4 and then answer the following questions.
 a. What is being presented and compared in this table? 
 b. What, exactly, do the numerals in the second line represent? What, exactly, do 
the numerals in the third line represent? (Be sure that you understand what 
these numbers mean.)  
 c. For the information given in lines 2, 3, 4, and 5, in which category have women 
made the greatest gains on men?  
 d. See if you can complete the missing information in the last line. Where will 
you look to find out how many men and women were single parents in 2000? 
(In 2010?) 
 e. Which figure surprises you the most? Why? 
 4. Maps can be used to show all kinds of information, not just the locations of 
 cities, rivers, or mountains. Study the map in  Figure 5.5 and then answer the 
questions that follow.
 a. What, exactly, does the map show? Why does it not  “look right”? 
 b. How many electoral votes did each candidate win? 
 c. How are the winning states for each candidate clustered? What conclusions 
can you draw from observing this clustering?  
 d. What advice would you give to each party to ensure that party’s  presidential 
win in 2016?  
 e. How would the map look if it were drawn to show population by state? Would 
the red states look bigger or smaller?  
■ ■
■ ■

 FIGURE 5.2   The Shifting of U.S. Racial-Ethnic Mix  (Source: James M. Henslin, Essentials of Sociology: A Down-to-
Earth Approach, 9th Edition, Figure 9.11 (p. 241), © 2011. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.)
Year 2000
281 million
69.4%
12.1%
12.5%
3.7%
0.7%
1.6%
Year 2025
357 million
59.3%
5.1%
12.4%
20.2%
0.8%
2.1%
European descent
Latinos
African Americans
Asian Americans
Native Americans
Claim membership in
two or more groups
Year 2050
439 million
49.9%
12.2%
27.8%
5.9%
0.8%
3.2%
130 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
$80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Income in Thousands
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
Year
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
$3,296 $3,816 $5,440
$7,719
$11,159
$16,252
$20,591
$26,547
$32,940
$42,219
Women
Men
$6,598
$9,184
$12,934
$19,173
$24,999
$28,979
$50,241
$58,373
58%
59%
60%
65%
71%
66%
66%
72%
61%
$5,434
$40,367
60%
 Note: The income jump from 1990 to 1995 is probably due to a statistical procedure. The 1995 source (for 
1990 income) uses “median income,” while the 1997 source (for 1995 income) merely says “average earnings.” 
How the “average” is computed is not stated. Broken lines indicate the author’s estimates.  
 FIGURE 5.3  The Gender Gap Over Time: What Percentage of Men’s Income Do 
Women Earn? (Source: James M. Henslin, Essentials of Sociology: A Down-to-Earth Approach, 9th Edition, 
Figure 10.8 (p. 264), © 2011. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.)

 FIGURE 5.4   Men and Women in a Changing Society   (Sources: for 1970:  1996 Statistical Abstract,  U.S. Dept. of 
Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the Census. 2000 data: National Center for Education Statistics 
 http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts ) 
1970
2000
MEN
WOMEN
MEN
WOMEN
Estimated life expectancy
67.1
74.1
74.24
79.9
% high school graduates
53
52
87
88
% of BAs awarded
43
40
13
55
% of MAs awarded
55
% of PhDs awarded
39
% in legal profession
95
30
Median earnings
$26,760
$14,232
$35,345
$25,862
Single parents
1.2 million
5.6 million
n/a
n/a
45
45
61
5
70
57
60
87
 Note: States drawn in proportion to number of electoral votes. Total electoral votes: 538  (Source: Based on a map that originally 
appeared in New York Times, November 5, 2002. Reprinted by permission of NYT Graphics. From O’Connor and Sabato, American 
Government © 2002; published by Allyn and Bacon, Boston, MA Copyright © 2002 by Pearson Education. Updated for the 2012 
election by the author.) 
 FIGURE 5.5   Electoral Votes per State for the 2012 Presidential Election 
WA
12
ID
4
MT
3
WY
3
OR
7
NV
6
AZ
7
UT
6
CO
9
OK
7
KS
6
NE
5
IA
6
MO
10
AR
6
AL
9
GA
16
TN
11
LA
8
MS
6
SD
3
ND
3
MN
10
WI
10
IL
20
KY
8
VA
13
PA
20
NY
29
ME
4
VT 3
NH
4
CT
7
NJ
14
RI
4
MD
10
DE
3
NC
15
SC
9 
OH
18
IN
11
WV
5
NM
5
TX
38
MI
16
CA
55
FL
29
MA
11
HI
4
AK
3
DC
 3
Romney
Obama
 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
131

132 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 THE USES OF AUTHORITY AND STATISTICS 
 Most of the visuals you have just studied provide a way of presenting  statistics—
data that many today consider essential to defending a claim. One reason you 
check the source information accompanying graphics is that you need to know—
and evaluate—the authority of that source. When a graphic’s numbers have 
come from the Census Bureau, you know you have a reliable source. When the 
author writes that “studies have shown . . . ,” you want to become suspicious of 
the authority of the data. All elements of the arguments we read—and write—
affect a writer’s credibility.  
 Judging Authorities 
 We know that movie stars and sports figures are not authorities on soft drinks 
and watches. But what about  real  authorities? When writers present the opin-
ions or research findings of authorities as support for a claim, they are saying 
to readers that the authority is trustworthy and the opinions valuable. But 
what they are asserting is actually an assumption or warrant, part of the glue 
connecting evidence to claim. Remember: Warrants can be challenged. If the 
“authority” can be shown to lack authority, then the logic of the argument is 
destroyed. Use this checklist of questions to evaluate authorities:
 u   Is the authority actually an authority on the topic under discussion? When a 
famous scientist supports a candidate for office, he or she speaks as a  citizen, 
not as an authority. 
 u   Is the work of the authority still current?  Times change; expertise does not 
always endure. Galileo would be lost in the universe of today’s astrophysi-
cists. Be particularly alert to the dates of information in the sciences in gen-
eral, in genetics and the entire biomedical field, in health and nutrition. It is 
almost impossible to keep up with the latest findings in these areas of 
research. 
 u   Does the authority actually have legitimate credentials?  Are the person’s publi-
cations in respected journals? Is he or she respected by others in the same 
field?  Just because it’s in print does not mean it’s a reliable source! 
 u   Do experts in the field generally agree on the issue? If there is widespread dis-
agreement, then referring to one authority does not do much to support a 
claim. This is why you need to understand the many sides of a controversial 
topic before you write on it, and you need to bring knowledge of controver-
sies and critical thinking skills to your reading of argument. This is also 
why writers often provide a source’s credentials, not just a name, unless the 
authority is quite famous. 
 u   Is the authority’s evidence reliable, so far as you can judge, but the interpretation of 
that evidence seems odd, or seems to be used to support strongly held beliefs? Does 
the evidence actually connect to the claim? A respected authority’s work 
can be stretched or manipulated in an attempt to defend a claim that the 
authority’s work simply does not support. 

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
133
 EXERCISES: Judging Authorities 
 1. 
Jane Goodall has received worldwide fame for her studies of chimpanzees in 
Gombe and for her books on those field studies. Goodall is a vegetarian. Should 
she be used as an authority in support of a claim for a vegetarian diet? Why or 
why not? Consider:
 
a. Why might Goodall have chosen to become a vegetarian? 
 
b. For what arguments might Goodall be used as an authority? 
 
c. For what arguments might she be used effectively for emotional appeal? 
 2. Suppose a respected zoologist prepares a five-year study of U.S. zoos, compil-
ing a complete list of all animals at each zoo. He then updates the list for each of 
the five years, adding births and deaths. When he examines his data, he finds 
that deaths are one and one-half times the number of births. He considers this 
loss alarming and writes a paper arguing for the abolishing of zoos on the 
grounds that too many animals are dying. Because of his reputation, his article 
is published in a popular science magazine. How would you evaluate his 
authority and his study?
 
a. Should you trust the data? Why or why not? 
 
b. Should you accept his conclusions? Why or why not? 
 
c. Consider: What might be possible explanations for the birth/death ratio?  
 Understanding and Evaluating Statistics 
 There are two useful clichés to keep in mind: “Statistics don’t lie, but people lie 
with statistics” and “There are lies, damned lies, and statistics.” The second 
cliché is perhaps a bit cynical. We don’t want to be naïve in our faith in num-
bers, but neither do we want to become so cynical that we refuse to believe any 
statistical evidence. What we do need to keep in mind is that when statistics are 
presented in an argument they are being used by someone interested in win-
ning that argument. 
 Some writers use numbers without being aware that the numbers are 
incomplete or not representative. Some present only part of the relevant 
 information. Some may not mean to distort, but they do choose to present the 
 information in language that helps their cause. There are many ways, some 
more innocent than others, to distort reality with statistics. Use the following 
guidelines to evaluate the presentation of statistical information. 
■ ■
■ ■
 •  Is the information current and therefore still relevant? Crime rates in 
your city based on 2000 census data probably are no longer relevant, 
certainly not current enough to support an argument for increased (or 
decreased) police department spending.  
GUIDELINES for  Evaluating 
Statistics 

134 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 EXERCISES: Reading Tables and Charts and Using Statistics 
 1. 
 Figure 5.6 , a table from the Census Bureau, shows U.S. family income data from 
1980 to 2009. Percentages and median income are given for all families and 
then, in turn, for white, black, Asian, and Hispanic families. Study the data and 
then complete the exercises that follow.
 
 a.  In a paper assessing the advantages of a growing economy, you want to 
include a paragraph on family income growth to show that a booming econ-
omy helps everyone, that “a rising tide lifts all boats.” Select data from the 
table that best support your claim. Write a paragraph beginning with a topic 
sentence and including your data as support. Think about how to present the 
numbers in the most persuasive form. 
 
b.  Write a second paragraph with the topic sentence “Not all Americans have 
benefited from the boom years” or  “A rising tide does not lift all boats.” Select 
data from the table that best support this topic sentence and present the 
numbers in the most persuasive form. 
 
c.  Exchange paragraphs with a classmate and evaluate each other’s selection 
and presentation of evidence. 
 2. Go back to  Figure 5.1 (p. 127) and reflect again on the information that it depicts. 
Then consider what conclusions can be drawn from the evidence and what the 
implications of those conclusions are. Working in small groups or with a class 
partner, decide how you want to use the data to support a point.  
 3.  Figure 5.7 (p. 136), another table from the  Census Bureau, presents mean earn-
ings by highest degree earned. First, be sure that you know the difference 
between mean and median (which is the number used in  Figure 5.6 ). Study the 
data and reflect on the conclusions you can draw from the statistics. Consider: 
Of the various groups represented, which group most benefits from obtaining a 
college degree—as opposed to having only a high school diploma? 
■ ■
■ ■
 •  If a sample was used, was it randomly selected and large enough to 
be significant? Sometimes in medical research, the results of a small 
study are publicized to guide researchers to important new areas of 
study. When these results are reported in the press or on TV, however, the 
small size of the study is not always made clear. Thus one week we learn 
that coffee is bad for us, the next week that it is okay.  
 •  What information, exactly, has been provided? When you read “Two 
out of three chose the Merit combination of low tar and good taste,” you 
must ask yourself “Two-thirds of how many altogether?”  
 •  How have the numbers been presented? And what is the effect of that 
presentation? Numbers can be presented as fractions, whole numbers, or 
percentages. Writers who want to emphasize budget increases will use 
whole numbers—billions of dollars. Writers who want to de-emphasize 
those increases select percentages. Writers who want their readers to 
respond to the numbers in a specific way add words to direct their 
 thinking: “a  mere 3 percent increase” or “the  enormous $5 billion 
increase.” 

FIGURE 5.6 Money Income of Families—Percent Distribution by Income Level in Constant (2009) 
Dollars: 1980 to 2009.
Year
ALL FAMILIES 1
HISPANIC ORIGIN 8
WHITE
BLACK
ASIAN AND
PACIFIC ISLANDER
1990  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2000  2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2008    . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2009  3 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1990  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2000  2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2008  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2009  3 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1990  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2000  2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2008  4, 5. . . . . . . . . . . .
2009  3, 4, 5 . . . . . . . . . .
1990  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2000  2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2008  4, 5. . . . . . . . . . . .
2009  3, 4, 5 . . . . . . . . . .
1990  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2000  2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2008  4, 7. . . . . . . . . . . .
2009  3, 4, 7 . . . . . . . . . .
Percent distribution
Median
income
(dollars)
Under
$15,000
$15,000
to
$24,999
$25,000
to
$34,999
$35,000
to
$49,999
$50,000
to
$74,999
$75,000
to
$99,999
$100,000
and over
Number
of
families
(1,000)
66,322 
8.7 
9.4 
10.3 
15.6 
22.5 
14.6 
19.1 
54,369
73,778 
7.0 
8.6 
9.3 
14.3 
19.8 
15.1 
26.2 
61,063
78,874 
8.4 
9.2 
9.9 
13.7 
19.3 
14.2 
26.0 
61,521
76,867 
8.7 
9.1 
10.0 
13.8 
19.4 
13.5 
25.6 
60,088
56,803 
6.6 
8.7 
10.0 
15.8 
23.3 
15.4 
20.4 
56,771
61,330 
5.7 
7.9 
9.0 
14.2 
20.1 
15.8 
27.7 
63,849
64,183 
6.9 
8.5 
9.5 
13.4 
19.8 
15.0 
27.5 
65,000
64,145 
7.2 
8.4 
9.5 
13.8 
19.9 
14.1 
27.0 
62,545
 7,471 
23.9 
14.7 
12.5 
14.4 
17.5 
8.8 
8.2 
32,946
 8,731 
15.7 
14.0 
12.8 
15.8 
16.7 
10.3 
13.0 
40,547
 9,359 
18.2 
14.4 
12.8 
15.3 
16.6 
9.8 
13.4 
39,879
 9,367 
18.0 
14.5 
13.3 
15.2 
16.4 
10.6 
12.1 
38,409
 1,536 
8.1 
7.8 
8.2 
11.6 
21.2 
15.0 
28.5 
64,969
 2,962 
6.2 
6.4 
6.4 
11.7 
17.3 
15.5 
37.0 
75,393
 3,494 
7.7 
7.2 
7.6 
12.8 
16.0 
13.0 
36.6 
73,578
 3,592 
6.9 
7.0 
7.9 
10.4 
17.7 
12.3 
37.7 
75,027
 4,961 
17.0 
16.3 
13.6 
17.3 
19.1 
8.5 
8.2 
36,034
 8,017 
12.8 
14.6 
13.0 
18.1 
19.4 
10.5 
12.0 
41,469
 10,503 
15.5 
14.6 
14.1 
16.8 
17.2 
9.6 
12.5 
40,466
 10,422 
15.2 
14.7 
14.3 
16.0 
17.9 
9.5 
12.4 
39,730
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Income, Poverty and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2009, Current Population
Reports, P60-238, and Historical Tables—Table F-23, September 2010. See also <http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/income.
html> and <http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/families/index.html>.
[Constant dollars based on CPI-U-RS deflator. Families as of March of following year, (66,322 represents 66,322,000). Based on 
Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC); see text, this section, Section 1, and Appendix III. For 
data collection changes over time, see <http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/history.html>. For definition of 
median, see Guide to Tabular Presentation]
          1 Includes other races not shown separately.      2 Data reﬂect implementation of Census 2000-based population controls and a
28,000 household sample expansion to 78,000 households.    3 Median income is calculated using $2,500 income intervals. Beginning
with 2009 income data, the Census Bureau expanded the upper income intervals used to calculate medians to $250,000 or more.
Medians falling in the upper open-ended interval are plugged with “$250,000.” Before 2009, the upper open-ended interval was
$100,000 and a plug of “$100,000” was used.    4 Beginning with the 2003 Current Population Survey (CPS), the questionnaire allowed
respondents to choose more than one race. For 2002 and later, data represent persons who selected this race group only and excludes
persons reporting more than one race. The CPS in prior years allowed respondents to report only one race group. See also comments
on race in the text for Section 1.    5 Data represent White alone, which refers to people who reported White and did not report any
other race category.    6 Data represent Black alone, which refers to people who reported Black and did not report any other race
category.    7 Data represent Asian alone, which refers to people who reported Asian and did not report any other race category.
8 People of Hispanic origin may be any race.
 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
135
 WRITING THE INVESTIGATIVE ARGUMENT 
 The first step in writing an investigative argument is to select a topic to study. 
Composition students can write successful investigative essays on the media, 
on campus issues, and on various local concerns. Although you begin with a 
topic—not a claim—since you have to gather evidence before you can see what 

136 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
it means, you should select a topic that holds your interest and that you may 
have given some thought to before choosing to write. For example, you 
may have noticed some clever ads for jeans or beer, or perhaps you are both-
ered by plans for another shopping area along a major street near your home. 
Either one of these topics can lead to an effective investigative, or inductive, 
argument.  
 Gathering and Analyzing Evidence 
 Let’s reflect on strategies for gathering evidence for a study of magazine ads for 
a particular kind of product (the topic of the sample student paper that 
follows).
 • Select a time frame and a number of representative magazines. 
 • Have enough magazines to render at least twenty-five ads on the product 
you are studying. 
 • Once you decide on the magazines and issues to be used, pull  all  ads for your 
product. Your task is to draw useful conclusions based on adequate data 
objectively collected. You can’t leave some ads out and have a valid study.  
 FIGURE 5.7   Mean Earnings by Highest Degree Earned: 2009 
[In dollars. For persons 18 years old and over with earnings. Persons as of March 2010. Based on Current Population Survey; see
text, Section 1 and Appendix III. For deﬁnition of mean, see Guide to Tabular Presentation]
42,469 
20,241 
30,627 
32,295 
39,771 
58,665 
73,738 
127,803 
103,054
35,595 
19,415 
30,627 
31,392 
35,544 
45,662 
58,997 
86,440 
74,628
49,356 
24,728 
27,511 
39,606 
42,489 
66,346 
80,583 
136,366 
108,147
51,956 
23,725 
36,090 
44,135 
45,145 
69,548 
86,532 
146,808 
112,134
50,372 
24,537 
34,583 
42,547 
42,344 
59,670 
75,372 
149,184 
110,895
37,544 
19,395 
28,469 
29,602 
33,541 
44,147 
45,138 
95,440 
95,585
Total
persons
Characteristic
Not a
high
school
graduate
High
school
graduate
only
Some
college,
no
degree
Asso-
ciate’s
Mean earnings by level of highest degree (dol.)
Bache-
lor’s
Master’s
Profes-
sional
Doctorate
All persons 1   . . .
25 to 34 years old . . . .
35 to 44 years old . . . .
45 to 54 years old . . . .
55 to 64 years old . . . .
65 years old and over  .
Male . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Female  . . . . . . . . . . .
Male . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Female  . . . . . . . . . . .
Male . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Female  . . . . . . . . . . .
Male . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Female  . . . . . . . . . . .
50,180 
23,036 
35,468 
39,204 
47,572 
69,479 
90,954 
150,310 
114,347
33,797 
15,514 
24,304 
23,340 
33,432 
43,689 
58,534 
89,897 
83,706
43,337 
20,457 
31,429 
33,119 
40,632 
57,762 
73,771 
127,942 
104,533
51,287 
23,353 
36,416 
40,352 
48,521 
71,286 
81,776 
149,149 
115,497
34,040 
15,187 
24,615 
25,537 
33,996 
43,309 
58,036 
89,526 
85,682
33,362 
18,938 
25,970 
29,129 
33,734 
47,799 
60,067 
102,328 
82,510
37,553 
21,829 
30,723 
33,969 
41,142 
55,655 
68,890 
(B) 
(B)
29,831 
15,644 
22,954 
25,433 
29,464 
42,567 
54,523 
(B) 
(B)
29,565 
19,816 
25,998 
29,836 
33,783 
49,017 
71,322 
79,220 
88,435
32,279 
21,588 
28,908 
35,089 
38,768 
58,570 
80,737 
(B) 
89,968
25,713 
16,170 
21,473 
24,281 
29,785 
39,568 
61,843 
(B) 
(B)
White  2. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sex:
Age:
Black  2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hispanic  3 . . . . . . . . . . .
B Base ﬁgure too small to meet statistical standards for reliability of a derived ﬁgure.    1 Includes other races not shown
separately.    2 For persons who selected this race group only. 3 Persons of Hispanic origin may be any race.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, unpublished data, <http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo
/educ-attn.html>.

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
137
 • Study the ads, reflecting on the inferences they allow you to draw. The 
inferences become the claim of your argument. You may want to take the 
approach of classifying the ads, that is, grouping them into categories by 
the various appeals used to sell the product.  
 More briefly, consider your hunch that your area does not need another 
shopping mall. What evidence can you gather to support a claim to that effect? 
You could locate all existing strip or enclosed malls within a 10-mile radius of 
the proposed new mall site, visit each one, and count the number and types of 
stores already available. You may discover that there are plenty of malls but 
that the area really needs a grocery store or a bookstore. So instead of reading to 
find evidence to support a claim, you are creating the statistics and doing the 
analysis to guide you to a claim. Just remember to devise objective procedures 
for collecting evidence so that you do not bias your results.  
 Planning and Drafting the Essay 
 You’ve done your research and studied the data you’ve collected; how do you 
put this kind of argument together? Here are some guidelines to help you draft 
your essay. 
 •  Begin with an opening paragraph that introduces your topic in an 
interesting way. Possibilities include beginning with a startling statistic 
or explaining what impact the essay’s facts will have on readers.  
 •  Devote space early in your paper to explaining your methods or 
 procedures, probably in your second or third paragraph. For example, 
if you have obtained information through questionnaires or interviews, 
recount the process: the questions asked, the number of people involved, 
the basis for selecting the people, and so on.  
 •  Classify the evidence that you present. Finding a meaningful organiza-
tion is part of the originality of your study and will make your argument 
more forceful. It is the way you see the topic and want readers to see it. If 
you are studying existing malls, you might begin by listing all of the malls 
and their locations. But then do not go store by store through each mall. 
Rather, group the stores by type and provide totals.  
 •  Consider presenting evidence in several ways, including in charts and 
tables as well as within paragraphs. Readers are used to visuals, 
 especially in essays containing statistics.  
 •  Analyze evidence to build your argument. Do not ask your reader to do 
the thinking. No data dumps! Explain how your evidence  is evidence by 
discussing the connection between facts and the inferences they 
support.  
GUIDELINES for  Writing an 
Investigative 
Argument 

138 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
   Analyzing Evidence: The Key to an Effective Argument 
 This is the thinking part of the process. Anyone can count stores or collect ads. 
What is your point? How does the evidence you have collected actually sup-
port your claim? You must guide readers through the evidence. Consider this 
example: 
 In a study of selling techniques used in computer ads in business maga-
zines, a student, Brian, found four major selling techniques, one of which he 
classifies as “corporate emphasis.” Brian begins his paragraph on corporate 
emphasis thus: 
 In the technique of corporate emphasis, the advertiser discusses the whole 
range of products and services that the corporation offers, instead of specific 
elements. This method relies on the public’s positive perception of the 
 company, the company’s accomplishments, and its reputation. 
 Brian then provides several examples of ads in this category, including an 
IBM ad: 
 In one of its eight ads in the study, IBM points to the scientists on its staff who 
have recently won the Nobel Prize in physics.  
 But Brian does not stop there. He explains the point of this ad, connecting the ad 
to the assertion that this technique emphasizes the company’s accomplishments: 
 The inference we are to draw is that IBM scientists are hard at work right now 
in their laboratories developing tomorrow’s technology to make the world a 
better place in which to live.  
 Preparing Graphics for Your Essay 
 Tables, bar charts, and pie charts are particularly helpful ways to present statis-
tical evidence you have collected for an inductive argument. One possibility is 
to create a pie chart showing your classification of ads (or stores or questions on 
a questionnaire) and the relative amount of each item. For example, suppose 
you find four selling strategies. You can show in a pie chart the percentage of 
ads using each of the four strategies. 
 Computers help even the technically unsophisticated prepare simple charts. 
You can also do a simple table. When preparing graphics, keep these points in 
mind:
 • Every graphic must be referred to in the text at the appropriate place—where 
you are discussing the information in the visual. Graphics are not discon-
nected attachments to an argument. They give a complete set of data in an 
easy-to-digest form, but some of that data must be discussed in the essay.  
 • Every graphic (except photographs) needs a label. Use  Figure 1 ,  Figure 2 , 
and so forth. Then, in the text refer to each graphic by its label.
 • Every graphic needs a title. Always place a title after  Figure 1 (and so forth), 
on the same line, at the top or bottom of your visual. 

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
139
BUYING TIME
Garrett Berger
Chances are you own at least one wristwatch.   Watches allow us 
immediate access to the correct time.  They are indispensable items in our 
modern world, where, as the saying is, time is money.  Today the primary function 
of a wristwatch does not necessarily guide its design; like clothes, houses, and 
cars, watches have become fashion statements and a way to flaunt one’s wealth.
To learn how watches are being sold, I surveyed all of the full-page ads 
from the November issues of four magazines.  The first two, GQ and Vogue, are 
well-known fashion magazines. The Robb Report is a rather new magazine that 
caters to the overclass. Forbes is of course a well-known financial magazine. I 
was rather surprised at the number of advertisements I found.  After surveying 
86 ads, marketing 59 brands, I have concluded that today watches are being 
sold through five main strategies: DESIGN/BRAND appeal, CRAFTSMANSHIP, 
ASSOCIATION, FASHION appeal, and EMOTIONAL appeal.  The percentage 
of ads using each of these strategies is shown in Figure 1.
 • In a technically sophisticated world, hand-drawn graphics are not 
 acceptable. Underline the graphic’s title line, or place the visual within a 
box. (Check the tool bar at the top of your screen.) Type elements within 
tables. Use a ruler or compass to prepare graphics, or learn to use the 
graphics programs in your computer.  
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION 
 
 u  Have I stated a claim that is precise and appropriate to the data I have 
collected? 
 u  Have I fully explained the methodology I used in collecting my data? 
 u  Have I selected a clear and useful organization? 
 u  Have I presented and discussed enough specifics to show readers how my 
data support my conclusions? 
 u  Have I used graphics to present the data in an effective visual display? 
 u  Have I revised, edited, and proofread my paper? 
 STUDENT ESSAY 
Introduction 
connects to reader.
Student explains 
his methodology 
of collecting ads. 
Paragraph 
concludes with 
his claim.

140 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
52.4%
18.7%
11.7%
10.6%
6.6%
Design/Brand
Fashion Statement
Emotional appeal
Craftsmanship
Association
 FIGURE 1   Percentage of Total Ads Using Each Strategy 
In most DESIGN/BRAND appeal ads, only a picture and the brand name 
are used.  A subset of this category uses the same basic strategy  with a slogan 
or phrases to emphasize something about the brand or product.  A Mont Blanc 
ad shows a watch profile with a contorted metal link band, asking the question 
“Is that you?”  The reputation of the name and the appeal of the design sell the 
watch. Rolex, perhaps the best-known name in high-end watches, advertises, 
in Vogue, its  “Oyster Perpetual Lady-Datejust Pearlmaster.”  A close-up of the 
watch face showcases the white, mother-of-pearl dial,  sapphire bezel, and 
diamond-set band.  A smaller, more complete picture crouches underneath, 
showing the watch on its side.  The model name is displayed along a gray band 
that runs near the bottom.  The Rolex crest anchors the bottom of the page. 
Forty-five ads marketing 29 brands use the DESIGN/BRAND strategy.  A large 
picture of the product centered on a solid background is the norm.
CRAFTSMANSHIP, the second strategy, focuses on the maker, the 
horologer, and the technical sides of form and function. Brand heritage and 
a unique, hand-crafted design are major selling points.  All of these ads are 
targeted at men, appearing in every magazine except Vogue. Collector pieces 
and limited editions were commonly sold using this strategy.  The focus is on 
accuracy and technical excellence. Pictures of the inner works and cutaways, 
technical information, and explanations of movements and features are 
popular. Quality and exclusivity are all-important.
A Cronoswiss ad from The Robb Report is a good example.  The top third 
pictures a horologer, identified as “Gerd-R Lange, master watchmaker and
Discussion of 
first category.
Detailed examples 
to illustrate second 
category.
Discussion of 
 second category.

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
141
founder of Cronoswiss in Munich,” directly below.   The middle third of the 
ad shows a watch, white-faced with a black leather band.  The logo and 
slogan appear next to the watch.  The bottom third contains copy beginning 
with the words  “My watches are a hundred years behind the times.”  The 
rest explains what that statement means. Mr. Lange apparently believes that 
technical perfection in horology has already been attained. He also offers his 
book, The Fascination of  Mechanics, free of charge along with the “sole 
distributor for North  America” at the bottom.  A “Daniel Roth” ad from the 
same magazine displays the name across the top of a white page; toward 
the top, left-hand corner a gold buckle and black band lead your eye to the 
center, where a gold watch with a transparent face displays its inner works 
exquisitely.  Above and to the right, copy explains the exclusive and unique 
design accomplished by inverting the movement, allowing it to be viewed 
from above.
The third strategy is to sell the watch by establishing an 
ASSOCIATION with an object, experience, or person, implying that its value 
and quality are beyond question. In the six ads I found using this approach, 
watches are associated with violins, pilots, astronauts, hot air balloons, and 
a hero of the free world.   This is similar to the first strategy, but relies on a 
reputation other than that of the maker.  The watch is presented as being 
desirable for the connections created in the ad.
Parmigiani ran an ad in The Robb Report featuring a gold watch with a 
black face and band illuminated by some unseen source.  A blue-tinted violin 
rises in the background; the rest of the page is black.  The brief copy reads: 
“For those who think a Stradivarius is only a violin.  The Parmigiani Toric 
Chronograph is only a wristwatch.”  “The Moon Watch” proclaims an Omega 
ad from GQ. Inset on a white background is a picture of an astronaut on the 
moon saluting the American flag.  The silver watch with a black face lies across 
the lower part of the page.  The caption reads:  “Speedmaster Professional.  The 
first and only watch worn on the moon.” Omega’s logo appears at the bottom. 
Figure 2 shows another Omega use of this strategy.
Discussion of 
third category.

142 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
FIGURE 2 Example of Association Advertising

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
143
The fourth strategy is to present the watch simply as a FASHION 
statement. In this line of  attack, the ads appeal to our need to be current, 
accepted, to fit in and be like everyone else, or to make a statement, setting us 
apart from others as hip and cool.  The product is presented as a necessary part 
of our wardrobes.  The watch is fashionable and will send the  “right” message. 
Design and style are the foremost concerns;  “the look” sells the watch.
Techno Marine has an ad in GQ which shows a large close-up of a watch 
running down the entire length of the left side of the page.  Two alternate 
color schemes are pictured on the right, separating small bits of copy.  At the 
bottom on the right are the name and logo.  The first words at the top read: 
“Keeping time—you keep your closet up to the minute,  why not your wrist? 
The latest addition to your watch wardrobe should be the  AlphaSport.” 
Longines uses a similar strategy in Vogue. Its ad is divided in half lengthwise. 
On the left is a black-and-white picture of Audrey Hepburn.  The right side is 
white with the Longines’ logo at the top and two ladies’ watches in the center. 
Near the bottom is the phrase “Elegance is an Attitude.” Retailers appear at 
the bottom.  The same ad ran in GQ, but with a man’s watch and a picture of 
Humphrey Bogart.  A kind of association is made, but quality and value aren’t 
the overriding concerns.  The point is to have an elegant attitude like these 
fashionable stars did, one that these watches can provide and enhance.
The fifth and final strategy is that of EMOTIONAL appeal.  The ads 
using this approach strive to influence our emotional responses and allege 
to influence the emotions of others towards us.  Their power and appeal are 
exerted through the feelings they evoke in us. Nine out of ten ads rely on a 
picture as the main device to trigger an emotional link between the product 
and the viewer.  Copy is scant; words are used mainly to guide the viewer to 
the advertiser’s desired conclusions.
A Frederique Constant ad pictures a man, wearing a watch, mulling over 
a chess game.  Above his head are the words  “Inner Passion.”  The man’s gaze is 
odd; he is looking at something on the right side of the page, but a large picture
Discussion of 
fourth category.
Discussion of 
fifth category.

144 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 FOR READING AND ANALYSIS 
 EVERY BODY’S TALKING   
 JOE  NAVARRO  
 Joe Navarro spent more than twenty-five years in the FBI, specializing in 
 counterintelligence and profiling. He is recognized as an authority on nonverbal 
 messages, especially given off by those who are lying, and he continues to consult 
to government and industry. He has also turned his expertise to poker and has 
 published, with Marvin Karlines,  Read ’Em and Reap (2006), a guide to reading the 
nonverbal messages from poker opponents. The following essay appeared in the 
 Washington Post  on June 24, 2008. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS What does the term “counterintelligence” mean? How 
much attention do you give to body language messages from others?  
of a watch superimposed over the picture hides whatever it is that he 
is looking at.  So we are led to the watch.  The bottom third is white and 
contains the maker’s logo and the slogan  “Live your Passion.” An ad in GQ 
shows a man holding a woman.  He leans against a rock; she reclines in his 
arms.  Their eyes are closed, and both have peaceful, smiling expressions. He 
is wearing a  Tommy Hilfiger watch. The ad spans two pages; a close-up of the 
watch is presented on the right half of the second page.  The only words are 
the ones in the logo.  This is perhaps one of those pictures that are worth a 
thousand words.  The message is he got the girl because he’s got the watch.
Even more than selling a particular watch, all of these ads focus on 
building the brand’s image. I found many of the ads extremely effective 
at conveying their messages. Many of the better-known brands favor the 
comparatively simple DESIGN/BRAND appeal strategy, to reach a broader 
audience. Lesser-known, high-end makers contribute many of the more 
specialized strategies.  We all count and mark the passing hours and minutes. 
And society places great importance on time, valuing punctuality. But these 
ads strive to convince us that having “the right time” means so much more 
than “the time.”
Strong conclusion; 
the effect of watch 
ads.

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
145
 Picture this: I was sailing the Caribbean for three days with a group of 
friends and their spouses, and everything seemed perfect. The weather was 
beautiful, the ocean diaphanous blue, the food exquisite; our evenings 
together were full of laughter and good conversation. 
 Things were going so well that one friend said to the group, “Let’s do this 
again next year.” I happened to be across from him and his wife as he spoke 
those words. In the cacophony of resounding replies of “Yes!” and “Absolutely!” 
I noticed that my friend’s wife made a fist under her chin as she grasped her 
necklace. This behavior stood out to me as powerfully as if someone had 
shouted, “Danger!” 
 I watched the words and gestures of the other couples at the table, and 
everyone seemed ecstatic—everyone but one, that is. She continued to smile, 
but her smile was tense. 
 Her husband has treated me as a brother for more than 15 years, and I 
consider him the dearest of friends. At that moment I knew that things 
between him and his wife were turning for the worse. I did not pat myself on 
the back for making these observations. I was saddened. 
 For 25 years I worked as a paid observer. I was a special agent for the FBI 
specializing in counterintelligence—specifically, catching spies. For me, observ-
ing human behavior is like having software running in the background, doing its 
job—no conscious effort needed. And so on that wonderful cruise, I made a 
“thin-slice assessment” (that’s what we call it) based on just a few significant 
behaviors. Unfortunately, it turned out to be right: Within six months of our 
return, my friend’s wife filed for divorce, and her husband discovered painfully 
that she had been seeing someone else for quite a while. 
 When I am asked what is the most reliable means of determining the 
health of a relationship, I always say that words don’t matter. It’s all in the lan-
guage of the body. The nonverbal behaviors we all transmit tell others, in real 
time, what we think, what we feel, what we yearn for or what we intend. 
 Now I am embarking on another cruise, wondering what insights I will 
have about my travel companions and their relationships. No matter what, this 
promises to be a fascinating trip, a journey for the mind and the soul. I am with 
a handful of dear friends and 3,800 strangers, all headed for Alaska; for an 
observer it does not get any better than this. 
 While lining up to board on our first day, I notice just ahead of me a couple 
who appear to be in their early 30s. They are obviously Americans (voice, 
weight and demeanor). 
 Not so obvious is their dysfunctional relationship. He is standing  stoically, 
shoulders wide, looking straight ahead. She keeps whispering loudly to him, 
but she is not facing forward. She violates his space as she leans into him. Her 
face is tense and her lips are narrow slivers each time she engages 
him with what clearly appears to be a diatribe. He occasionally nods his head 
but avoids contact with her. He won’t let his hips near her as they start to walk 
side by side. He reminds me of Bill and Hillary Clinton walking toward the 
Marine One helicopter immediately after the Monica Lewinsky affair: looking 
straight ahead, as much distance between them as possible. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

  Illustrations by Peter Arkle. Reprinted by permission.  
146 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 I think everyone can decipher this one from afar because we have all seen 
situations like this. What most people will miss is something I have seen this 
young man do twice now, which portends poorly for both of them. Every time 
she looks away, he “disses” her. He smirks and rolls his eyes, even as she 
stands beside him. He performs his duties, pulling their luggage along; 
I  suspect he likes to have her luggage nearby as a barrier between them. I 
won’t witness the dissolution of their marriage, but I know it will happen, for 
the research behind this is fairly robust. When two people in a relationship 
have contempt for each other, the marriage will not last. 
10

 
CHAPTER 5 Reading, Analyzing, and Using Visuals and Statistics in Argument 
147
 When it comes to relationships and courtship behaviors, the list of  useful 
cues is long. Most of these behaviors we learned early when interacting with 
our mothers. When we look at loving eyes, our own eyes get larger, our pupils 
dilate, our facial muscles relax, our lips become full and warm, our skin 
becomes more pliable, our heads tilt. These behaviors stay with us all of our 
lives.
 I watched two lovers this morning in the dining room. Two young  people, 
perhaps in their late 20s, mirror each other, staring intently into each other’s 
eyes, chin on hand, head slightly tilted, nose flaring with each breath. They are 
trying to absorb each other visually and tactilely as they hold hands across the 
table. 
 Over time, those who remain truly in love will show even more indicators 
of mirroring. They may dress the same or even begin to look alike as they 
adopt each other’s nonverbal expressions as a sign of synchrony and empathy. 
They will touch each other with kind hands that touch fully, not with the finger-
tips of the less caring. 
 They will mirror each other in ways that are almost imperceptible; they will 
have similar blink rates and breathing rates, and they will sit almost identically. 
They will look at the same scenery and not speak, merely look at each other 
and take a deep breath to reset their breathing synchrony. They don’t have to 
talk. They are in harmony physically, mentally and emotionally, just as a baby is 
in exquisite synchrony with its mother who is tracing his every expression and 
smile. 
 As I walk through the ship on the first night, I can see the nonverbals of 
courtship. There is a beautiful woman, tall, slender, smoking a cigarette 
 outside. Two men are talking to her, both muscular, handsome, interested. She 
has crossed her legs as she talks to them, an expression of her comfort. As she 
holds her cigarette, the inside of her wrist turns toward her newfound friends. 
Her interest and comfort with them resounds, but she is favoring one of them. 
As he speaks to her, she preens herself by playing with her hair. I am not sure 
he is getting the message that she prefers him; in the end, I am sure it will all 
get sorted out. 
 At the upscale lounge, a man is sitting at the bar talking animatedly to the 
woman next to him and looking at everyone who walks by. The woman has 
begun the process of ignoring him, but he does not get it. After he speaks to 
her a few times, she gathers her purse and places it on her lap. She has turned 
slightly away from him and now avoids eye contact. He has no clue; he thinks 
he is cool by commenting on the women who pass by. She is verbally and non-
verbally indifferent. 
 The next night it is more of the same. This time, I see two people who just 
met talking gingerly. Gradually they lean more and more into each other. She 
is now dangling her sandal from her toes. I am not sure he knows it. Perhaps 
he sees it all in her face, because she is smiling, laughing and relaxed. 
Communication is fluid, and neither wants the conversation to end. She is 
extremely interested. 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

148 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What is Navarro’s subject? (Do not answer “taking cruises”!) 
 2. 
What clues are offered to support the conclusion that the two cruise couples’ 
relationships are about to dissolve? 
 3. 
What are the nonverbal messages that reveal loving relationships? 
 4. 
What nonverbal messages should the man in the lounge be observing? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Navarro’s claim? 
 6. 
What kind of evidence does he provide? 
 7. 
How do the illustrations contribute to the argument? What is effective about 
the author’s opening?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Has the author convinced you that nonverbal language reveals our thoughts 
and feelings? Why or why not?  
 9. 
Can you “read” the nonverbal language of your instructors? Take some time to 
analyze each of your instructors. What have you learned? (You might also 
reflect on what messages you may be sending in class.) 
 All of these individuals are carrying on a dialogue in nonverbals. The 
socially adept will learn to read and interpret the signs accurately. Others will 
make false steps or pay a high price for not being observant. They may end up 
like my friend on the Caribbean cruise, who missed the clues of deceit and 
indifference. 
 This brings me back to my friend and his new wife, who are on this 
 wonderful voyage. They have been on board for four days, and they are a 
delight individually and together. He lovingly looks at her; she stares at him 
with love and admiration. When she holds his hand at dinner, she massages it 
ever so gently. Theirs is a strong marriage. They don’t have to tell me. I can 
sense it and observe it. I am happy for them and for myself. I can see cues of 
happiness, and they are unmistakable. You can’t ask for more.  
Source: Washington Post, June 24, 2008. Reprinted by permission of the author.
18
19

149
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 For all investigative essays—inductive arguments—follow the guidelines in this chapter 
and use the student essay as your model. Remember that you will need to explain your 
methods for collecting data, to classify evidence and present it in several formats, and 
also to explain its significance for readers. Just collecting data does not create an argu-
ment. Here are some possible topics to explore:
 1. 
Study print ads for one type of product (e.g., cars, cosmetics, cigarettes) to draw 
inferences about the dominant techniques used to sell that product. Remember that 
the more ads you study, the more support you have for your inferences. You should 
study at least twenty-five ads.  
 2. 
Study print ads for one type of product as advertised in different types of maga-
zines clearly directed to different audiences to see how (or if ) selling techniques 
change with a change in audience. (Remember: To demonstrate no change in tech-
niques can be just as interesting a conclusion as finding changes.) Study at least 
twenty-five ads, in a balanced number from the different magazines.  
 3. 
Select a major figure currently in the news and conduct a study of bias in one of the 
newsmagazines (e.g.,  Time, U.S. News & World Report,  or  Newsweek ) or a newspaper. 
Use at least eight issues of the magazine or newspaper from the last six months and 
study all articles on your figure in each of those issues. To determine bias, look at 
the amount of coverage, the location (front pages or back pages), the use of photos 
(flattering or unflattering), and the language of the articles.  
 4. 
Conduct a study of amounts of violence on TV by analyzing, for one week, all 
prime-time programs that may contain violence. (That is, eliminate sitcoms and 
decide whether you want to include or exclude news programs.) Devise some clas-
sification system for types of violence based on your prior TV viewing experience 
before beginning your study—but be prepared to alter or add to your categories 
based on your viewing of shows. Note the number of times each violent act occurs. 
You may want to consider the total length of time (per program, per night, per type 
of violent act) of violence during the week you study. Give credit to any authors in 
this text or other publications for any ideas you borrow from their articles.  
 5. 
As an alternative to topic 4, study the number and types of violent acts in children’s 
programs on Saturday mornings. (This and topic 4 are best handled if you can 
record and then replay the programs several times.) 
 6. 
Conduct a survey and analyze the results on some campus issue or current public 
policy issue. Prepare questions that are without bias and include questions to get 
information about the participants so that you can correlate answers with the demo-
graphics of your participants (e.g., age, gender, race, religion, proposed major in 
college, political affiliation, or whatever else you think is important to the topic 
studied). Decide whether you want to survey students only or both students and 
faculty. Plan how you are going to reach each group. 

 READ: What is the situation? What are Pig’s reactions to what he is told? 
 REASON: Who are the only creatures who can never lie? What is Pig’s solution 
to what he has been told? Are we invited to accept Pig’s solution? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE: What makes the cartoon amusing? What is its more 
serious message? 
 Learning More about Argument: 
Induction, Deduction, Analogy, 
and Logical Fallacies 
 CHAPTER 6 
PEARLS BEFORE SWINE © 2010 Stephan Pastis. 
Reprinted by permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK for UFS. 
All rights reserved.

151
 Y
 ou can build on your knowledge of the basics of argument, examined in 
Chapter 3, by understanding some traditional forms of argument: induc-
tion, deduction, and analogy. It is also important to recognize arguments that 
do not meet the standards of good logic. 
 INDUCTION 
 Induction is the process by which we reach inferences—opinions based on facts, or on a 
combination of facts and less debatable inferences. The inductive process moves 
from particular to general, from support to assertion. We base our inferences on 
the facts we have gathered and studied. In general, the more evidence, the more 
convincing the argument. No one wants to debate tomorrow’s sunrise; the evi-
dence for counting on it is too convincing. Most inferences, though, are drawn 
from less evidence, so we need to examine these arguments closely to judge 
their reasonableness. 
 The pattern of induction looks like this:
EVIDENCE: 
There is the dead body of Smith. Smith was shot in his  bedroom 
between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 2:00 A.M.,  according to the 
coroner. Smith was shot by a .32-caliber pistol. The pistol left in 
the bedroom contains Jones’s fingerprints. Jones was seen, by a 
neighbor, entering the Smith home at around 11:00 the night of 
Smith’s death. A coworker heard Smith and Jones arguing in 
Smith’s office the morning of the day Smith died.
CLAIM: 
Jones killed Smith.
The facts are presented. The jury infers that Jones is a murderer. Unless there 
is a confession or a trustworthy eyewitness, the conclusion is an inference, not 
a fact. This is the most logical explanation. The conclusion meets the stan-
dards of simplicity and frequency while accounting for all of the known 
evidence. 
 The following paragraph illustrates the process of induction. In their book 
 Discovering Dinosaurs, authors Mark Norell, Eugene Gaffney, and Lowell 
Dingus answer the question “Did dinosaurs really rule the world?” 
 For almost 170 million years, from the Late Triassic to the end of the 
Cretaceous, there existed dinosaurs of almost every body form imaginable: 
small carnivores, such as  Compsognathus and  Ornitholestes, ecologically 
equivalent to today’s foxes and coyotes; medium-sized carnivores, such as 
 Velociraptor and the troÖdontids, analogous to lions and tigers; and the 
monstrous carnivores with no living analogs, such as  Tyrannosaurus and 
 Allosaurus. Included among the ornithischians and the elephantine sauropods 
are terrestrial herbivores of diverse body form. By the end of the Jurassic, 
dinosaurs had even taken to the skies. The only habitats that dinosaurs did 
not dominate during the Mesozoic were aquatic. Yet, there were marine 
representatives, such as the primitive toothed bird  Hesperornis. Like penguins, 
these birds were flightless, specialized for diving, and probably had to return 
to land to reproduce. In light of this broad morphologic diversity [number of 

152 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
body forms], dinosaurs did “rule the planet” as the dominant life form on 
Earth during most of the Mesozoic [era that includes the Triassic, Jurassic, and 
Cretaceous periods, 248 to 65 million years ago]. 
 Observe that the writers organize evidence by type of dinosaur to demonstrate 
the range and diversity of these animals. A good inductive argument is based 
on a sufficient volume of  relevant evidence. The basic shape of this inductive 
argument is illustrated in  Figure 6.1 . 
 COLLABORATIVE EXERCISE: Induction 
 With your class partner or in small groups, make a list of facts that could be used to 
support each of the following inferences:
 1. Fido must have escaped under the fence during the night. 
 2. Sue must be planning to go away for the weekend. 
 3. Students who do not hand in all essay assignments fail Dr. Bradshaw’s English 
class. 
 4. The price of Florida oranges will go up in grocery stores next year. 
 5. Yogurt is a better breakfast food than bread.
 DEDUCTION 
 Although induction can be described as an argument that moves from particu-
lar to general, from facts to inference, deduction cannot accurately be described 
as the reverse. Deductive arguments are more complex.  Deduction is the reason-
ing process that draws a conclusion from the logical relationship of two assertions, usu-
ally one broad judgment or definition and one more specific assertion, often an inference. 
Suppose, on the way out of American history class, you say, “Abraham Lincoln 
certainly was a great leader.” Someone responds with the expected question 
“Why do you think so?” You explain: “He was great because he performed 
with courage and a clear purpose in a time of crisis.” Your explanation contains 
a conclusion and an assertion about Lincoln (an inference) in support. But 
behind your explanation rests an idea about leadership, in the terms of deduc-
tion,  a premise. The argument’s basic shape is illustrated in  Figure 6.2 . 
CLAIM: 
Dinosaurs were the dominant life form during the Mesozoic era. 
GROUNDS: 
The facts presented in the paragraph. 
ASSUMPTION
(WARRANT):
The facts are representative, revealing dinosaur diversity. 
FIGURE 6.1  The Shape of an Inductive Argument 
■ ■
■ ■

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
153
 Traditionally, the deductive argument is arranged somewhat differently 
from these sentences about Lincoln. The two reasons are called  premises; the 
broader one, called the  major premise, is written first and the more specific one, 
the  minor premise, comes next. The premises and conclusion are expressed to 
make clear that assertions are being made about categories or classes. To 
illustrate:
MAJOR PREMISE:  
 All people who perform with courage and a clear purpose 
in a crisis are great leaders.
MINOR PREMISE:  
 Lincoln was a person who performed with courage and a 
clear purpose in a crisis.
CONCLUSION: 
 
Lincoln was a great leader.
If these two premises are correctly, that is, logically, constructed, then the con-
clusion follows logically, and the deductive argument is  valid. This does not 
mean that the conclusion is necessarily  true. It does mean that if you accept 
the truth of the premises, then you must accept the truth of the conclusion, 
because in a valid argument the conclusion follows logically, necessarily. How 
do we know that the conclusion must follow if the argument is logically con-
structed? Let’s think about what each premise is saying and then diagram 
each one to represent each assertion visually. The first premise says that all 
people who act a particular way are people who fit into the category called 
“great leaders”: 
 
G
r
e
a
t
 
l
e
a
d
e
r
s
People with
courage and
clear purpose
in a crisis
CLAIM: 
Lincoln was a great leader. 
GROUNDS: 
1. People who perform with courage and clear purpose in a 
crisis are great leaders. 
2. Lincoln was a person who performed with courage and a 
clear purpose in a crisis. 
ASSUMPTION
 The relationship of the two reasons leads, logically, to 
(WARRANT): 
the conclusion.
 FIGURE 6.2   The Shape of a Deductive Argument 

154 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 The second premise says that Lincoln, a category of one, belongs in the 
 category of people who act in the same particular way that the first premise 
describes: 
 
P
e
o
p
l
e
 
w
i
t
h
 
c
o
u
r
a
g
e
 
a
n
d
c
l
e
a
r
 
p
u
r
p
o
s
e
 
i
n
 
a
 
c
r
i
s
i
s
Lincoln
 If we put the two diagrams together, we have the following set of circles, 
 demonstrating that the conclusion follows from the premises: 
 
G
r
e
a
t
 
l
e
a
d
e
r
s
P
e
o
p
l
e
 
w
i
t
h
 
c
o
u
r
a
g
e
 
.
 
.
 
.
Lincoln
 We can also make negative and qualified assertions in a deductive  argument. 
For example:
PREMISE: 
 No cowards can be great leaders.
PREMISE: 
 Falstaff was a coward.
CONCLUSION: 
 Falstaff was not a great leader.
Or, to reword the conclusion to make the deductive pattern clearer: No Falstaff 
(no member of this class) is a great leader. Diagramming to test for validity, we 
find that the first premise says no A’s are B’s: 
 
A
B

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
155
 The second premise asserts all C’s are A’s: 
 
A
C
 Put together, we see that the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises: 
No C’s can possibly be members of class B. 
 
A
B
C
 Some deductive arguments merely look right, but the two premises do not 
lead logically to the conclusion that is asserted. We must read each argument 
carefully or diagram each one to make certain that the conclusion follows from 
the premises. Consider the following argument:  Unions must be communistic 
because they want to control wages.  The sentence contains a conclusion and one 
reason, or premise. From these two parts of a deductive argument we can also 
determine the unstated premise, just as we could with the Lincoln argument: 
 Communists want to control wages.  If we use circles to represent the three catego-
ries of people in the argument and diagram the argument, we see a different 
result from the previous diagrams: 
 
G
r
o
u
p
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
w
a
n
t
 
t
o
c
o
n
t
r
o
l
 
w
a
g
e
s
Unions
Communists

156 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 Diagramming the argument reveals that it is invalid; that is, it is not logically 
constructed because the statements do not require that the union circle be 
placed inside the communist circle. We cannot draw the conclusion we want 
from any two premises, only from those that provide a logical basis from which 
a conclusion can be reached. 
 We must first make certain that deductive arguments are properly con-
structed or valid. But suppose the logic works and yet you do not agree with 
the claim? Your complaint, then, must be with one of the premises, a judgment 
or inference that you do not accept as true. Consider the following argument:
MAJOR PREMISE:  
(All) dogs make good pets.
MINOR PREMISE:  
Fido is a dog.
CONCLUSION: 
 
Fido will make a good pet. 
 This argument is valid. (Diagram it; your circles will fit into one another just as 
with the Lincoln argument.) However, you are not prepared to agree, necessar-
ily, that Fido will make a good pet. The problem is with the major premise. For 
the argument to work, the assertion must be about  all dogs, but we know that 
not all dogs will be good pets. 
 When composing a deductive argument, your task will be to defend the 
truth of your premises. Then, if your argument is valid (logically constructed), 
readers will have no alternative but to agree with your conclusion. If you dis-
agree with someone else’s logically constructed argument, then you must show 
why one of the premises is not true. Your counterargument will seek to dis-
credit one (or both) of the premises. The Fido argument can be discredited by 
your producing examples of dogs that have not made good pets. 
 A deductive argument can serve as the core of an essay, an essay that sup-
ports the argument’s claim by developing support for each of the premises. 
Since the major premise is either a broad judgment or a definition, it will need 
to be defended on the basis of an appeal to values or beliefs that the writer 
expects readers to share. The minor premise, usually an inference about a par-
ticular situation (or person), would be supported by relevant evidence, as with 
any inductive argument. You can see this process at work in the Declaration of 
Independence. Questions follow the Declaration to guide your analysis of this 
famous example of the deductive process. 
 THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE 
 In Congress, July 4, 1776  
The unanimous declaration of the thirteen  
United States of America 
 When in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one  people to 
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and 
to assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to 
which the Laws of Nature and of Nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect 
1

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
157
to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which 
impel them to the separation. 
 We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, 
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that 
among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. That to secure 
these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just pow-
ers from the consent of the governed. That whenever any form of government 
becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to 
abolish it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such prin-
ciples and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most 
likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that 
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient 
causes; and accordingly all experience hath shown, that mankind are more 
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abol-
ishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of 
abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object evinces a design 
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to 
throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future secu-
rity. Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now 
the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of govern-
ment. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated 
injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an 
absolute tyranny over these States. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a 
candid world. 
 He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for 
the public good. 
 He has forbidden his Governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing 
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be 
obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them. 
 He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large  districts 
of people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in 
the Legislature, a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only. 
 He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfort-
able, and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole pur-
pose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures. 
 He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly, for opposing with 
manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people. 
 He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to 
be elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have 
returned to the people at large for their exercise; the State remaining in the 
meantime exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without and convul-
sions within. 
 He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that 
purpose obstructing the laws of naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass 
others to encourage their migration hither, and raising the conditions of new 
appropriations of lands. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

158 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to 
laws for establishing judiciary powers. 
 He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their 
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries. 
 He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of 
 officers to harass our people, and eat out their substance. 
 He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies without the 
consent of our legislatures. 
 He has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the 
civil power. 
 He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our 
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts 
of pretended legislation: 
 For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us: 
 For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders 
which they should commit on the inhabitants of these States: 
 For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world: 
 For imposing taxes on us without our consent: 
 For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury: 
 For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offences: 
 For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighbouring Province, 
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries so 
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same 
absolute rule into these Colonies: 
 For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and alter-
ing fundamentally the forms of our governments: 
 For suspending our own Legislatures, and declaring themselves invested 
with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever. 
 He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection 
and waging war against us. 
 He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and 
destroyed the lives of our people. 
 He is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to com-
plete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with circum-
stances of cruelty and perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most  barbarous ages, 
and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation. 
 He has constrained our fellow citizens taken captive on the high seas to 
bear arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends 
and brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands. 
 He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured 
to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, 
whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, 
sexes, and conditions. 
 In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the 
most humble terms; our repeated petitions have been answered only by 
repeated injury. A prince whose character is thus marked by every act which 
may define a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people. 
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
159
 QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 
 1. 
What is the Declaration’s central deductive argument? State the argument in 
the shape illustrated above: major premise, minor premise, conclusion. 
Construct a valid argument. If necessary, draw circles representing each of the 
three terms in the argument to check for validity. ( Hint: Start with the claim 
“George III’s government should be overthrown.”) 
 2. 
Which paragraphs are devoted to supporting the major premise? What kind of 
support has been given?  
 3. 
Which paragraphs are devoted to supporting the minor premise? What kind of 
support has been given?  
 4. 
Why has more support been given for one premise than the other? 
 EXERCISES: Completing and Evaluating Deductive Arguments 
 Turn each of the following statements into valid deductive arguments. (You have the 
conclusion and one premise, so you will have to determine the missing premise that 
would complete the argument. Draw circles if necessary to test for validity.) Then 
decide which arguments have premises that could be supported. Note the kind 
 Nor have we been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have 
warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an 
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circum-
stances of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their 
native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our 
common kindred to disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably inter-
rupt our connections and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the 
voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the 
necessity, which denounces our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest 
of mankind, enemies in war, in peace friends. 
 We, therefore, the Representatives of the United States of America, in 
General Congress assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world 
for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name, and by the authority of the 
good people of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these 
United Colonies are, and of right ought to be Free and Independent States; 
that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all 
political connection between them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought 
to be totally dissolved; and that as Free and Independent States, they have full 
power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, 
and to do all other acts and things which Independent States may of right do. 
And for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection 
of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our for-
tunes, and our sacred honor.  
31
32
■ ■

160 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
of support that might be provided. Explain why you think some arguments have 
 insupportable premises. Here is an example:
PREMISE: 
 All Jesuits are priests.
PREMISE: 
 No women are priests.
CONCLUSION: 
 No women are Jesuits.
Since the circle for women must be placed outside the circle for priests, it must also be 
outside the circle for Jesuits. Hence the argument is valid. The first premise is true by 
definition; the term  Jesuit refers to an order of Roman Catholic priests. The second 
premise is true for the Roman Catholic Church, so if the term  priest is used only to 
refer to people with a religious vocation in the Roman Catholic Church, then the 
 second premise is also true by definition. 
 1. 
Mrs. Ferguson is a good teacher because she can explain the subject matter 
clearly. 
 2. Segregated schools are unconstitutional because they are unequal. 
 3. Michael must be a good driver because he drives fast. 
 4. The media clearly have a liberal bias because they make fun of religious 
fundamentalists.  
 ANALOGY 
 The argument from analogy is an argument based on comparison. Analogies assert 
that since A and B are alike in several ways, they must be alike in another way 
as well. The argument from analogy concludes with an inference, an assertion 
of a significant similarity in the two items being compared. The other similari-
ties serve as evidence in support of the inference. The shape of an argument by 
analogy is illustrated in  Figure 6.3 . 
 Although analogy is sometimes an effective approach to an issue because 
clever, imaginative comparisons are often moving, analogy is not as rigorously 
logical as either induction or deduction. Frequently, an analogy is based on 
only two or three points of comparison, whereas a sound inductive argument 
pre sents many examples to support its conclusion. Further, to be convincing, 
the points of comparison must be fundamental to the two items being com-
pared. An argument for a county leash law for cats developed by analogy with 
dogs may cite the following similarities:
GROUNDS: 
A has characteristics 1, 2, 3, and 4.
B has characteristics 1, 2, and 3.
CLAIM: 
B has characteristic 4 (as well).
ASSUMPTION
If B has three characteristics in common with A, it must have
(WARRANT): 
the key fourth characteristic as well.
FIGURE 6.3  The Shape of an Argument by Analogy 
■ ■

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
161
 • Cats are pets, just like dogs. 
 • Cats live in residential communities, just like dogs. 
 • Cats can mess up other people’s yards, just like dogs. 
 • Cats, if allowed to run free, can disturb the peace (fighting, howling at 
night), just like dogs.  
 Does it follow that cats should be required to walk on a leash, just like 
dogs? If such a county ordinance were passed, would it be enforceable? Have 
you ever tried to walk a cat on a leash? In spite of legitimate similarities brought 
out by the analogy, the conclusion does not logically follow because the arguer 
is overlooking a fundamental difference in the two animals’ personalities. Dogs 
can be trained to a leash; most cats (Siamese are one exception) cannot be so 
trained. Such thinking will produce sulking cats and scratched owners. But the 
analogy, delivered passionately to the right audience, could lead community 
activists to lobby for a new law. 
 Observe that the problem with the cat-leash-law analogy is not in the simi-
larities asserted about the items being compared but rather in the underlying 
assumption that the similarities logically support the argument’s conclusion. A 
good analogy asserts many points of comparison and finds likenesses that are 
essential parts of the nature or purpose of the two items being compared. The 
best way to challenge another’s analogy is to point out a fundamental differ-
ence in the nature or purpose of the compared items. For all of their similarities, 
when it comes to walking on a leash, cats are  not like dogs. 
 EXERCISES: Analogy 
 Analyze the following analogies. List the stated and/or implied points of comparison 
and the conclusion in the pattern illustrated in Figure 6.3. Then judge each argument’s 
logic and effectiveness as a persuasive technique. If the argument is not logical, state 
the fundamental difference in the two compared items. If the argument could be per-
suasive, describe the kind of audience that might be moved by it. 
 1. 
College newspapers should not be under the supervision or control of a faculty 
sponsor. Fortunately, no governmental sponsor controls the  New York Times, or 
we would no longer have a free press in this country. We need a free college 
press, too, one that can attack college policies when they are wrong. 
 2. Let’s recognize that college athletes are really professional and start paying them 
properly. College athletes get a free education, and spending money from boost-
ers. They are required to attend practices and games, and—if they play football 
or basketball—they bring in huge revenues for their “organization.” College 
coaches are also paid enormous salaries, just like professional coaches, and often 
college coaches are tapped to coach professional teams. The only difference: The 
poor college athletes don’t get those big salaries and huge signing bonuses.  
 3. Just like any business, the federal government must be made to balance its 
 budget. No company could continue to operate in the red as the government 
does and expect to be successful. A constitutional amendment requiring a 
 balanced federal budget is long overdue. 
■ ■
■ ■

162 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 LOGICAL FALLACIES 
 A thorough study of argument needs to include a study of logical fallacies 
because so many “arguments” fail to meet standards of sound logic and good 
sense. Why do people offer arguments that aren’t sensible? 
 Causes of Illogic 
 Ignorance  
One frequent cause for illogical debate is a lack of knowledge of the subject. Some 
people have more information than others. The younger you are, the less you can 
be expected to know about complex issues. On the other hand, if you want to 
debate a complex or technical issue, then you cannot use ignorance as an excuse. 
Instead, read as much as you can, listen carefully to discussions, ask questions, and 
select topics about which you have knowledge or will research before writing.  
 Egos  
Ego problems are another cause of weak arguments. Those with low self-esteem 
often have difficulty in debates because they attach themselves to their ideas and 
then feel personally attacked when someone disagrees with them. Remember: 
Self-esteem is enhanced when others applaud our knowledge and thoughtful-
ness, not our irrationality.  
 Prejudices  
The prejudices and biases that we carry around, having absorbed them “ages 
ago” from family and community, are also sources of irrationality. Prejudices 
range from the worst ethnic, religious, or sexist stereotypes to political views 
we have adopted uncritically (Democrats are all bleeding hearts; Republicans 
are all rich snobs) to perhaps less serious but equally insupportable notions (if 
it’s in print, it must be right). People who see the world through distorted lenses 
cannot possibly assess facts intelligently and reason logically from them.  
 A Need for Answers  
Finally, many bad arguments stem from a human need for answers—any 
answers—to the questions that deeply concern us. We want to control our 
world because that makes us feel secure, and having answers makes us feel in 
control. This need can lead to illogic from oversimplifying issues. 
 Based on these causes of illogic, we can usefully divide fallacies into (1) over-
simplifying the issue and (2) ignoring the issue by substituting emotion for reason. 
 Fallacies That Result from Oversimplifying 
 Errors in Generalizing  
Errors in generalizing include overstatement and hasty or faulty generaliza-
tion. All have in common an error in the inductive pattern of argument. The 
inference drawn from the evidence is unwarranted, either because too broad a 

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
163
generalization is made or because the generalization is drawn from incomplete 
or incorrect evidence. 
 Overstatement occurs when the argument’s assertion is unqualified—
referring to all members of a category. Overstatements often result from stereo-
typing, giving the same traits to everyone in a group. Overstatements are 
frequently signaled by words such as  all, every, always, never, and  none. But 
remember that assertions such as “children love clowns” are understood to refer 
to “all  children,” even though the word  all  does not appear in the sentence. It is 
the writer’s task to qualify statements appropriately, using words such as  some, 
many, or  frequently, as appropriate. 
 Overstatements are discredited by finding only one exception to disprove 
the assertion. One frightened child who starts to cry when the clown approaches 
will destroy the argument. Here is another example:
 • Lawyers are only interested in making money. 
   (What about lawyers who work to protect consumers, or public defenders 
who represent those unable to pay for a lawyer?) 
Hasty or faulty generalizations may be qualified assertions, but they still over-
simplify by arguing from insufficient evidence or by ignoring some  relevant 
evidence. For example:
 • Political life must lead many to excessive drinking. In the last six months 
the paper has written about five members of Congress who either have 
confessed to alcoholism or have been arrested on DUI charges. 
   (Five is not a large enough sample from which to generalize about  many 
politicians. Also, the five in the newspaper are not a representative sample; 
they have made the news because of their drinking.) 
 Forced Hypothesis  
The  forced hypothesis  is also an error in inductive reasoning. The explanation 
(hypothesis) offered is “forced,” or illogical, because either (1) sufficient evi-
dence does not exist to draw any conclusion or (2) the evidence can be explained 
more simply or more sensibly by a different hypothesis. This fallacy often results 
from not considering other possible explanations. You discredit a forced hypoth-
esis by providing alternative conclusions that are more sensible than or just as 
sensible as the one offered. Consider this example:
 • Professor Redding’s students received either A’s or B’s last semester. He 
must be an excellent teacher. 
   (The grades alone cannot support this conclusion. Professor Redding could 
be an excellent teacher; he could have started with excellent students; he 
could be an easy grader.) 
 Non Sequitur  
The term  non sequitur, meaning literally “it does not follow,” could apply to all 
illogical arguments, but the term is usually reserved for those in which the 

164 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
conclusions are not logically connected to the reasons. In a hasty generalization, for 
example, there is a connection between support (five politicians in the news) and 
conclusion (many politicians with drinking problems), just not a convincing con-
nection. With the  non sequitur  there is no recognizable connection, either because 
(1) whatever connection the arguer sees is not made clear to others or because 
(2) the evidence or reasons offered are irrelevant to the conclusion. For example:
 • Donna will surely get a good grade in physics; she earned an A in her 
 biology class. 
   (Doing well in one course, even one science course, does not support the 
conclusion that the student will get a good grade in another course. If 
Donna is not good at math, she definitely will not do well in physics.) 
 Slippery Slope  
The  slippery slope argument asserts that we should not proceed with or permit A 
because, if we do, the terrible consequences X, Y, and Z will occur. This type of 
argument oversimplifies by assuming, without evidence and usually by ignoring 
historical examples, existing laws, or any reasonableness in people, that X, Y, and 
Z will follow inevitably from A. This kind of argument rests on the belief that most 
people will not want the final, awful Z to occur. The belief, however accurate, does 
not provide a sufficiently good reason for avoiding A. One of the best-known 
examples of slippery slope reasoning can be found in the gun-control debate:
 • If we allow the government to register handguns, next it will register 
 hunting rifles; then it will prohibit all citizen ownership of guns, thereby 
 creating a police state or a world in which only outlaws have guns. 
   (Surely no one wants the final dire consequences predicted in this argument. 
However, handgun registration does not mean that these consequences will 
follow. The United States has never been a police state, and its system of free 
elections guards against such a future. Also, citizens have registered cars, 
boats, and planes for years without any threat of their confiscation.)  
 False Dilemma  
The  false dilemma  oversimplifies by asserting only two alternatives when there 
are more than two. The either–or thinking of this kind of argument can be an 
effective tactic if undetected. If the arguer gives us only two choices and one of 
those is clearly unacceptable, then the arguer can push us toward the preferred 
choice. For example:
 • The Federal Reserve System must lower interest rates, or we will never pull 
out of the recession. 
   (Clearly, staying in a recession is not much of a choice, but the alternative 
may not be the only or the best course to achieve a healthy economy. If 
interest rates go too low, inflation can result. Other options include the 
 government’s creating new jobs and patiently letting market forces play 
themselves out.) 

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
165
 False Analogy  
When examining the shape of analogy, we also considered the problems with 
this type of argument. (See pp. 160–61.) Remember that you challenge a false 
analogy by noting many differences in the two items being compared or by not-
ing a significant difference that has been ignored. 
 Post Hoc Fallacy  
The term  post hoc,  from the Latin  post hoc, ergo propter hoc  (literally, “after this, 
therefore because of it”) refers to a common error in arguments about cause. 
One oversimplifies by confusing a time relationship with cause. Reveal the 
illogic of  post hoc arguments by pointing to other possible causes:
 • We should throw out the entire city council. Since the members were 
elected, the city has gone into deficit spending. 
   (Assuming that deficit spending in this situation is bad, was it caused by 
the current city council? Or did the current council inherit debts? Or is the 
entire region suffering from a recession?) 
 EXERCISES: Fallacies That Result from Oversimplifying 
 1. 
Here is a list of the fallacies we have examined so far. Make up or collect from 
your reading at least one example of each fallacy.
 a. Overstatement 
 f. 
Slippery slope 
 b. Stereotyping 
 g. False dilemma 
 c. Hasty generalization 
 h. False analogy 
 d. Forced hypothesis 
 i. 
 Post hoc fallacy 
 e.  Non sequitur 
      2. Explain what is illogical about each of the following arguments. Then name the 
fallacy represented. (Sometimes an argument will fit into more than one  category. 
In that case name all appropriate terms.)
 a. Everybody agrees that we need stronger drunk-driving laws. 
 b. The upsurge in crime on Sundays is the result of the reduced rate of church 
attendance in recent years. 
 c. The government must create new jobs. A factory in Illinois has laid off half its 
workers. 
 d. Steve has joined the country club. Golf must be one of his favorite sports. 
 e. Blondes have more fun. 
 f. 
You’ll enjoy your Volvo; foreign cars never break down. 
 g. Gary loves jokes. He would make a great comedian. 
 h. The economy is in bad shape because of the Federal Reserve Board. Ever 
since it expanded the money supply, the stock market has been declining. 
 i. 
Either we improve the city’s street lighting, or we will fail to reduce crime. 
 j. 
DNA research today is just like the study of nuclear fission. It seems impor-
tant, but it’s just another bomb that will one day explode on us. When will we 
learn that government must control research? 
■ ■

166 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 k. To prohibit prayer in public schools is to limit religious practice solely to 
internal belief.  The result is that an American is religiously  “free” only in his 
or her own mind. 
 l. 
Professor Johnson teaches in the political science department. I’ll bet she’s 
another socialist. 
 m. Coming to the aid of any country engaged in civil war is a bad idea. Next we’ll 
be sending American troops, and soon we’ll be involved in another Vietnam. 
 n. We must reject affirmative action in hiring or we’ll have to settle for incompe-
tent employees. 
 Fallacies That Result from Avoiding the Real Issue 
 There are many ways to divert attention from the issue under debate. Of the six 
discussed here, the first three try to divert attention by introducing a separate 
issue or “sliding by” the actual issue. The following three divert by appealing 
to the audience’s emotions or prejudices. In the first three the arguer tries to 
give the impression of good logic. In the last three the arguer charges forward 
on emotional manipulation alone. 
 Begging the Question  
To assume that part of your argument is true without supporting it is to  beg the 
question.  Arguments seeking to pass off as proof statements that must them-
selves be supported are often introduced with such phrases as “the fact is” (to 
introduce opinion), “obviously,” and “as we can see.” For example:
 • Clearly, lowering grading standards would be bad for students, so a pass/
fail system should not be adopted. 
   (Does a pass/fail system lower standards? No evidence has been given. If 
so, is that necessarily bad for students?) 
 Red Herring  
The  red herring is a foul-smelling argument indeed. The debater introduces a 
side issue, some point that is not relevant to the debate:
 • The senator is an honest woman; she loves her children and gives to 
charities. 
   (The children and charities are side issues; they do not demonstrate 
honesty.) 
 Straw Man  
The  straw man argument attributes to opponents incorrect and usually ridicu-
lous views that they do not hold so that their position can be easily attacked. 
We can challenge this illogic by demonstrating that the arguer’s opponents do 
not hold those views or by demanding that the arguer provide some evidence 
that they do:
■ ■

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
167
 • Those who favor gun control just want to take all guns away from 
 responsible citizens and put them in the hands of criminals. 
   (The position attributed to proponents of gun control is not only inaccurate 
but actually the opposite of what is sought by gun-control proponents.) 
 Ad Hominem  
One of the most frequent of all appeals to emotion masquerading as argument is 
the  ad hominem  argument (literally, argument “to the man”). When someone 
says that “those crazy liberals at the ACLU just want all criminals to go free,” or 
a pro-choice demonstrator screams at those “self-righteous fascists” on the other 
side, the best retort may be silence, or the calm assertion that such  statements do 
not contribute to meaningful debate.  
 Common Practice or Bandwagon  
To argue that an action should be taken or a position accepted because “every-
one is doing it” is illogical. The majority is not always right. Frequently, when 
someone is defending an action as ethical on the ground that everyone does it, 
the action isn’t ethical and the defender knows it isn’t. For example:
 • There’s nothing wrong with fudging a bit on your income taxes. After all, 
the superrich don’t pay any taxes, and the government expects everyone to 
cheat a little. 
   (First, not everyone cheats on taxes; many pay to have their taxes done 
 correctly. And if it is wrong, it is wrong regardless of the number who do it.)     
 Ad Populum  
Another technique for arousing an audience’s emotions and ignoring the issue 
is to appeal  ad populum, “to the people,” to the audience’s presumed shared 
values and beliefs. Every Fourth of July, politicians employ this tactic, appeal-
ing to God, mother, apple pie, and “traditional family values.” Simply reject the 
argument as illogical. 
 • Good, law-abiding Americans must be sick of the violent crimes occurring 
in our once godly society. But we won’t tolerate it anymore; put the crimi-
nals in jail and throw away the key. 
   (This does not contribute to a thoughtful debate on criminal justice issues.) 
 EXERCISES: Fallacies That Result from Ignoring the Issue 
 1. 
Here is a list of fallacies that result from ignoring the issue. Make up or collect 
from your reading at least one example of each fallacy.
 a. Begging the question 
 b. Red herring 
 c. Straw man 
■ ■

168 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 d.  Ad hominem 
 e. Common practice or bandwagon 
 f. 
 Ad populum 
 2. Explain what is illogical about each of the following arguments. Then name the 
fallacy represented.
 a. Gold’s book doesn’t deserve a Pulitzer Prize. She had been married four 
times. 
 b. I wouldn’t vote for him; many of his programs are basically socialist. 
 c. Eight out of ten headache sufferers use Bayer to relieve headache pain. It will 
work for you, too.  
 d. We shouldn’t listen to Colman McCarthy’s argument against liquor ads in 
college newspapers because he obviously thinks young people are ignorant 
and need guidance in everything. 
 e. My roommate Joe does the craziest things; he must be neurotic. 
 f. 
Since so many people obviously cheat the welfare system, it should be 
abolished. 
 g. She isn’t pretty enough to win the contest, and besides she had her nose 
“fixed”  two years ago. 
 h. Professors should chill out; everybody cheats on exams from time to time. 
 i. 
The fact is that bilingual education is a mistake because it encourages stu-
dents to use only their native language and that gives them an advantage over 
other students. 
 j. 
Don’t join those crazy liberals in support of the American Civil Liberties 
Union. They want all criminals to go free. 
 k. Real Americans understand that free-trade agreements are evil. Let your rep-
resentatives know that we want American goods protected. 
 EXERCISE: Analyzing Arguments 
 Examine the following letter to the editor by Christian Brahmstedt that appeared in 
the  Washington Post  on January 2, 1989. If you think it contains logical fallacies, identify 
the passages and explain the fallacies. 
Help Those Who Help, Not Hurt, Themselves
In the past year, and repeatedly throughout the holiday season, the Post has 
devoted an abnormally large share of newsprint to the “plight” of the vagrants 
who wander throughout the city in search of free handouts: i.e., the “homeless.”
As certain as taxes, the poor shall remain with civilization forever.  Yet 
these “homeless” are certainly not in the same category as the poor.  The poor 
of civilization, of which we have all been a part at one time in our lives, are proud 
and work hard until a financial independence frees them from the category.
1
2
■ ■
■ ■

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
169
 FOR READING AND ANALYSIS 
The “homeless” do not seek work or pride.  They are satisfied to beg and 
survive on others’ generosity.
The best correlation to the “homeless” I have witnessed are the gray 
squirrels on Capitol Hill. After feeding several a heavy dose of nuts one 
afternoon, I returned the next day to see the same squirrels patiently waiting 
for a return feeding. In the same fashion, the “homeless” are trained by 
Washington’s guilt-ridden society to continue begging a sustenance rather than 
learning independence.
The Post has preached that these vagrants be supported from the 
personal and federal coffers—in the same manner as the squirrels on Capitol 
Hill. This support is not helping the homeless; it is only teaching them to rely 
on it. All of our parents struggled through the depression as homeless of a 
sort, to arise and build financial independence through hard work.
The “homeless” problem will go away when, and only when,  Washingtonians 
refuse to feed them. They will learn to support themselves and learn that society 
demands honest work for an honest dollar.
It would be better for Washington citizens to field their guilt donations 
to the poor, those folks who are holding down two or more jobs just to make 
ends meet, rather than throwing their tribute to the vagrants on the sewer 
grates. The phrase “help those who help themselves” has no more certain 
relevance than to the “homeless” issue.
Source: © The Washington Post. 
■ ■
3
4
5
6
 DECLARATION OF SENTIMENTS   
 ELIZABETH CADY   STANTON  
 Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902) was one of the most important leaders of the 
women’s rights movement. Educated at the Emma Willard Seminary in Troy, New 
York, Stanton studied law with her father before her marriage. At the Seneca Falls 
Convention in 1848 (the first women’s rights convention), Stanton gave the opening 
speech and read her “Declaration of Sentiments.” She founded and became 
 president of the National Women’s Suffrage Association in 1869.  

170 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 PREREADING QUESTION  As you read, think about the similarities and differences 
between this document and the Declaration of Independence. What significant 
differences in wording and content do you find? 
 When, in the course of human events, it 
becomes necessary for one  portion of the fam-
ily of man to assume among the people of the 
earth a  position different from that which they 
have hitherto occupied, but one to which the 
laws of nature and of nature’s God entitle 
them, a decent respect to the opinions of 
mankind requires that they should declare the 
causes that impel them to such a course. 
 We hold these truths to be self-evident: 
that all men and women are  created equal; 
that they are endowed by their Creator with 
certain inalienable rights; that among these 
are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; 
that to secure these rights governments are 
instituted, deriving their just powers from 
the consent of the governed. Whenever any 
form of government becomes destructive of 
these ends, it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance to it, 
and to insist upon the institution of a new government, laying its foundation on 
such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem 
most likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate 
that governments long established should not be changed for light and tran-
sient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shown that mankind are more 
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolish-
ing the forms to which they were accustomed. But when a long train of abuses 
and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object evinces a design to reduce 
them under absolute despotism, it is their duty to throw off such government, 
and to provide new guards for their future security. Such has been the patient 
sufferance of the women under this government, and such is now the necessity 
which  constrains them to demand the equal station to which they are entitled. 
 The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on 
the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an 
absolute tyranny over her. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid world. 
 He has never permitted her to exercise her inalienable right to the  elective 
franchise. 
 He has compelled her to submit to laws, in the formation of which she had 
no voice. 
 He has withheld from her rights which are given to the most ignorant and 
degraded men—both natives and foreigners. 
 Having deprived her of this first right of a citizen, the elective franchise, 
thereby leaving her without representation in the halls of legislation, he has 
oppressed her on all sides. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
171
 He has made her, if married, in the eye of the law, civilly dead. 
 He has taken from her all right in property, even to the wages she earns. 
 He has made her, morally, an irresponsible being, as she can commit many 
crimes with impunity, provided they be done in the presence of her husband. 
In the covenant of marriage, she is compelled to promise  obedience to her 
husband, he becoming, to all intents and purposes, her master—the law giv-
ing him power to deprive her of her liberty, and to administer chastisement. 
 He has so framed the laws of divorce, as to what shall be the proper 
causes, and in case of separation, to whom the guardianship of the children 
shall be given, as to be wholly regardless of the happiness of women—the law, 
in all cases, going upon a false supposition of the supremacy of man, and giv-
ing all power into his hands. 
 After depriving her of all rights as a married woman, if single, and the 
owner of property, he has taxed her to support a government which recog-
nizes her only when her property can be made profitable to it. 
 He has monopolized nearly all the profitable employments, and from those 
she is permitted to follow, she receives but a scanty remuneration. He closes 
against her all the avenues to wealth and distinction which he considers most 
honorable to himself. As a teacher of theology, medicine, or law, she is not known. 
 He has denied her the facilities for obtaining a thorough education, all col-
leges being closed against her. 
 He allows her in Church, as well as State, but a subordinate position, claim-
ing Apostolic authority for her exclusion from the ministry, and, with some 
exceptions, from any public participation in the affairs of the Church. 
 He has created a false public sentiment by giving to the world a different 
code of morals for men and women, by which moral delinquencies which exclude 
women from society, are not only tolerated, but deemed of little account in man. 
 He has usurped the prerogative of Jehovah himself, claiming it as his right 
to assign for her a sphere of action, when that belongs to her  conscience and 
to her God. 
 He has endeavored, in every way that he could, to destroy her  confidence 
in her own powers, to lessen her self-respect, and to make her willing to lead 
a dependent and abject life. 
 Now in view of this entire disfranchisement of one-half the people of this 
country, their social and religious degradation—in view of the unjust laws 
above mentioned, and because women do feel themselves aggrieved, 
oppressed, and fraudulently deprived of their most sacred rights, we insist 
that they have immediate admission to all the rights and privileges which 
belong to them as citizens of the United States. 
 In entering upon the great work before us, we anticipate no small amount 
of misconception, misrepresentation, and ridicule; but we shall use every 
instrumentality within our power to effect our object. We shall employ 
agents, circulate tracts, petition the State and National legislatures, and 
endeavor to enlist the pulpit and the press in our behalf. We hope this 
Convention will be followed by a series of Conventions embracing every part 
of the country.  
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

172 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
Summarize the ideas of paragraphs 1 and 2. Be sure to use your own words. 
 2. 
What are the first three facts given by Stanton? Why are they presented first? 
 3. 
How have women been restricted by law if married or owning property? How 
have they been restricted in education and work? How have they been restricted 
psychologically?  
 4. 
What, according to Stanton, do women demand? How will they seek their 
goals? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Stanton’s claim? With what does she charge men? 
 6. 
Most—but not all—of Stanton’s charges have been redressed, however slowly. 
Which continue to be legitimate complaints, in whole or in part?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
Do we need a new declaration of sentiments for women? If so, what specific 
charges would you list? If not, why not?  
 8. 
Do we need a declaration of sentiments for other groups—children, minorities, 
the elderly, animals? If so, what specific charges should be listed? Select one 
group (that concerns you) and prepare a declaration of sentiments for that 
group. If you do not think any group needs a declaration, explain why. 
 THINGS PEOPLE SAY   
 NEIL DEGRASSE   TYSON 
 An astrophysicist whose research interests include star formation and the structure of 
the Milky Way, Neil Tyson is director of the Hayden Planetarium in New York City. He 
is also one of today’s most important figures in bringing science to the nonspecialist. 
He has been  Natural History magazine’s columnist, and since 2006 he has been the 
host of the PBS show  NOVAScienceNow.  A popular public speaker, Tyson is the 
author of nine books, including a collection of his essays. The following column from 
 Natural History  was originally published in the July/August 1998 issue.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Given your knowledge of the author and the title of his 
essay, what do you expect his subject to be? How often do you observe the 
physical universe and think about what you see?
  A ristotle once declared that while the planets moved against the 
 background stars, and while shooting stars, comets, and eclipses represented 
intermittent variability in the atmosphere and the heavens, the stars  themselves 
were fixed and unchanging on the sky and that Earth was the center of all 
motion in the universe. From our enlightened perch, 25 centuries later, we 
chuckle at the folly of these ideas, but the claims were the  consequence of 
legitimate, albeit simple, observations of the natural world. 
1

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
173
 Aristotle also made other 
kinds of claims. He said that 
heavy things fall faster than light 
things. Who could argue against 
that? Rocks obviously fall to the 
ground faster than tree leaves. 
But Aristotle went further and 
declared that heavy things fall 
faster than light things in direct 
proportion to their own weight, 
so that a 10-pound object would 
fall ten times faster than a 
1-pound object. 
 Aristotle was badly mistaken. 
 To test him, simply release 
a small rock and a big rock 
simultaneously from the same 
height. Unlike fluttering leaves, 
neither rock will be much influ-
enced by air resistance and both will hit the ground at the same time. This 
experiment does not require a grant from the National Science Foundation to 
execute. Aristotle could have performed it but didn’t. Aristotle’s teachings 
were later adopted into the doctrines of the Catholic Church. And through the 
Church’s power and influence Aristotelian philosophies became lodged in the 
common knowledge of the Western world, blindly believed and repeated. Not 
only did people repeat to others that which was not true, but they also ignored 
things that clearly happened but were not supposed to be true. 
 When scientifically investigating the natural world, the only thing worse 
than a blind believer is a seeing denier. In  A.D. 1054, a star in the constellation 
Taurus abruptly increased in brightness by a factor of a million. The Chinese 
astronomers wrote about it. Middle Eastern astronomers wrote about it. Native 
Americans of what is now the southwestern United States made rock engrav-
ings of it. The star became bright enough to be plainly visible in the daytime 
for weeks, yet we have no record of anybody in all of Europe recording the 
event. (The bright new star in the sky was actually a supernova explosion that 
occurred in space some 7,000 years earlier but its light had only just reached 
Earth.) True, Europe was in the Dark Ages, so we cannot expect that acute 
data-taking skills were common, but cosmic events that were “allowed” to 
happen were routinely recorded. For example, 12 years later, in 1066, what 
ultimately became known as Halley’s comet was seen and duly depicted—
complete with agape onlookers—in a section of the famous Bayeux tapestry, 
circa 1100. An exception indeed. The Bible says the stars don’t change. 
Aristotle said the stars don’t change. The Church, with its unmatched author-
ity, declares the stars don’t change. The population then falls victim to a 
 collective delusion that was stronger than its members’ own powers of 
observation. 
2
3
4
5
  Neil deGrasse Tyson with the “tools of his trade.” 

174 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 We all carry some blindly believed knowledge because we cannot realisti-
cally test every statement uttered by others. When I tell you that the proton 
has an antimatter counterpart (the antiproton), you would need $1 billion 
worth of laboratory apparatus to verify my statement. So it’s easier to just 
believe me and trust that, at least most of the time, and at least with regard to 
the astrophysical world, I know what I am talking about. I don’t mind if you 
remain skeptical. In fact, I encourage it. Feel free to visit your nearest particle 
accelerator to see antimatter for yourself. But how about all those statements 
that don’t require fancy apparatus to prove? One would think that in our mod-
ern and enlightened culture, popular knowledge would be immune from false-
hoods that were easily testable. 
 It is not. 
 Consider the following declarations. The North Star is the brightest star in 
the nighttime sky. The Sun is a yellow star. What goes up must come down. On 
a dark night you can see millions of stars with the unaided eye. In space there 
is no gravity. A compass points north. Days get shorter in the winter and lon-
ger in the summer. Total solar eclipses are rare. 
 Every statement in the above paragraph is false. 
 Many people (perhaps most people) believe one or more of these state-
ments and spread them to others even when a firsthand demonstration of 
falsehood is trivial to deduce or obtain. Welcome to my things-people-say 
rant: 
 The North Star is not the brightest star in the nighttime sky. It’s not even 
bright enough to earn a spot in the celestial top 40. Perhaps people equate 
popularity with brightness. But when gazing upon the northern sky, three of 
the seven stars of the Big Dipper, including its “pointer” star, are brighter than 
the North Star, which is parked just three fist-widths away. There is no excuse. 
 And I don’t care what else anyone has ever told you, the Sun is white, not 
yellow. Human color perception is a complicated business, but if the Sun were 
yellow, like a yellow lightbulb, then white stuff such as snow would reflect this 
light and appear yellow—a snow condition confirmed to happen only near fire 
hydrants. What could lead people to say that the Sun is yellow? In the middle 
of the day, a glance at the Sun can damage your eyes. Near sunset, however, 
with the Sun low on the horizon and when the atmospheric scattering of blue 
light is at its greatest, the Sun’s intensity is significantly diminished. The blue 
light from the Sun’s spectrum, lost to the twilight sky, leaves behind a yellow-
orange-red hue for the Sun’s disk. When people glance at this color-corrupted 
setting Sun, their misconceptions are fueled. 
 What goes up need not come down. All manner of golf balls, flags, auto-
mobiles, and crashed space probes litter the lunar surface. Unless somebody 
goes up there to bring them back, they will never return to Earth. Not ever. If 
you want to go up and not come down, all you need to do is travel at any 
speed faster than about seven miles per second. Earth’s gravity will  gradually 
slow you down but it will never succeed in reversing your motion and  forcing 
you back to Earth. 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
175
 Unless your eyes have pupils the size of binocular lenses, no matter your 
seeing conditions and no matter your location on Earth, you will not resolve 
any more than about five or six thousand stars in the entire sky out of the 100 
billion (or so) stars of our Milky Way galaxy. Try it one night. Things get much, 
much worse when the Moon is out. And if the Moon happens to be full, it will 
wash out the light of all but the brightest few hundred stars. 
 During the Apollo space program, while one of the missions was en route 
to the Moon, a noted television news anchor announced the exact moment 
when the “astronauts left the gravitational field of Earth.” Since the astronauts 
were still on their way to the Moon, and since the Moon orbits Earth, then 
Earth’s gravity must extend into space  at least as far as the Moon.  Indeed, 
Earth’s gravity, and the gravity of every other object in the universe, extends 
without limit—albeit with ever-diminishing strength. Every spot in space is 
teeming with countless gravitational tugs in the direction of every other object 
in the universe. What the announcer meant was that the astronauts crossed 
the point in space where the force of the Moon’s gravity exceeds the force of 
Earth’s gravity. The whole job of the mighty three-stage  Saturn V  rocket was to 
endow the command module with enough initial speed to just reach this point 
in space because thereafter you can passively accelerate toward the Moon—
and they did. Gravity is everywhere. 
 Everybody knows that when it comes to magnets, opposite poles attract 
while similar poles repel. But a compass needle is designed so that the half 
that has been magnetized “North” points to Earth’s magnetic north pole. The 
only way a magnetized object can align its north half to Earth’s magnetic north 
pole is if Earth’s magnetic north pole is actually in the south and the magnetic 
south pole is actually in the north. Furthermore, there is no particular law of 
the universe that requires the precise alignment of an object’s magnetic poles 
with its geographic poles. On Earth the two are separated by about 800 miles, 
which makes navigation by compass a futile exercise in northern Canada. 
 Since the first day of winter is the shortest “day” of the year, then every 
succeeding day in the winter season must get longer and longer. Similarly, 
since the first day of summer is the longest “day” of the year, then every suc-
ceeding day in the summer must get shorter and shorter. This is, of course, the 
opposite of what is told and retold. 
 On average, every couple years, somewhere on Earth’s surface, the Moon 
passes completely in front of the Sun to create a total solar eclipse. This event 
is more common than the Olympics, yet you don’t read  newspaper headlines 
declaring “a rare Olympics will take place this year.” The perceived rarity of 
eclipses may derive from a simple fact: for any chosen spot on Earth, you can 
wait up to a half-millennium before you see a total solar eclipse. True, but lame 
as an argument because there are spots on Earth (like the middle of the Sahara 
Desert or any region of Antarctica) that have never, and will not likely ever, 
host the Olympics. 
 Want a few more? At high noon, the Sun is directly overhead. The Sun 
rises in the east and sets in the west. The Moon comes out at night. On the 
14
15
16
17
18
19

176 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
equinox there are 12 hours of day and 12 hours of night. The Southern Cross 
is a beautiful constellation. All of these statements are wrong too. 
 There is no time of day, nor day of the year, nor place in the continental 
United States where the Sun ascends to directly overhead. At “high noon,” 
straight vertical objects cast no shadow. The only people on the planet who 
see this live between 23.5 degrees south latitude and 23.5 degrees north 
 latitude. And even in that zone, the Sun reaches directly overhead on only two 
days per year. The concept of high noon, like the brightness of the North Star 
and the color of the Sun, is a collective delusion. 
 For every person on Earth, the Sun rises due east and sets due west on only 
two days of the year: the first day of spring and the first day of fall. For every 
other day of the year, and for every person on Earth, the Sun rises and sets 
someplace else on the horizon. On the equator, sunrise varies by 47 degrees 
across the eastern horizon. From the latitude of New York City (41 degrees 
north—the same as that of Madrid and Beijing) the sunrise spans more than 60 
degrees. From the latitude of London (51 degrees north) the sunrise spans 
nearly 80 degrees. And when viewed from either the Arctic or Antarctic circles, 
the Sun can rise due north and due south, spanning a full 180 degrees. 
 The Moon also “comes out” with the Sun in the sky. By invoking a small 
extra investment in your skyward viewing (like looking up in broad daylight) 
you will notice that the Moon is visible in the daytime nearly as often as it is 
visible at night. 
 The equinox does not contain exactly 12 hours of day and 12 hours of 
night. Look at the sunrise and sunset times in the newspaper on the first day of 
either spring or fall. They do not split the day into two equal 12-hour blocks. In 
all cases, daytime wins. Depending on your latitude, it can win by as few as 
seven minutes at the equator up to nearly half an hour at the Arctic and 
Antarctic circles. Who or what do we blame? Refraction of sunlight as it passes 
from the vacuum of interplanetary space to Earth’s atmosphere enables an 
image of the Sun to appear above the horizon several minutes before the 
actual Sun has actually risen. Equivalently, the actual Sun has set several min-
utes before the Sun that you see. The convention is to measure sunrise by 
using the upper edge of the Sun’s disk as it peeks above the  horizon; similarly, 
sunset is measured by using the upper edge of the Sun’s disk as it sinks below 
the horizon. The problem is that these two “upper edges” are on opposite 
halves of the Sun thereby providing an extra solar width of light in the sunrise/
sunset calculation. 
 The Southern Cross gets the award for the greatest hype among all eighty-
eight constellations. By listening to Southern Hemisphere people talk about 
this constellation, and by listening to songs written about it, and by noticing it 
on the national flags of Australia, New Zealand, Western Samoa, and Papua 
New Guinea, you would think we in the North were somehow deprived. Nope. 
Firstly, one needn’t travel to the Southern Hemisphere to see the Southern 
Cross. It’s plainly visible (although low in the sky) from as far north as Miami, 
Florida. This diminutive constellation is the smallest in the sky—your fist at 
20
21
22
23
24

 CHAPTER 6 Learning More about Argument: Induction, Deduction, Analogy, and Logical Fallacies 
177
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
    1. 
What happened in 1054? Who wrote about the event? Who did not? What 
 happened in 1066? Why did Europeans record this year’s event? 
 2. 
What  kinds  of knowledge do we usually have to accept from experts? What 
 kinds of falsehoods should we not hold on to? 
   3. 
Why do people believe that the sun is yellow? Or that it rises in the east and 
sets in the west? 
   4. 
How does Tyson account for people believing statements that conflict with 
evidence?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What does Tyson accomplish in his opening four paragraphs? 
   6. 
The author provides a list of well-known “truths” and then explains why each 
one is a false fact. Has he provided sufficient evidence to make his point? If not, 
why not? 
 7. 
What is Tyson’s claim, the main point he wants to establish with readers? 
arm’s length would eclipse it completely. Its shape isn’t very interesting either. 
If you were to draw a rectangle using a connect-the-dots method you would 
use four stars. And if you were to draw a cross you would presumably include a 
fifth star in the middle to indicate the cross-point of the two beams. But the 
Southern Cross is composed of only four stars, which more accurately resemble 
a kite or a crooked box. The constellation lore of Western cultures owes its 
origin and richness to centuries of Babylonian, Chaldean, Greek, and Roman 
imaginations. Remember, these are the same imaginations that gave rise to the 
endless dysfunctional social lives of the gods and goddesses. Of course, these 
were all Northern Hemisphere civilizations, which means the constellations of 
the southern sky (many of which were named only within the last 250 years) are 
mythologically impoverished. In the North we have the Northern Cross, which 
is composed of all five stars that a cross deserves. It forms a  subset of the 
larger constellation Cygnus the swan, which is flying across the sky along the 
Milky Way. Cygnus is nearly twelve times larger than the Southern Cross. 
 When people believe a tale that conflicts with self-checkable evidence it 
tells me that people undervalue the role of evidence in formulating an internal 
belief system. Why this is so is not clear, but it enables many people to hold 
fast to ideas and notions based purely on supposition. But all hope is not lost. 
Occasionally, people say things that are simply true no matter what. One of 
my favorites is,“Wherever you go, there you are” and its Zen corollary, “If we 
are all here, then we must not be all there.”
Source: Reprinted with permission from Natural History, July/August 1998. This article appears in Neil 
deGrasse Tyson’s book Death by Black Hole: And Other Cosmic Quandaries (New York: W. W. Norton, 
2007), pp. 291–297. 
25

178 
SECTION 2 THE WORLD OF ARGUMENT
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  8. Has Tyson convinced you that it is important to observe the natural world and 
use logic to test what we assume to be true? If not, why not?  
  9. What are some of the sources of false facts? Where does Tyson put most of the 
blame—on those who pass on false facts or those who embrace them by ignor-
ing evidence to the contrary? Do you agree with his view on where to place the 
blame? Why or why not?  
 10. How many of Tyson’s false facts did you believe to be true? Have you now 
adjusted your fact list? Are you sharing your new knowledge with family and 
friends? Reflect on your reactions to Tyson’s essay. 

 SECTION 3 
 Studying Some 
Arguments by Genre 

 READ: How does the cat respond to the big dog’s questions? 
 REASON: Does the big dog expect the responses he gets to his questions? 
How do you know? 
 REFLECT/WRITE: What is a rhetorical question? What is the risk of using one? 
 Definition Arguments 
 CHAPTER 7 
GET FUZZY © 2008 Darby Conley. 
Reprinted by permission of 
UNIVERSAL UCLICK for UFS. All 
rights reserved.

181
 “D
 efine your terms!” someone yells in the middle of a heated debate. 
Although yelling may not be the best strategy, the advice is sound for 
writers of argument. People do disagree over the meaning of words. Although 
we cannot let words mean whatever we want and still communicate, we do 
recognize that many words have more than one meaning. In addition, some 
words carry strong connotations, the emotional associations we attach to them. 
For this reason, realtors never sell  houses; they always sell  homes. They want you 
to believe that the house they are showing will become the home in which you 
will feel happy and secure. 
 Many important arguments turn on the definition of key terms. If you can 
convince others that you have the correct definition, then you are well on your 
way to winning your argument. The civil rights movement, for example, really 
turned on a definition of terms. Leaders argued that some laws are unjust, that 
because it is the law does not necessarily mean it is right. Laws requiring sepa-
rate schools and separate drinking fountains and seats at the back of the bus for 
blacks were, in the view of civil rights activists, unjust laws, unjust because 
they are immoral and as such diminish us as humans. If obeying unjust laws is 
immoral, then it follows that we should not obey such laws. And when we rec-
ognize that obeying such laws hurts us, then we have an obligation to act to 
remove unjust laws. Civil disobedience—illegal behavior to some—becomes, 
by definition, the best moral behavior. 
 Attorney Andrew Vachss has argued that there are no child prostitutes, 
only prostituted children. Yes, there are children who engage in sex for money. 
But, Vachss argues, that is not the complete definition of a prostitute. A prosti-
tute chooses to exchange sex for money. Children do not choose; they are 
exploited by adults, beaten and in other ways abused if they do not work for 
the adult controlling them. If we agree with his definition, Vachss expects that 
we will also agree that the adults must be punished for their abuse of those 
prostituted children. 
 DEFINING AS PART OF AN ARGUMENT  
 There are two occasions for defining words as a part of your argument:
 • You need to define any technical terms that may not be familiar to  readers—
or that readers may not understand as fully as they think they do. David 
Norman, early in his book on dinosaurs, writes:
 Nearly everyone knows what some dinosaurs look like, such as  Tyrannosaurus, 
Triceratops, and  Stegosaurus. But they may be much more vague about the 
lesser known ones, and may have difficulty in distinguishing between 
 dinosaurs and other types of prehistoric creatures. It is not at all unusual to 
overhear an adult, taking a group of children around a museum display, being 
reprimanded sharply by the youngsters for failing to realize that a woolly 
mammoth was not a dinosaur, or—more forgivably—that a giant flying reptile 
such as  Pteranodon, which lived at the time of the dinosaurs, was not a 
 dinosaur either. 

182 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 So what exactly is a dinosaur? And how do paleontologists decide on the 
groups they belong to? 
  Norman answers his questions by explaining the four characteristics 
that all dinosaurs have. He provides what is often referred to as a  formal 
 definition. He places the dinosaur in a class, established by four criteria, 
and then distinguishes this animal from other animals that lived a long 
time ago. His definition is not open to debate. He is presenting the defi-
nition and classification system that paleontologists, the specialists, have 
established.  
 • You need to define any word you are using in a special way. If you were 
to write: “We need to teach discrimination at an early age,” you should 
add: “by  discrimination I do not mean prejudice. I mean discernment, the 
ability to see differences.” ( Sesame Street has been teaching children this 
good kind of discrimination for many years.) The word  discrimination 
used to have only a positive connotation; it referred to an important criti-
cal thinking skill. Today, however, the word has been linked to prejudice; 
to discriminate is to act on one’s prejudice against some group. Writing 
today, you need to clarify if you are using the word in its original, positive 
meaning.  
 WHEN DEFINING  IS THE ARGUMENT 
 We also turn to definition because we believe that a word is being used incor-
rectly or is not fully understood. Columnist George Will once argued that we 
should forget  values and use instead the word  virtues —that we should seek and 
admire virtues, not values. His point was that the term  values, given to us by 
today’s social scientists, is associated with situational ethics, or with an “if it 
feels good do it” approach to action. He wants people to return to the more old-
fashioned word  virtues so that we are reminded that some behavior is right and 
some is wrong, and that neither the situation nor how we might “feel” about it 
alters those truths. In discussions such as Will’s the purpose shifts. Instead of 
using definition as one step in an argument, definition becomes the central pur-
pose of the argument. Will rejects the idea that  values means the same thing as 
 virtues and asserts that it is virtue—as he defines it—that must guide our behav-
ior. An extended definition  is the argument. 
 STRATEGIES FOR DEVELOPING 
AN EXTENDED DEFINITION 
 Arguing for your meaning of a word provides your purpose in writing. But, it 
may not immediately suggest ways to develop such an argument. Let’s think in 
terms of what definitions essentially do: They establish criteria for a class or 
category and then exclude other items from that category. (A pen is a writing 

 
CHAPTER 7 Definition Arguments 
183
instrument that uses ink.) Do you see your definition as drawing a line or as 
setting up two entirely separate categories? For example: 
When does interrogation
become
torture?
 One might argue that some strategies for making the person questioned 
uncomfortable are appropriate to interrogation (reduced sleep or comforts, 
loud noise). But, at some point (stretching on a rack or waterboarding) one 
crosses a line to torture. To define torture, you have to explain where that line 
is—and how the actions on one side of the line are different from those on the 
other side. 
 What are the characteristics of wisdom as opposed to knowledge? 
 
Knowledge
Wisdom
 Do we cross a line from knowledge to become wise? Many would argue that 
wisdom requires traits or skills that are not found simply by increasing one’s 
knowledge. The categories are separate. Others might argue that, while the cat-
egories are distinct, one does need knowledge to also be wise.
 Envisioning these two approaches supports the abstract thinking that 
defining requires. Then what? Use some of the basic strategies of good writing:
 •  Descriptive details. Illustrate with specifics. List the traits of a leader or a 
courageous person. Explain the behaviors that we find in a wise person, or 
the behaviors that should be called torture. Describe the situations in which 
liberty can flourish, or the situations that result from unjust laws. Remem-
ber to use negative traits as well as positive ones. That is, show what is  not 
covered by the word you are defining. 
 •  Examples. Develop your definition with actual or hypothetical examples. 
Churchill, Lincoln, and FDR can all be used as examples of leaders. The 
biblical Solomon is generally acknowledged as a good example of a wise 
person. You can also create a hypothetical wise or courteous person, or a 
person whose behavior you would consider virtuous. 
 •  Comparison and/or contrast.  Clarify and limit your definition by contrasting it 
with words of similar—but not exactly the same—meanings. For example, 
what are the differences between knowledge and wisdom or interrogation 

184 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
and torture? The goal of your essay is to establish subtle but important dif-
ferences so that your readers understand precisely what you want a given 
word to mean. In an essay at the end of this chapter, Robin Givhan distin-
guishes among  glamour, charisma, and  cool as a way to develop her defini-
tion of  glamour.  
 •  History of usage or word origin.  The word’s original meanings can be instruc-
tive. If the word has changed meaning over time, explore these changes 
as clues to how the word can (or should) be used. If you want readers to 
reclaim  discrimination as a positive trait, then show them how that was part 
of the word’s original meaning before the word became tied to prejudice. 
Word origin—etymology—can also give us insight into a word’s mean-
ing. Many words in English come from another language, or they are a 
combination of two words. The words  liberty and  freedom can usefully 
be discussed by examining etymology. Most dictionaries provide some 
word origin information, but the best source is, always, the  Oxford English 
Dictionary.   
 •  Use or function. A frequent strategy for defining is explaining an item’s use 
or function: A pencil is a writing instrument. A similar approach can give 
insight into more general or abstract words as well. For example, what do 
we have—or gain—by emphasizing virtues instead of values? Or, what 
does a wise person  do that a non-wise person does not do? 
 •  Metaphors. Consider using figurative comparisons. When fresh, not  clichés, 
they add vividness to your writing while offering insight into your under-
standing of the word.  
 In an essay titled “Why I Blog,” Andrew Sullivan, one of the Internet’s ear-
liest bloggers, uses many of these strategies for developing a definition of the 
term  blog: 
 •  Word origin. “The word  blog is a conflation of two words:  Web and  log.  . . . 
In the monosyllabic vernacular of the Internet,  Web log soon became the 
word  blog. ”  
 •  One-sentence definition. “It contains in its four letters a concise and accurate 
self-description: it is a log of thoughts and writing posted publicly on the 
World Wide Web.” 
 •  Descriptive details.  “This form of instant and global self-publishing . . . allows 
for no retroactive editing. . . . [I]ts truth [is] inherently transitory.” 
 •  Contrast. “The wise panic that can paralyze a writer . . . is not available to a 
blogger. You can’t have blogger’s block.” 
 •  Metaphors.  “A blog . . . bobs on the surface of the ocean but has its anchor-
age in waters deeper than those print media is technologically able to 
exploit.”  
These snippets from Sullivan’s lengthy essay give us a good look at defining 
strategies in action. 

 When reading deﬁ nition arguments, what should you look for? The basics 
of good argument apply to all arguments: a clear statement of claim, quali-
ﬁ ed if appropriate, a clear explanation of reasons and evidence, and enough 
relevant evidence to support the claim. How do we recognize these qualities 
in a deﬁ nition argument? Use the following points as guides to evaluating:
 •  Why is the word being defined? Has the writer convinced you of the 
need to understand the word’s meaning or change the way the word is 
commonly used?  
 •  How is the word defined? Has the writer established his or her defini-
tion, clearly distinguishing it from what the writer perceives to be objec-
tionable definitions? It is hard to judge the usefulness of the writer’s 
position if the differences in meaning remain fuzzy. If George Will is going 
to argue for using  virtues instead of  values, he needs to be sure that read-
ers understand the differences he sees in the two words.  
 •  What strategies are used to develop the definition? Can you recog-
nize the different types of evidence presented and see what the writer is 
doing in his or her argument? This kind of analysis can aid your evaluation 
of a definition argument.  
 •  What are the implications of accepting the author’s definition? Why 
does George Will want readers to embrace  virtues rather than  values ? 
Will’s argument is not just about subtle points of language. His argument 
is also about attitudes that affect public policy issues. Part of any evalua-
tion of a definition argument must include our assessment of the author’s 
definition.  
 •  Is the definition argument convincing? Do the reasons and evidence 
lead you to agree with the author, to accept the idea of the definition and 
its implications as well?  
GUIDELINES for  Evaluating 
Definition 
Arguments 
 
CHAPTER 7 Definition Arguments 
185
 PREPARING A DEFINITION ARGUMENT 
 In addition to the guidelines for writing arguments presented in Chapter 4, you 
can use the following advice specific to writing definition arguments. 
 Planning 
 1. 
 Think: Why do you want to define your term? To add to our understanding 
of a complex term? To challenge the use of the word by others? If you don’t 
have a good reason to write, find a different word to examine. 
 2. 
 Think: How are you defining the word? What are the elements/parts/steps 
in your definition? Some brainstorming notes are probably helpful to keep 
your definition concrete and focused. 

186 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 3. 
 Think: What strategies will you use to develop and support your defini-
tion? Consider using several of these possible strategies for development:
 •  Word origin or history of usage 
 •  Descriptive details 
 •  Comparison and/or contrast 
 •  Examples 
 •  Function or use 
 •  Metaphors 
 Drafting 
 1. 
Begin with an opening paragraph or two that introduces your subject in an 
interesting way. Possibilities include the occasion that has led to your 
 writing—explain, for instance, a misunderstanding about your term’s 
meaning that you want to correct. 
 2. 
Do  not begin by quoting or paraphrasing a dictionary definition of the 
term. “According to Webster . . .” is a tired approach lacking reader interest. 
If the dictionary definition were sufficient, you would have no reason to 
write an entire essay to define the term. 
 3. 
State your claim—your definition of the term—early in your essay, if you 
can do so in a sentence or two. If you do not state a brief claim, then estab-
lish your purpose in writing early in your essay. (You may find that there are 
too many parts to your definition to combine into one or two sentences.)  
 4. 
Use several specific strategies for developing your definition. Select strategies 
from the list above and organize your approach around these  strategies. That 
is, you can develop one paragraph of descriptive details, another of examples, 
another of contrast with words that are not exactly the same in meaning.  
 5. 
Consider specifically refuting the error in word use that led to your decision 
to write your own definition. If you are motivated to write based on what 
you have read, then make a rebuttal part of your definition argument.  
 6. 
Consider discussing the implications of your definition. You can give 
weight and value to your argument by explaining the larger significance of 
your definition. 
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION   
 
 u Do I have a good understanding of my purpose? Have I made this clear to 
readers? 
 u Have I clearly stated my definition? Or clearly established the various parts 
of the definition that I discuss in separate paragraphs? 
 u Have I organized my argument, building the parts of my definition into a 
logical, coherent structure? 
 u Have I used specifics to clarify and support my definition? 
 u Have I used the basic checklist for revision in Chapter 4 (see p. 111)? 

 
CHAPTER 7 Definition Arguments 
187
 STUDENT ESSAY  
 PARAGON OR PARASITE? 
 Laura   Mullins  
 Do you recognize this creature? He is  low maintenance and often 
unnoticeable, a favorite companion of many.  Requiring no special attention, 
he grows from the soil of pride and rejection,  feeding regularly on a diet 
of ignorance and insecurity, scavenging for hurt feelings and defensiveness, 
gobbling up dainty morsels of lust and scandal. Like a cult leader clothed in 
a gay veneer,  disguising himself as blameless, he wields power.  Bewitching 
unsuspecting but devoted groupies, distracting them from honest  
self-examination,  deceiving them into believing illusions of grandeur or, on 
the other extreme,  unredeemable worthlessness,  he breeds jealousy,  hate, 
and fear;  thus,  he thrives. He is Gossip.   
One of my dearest friends is a gossip.  She is an educated, honorable, 
compassionate, loving woman whose character and judgment I deeply admire 
and respect.  After sacrificially raising six children, she went on to study medicine 
and become a doctor who graciously volunteers her expertise. How,  you may be 
wondering, could a gossip deserve such praise? Then you do not understand the 
word. My friend is my daughter’s godmother; she is my gossip, or  godsib, meaning 
sister-in-god. Derived from Middle English words  god, meaning spiritual, and  sip/
sib/syp, meaning kinsman, this term was used to refer to a familiar acquaintance, 
close family friend, or intimate relation, according to the  Oxford English Dictionary.  
As a male, he would have joined in fellowship and celebration with the father 
of the newly born; if a female, she would have been a trusted friend, a birth-
attendant or midwife to the mother of the baby.  The term grew to include 
references to the type of easy, unrestrained conversation shared by these folks.
As is often the case with words, the term’s meaning has certainly 
evolved, maybe eroded from its original idea. Is it harmless, idle chat, 
innocuous sharing of others’ personal news, or back-biting, rumor-spreading, 
 Attention-getting 
introduction. 
 Clever extended 
metaphor. 
 Subject introduced. 
 Etymology of  gossip 
 and early meanings. 
 Current meanings. 

188 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 and manipulation? Is it a beneficial activity worthy of pursuit, or a deplorable 
danger to be avoided? 
 In her article  “Evolution,  Alienation, and Gossip” (for the Social Issues 
Research Centre in Oxford, England), Kate Fox writes that “gossip is not a 
trivial pastime; it is essential to human social, psychological, and even physical 
well-being.” Many echo her view that gossip is a worthy activity, claiming that 
engaging in gossip produces endorphins, reduces stress,  and aids in building 
intimate relationships. Gossip, seen at worst as a harmless outlet, is encouraged 
in the workplace. Since much of its content is not inherently critical or malicious, 
it is viewed as a positive activity. However, this view does nothing to encourage 
those speaking or listening to evaluate or examine motive or purpose; instead, it 
seems to reflect the “anything goes” thinking so prevalent today. 
 Conversely, writer and high school English and geography teacher Lennox V. 
Farrell of Toronto, Canada, in his essay titled  “Gossip:   An Urban Form of Sorcery,” 
presents gossip as a kind of   “witchcraft . . . based on using unsubstantiated 
accusations by those who make them, and on uncritically accepting these by those 
enticed into listening.” Farrell uses gossip in its more widely understood definition, 
encompassing the breaking of confidences,  inappropriate sharing of indiscretions, 
destructive tale-bearing, and malicious slander.
 What, then, is gossip?  We no longer use the term to refer to our 
children’s godparents. Its current definition usually comes with derogatory 
implications. Imagine a backyard garden: you see a variety of greenery, 
recognizing at a glance that you are looking at different kinds of plants.  Taking 
a closer look, you will find the gossip vine; inconspicuously blending in, it 
doesn’t appear threatening, but ultimately it destroys. If left in the garden it 
will choke and then suck out life from its host. Zoom in on the garden scene 
and follow the creeping vine up trees and along a fence where two neighbors 
visit. You can overhear one woman saying to the other,  “I know I should be the 
last to tell you, but your husband is being unfaithful to me.” (Caption from a 
cartoon by Alan De la Nougerede.)
 Good use of sources 
to develop definition.  
 Good use of 
 metaphor to depict 
gossip as negative.  

 
CHAPTER 7 Definition Arguments 
189
     FOR ANALYSIS AND DEBATE  
 The current popular movement to legitimize gossip seems an excuse to 
condone the human tendency to puff-up oneself. Compared in legal terms, gossip 
is to conversation as hearsay is to eyewitness testimony; it’s not credible.  Various 
religious doctrines abhor the idea and practice of gossip.  An old  Turkish proverb 
says, “He who gossips to you will gossip of you.” From the Babylonian  Talmud, 
which calls gossip the three-pronged tongue, destroying the one talking, the 
one listening, and the one being spoken of, to the Upanishads, to the Bible, we 
can conclude that no good fruit is born from gossip. Let’s tend our gardens and 
check our motives when we have the urge to gossip. Surely we can find more 
noble pursuits than the self-aggrandizement we have come to know as gossip. 
 GLAMOUR, THAT CERTAIN SOMETHING  
 ROBIN  GIVHAN 
 Robin Givhan is a graduate of Princeton and holds a master’s degree in journalism from 
the University of Michigan. When she was fashion editor at the Washington Post, she won 
a Pulitzer Prize (2006) for criticism, the first time the prize has been awarded to a fashion 
writer. In 2010 she moved to The Daily Beast and Newsweek, but was laid off by these 
publications in December 2012, when Newsweek gave up print journalism. Givhan’s cover-
age of the world of fashion frequently becomes a study of culture, as we see in the follow-
ing column, published February 17, 2008, shortly before the 2008 Academy Awards show.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS What is the difference between glamour and good 
looks? What famous people do you consider glamorous? 
 Glamour isn’t a cultural necessity, but its usefulness can’t be denied. 
 It makes us feel good about ourselves by making us believe that life can 
sparkle. Glamorous people make difficult tasks seem effortless. They appear 
to cruise through life shaking off defeat with a wry comment. No matter how 
hard they work for what they have, the exertion never seems to show. Yet the 
cool confidence they project doesn’t ever drift into lassitude. 
 Hollywood attracts people of glamour—as well as the misguided souls 
who confuse it with mere good looks—because that is where it is richly 
rewarded. And the Academy Awards are the epicenter of it all. We’ll watch the 
Oscars next Sunday to delight in the stars who glide down the red carpet like 
graceful swans or who swagger onto the stage looking dashing. 
1
2
3
 Conclusion states 
view that gossip is 
to be avoided—the 
writer’s thesis. 

190 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 Of course, we’ll watch for other reasons, too. There’s always the possibility 
of a supremely absurd fashion moment or an acceptance speech during which 
the winner becomes righteously indignant—Michael Moore–style—or practi-
cally hyperventilates like Halle Berry. While Moore, a nominee, is not glamor-
ous, he is compelling for the sheer possibility of an impolitic eruption. Berry 
isn’t glamorous either, mostly because nothing ever looks effortless with her. 
(She has even expressed anguish over her beauty.) Mostly, though, we will 
watch in search of “old Hollywood” glamour. But really, is there any other 
kind? 
 Among the actors who consistently manage to evoke memories of Cary 
Grant or Grace Kelly are George Clooney and Cate Blanchett. There’s some-
thing about the way they present themselves that speaks to discretion, sex 
appeal and glossy perfection. As an audience, we think we know these actors 
but we really don’t. We know their image, the carefully crafted personality 
they display to the public. If they have been to rehab, they went quietly and 
without a crowd of paparazzi. 
 Their lives appear to be an endless stream of lovely adventures, minor 
mishaps that turn into cocktail party banter, charming romances and just 
enough gravitas to keep them from floating away on a cloud of frivolity. 
 These actors take pretty pictures because they seem supremely comfort-
able with themselves. It’s not simply their beauty we’re seeing; it’s also an 
unapologetic pleasure in being who they are. 
 Oscar nominee Tilda Swinton has the kind of striking, handsome looks of 
Anjelica Huston or Lauren Bacall. But Swinton doesn’t register as glamorous as 
much as cool. She looks a bit androgynous and favors the eccentric Dutch 
design team of Viktor & Rolf, which once populated an entire runway show 
with Swinton doppelgangers. Coolness suggests that the person knows 
4
5
6
7
8

 
CHAPTER 7 Definition Arguments 
191
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
How does glamour make us feel? 
 2. 
Where do we usually find glamour? Why? 
 3. 
Which celebrities today best capture Hollywood’s glamour of the past? 
 4. 
What traits do the glamorous have? 
 5. 
Explain the differences among glamour, charisma, and cool. 
something or understands something that average folks haven’t yet figured 
out. Cool people are a step ahead. Glamour is firmly situated in the now. 
 There’s nothing particularly intimate about glamour, which is why it 
plays so well on the big screen and why film actors who embody it can 
sometimes be disappointing in real life. Glamour isn’t like charisma, which 
is typically described as the ability to make others feel important or 
special. 
 Neither quality has much to do with a person’s inner life. Glamour is no 
measure of soulfulness or integrity. It isn’t about truth, but perception. 
 Redbook traffics in truth.  Vogue promotes glamour. 
 Although Hollywood is the natural habitat for the glitterati, they exist 
everywhere: politics, government, sports, business. Tiger Woods brought 
glamour to golf with his easy confidence and his ability to make the profes-
sional game look as simple as putt-putt. Donald Trump aspires to glamour 
with his flashy properties and their gold-drenched decor. But his efforts are 
apparent, his yearning obvious. The designer Tom Ford is glamorous. The man 
never rumples. 
 In the political world, Barack Obama has glamour. Bill Clinton has cha-
risma. And Hillary Clinton has an admirable work ethic. Bill Clinton could con-
vince voters that he felt their pain. Hillary Clinton reminds them detail by detail 
of how she would alleviate it. Glamour has a way of temporarily making you 
forget about the pain and just think the world is a beautiful place of endless 
possibilities. 
 Ronald Reagan evoked glamour. His white-tie inaugural balls and 
 morning-coat swearing-in were purposefully organized to bring a twinkle back 
to the American psyche. George W. Bush has charisma, a.k.a. the likability fac-
tor, although it does not appear to be helping his approval rating now. Still, he 
remains a back-slapper and bestower of nicknames. 
 Charisma is personal. Glamour taps into a universal fairy tale. It’s uncon-
cerned with the nitty-gritty. Instead, it celebrates the surface gloss. And some-
times, a little shimmer can be hard to resist.  
Source: Washington Post, February 17, 2008. © 2008 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used 
by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
www.washingtonpost.com
9
10
11
12
13
14

192 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  6. Examine the opening three sentences in paragraph 12. What makes them 
effective? 
  7. What are the specific strategies Givhan uses to develop her definition? 
  8. What is Givhan’s claim? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  9. Givhan asserts that glamour is in the present but “cool people are a step ahead.” 
Does this contrast make sense to you? Why or why not?  
 10. Do we ever really know the glamorous, charismatic, and cool celebrities? 
Explain.  
 11. Some young people aspire to be cool. How would you advise them? What 
should one do, how should one behave, to be cool? Is “cool” a trait that we can 
“put on” if we wish? Why or why not?  

193
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
In the student essay, Laura Mullins defines the term  gossip. Select one of the follow-
ing words to define and prepare your own extended definition argument, using at 
least three of the strategies for defining described in this chapter. For each word in 
the list, you see a companion word in parentheses. Use that companion word as a 
word that you contrast with the word you are defining. (For example, how does 
gossip differ from conversation?) The idea of an extended definition argument is to 
make fine distinctions among words similar in meaning.
 courtesy (manners)  
 hero (star) 
 wisdom (knowledge)  
 community (subdivision) 
 patriotism (chauvinism)  
 freedom (liberty) 
 2. 
Select a word you believe is currently misused. It can be misused because it has 
taken on a negative (or positive) connotation that it did not originally have, or 
because it has changed meaning and lost something in the process. A few sugges-
tions include  awful, fabulous, exceptional (in education),  propaganda. 
 3. 
Define a term that is currently used to label people with particular traits or values. 
Possibilities include  nerd, yuppie, freak, jock, redneck, bimbo, wimp. Reflect, before 
selecting this topic, on why you want to explain the meaning of the word you have 
chosen. One purpose might be to explain the word to someone from another cul-
ture. Another might be to defend people who are labeled negatively by a term; that 
is, you want to show why the term should not have a negative connotation.  

 READ: What is the situation? Where are we? 
 REASON: Look at the faces; what do you infer to be the attitude of the 
participants? 
 REASON/WRITE: What is the photo’s message? 
 Evaluation Arguments 
 CHAPTER 8 

195
 “I
 really love Ben’s Camaro; it’s so much more fun to go out with him than 
to go with Gregory in his Volvo wagon,” you confide to a friend. “On the 
other hand, Ben always wants to see the latest horror movie—and boy are they 
horrid! I’d much rather watch one of our teams play—whatever the season; 
sports events are so much more fun than horror movies!” 
 “Well, at least you and Ben agree not to listen to Amy Winehouse CDs. 
Her life was so messed up; why would anyone admire her music?” your friend 
responds. 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF EVALUATION 
ARGUMENTS 
 Evaluations. How easy they are to make. We do it all the time. So, surely an 
evaluation argument should be easy to prepare. Not so fast. Remember at the 
beginning of the discussion of argument in Chapter 3, we observed that we do 
not argue about personal preferences because there is no basis for building an 
argument. If you don’t like horror movies, then don’t go to them—even with 
Ben! However, once you assert that sporting events are more fun than horror 
movies, you have shifted from personal preference to the world of argument, 
the world in which others will judge the effectiveness of your logic and evi-
dence. On what basis can you argue that one activity is more fun than the other? 
And, always more fun? And, more fun for everyone? You probably need to 
qualify this claim and then you will need to establish the criteria by which you 
have made your evaluation. Although you might find it easier to defend your 
preference for a car for dates, you, at least in theory, can build a convincing 
argument for a qualified claim in support of sporting events. Your friend, 
though, will have great difficulty justifying her evaluation of Winehouse based 
on Winehouse’s lifestyle. An evaluation of her music needs to be defended 
based on criteria about music—unless she wants to try to argue that any music 
made by people with unconventional or immoral lifestyles will be bad music, a 
tough claim to defend. 
 In a column for  Time magazine, Charles Krauthammer argues that Tiger 
Woods is the greatest golfer ever to play the game. He writes: 
 How do we know? You could try Method 1: Compare him directly with the 
former greatest golfer, Jack Nicklaus. . . . But that is not the right way to 
 compare. You cannot compare greatness directly across the ages. There are so 
many intervening variables: changes in technology, training, terrain, 
 equipment, often rules and customs. 
 How then do we determine who is greatest? Method 2: The Gap. Situate 
each among his contemporaries. Who towers? . . . Nicklaus was great, but he 
ran with peers: Palmer, Player, Watson. Tiger has none.  
 Krauthammer continues with statistics to demonstrate that there is no one play-
ing now with Tiger who comes close in number of tournaments won, number 
of majors won, and number of strokes better in these events than the next 
player. He then applies the Gap Method to Babe Ruth in baseball, Wayne 

196 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
Gretzky in hockey, and Bobby Fischer in chess to demonstrate that it works to 
reveal true greatness in competition among the world’s best. 
 Krauthammer clearly explains his Gap Method, his basic criterion for judg-
ing greatness. Then he provides the data to support his conclusions about who 
are or were the greatest in various fields. His is a convincing evaluation 
argument. 
 These examples suggest some key points about evaluation arguments:
 •  Evaluation arguments are arguments, not statements of personal prefer-
ences. As such, they need a precise, qualified claim and reasons and evi-
dence for support, just like any argument. 
 •  Evaluation arguments are about “good” and “bad,” “best” and “worst. ” 
These arguments are not about what we should or should not do or why 
a situation is the way it is. The debate is not whether one should select a 
boyfriend based on the kind of car he drives or why horror movies have 
so much appeal for many viewers. The argument is that sports events are 
great entertainment, or better entertainment than horror movies. 
 •  Evaluation arguments need to be developed based on a clear statement of 
the criteria for evaluating.  Winehouse won Grammys for her music—why? 
By what standards of excellence do we judge a singer? A voice with great 
musicality and nuance? The selection of songs with meaningful lyrics? The 
ability to engage listeners—the way the singer can “sell” a song? The number 
of recordings sold and awards won? All of these criteria? Something else?  
 •  Evaluation arguments, to be successful, may need to defend the criteria, 
not just to list them and show that the subject of the argument meets 
those criteria. Suppose you want to argue that sporting events are great 
entertainment because it is exciting to cheer with others, you get to see 
thrilling action, and it is good, clean fun. Are sports always “good, clean 
fun”? Some of the fighting in hockey matches is quite vicious. Some football 
players get away with dirty hits. Krauthammer argues that his Gap Method 
provides the better criterion for judging greatness and then shows why it is 
the better method. Do not underestimate the challenge of writing an effec-
tive evaluation argument.  
 TYPES OF EVALUATION ARGUMENTS 
 The examples we have examined above are about people or items or experi-
ences in our lives. Tiger Woods is the greatest golfer ever, based on the Gap 
Method strategy. Sports events are more fun to attend than horror movies. We 
can (and do!) evaluate just about everything we know or do or buy. This is one 
type of evaluation argument. In this category we would place the review—of a 
book, movie, concert, or something similar. 
 A second type of evaluation is a response to another person’s argument. 
We are not explaining why the car or college, sitcom or singer, is good or great 
or the best. Instead, we are responding to one specific argument we have read 
(or listened to) that we think is flawed, flawed in many ways or in one 

 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluation Arguments 
197
significant way that essentially destroys the argument. This type of evaluation 
argument is called a rebuttal or refutation argument. 
 Sometimes our response to what we consider a really bad argument is to go 
beyond the rebuttal and write a counterargument. Rather than writing about 
the limitations and flaws in our friend’s evaluation of Winehouse as a singer 
not to be listened to, we decide to write our own argument evaluating 
Winehouse’s strengths as a contemporary singer. This counterargument is best 
described as an evaluation argument, not a refutation. Similarly, we can dis-
agree with someone’s argument defending restrictions placed by colleges on 
student file sharing. But, if we decide to write a counterargument defending 
students’ rights to share music files, we have moved from rebuttal to our own 
position paper, our own argument based on values. Counterarguments are best 
seen as belonging to one of the other genres of argument discussed in this sec-
tion of the text. 
 The basics of good argument apply to all arguments: a clear statement of 
claim, qualiﬁ ed as appropriate, a clear explanation of reasons and evidence, 
and enough relevant evidence to support the claim. When reading evalua-
tion arguments, use the following points as additional guides:
 •  What is the writer’s claim? Is it clear, qualified if necessary, and focused 
on the task of evaluating?  
 •  Has the writer considered audience as a basis for both claim and cri-
teria? Your college may be a good choice for you, given your criteria for 
choosing, but is it a good choice for others? Qualifications need to be 
based on audience: College A is a great school for young people in need 
of B and with X amount of funds. Or:  The Da Vinci Code is an entertaining 
read for those with some understanding of art history and knowledge of 
the Roman Catholic Church.  
 •  What criteria are presented as the basis for evaluation?  Are they 
clearly stated? Do they seem reasonable for the topic of evaluation? Are 
they defended if necessary?  
 •  What evidence and/or reasons are presented to show that the item 
under evaluation meets the criteria?  Specifics are important in any eval-
uation argument.  
 •  What are the implications of the claim?  If we accept the Gap Method 
for determining greatness, does that mean that we can never compare 
stars from different generations? If we agree with the rebuttal argument, 
does that mean that there are no good arguments for the claim in the 
essay being refuted?  
 •  Is the argument convincing?  Does the evidence lead you to agree with 
the author? Do you want to buy that car, listen to that CD, read that book, 
see that film as a result of reading the argument?  
GUIDELINES for  Analyzing an 
Evaluation 
Argument 

198 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 PREPARING AN EVALUATION ARGUMENT 
 In addition to the guidelines for writing arguments presented in Chapter 4, you 
can use the following advice specific to writing evaluation arguments. 
 Planning 
 1. 
 Think: Why do you want to write this evaluation? Does it matter, or are 
you just sharing your personal preferences? Select a topic that requires you 
to think deeply about how we judge that item (college, book, CD, etc.). 
 2. 
 Think about audience: Try to imagine writing your evaluation for your 
classmates, not just your instructor. Instead of thinking about an assign-
ment to be graded, think about why we turn to reviews, for example. What 
do readers want to learn? They want to know if they should see that film. 
Your job is to help them make that decision. 
 3. 
 Think: What are my criteria for evaluation? And, how will I measure my 
topic against them to show that my evaluation is justified? You really must 
know how you would determine a great singer or a great tennis player 
before you write, or you risk writing only about personal preferences.  
 4. 
 Establish a general plan: If you are writing a review, be sure to study the 
work carefully. Can you write a complete and accurate summary? (It is easier 
to review a CD than a live concert because you can replay the CD to get all the 
details straight.) You will need to balance summary, analysis, and evaluation 
in a review—and be sure that you do not mostly write summary or reveal the 
ending of a novel or film! If you are evaluating a college or a car, think about 
how to order your criteria. Do you want to list all criteria first and then show 
how your item connects to them, point by point? Or, do you want the criteria 
to unfold as you make specific points about your item? 
 To analyze a film, consider the plot, the characters, the actors who play 
the lead characters, any special effects used, and the author’s (and director’s) 
“take” on the story. If the “idea” of the film is insignificant, then it is hard to 
argue that it is a great film. Analysis of style in a book needs to be connected 
to that book’s intended audience. Style and presentation will vary depending 
on the knowledge and sophistication of the intended reader. If, for example, 
you have difficulty understanding a book aimed at a general audience, then it 
is fair to say that the author has not successfully reached his or her audience. 
But if you are reviewing a book intended for specialists, then your difficulties 
in reading are not relevant to a fair evaluation of that book. You can point out, 
though, that the book is tough going for a nonspecialist—just as you could 
point out that a movie sequel is hard to follow for those who did not see the 
original film.  
 Drafting 
 1. 
Begin with an opening paragraph or two that engages your reader while 
introducing your subject and purpose in writing. Is there a specific  occasion 
that has led to your writing? And what, exactly, are you evaluating? 

 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluation Arguments 
199
 2. 
Either introduce your criteria next and then show how your item for evalu-
ation meets the criteria, point by point, through the rest of the essay; or, 
decide on an order for introducing your criteria and use that order as your 
structure. Put the most important criterion either first or last. It can be effec-
tive to put the most controversial point last.  
 3. 
If you are writing a review, then the basic criteria are already established. 
You will need some combination of summary, analysis, and evaluation. 
Begin with an attention-getter that includes a broad statement of the work’s 
subject or subject category: This is a  biography of Benjamin Franklin; this is 
a  female action-hero film. An evaluation in general terms can complete the 
opening paragraph. For example:
 Dr. Cynthia Pemberton’s new book,  More Than a Game: One Woman’s Fight for 
Gender Equity in Sport, is destined to become a classic in sport sociology, sport 
history, and women’s studies.  
 4. The rest of the review will then combine summary details, analysis of 
presentation, and a final assessment of the work in the concluding para-
graph. From the same review, after learning specifics of content, we 
read:
 The target audience for this book includes educators, coaches, athletes, and 
administrators at any level. Additionally, anyone interested in studying 
women’s sports or pursuing a Title IX case will love this book.  
   5. Consider discussing the implications of your evaluation. Why is this 
important? Obviously for a book or film or art show, for example, we want 
to know if this is a “must read” or “must see.” For other evaluation argu-
ments, let us know why we should care about your subject and your per-
spective. Charles Krauthammer does not just argue that Tiger Woods is the 
greatest golfer ever; he also argues that his Gap Method is the best strategy 
for evaluation. That’s why he shows that it works not just to put Woods 
ahead of Nicklaus but also to put other greats in their exalted place in 
other sports.  
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION 
 
 u Do I have a good understanding of my purpose? Have I made my evalua-
tion purpose clear to readers? 
 u Have I clearly stated my claim? 
 u Have I clearly stated my criteria for evaluation—or selected the appropriate 
elements of content, style, presentation, and theme for a review? 
 u Have I organized my argument into a coherent structure by some pattern 
that readers can recognize and follow? 
 u  Have I provided good evidence and logic to support my evaluation? 
 u Have I used the basic checklist for revision in Chapter 4? (See p. 111.) 

200 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 STUDENT REVIEW 
 WINCHESTER’S ALCHEMY:  TWO MEN AND A BOOK 
 Ian  Habel 
 One can hardly imagine a tale promising less excitement for a general 
audience than that of the making of the  Oxford English Dictionary  ( OED ). 
The sensationalism of murder and insanity would have to labor intensely 
against the burden of lexicography in crafting a genuine page-turner on the 
subject.  Much to my surprise,  Simon Winchester,  in writing  The Professor and 
the Madman:  A Tale of Murder,  Insanity,  and the Making of the Oxford English 
Dictionary,  has succeeded in producing so compelling a story that I was forced 
to devour it completely in a single afternoon,  an unprecedented personal feat. 
 The Professor and the Madman  is the story of the lives of two apparently 
very different men and the work that brought them together.   Winchester 
begins by recounting the circumstances that led to the incarceration of 
Dr.   W. C. Minor,  a well-born,  well-educated,  and quite insane American 
ex-Army surgeon.  Minor,  in a fit of delusion,  had murdered a man whom he 
believed to have crept into his Lambeth hotel room to torment him in his 
sleep.  The doctor is tried and whisked off to the Asylum for the Criminally 
Insane,  Broadmoor. 
 The author then introduces readers to the other two main characters: 
the  OED itself and its editor James Murray,  a lowborn,  self-educated Scottish 
philologist.  The shift in narrative focus is used to dramatic effect.  The natural 
assumption on the part of the reader that these two seemingly unrelated plots 
must eventually meet urges us to read on in anticipation of that connection. 
As each chapter switches focus from one man to the other,  it is introduced 
by a citation from the  OED, reminding us that the story is ultimately about the 
dictionary.   The citations also serve to foreshadow and provide a theme for 
the chapter.  For example,  the  OED  definition of  murder  heads the first chapter, 
relating to the details of Minor’s crime. 

 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluation Arguments 
201
 Winchester acquaints us with the shortcomings of seventeenth- and 
eighteenth-century attempts at compiling a comprehensive dictionary of 
the English language. He takes us inside the meetings of the Philological 
Society, whose members proposed the compilation of the dictionary to end 
all dictionaries.  The  OED  was to include examples of usage illustrating every 
shade of meaning for every word in the English language. Such a mammoth 
feat would require enlisting thousands of volunteer readers to comb the 
corpus of English literature in search of illustrative quotations to be submitted 
on myriad slips of paper.  These slips of paper on each word would in turn be 
studied by a small army of editors preparing the definitions. 
 It is not surprising that our Dr.  Minor,  comfortably tucked away at 
Broadmoor,  possessing both a large library and seemingly infinite free time,  should 
become one of those volunteer readers.  After all,  we are still rightfully assuming 
some connection of the book’s two plot lines.  Yet what sets Dr.  Minor apart from 
his fellow volunteers (aside from the details of his incarceration) is the remarkable 
efficiency with which he approached his task.  Not content merely to fill out slips 
of paper for submission, Minor methodically indexed every possibly useful mention 
of any word appearing in his personal library.  He then asked to be kept informed 
of the progress of the work,  submitting quotations that would be immediately 
useful to editors.  In this way he managed to  “escape” his cell and plunge himself 
into the work of contemporaries, to become a part of a major event of his time. 
 Minor’s work proved invaluable to the  OED ’s staff of editors, led by James 
Murray.   With the two plot lines now intertwined, readers face such questions as 
“Will they find out that Minor is insane?”  “Will Minor and Murray ever meet?” 
and  “How long will they take to complete the dictionary?”  The author builds 
suspense regarding a meeting of  Minor and Murray by providing a false account 
of their first encounter,   as reported by the  American press,  only to shatter us 
with the fact that this romantic version did not happen. I’ll let Winchester give 
you the answers to these questions,  while working his magic on you, drawing 
you into this fascinating tale of the making of the world’s most famous dictionary.  

202 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 EVALUATING AN ARGUMENT: THE REBUTTAL 
OR REFUTATION ESSAY 
 When your primary purpose in writing is to challenge someone’s argument 
rather than to present your own argument, you are writing a  rebuttal or  refuta-
tion. A good refutation demonstrates, in an orderly and logical way, the weak-
nesses of logic or evidence in the argument. Study the following guidelines to 
prepare a good refutation essay and then study the sample refutation that fol-
lows. It has been annotated to show you how the author has structured his 
rebuttal. 
GUIDELINES for
 1.  Read accurately.  Make certain that you have understood your oppo-
nent’s argument. If you assume views not expressed by the writer and 
accuse the writer of holding those illogical views, you are guilty of the 
straw man fallacy, of attributing and then attacking a position that the 
person does not hold. Look up terms and references you do not know 
and examine the logic and evidence thoroughly.  
 2.  Pinpoint the weaknesses in the original argument. Analyze the argu-
ment to determine, specifically, what flaws the argument contains. If the 
argument contains logical fallacies, make a list of the ones you plan to 
discredit. Examine the evidence presented. Is it insufficient, unreliable, or 
irrelevant? Decide, before drafting your refutation, exactly what elements 
of the argument you intend to challenge.  
 3.  Write your claim. After analyzing the argument and deciding on the 
weaknesses to be challenged, write a claim that establishes that your dis-
agreement is with the writer’s logic, assumptions, or evidence, or a com-
bination of these.  
 4.  Draft your essay, using the following three-part organization: 
 a.  The opponent’s argument. Usually you should not assume that your 
reader has read or remembered the argument you are refuting. Thus 
at the beginning of your essay, you need to state, accurately and fairly, 
the main points of the argument to be refuted.  
 b.  Your claim. Next make clear the nature of your disagreement with the 
argument you are rebutting.  
 c.  Your refutation. The specifics of your rebuttal will depend on the 
nature of your disagreement. If you are challenging the writer’s evi-
dence, then you must present the evidence that will show why the 
evidence used is unreliable or misleading. If you are challenging 
assumptions, then you must explain why they do not hold up. If your 
claim is that the piece is filled with logical fallacies, then you must 
present and explain each fallacy.  
 Preparing a Refutation or Rebuttal Argument 

 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluation Arguments 
203
 MIND OVER MASS MEDIA   
 STEVEN  PINKER  
 A professor of psychology at Harvard University, Steven Pinker is the author of signifi-
cant articles and books on visual cognition and the psychology of language—his areas 
of research. These include  The Language Instinct (2007) and  How the Mind Works 
(2009).  Time magazine has listed Pinker as one of the “100 most influential people in 
the world.” His contribution to the ongoing debate over the impact of the Internet 
and social media was published on June 12, 2010.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Given Pinker’s title and the headnote information, what 
do you expect him to write about? Can you anticipate his position—or will you 
have to read to discover it? 
New forms of media have 
always caused moral panics: the 
printing press, newspapers, paper-
backs and television were all once 
denounced as threats to their con-
sumers’ brainpower and moral fiber.
So too with electronic technol-
ogies. PowerPoint, we’re told, is 
reducing discourse to bullet points. 
Search engines lower our intelli-
gence, encouraging us to skim on 
the surface of knowledge rather 
than dive to its depths. Twitter is 
shrinking our attention spans.
 But such panics often fail 
basic reality checks. When comic 
books were accused of turning 
juveniles into delinquents in the 
1950s, crime was falling to record 
lows, just as the denunciations of 
video games in the 1990s coin-
cided with the great American 
crime decline. The decades of 
television, transistor radios and rock videos were also decades in which I.Q. 
scores rose continuously. 
 For a reality check today, take the state of science, which demands high 
levels of brainwork and is measured by clear benchmarks of discovery. These 
days scientists are never far from their email, rarely touch paper and cannot 
lecture without PowerPoint. If electronic media were hazardous to intelligence, 
the quality of science would be plummeting. Yet discoveries are multiplying 
like fruit flies, and progress is dizzying. Other activities in the life of the mind, 
like philosophy, history and cultural criticism, are likewise flourishing, as anyone 
who has lost a morning of work to the Website  Arts & Letters Daily can attest. 
Critics of new media sometimes use science itself to press their case, cit-
ing research that shows how “experience can change the brain.” But cognitive 
1
2
3
4
5
Attention-getting 
opening.
1st point of 
refutation: Real-
ity check, past 
and present.

204 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
neuroscientists roll their eyes at such talk. Yes, every time we learn a factor skill 
the wiring of the brain changes; it’s not as if the information is stored in the 
pancreas. But the existence of neural plasticity does not mean the brain is a 
blob of clay pounded into shape by experience.
 Experience does not revamp the basic information-processing capacities 
of the brain. Speed-reading programs have long claimed to do just that, but 
the verdict was rendered by Wood Allen after he read  War and Peace in one 
sitting: “It was about Russia.” Genuine multitasking, too, has been exposed as 
a myth, not just by laboratory studies but by the familiar sight of an S.U.V. 
undulating between lanes as the driver cuts a deal on his cellphone. 
 Moreover, as the psychologists Christopher Chabris and Daniel Simons show 
in their new book  The Invisible Gorilla: And Other Ways Our Intuitions Deceive 
Us, the effects of experience are highly specific to the experiences themselves. If 
you train people to do one thing (recognize shapes, solve math puzzles, find hid-
den words), they get better at doing that thing, but almost nothing else. Music 
doesn’t make you better at math, conjugating Latin doesn’t make you more logi-
cal, brain-training games don’t make you smarter. Accomplished people don’t 
bulk up their brains with intellectual calisthenics; they immerse themselves in 
their fields. Novelists read lots of novels, scientists read lots of science. 
 The effects of consuming electronic media are also likely to be far more 
limited than the panic implies. Media critics write as if the brain takes on the 
qualities of whatever it consumes, the informational equivalent of “you are 
what you eat.” As with primitive peoples who believe that eating fierce ani-
mals will make them fierce, they assume that watching quick cuts in rock vid-
eos turns your mental life into quick cuts or that reading bullet points and 
Twitter turns your thoughts into bullet points and Twitter postings. 
 Yes, the constant arrival of information packets can be distracting or addic-
tive, especially to people with attention deficit disorder. But distraction is not 
a new phenomenon. The solution is not to bemoan technology but to develop 
strategies of self-control, as we do with every other temptation in life. Turn off 
email or Twitter when you work, put away your BlackBerry at dinner time, ask 
your spouse to call you to bed at a designated hour.
 And to encourage intellectual depth, don’t rail at PowerPoint or Google. It’s 
not as if habits of deep reflection, thorough research and rigorous reasoning ever 
came naturally to people. They must be acquired in special institutions, which we 
call universities, and maintained with constant upkeep, which we call analysis, criti-
cism and debate. They are not granted by propping a heavy encyclopedia on 
your lap, nor are they taken away by efficient access to information on the Internet. 
 The new media have caught on for a reason. Knowledge is increasing 
exponentially; human brainpower and waking hours are not. Fortunately, the 
Internet and information technologies are helping us manage, search and 
retrieve our collective intellectual output at different scales, from Twitter and 
previews to e-books and online encyclopedias. Far from making us stupid, 
these technologies are the only things that will keep us smart.  
Source: New York Times/International Herald Tribune, June 12, 2010. Reprinted by permission of the 
author.
6
7
8
9
10
11
3rd point: 
Control use 
and understand 
what makes us 
smart.
2nd point: How 
the brain really 
works.

 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluation Arguments 
205
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What is Pinker’s subject? (Be precise.) 
 2. 
What happened to the crime rate during the 1990s? 
 3. 
What happened during the years of heavy TV use and the publication of rock videos?  
 4. 
What changes occur in the brain when we learn new information? What does 
not change?  
 5. 
What do people do to be successful in their fields? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. 
What is Pinker’s response to those who complain about the new electronic 
technologies? What is his claim?  
 7. 
What kinds of evidence does Pinker provide? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Pinker asserts that speed reading and multitasking have been shown to be 
myths. Is this idea new to you? Are you surprised? Do you believe that you can 
multitask successfully? If so, how would you seek to refute Pinker? 
 9. 
Is the author convincing in his refutation of those who argue that electronic 
technologies will make us stupid? If so, why? If not, why not?  
 CHRISTMAS-TREE TOTALITARIANS   
 THOMAS  SOWELL  
 A former professor of economics with a PhD from the University of Chicago, Thomas 
Sowell is currently a Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. He 
is the author of numerous books and articles, including  Intellectuals and Society (2009). 
The following column was posted December 25, 2012, on the  National Review Online. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Does the title give you any clue as to the subject of 
Sowell’s essay—beyond connecting it to its publication date? What might be his 
general subject or approach? 
 When I was growing up, an older member of the family used to say, “What 
you don’t know would make a big book.” Now that I am an older member of the 
family, I would say to anyone, “What you don’t know would fill more books than 
the  Encyclopaedia Britannica.” At least half of society’s trouble come from know-
it-alls, in a world where nobody knows even 10 percent of it all. 
 Some people seem to think that, if life is not fair, then the answer is to turn 
more of the nation’s resources over to politicians—who will, of course, then spend 
these resources in ways that increase the politicians’ chance of getting reelected. 
 The annual outbursts of intolerance toward any display of traditional Christmas 
scenes, or even daring to call a Christmas tree by its name, show that today’s liber-
als are by no means liberal. Behind the mist of their lofty words, the totalitarian 
mindset shows through. 
1
2
3
 FOR ANALYSIS AND DEBATE 

206 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 If you don’t want to have a gun 
in your home or in your school, 
that’s your choice. But don’t be 
such a damn fool as to advertise to 
the whole world that you are in “a 
gun-free environment” where you 
are a helpless target for any homi-
cidal fiend who is armed. Is it worth 
a human life to be a politically cor-
rect moral exhibitionist? 
 The more I study the history of 
intellectuals, the more they seem 
like a wrecking crew, dismantling 
civilization bit by bit—replacing 
what works with what sounds good. 
 Some people are wondering 
what takes so long for the negotia-
tions about the “fiscal cliff.” Maybe 
both sides are waiting for supplies. 
Democrats may be waiting for more 
cans to kick down the road. 
Republicans may be waiting for more 
white flags to hold up in surrender. 
 If I were rich, I would have a plaque made up, and sent to every judge in 
America, bearing a statement made by Adam Smith more than two-and-a-half 
centuries ago: “Mercy to the guilty is cruelty to the innocent.” 
 If someone wrote a novel about a man who was raised from childhood to 
resent the successful and despise the basic values of America—and who then went 
on to become president of the United States—that novel would be considered too 
unbelievable, even for a work of fiction. Yet that is what has happened in real life. 
 Many people say, “War should be a last resort.” Of course it should be a 
last resort. So should heart surgery, divorce, and many other things. But that 
does not mean that we should just continue to hope against hope indefinitely 
that things will work out, somehow, until catastrophe suddenly overtakes us. 
 Everybody is talking about how we are going to pay for the huge national 
debt, but nobody seems to be talking about the runaway spending that cre-
ated that record-breaking debt. In other words, the big spenders get political 
benefits from handing out goodies, while those who resist giving them more 
money to spend will be blamed for sending the country off the “fiscal cliff.” 
 When Barack Obama refused to agree to a requested meeting with Israeli 
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu—the leader of a country publically and 
repeatedly threatened with annihilation by Iran’s leaders, as the Iranians move 
toward creating nuclear bombs—I thought of a line from the old movie classic 
 Citizen Kane: “Charlie wasn’t cruel. He just did cruel things.” 
 There must be something liberating about ignorance. Back when most 
members of Congress had served in the military, there was a reluctance of 
politicians to try to tell military leaders how to run the military services. But, 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Thomas Sowell

 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluation Arguments 
207
now that few members of Congress have 
ever served in the military, they are ready 
to impose all sorts of fashionable notions 
on the military. 
 After watching a documentary about 
the tragic story of Jonestown, I was 
struck by the utterly unthinking way that 
so many people put themselves com-
pletely at the mercy of a glib and warped 
man, who led them to degradation and 
destruction. And I could not help think-
ing of the parallel with the way we put 
a glib and warped man in the White 
House. 
 There are people calling for the ban-
ning of assault weapons who could not 
define an “assault weapon” if their lives 
depended on it. Yet the ignorant expect 
others to take them seriously.  
Source: National Review Online, December 25, 2012. Reprinted by permission of Thomas Sowell and 
Creators Syndicate, Inc. © 2012 Creators Syndicate, Inc.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
Who, in Sowell’s view, are totalitarians? 
 2. 
Who are “politically correct moral exhibitionist[s]”? 
 3. 
What action leads the author to write that Obama does “cruel things”? What 
else does Sowell call Obama?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
Sowell writes about Christmas trees, the fiscal cliff, Obama, guns, and the 
national debt; how do these topics connect to give Sowell his general subject?  
 5. 
What, then, is the author’s claim? Do you see a general theme that unites the 
many issues Sowell includes?  
 6. 
How does the author develop and support his claim? 
 7. 
Examine Sowell’s style and tone. How would you characterize his tone? Is his 
approach likely to be effective for his primary audience? Explain.  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Do you find any logical fallacies in Sowell’s argument? If so, how would you 
challenge them?  
 9. 
Has Sowell supported his general claim and specific generalizations to your 
satisfaction? Why or why not?
13
14

208
   SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
Think about sports stars you know. Write an argument defending one player as the 
best in his or her field of play. Think about whether you want to use Krauthammer’s 
“Method 1” or “Method 2” or your own method for your criteria. (Remember that 
you can qualify your argument; you could write about the best college football 
player this year, for example.)  
 2. 
If you like music, think about what you might evaluate from this field. Who is the 
best rock band? Hip-hop artist? Country-western singer? And so forth. Be sure to 
make your criteria for evaluation clear. 
 3. 
You have had many instructors—and much instruction—in the last 12 1  years. Is 
there one teacher who is/was the best? If so, why? Is there a teaching method that 
stands out in your memory for the excellence of its approach? Find an evaluation 
topic from your educational experiences.  
 4. 
Select an editorial, op-ed column, letter to the editor, or one of the essays in this text 
as an argument with which you disagree. Prepare a refutation of the work’s logic or 
evidence or both. Follow the guidelines for writing a refutation or rebuttal in this 
chapter. 
 5. 
What is your favorite book? Movie? Television show? Why is it your favorite? Does 
it warrant an argument that it is really good, maybe even the best, in some way or 
in some category (sitcoms, for example)? Write a review, following the guidelines 
for this type of evaluation argument given in this chapter. 

 READ: Who are the speakers? What is the situation? 
 REASON: What is the point of the cartoon? What does Dana Summers, the 
cartoonist, want readers to think about? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE: Why does this cartoon make a good opening for a 
chapter on arguments based on values? 
 The Position Paper: 
Claims of Values  
 CHAPTER 9 
Dana Summers. © Tribune Media Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
Reprinted with permission.

210
 A
 s we established in Chapter 4, all arguments involve values. Evaluation 
arguments require judgment—thoughtful judgment, one hopes, based on 
criteria—but judgment nonetheless. If you believe that no one should spend 
more than $25,000 for a car, then you will not appreciate the qualities that 
attract some people to Mercedes. When one argues that government tax rates 
should go up as income goes up, it is because one believes that it is  right for 
government to redistribute income to some degree: The rich pay more in taxes, 
the poor get more in services. When countries ban the importing of ivory, they 
do so because they believe it is  wrong to destroy the magnificent elephant just 
so humans can use their ivory tusks for decorative items. (Observe that the 
word  magnificent expresses a value.) 
 Some arguments, though, are less about judging what is good or best, or 
less about how to solve specific problems, than they are about stating a position 
on an issue. An argument that defends a general position (segregated schools 
are wrong) may imply action that should result (schools should be integrated), 
but the focus of the argument is first to state and defend the position. It is help-
ful to view these arguments, based heavily on values and a logical sequencing 
of ideas with less emphasis on specifics, as a separate type—genre—of argu-
ment. These claims of values are often called position papers. 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POSITION PAPER 
 The position paper, or claim of values, may be the most difficult of arguments 
simply because it is often perceived to be the easiest. Let’s think about this kind 
of argument:
 • A claim based on values and argued more with logic than specifics is usu-
ally more general or abstract or philosophical than other types of argument. 
Greenpeace objects to commercial fishing that uses large nets that ensnare 
dolphins along with commercial fish such as tuna. Why? Because we ought 
not to destroy such beautiful and highly developed animals. Because we 
ought not to destroy more than we need, to waste part of nature because 
we are careless or in a hurry. For Greenpeace, the issue is about values—
though it may be about money for the commercial fishermen. 
 • The position paper makes a claim about what is right or wrong, good or 
bad, for us as individuals or as a society. Topics can range from capital pun-
ishment to pornography to reducing the amount of trash we toss. 
 • Although a claim based on values is often developed in large part by a logi-
cal sequencing of reasons, support of principles also depends on relevant 
facts. Remember the long list of specific abuses listed in the Declaration of 
Independence (see pp. 156–59). If Greenpeace can show that commercial 
fisheries can be successful using a different kind of net or staying away 
from areas heavily populated by dolphins, it can probably get more support 
for its general principles. 

 
CHAPTER 9  The Position Paper: Claims of Values  
211
 • A successful position paper requires more than a forceful statement of 
 personal beliefs. If we can reason logically from principles widely shared 
by our audience, we are more likely to be successful. If we are going to 
challenge their beliefs or values, then we need to consider the conciliatory 
approach as a strategy for getting them to at least listen to our argument.  
 PREPARING A POSITION PAPER 
 In addition to the guidelines for writing arguments presented in Chapter 4, you 
can use the following advice specific to writing position papers or claims of value.  
   Planning 
 1. 
 Think: What claim, exactly, do you want to support? Should you qualify 
your first attempt at a claim statement? 
 2. 
 Think: What grounds (evidence) do you have to support your claim? You 
may want to make a list of the reasons and facts you would consider using 
to defend your claim.  
 When reading position papers, what should you look for? Again, the basics 
of good argument apply here as well as with deﬁ nition arguments. To  analyze 
claims of values speciﬁ cally, use these questions as guides:
 •  What is the writer’s claim? Is it clear?  
 •  Is the claim qualified if necessary? Some claims of value are broad 
 philosophical assertions (“Capital punishment is immoral and bad public 
policy”). Others are qualified (“Capital punishment is acceptable only in 
crimes of treason”).  
 •  What facts are presented?  Are they credible? Are they relevant to the 
claim’s support?  
 •  What reasons are given in support of the claim?  What assumptions are 
necessary to tie reasons to claim? Make a list of reasons and assumptions 
and analyze the writer’s logic. Do you find any fallacies?  
 •  What are the implications of the claim?  For example, if you argue for 
the legalization of all recreational drugs, you eliminate all “drug 
 problems” by definition. But what new problems may be created by this 
approach? Consider more car accidents and reduced productivity for 
openers.  
 •  Is the argument convincing?  Does the evidence provide strong support 
for the claim? Are you prepared to agree with the writer, in whole or in 
part? 
GUIDELINES for  Analyzing a 
Claim of 
Value 

212 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 3. 
 Think: Study your list of possible grounds and identify the assumptions 
(warrants) and backing for your grounds. 
 4. 
 Think: Now make a list of the grounds most often used by those holding 
views that oppose your claim. This second list will help you prepare coun-
terarguments to possible rebuttals, but first it will help you test your com-
mitment to your position. If you find the opposition’s arguments persuasive 
and cannot think how you would rebut them, you may need to rethink 
your position. Ideally, your two lists will confirm your views but also 
increase your respect for opposing views. 
 5. 
 Consider: How can I use a conciliatory approach? With an emotion-laden 
or highly controversial issue, the conciliatory approach can be an effective 
strategy. Conciliatory arguments include
 • the use of nonthreatening language,  
 • the fair expression of opposing views, and 
 • a statement of the common ground shared by opposing sides.  
 You may want to use a conciliatory approach when (1) you know your 
views will be unpopular with at least some members of your audience; (2) the 
issue is highly emotional and has sides that are “entrenched” so that you are 
seeking some accommodations rather than dramatic changes of position; (3) 
you need to interact with members of your audience and want to keep a respect-
ful relationship going. The sample student essay on gun control (at the end of 
this chapter) illustrates a conciliatory approach. 
 Drafting 
 1. 
Begin with an opening paragraph or two that introduces your topic in an 
interesting way. Possibilities include a statement of the issue’s seriousness 
or reasons why the issue is currently being debated—or why we should go 
back to reexamine it. Some writers are spurred by a recent event that receives 
media coverage; recounting such an event can produce an effective open-
ing. You can also briefly summarize points of the opposition that you will 
challenge in supporting your claim. Many counterarguments are position 
papers.  
 2. 
Decide where to place your claim statement. Your best choices are either 
early in your essay or at the end of your essay, after you have made your 
case. The second approach can be an effective alternative to the more 
 common pattern of stating one’s claim early. 
 3. 
Organize evidence in an effective way. One plan is to move from the least 
important to the most important reasons, followed by rebuttals to potential 
counterarguments. Another possibility is to organize by the arguments of 
the opposition, explaining why each of their reasons fails to hold up. A 
third approach is to organize logically. That is, if some reasons build on the 
accepting of other reasons, you want to begin with the necessary underpin-
nings and then move forward from those. 

 
CHAPTER 9  The Position Paper: Claims of Values  
213
EXAMINING THE ISSUE OF GUN CONTROL
Chris Brown
The United States has a long history of compromise. Issues such as 
representation in government have been resolved because of compromise, 
forming some of the bases of American life. Americans, however, like to feel
Introduc-
tion  connects 
 ambivalence in 
American character 
to conflict over gun 
control.
 4. 
Maintain an appropriate level of seriousness for an argument of principle. 
Of course, word choice must be appropriate to a serious discussion, but in 
addition be sure to present reasons that are also appropriately serious. For 
example, if you are defending the claim that music CDs should not be sub-
ject to content labeling because such censorship is inconsistent with First 
Amendment rights, do not trivialize your argument by including the point 
that young people are tired of adults controlling their lives. (This is another 
issue for another paper.) 
 5. 
Provide a logical defense of or specifics in support of each reason. You have 
not finished your task by simply asserting several reasons for your claim. 
You also need to present facts or examples for or a logical explanation of 
each reason. For example, you have not defended your views on capital 
punishment by asserting that it is right or just to take the life of a murderer. 
Why is it right or just? Executing the murderer will not bring the victim 
back to life. Do two wrongs make a right? These are some of the thoughts 
your skeptical reader may have unless you explain and justify your reason-
ing.  Remember: Quoting another writer’s opinion on your topic does not 
provide proof for your reasons. It merely shows that someone else agrees 
with you. 
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION  
 u   Do I have a clear statement of my claim? Is it qualified, if appropriate? 
 u   Have I organized my argument, building the parts of my support into a 
clear and logical structure that readers can follow? 
 u   Have I avoided logical fallacies? 
 u   Have I found relevant facts and examples to support and develop my 
reasons? 
 u    Have I paid attention to appropriate word choice, including using a  conciliatory 
approach if that is a wise strategy?  
 u   Have I used the basic checklist for revision in Chapter 4 (see p. 111)? 
 STUDENT ESSAY 

214 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
that they are uncompromising, never willing to surrender an argument. This 
attitude has led to a number of issues in modern America that are unresolved, 
including the issue of gun control. Bickering over the issue has slowed 
progress toward legislation that will solve the serious problem of gun violence 
in America, while keeping recreational use of firearms available to responsible 
people. To resolve the conflict over guns, the arguments of both sides must be 
examined, with an eye to finding the flaws in both. Then perhaps we can reach 
some meaningful compromises.
Gun advocates have used many arguments for the continued availability 
of firearms to the public. The strongest of these defenses points to the many 
legitimate uses for guns. One use is protection against violence, a concern of 
some people in today’s society. There are many problems with the use of guns 
for protection, however, and these problems make the continued use of firearms 
for protection dangerous. One such problem is that gun owners are not always 
able to use guns responsibly. When placed in a situation in which personal injury 
or loss is imminent, people often do not think intelligently. Adrenaline surges 
through the body, and fear takes over much of the thinking process. This causes 
gun owners to use their weapons, firing at whatever threatens them. Injuries 
and deaths of innocent people, including family members of the gun owner, 
result. Removing guns from the house may be the best solution to these sad 
consequences.
Responding to this argument, gun advocates ask how they are to defend 
themselves without guns. But guns are needed for protection from other guns. 
If there are no guns, people need only to protect themselves from criminals 
using knives, baseball bats, and other weapons. Obviously the odds of surviving 
a knife attack are greater than the odds of surviving a gun attack. One reason 
is that a gun is an impersonal weapon. Firing at someone from 50 feet away 
requires much less commitment than charging someone with a knife and 
stabbing repeatedly. Also, bullet wounds are, generally, more severe than knife 
wounds. Guns are also more likely to be misused when a dark figure is in one’s 
house. To kill with the gun requires only to point and shoot; no recognition of
Student organizes 
by arguments for 
no gun control.
1. Guns for 
protection.

 
CHAPTER 9  The Position Paper: Claims of Values  
215
the figure is needed. To kill with a knife, by contrast, requires getting within arm’s 
reach of the figure, and knowing, for sure, the identity of your presumed opponent.
There are other uses of guns, including recreation. Hunting and target 
shooting are valid, responsible uses of guns. How do we keep guns available 
for recreation? The answer is in the form of gun clubs and hunting clubs. Many 
are already established; more can be constructed. These clubs can provide 
recreational use of guns for responsible people while keeping guns off the 
streets and out of the house.
The last argument widely used by gun advocates is the constitutional 
right to bear arms. The fallacies in this argument are that the Constitution 
was written in a vastly different time. This different time had different uses for 
guns, and a different type of gun. Firearms were defended in the Constitution 
because of their many valid uses and fewer problems. Guns were mostly 
muskets, guns that were not very accurate beyond close range. Also, guns 
took more than 30 seconds to load in the eighteenth century and could fire 
only one shot before reloading. These differences with today’s guns affect the 
relative safety of guns then and now. In addition, those who did not live in the 
city at the time used hunting for food as well as for recreation; hunting was a 
necessary component of life. That is not true today. Another use of guns in the 
eighteenth century was as protection from animals. Wild animals such as bears 
and cougars were much more common. Settlers, explorers, and hunters needed 
protection from these animals in ways not comparable with modern life.
Finally, Revolutionary America had no standing army. Defense of the nation 
and of one’s home from other nations relied on local militia. The right to bear 
arms granted in the Constitution was inspired by the need for national protection 
as well as by the other outdated needs previously discussed. Today America has 
a standing army with enough weaponry to adequately defend itself from outside 
aggressors. There is no need for every citizen to carry a musket, or an AK-47, for 
the protection of the nation. It would seem, then, that the Second Amendment 
does not fully apply to modern society. While it justifies gun ownership, it is open 
to restrictions and controls based on the realities of today’s world.
2. Recreational uses.
3. Second Amend-
ment rights.

216 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
To reach a compromise, we also have to examine the other side of the 
issue. Some gun-control advocates argue that all guns are unnecessary and 
should be outlawed. The problem with this argument is that guns will still be 
available to those who do not mind breaking the law. Until an economically 
sound and feasible way of controlling illegal guns in America is found, guns 
cannot be totally removed, no matter how much legislation is passed. This 
means that if guns are to be outlawed for uses other than recreational uses, 
a way must be found to combat the illegal gun trade that will evolve. Tough 
criminal laws and a large security force are all that can be offered to stop 
illegal uses of guns until better technology is available. This means that, 
perhaps, a good resolution would involve gradual restrictions on guns, until 
eventually guns were restricted only to recreational uses in a controlled 
setting for citizens not in the police or military.
Both sides on this issue have valid points. Any middle ground needs 
to offer something to each side. It must address the reasons people feel 
they need guns for protection and allow for valid recreational use, but keep 
military-style guns off the street, except when in the hands of properly trained 
police officers. Time and money will be needed to move toward the removal 
of America’s huge gun arsenal. But, sooner or later a compromise on the issue 
of gun control must be made to make America a safer, better place to live.
TO TRACK MY THIEF   DAVID   POGUE 
 A graduate of Yale University with an interesting blend of study in music, English, and 
computer science, David Pogue writes a weekly column for the  New York Times and a 
monthly column for  Scientific American, focusing on technology issues. He has hosted 
NOVA ScienceNow shows on PBS and is a CBS News correspondent. Before becom-
ing a columnist, he arranged and conducted a number of Broadway musicals and 
wrote a number of the books “for Dummies.” The following column comes from the 
November 2012 issue of  Scientific American. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Knowing that this is a technology column and 
considering the title, what do you expect Pogue’s subject to be? What makes 
Pogue’s title clever and catchy? 
Student establishes 
a compromise 
position.
Conclusion restates 
student’s claim.

 
CHAPTER 9  The Position Paper: Claims of Values  
217
 When I boarded an Amtrak 
train this summer, I had no idea 
what kind of ride I was in for. 
 Upon arrival at my home stop 
in Connecticut, I realized that my 
iPhone was missing. I still had 
hope, though. Apple’s free Find 
My iPhone service uses GPS, 
Wi-Fi and cellular information to 
locate lost i-gadgets on a map. 
After a couple of days, Find My 
iPhone emailed me to announce 
that it had found my phone—a 
map revealed it to be at a house 
in Seat Pleasant, MD. 
 Well, great. How was I going 
to retrieve a phone five states 
away? On a nutty whim, I posted 
a note to my Twitter followers 
about my lost phone. “Find My 
iPhone shows it in MD. Anyone 
want to help me track it down? 
ADVENTURE!” And I included a map showing the green locator dot over a 
satellite image of a nondescript house. 
 Within an hour the quest to recover my phone was on blogs, Twitter, and 
even national newspapers and television shows. “Where’s Pogue’s phone?” 
became a high-tech treasure hunt. 
 Using the address provided by Find My iPhone, local police got involved. 
The homeowner confessed to stealing the phone—no doubt baffled as to how 
the police had known exactly how to find him. And a day later I had the phone 
back. (I decided not to press charges.) 
 To me, that was that. Modern tech  1 good old-fashioned police work  5 
happy ending, right? 
 Not for everyone. Lots of people were disturbed by the affair. They saw 
my posting the thief’s address as a gross violation of his privacy. 
 “Are there to be ANY limits in this country?” wrote one reader. “Mr. Pogue 
. . . not only . . . crowdsourced instant ‘deputies,’ giving [them] detailed maps 
of the device’s location but got the police to go to that location. That location 
is someone’s home. What’s the presumption of privacy there?” 
 My initial thought was: “Wait a minute—we’re expressing sympathy for 
the  thief? ” When you steal something, don’t you risk giving up some rights? 
How was my Twitter post any different from the “wanted” posters of suspects’ 
photographs that still hang in post offices? 
 Of course, the difference in this case is that I, not law enforcement, posted 
the map and began the chase. Does that constitute a breach of the thief’s 
rights? Is this a slippery slope into a world where the Internet’s citizens become 
digital vigilantes? 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

218 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 Those are tricky questions. Even when the government or law- enforcement 
agencies want to get cell location information, the law is not always clear-cut. 
Sometimes the police require a warrant to obtain such information from cell 
phone companies; in other instances, they do not. In my case, there’s not even 
much law to guide us, says Chris Soghoian, a privacy researcher at Indiana 
University Bloomington. A bill proposed last year in Congress, nicknamed the 
“GPS Act,” would have addressed “find my phone” services, saying that it’s 
“not unlawful” for the owner of a stolen phone to use geolocation information 
to help an investigation. 
 It is possible, Soghoian says, that I violated some kind of state harassment or 
stalking statute. For the most part, however, both the legal and ethical ramifica-
tions of my crowdsourced phone quest are nothing but murk. It would have been 
better if I had been able to recover the phone without blasting a photograph of 
the guy’s home to the Internet at large. It would have been better if he hadn’t 
taken my phone at all or had responded to the “Reward if found” messages I sent 
to its screen. Yet combining the powers of geotracking and social networking 
seemed such an obvious tactic that, at the time, I hardly gave it a second thought. 
 In the end, maybe what society really needs is an app called Find My Moral 
Compass.  
Source: Scientific American, November 2012. Reproduced with permission. Copyright © 2012 Scientific 
American, a division of Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What happened to the author on his train ride home? 
 2. 
What app found his phone? 
 3. 
What did he do with this information? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
What sequence of thoughts and discussions did Pogue go through as he lis-
tened to others and reflected on his actions?  
 5. 
What is the ethical issue created by Pogue’s actions? 
 6. 
What position does he reach on the issue? Does he offer a specific claim state-
ment or imply one?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
How might we classify Pogue’s essay, based on style and approach? Would you 
still assert that the author has presented an argument—one that explores an 
ethical issue created by modern technology? Why or why not? Explain.  
 8. 
If you had been one of the author’s Twitter followers, how would you have 
responded to his “ADVENTURE”? Does Pogue need a moral compass, or did 
he act ethically? Be prepared to defend your view. 
 9. 
Does our digital world come with a loss of privacy? If so, is it worth the trade-
off? Be prepared to discuss or write about this issue. 
11
12
13

 
CHAPTER 9  The Position Paper: Claims of Values  
219
TRASH TALK: REFLECTIONS 
ON OUR THROWAWAY SOCIETY  
 GREGORY M.   KENNEDY, SJ  
 The author of  An Ontology of Trash (2007), Greg Kennedy is currently a student of 
theology at Regis College in Toronto, Canada. His essay originally appeared May 7, 
2012, in  America, a national weekly journal for Roman Catholics. He chose to modify 
the original article somewhat to reach out to this text’s more diverse readership.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Knowing that the author is a Jesuit seminarian, would 
you necessarily expect his position on trash to be different from that of any other 
writer on this topic? How might his education and training influence his approach 
or writing style? 
 Every morning my colleague’s desk captured my passing eye. Nestled 
beneath the computer screen, between her cup of pens and a stapler, she kept 
her mid-morning snack. Sometimes it was two chocolates in gold foil, or a pair 
of sugar biscuits bound together in cellophane, sometimes rose-colored paper 
enveloping a candy from the Philippines. And always fruit. One day it was an 
apple, another an orange, a third day a banana. Regardless of the variety, the 
fruit was invariably as meticulously wrapped as its companion foodstuffs. 
 Now plastic wrap around an apple struck me as redundant. Plastic wrap 
around a banana or orange still snug in its peel struck me as downright ridicu-
lous. I could not help staring incredulously each morning at these doubly 
embedded specimens, but never gathered the gumption to query my col-
league about her logic. 
 Why, I wondered, would a person spend time, energy, and money to 
shroud a banana in plastic, which would later require more time, energy and 
money to get rid of? After all, the good Creator already outfitted the banana 
with an effective, protective cover. What purpose does that extra layer of pet-
rochemical veneer serve? 
 By no means would my colleague stand alone in the dock before such 
questions. Nearly every retailer and almost as many customers in this country 
suspect that no licit commercial transaction has occurred if, in the end, there 
isn’t a bag, or a box, a bottle, or a blister pack to pitch into the garbage pail. 
 In  Gone Tomorrow: The Hidden Life of Garbage, Heather Rogers estimates 
that 80% of U.S. products, like plastic wrap, are discarded after a single use. Of 
course, it takes a special kind of person to use a banana more than once. Food, 
the quintessential consumer good, has become a Grade-A disposable in the over-
stocked market. A supersized portion of comestibles in this country does not 
receive even the fleeting honor of a single use. The average American household 
wastes a quarter of all the food it presumably worked hard to bring home. Add to 
that the other waste occurring along the entire length of the production and dis-
tribution line—from the farm to the supermarket deli—and the total percentage 
of food wasted before tasted approaches a shocking and shaming forty percent. 
 Except in rare instances, for example, pie-throwing contests, food is not 
intentionally produced in order to be tossed. The same does not hold for 
food’s innumerable, protective accessorizing. Of all municipal solid waste, the 
single largest share goes to containers and packaging at 30%. Juice boxes, 
1
2
3
4
5
6

220 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
polystyrene clamshells, tin 
cans, plastic this, that and 
the other thing—nary a 
bite comes to our lips that 
has not recently emerged 
from an artificial peel. 
 At first glance, it may 
seem that the plastic cling 
wrap 
and 
the 
organic 
banana peel differ only 
chemically, 
since 
they 
share the same function: 
packaging. 
Ever 
since 
Aristotle, philosophers have looked to an object’s putative purpose in seeking 
to define its particular essence. This technique often succeeds with manufac-
tured objects, but always stumbles over natural things. Only the consumer 
conveniently regards the banana peel as packaging. From the standpoint of 
the banana tree, the peel plays a vital part in procreation. To the soil the peel 
means future nutrients and increased fertility. 
 Irreducible to a single purpose, natural things exist as waste only tempo-
rarily and conditionally. When out one evening picking saskatoon berries, a 
friend expressed his anxiety to me about the coming nightfall. “If we don’t 
pick these bushes clean, all their berries will go to waste.” I conceded a lim-
ited truth to this statement. As far as our stomachs were concerned, the ber-
ries would not fulfill their function if they never reached our mouths. 
 Had we consulted the bush and berries, however, we might have slowed 
our hurried harvest. With respect to reproduction, the berries existed as inge-
niously designed aerial seed-distribution units. In boyishly biological terms: 
birds eat the berries, fly a while and poop out the seeds across all the various 
kinds of soils one hears about in parables. However, we, the civilized consumers, 
would, by eating the seeds, destine them to destruction in the sewage treat-
ment plant. So where exactly was the waste, on the bush or in our plumbing? 
 Plastic wrap does not enjoy this multiplicity of purpose, nor the redemp-
tive ambiguity of “waste.” Its design is much less intelligent. Once the wrap 
fulfills its single function, it is good for nothing. In fact, it is about as good  as 
nothing, because it has no more to achieve. If function and essence do go 
together in manufactured objects, then a consumer item deprived of function 
will also be devoid of essence. It becomes waste unconditionally and forever, 
since it no longer serves any possible end. 
 Since it was originally conceived and produced to lose its function after a 
single use, the object was in a sense already wasted even before it performed 
its purpose. So here we have an object that already existed as waste. Planned 
obsolescence, you could say, renders objects presently obsolete. Such abso-
lute waste, waste considered from all possible angles, waste built right into 
the conception of an object, I philosophically classify as “trash.” 
 The word “trash” has a modern ring. The reality began littering history only 
after the Industrial Revolution, when the mass production of goods took off, 
leaving the ground piled up with discarded, worn out bags. Albert Borgmann, 
7
8
9
10
11
12

 
CHAPTER 9  The Position Paper: Claims of Values  
221
philosopher of technology at the University of Montana, locates the key to 
modern industry in its division of labor. This is standard history. What moves 
Borgmann’s interpretation well beyond mediocrity is where he draws the most 
basic lines of division: not between human workers, but within technology itself. 
 The genius of modern technology, he demonstrates, lies in its unprece-
dented ability to split the product from its production. Consumers desire com-
modities, such as tasty food, amusing entertainment, easy transportation. 
Devices deliver these desirables. Their delivery advances toward perfection 
the closer they come to providing products in demand without demanding 
anything in return. Thus the perfect device remains completely hidden behind 
the convenience of the consumable commodity. 
 Convenience, the rock on which we have built the consumer world, relies 
absolutely on the division between commodity and device. Digging your own 
potatoes is not terribly convenient, especially when compared to dashing into 
7-11 for a sealed-fresh bag of salt-and-vinegar chips. A complex, technologi-
cal and all but invisible industrial food system is the globalized device feeding 
our hunger for fast-food convenience items. Packaging, of course, is an essen-
tial ingredient for making food convenient. 
 As part of the device, packaging has a sole function: to deliver the com-
modity of food as safely and conveniently as possible. Its single function 
necessitates its single use. If the consumer had to fold the plastic wrap and 
bring it home for tomorrow’s snack, or had to wash and dry the take-away cup 
in preparation for the next injection of java, or had to return the aluminum can 
to the cola company for refills, then these devices would be delivering their 
goods inconveniently. But by definition, the device can’t make such demands; 
its whole point is to disappear. As soon as it has accomplished its mission of 
delivery, the packaging device exhausts the conditions of its existence. It is 
trash, pure and simple. Into the void of the trash or recycling bin it vanishes. 
 So the banana peel and the plastic wrap differ much more than just chemi-
cally. The peel, not limited to a single purpose, exists and functions within an 
integrated web of relationships. Each relationship lets it be in a unique way. The 
peel exists as waste only within a limited subset of its total interconnections. 
 The plastic wrap, on the other hand, was expressly designed to deliver just 
one value: the protection of goods from air, dirt and germs. Once the food is 
gone then so goes the plastic’s  raison d’etre. The wrap has nothing left to live 
for; it is curled up and buried. Materially, the object has the same qualities as 
it had when it first spooled off the roll. But as far as the consumer is con-
cerned, it has instantly become irredeemable waste. How many of us would 
entrust another sandwich to it? No, it simply must be trashed. It belongs 
nowhere in our consumer world. 
 We all know that, despite our worst intentions, the disposables we discard 
do not really disappear. Yet we like to pretend that they do. As consumers we 
have precious little business with the trash we generate. Our elaborate system of 
garbage collection, incineration, disposal and recycling is a sophisticated device 
that delivers to most urban consumers the commodities of sanitation and cleanli-
ness. Undoubtedly, swept streets and clean homes count as real blessings. But 
hiding our trash within the technological division of commodity and device 
allows us to consume without concerning ourselves about consequences. 
13
14
15
16
17
18

222 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 And the consequences keep piling up. In spite of all our roused environ-
mental consciousness and the de-materialization of the digital age, our quan-
tity of trash compounds. According to the EPA, Americans generated 2.68 lbs 
of municipal solid waste per person per day in 1960. By 2010 that total had 
bloated to 4.43 lbs. The fatter the wedge we drive between the commodity 
and its device, the more trash we inevitably stuff into the gap. 
 We can and must do otherwise. Some years after WWII, French philoso-
pher Jean-Paul Sartre said: “We were never more free than during German 
occupation.” Sartre had a flair for paradox. Under occupation, every act took 
on significance; every act, no matter how prosaic, held out the chance for 
bravery and non-conformity. In a throw-away society, analogous opportunities 
prevail. Every shopping bag you refuse, every coffee cup you reuse, every 
piece of plastic you eschew is an act of freedom and conscience against our 
thoughtless slavery to trash.  
Source: America: The National Catholic Weekly, May 7, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What percentage of food is wasted? 
 2. 
What percentage of solid waste is composed of packaging? How does packag-
ing’s purpose differ from food’s purpose?  
 3. 
How does plastic covering differ from organic covering—such as the banana peel? 
 4. 
What do modern consumers want? How does plastic packaging help to deliver 
this? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
Explain why plastic packaging is “trash” whereas organic “waste” is not. 
 6. 
Our digital age has presumably resulted in less paper, and yet our volume of 
solid waste continues to increase. What—implies Kennedy—is contributing to 
the increased tonnage of trash?  
 7. 
Review elements of style in Chapter 2 and then analyze Kennedy’s writing, 
focusing on three characteristics that you select to study. How does his style 
contribute to his argument? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
What specific suggestions for wasting less food and tossing less trash do you 
have to add to Kennedy’s discussion? Explain and defend your suggestions. If 
you don’t think that wasting food along the way or filling solid waste dumps 
are really that big a problem, prepare your rebuttal of Kennedy’s argument. 
 9. 
Kennedy concludes his essay by quoting Sartre. Explain Sartre’s point and how 
Kennedy uses it to support his concluding point. Contemplate other ways in 
which we could use these ideas as guides to living.  
19
20

223
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
Chris Brown, in the student essay, writes a conciliatory argument seeking common 
ground on the volatile issue of gun control. Write your own conciliatory argument 
on this issue, offering a different approach than Brown, but citing Brown for any 
ideas you borrow from his essay. Alternatively, write a counterargument of his essay. 
 2. 
There are other “hot issues,” issues that leave people entrenched on one side or the 
other, giving expression to the same arguments again and again without budging 
many, if any, readers. Do not try to write on any one of these about which you get 
strongly emotional. Select one that you can be calm enough over to write a concilia-
tory argument, seeking to find common ground. Some of these issues include same-
sex marriage, legalizing recreational drugs, capital punishment, mainstreaming 
students with disabilities, the use of torture to interrogate terrorists. Exclude abortion 
rights from the list—it is too controversial for most writers to handle successfully.  
 3. 
Other issues that call for positions based on values stem from First Amendment 
rights. Consider a possible topic from this general area. Possibilities include:
 Hate speech should (or should not) be a crime. 
 Obscenity and pornography on the Internet should (or should not) be restricted. 
 Hollywood films should (or should not) show characters smoking. 
 4. 
Consider issues related to college life. Should all colleges have an honor code—or 
should existing codes be eliminated? Should students be automatically expelled for 
plagiarism? Should college administrators have any control over what is published 
in the college newspaper?  

 READ: Who is the person in the ad? Why is she posed with the draped net? 
 REASON: What argument does the ad make?  What visual strategies are used? 
What assumption about audience is made?
 REFLECT/ WRITE: Is the ad effective? Why or why not? 
 Arguments about Cause 
 CHAPTER 10 

225
 B
 ecause we want to know  why  things happen, arguments about cause are 
both numerous and important to us. We begin asking why at a young age, 
pestering adults with questions such as “Why is the sky blue?” and “Why is the 
grass green?” And, to make sense of our world, we try our hand at explanations 
as youngsters, deciding that the first-grade bully is “a bad boy.” The bully’s 
teacher, however, will seek a more complex explanation because an under-
standing of the causes is the place to start to guide the bully to more socially 
acceptable behavior. 
 As adults we continue the search for answers. We want to understand past 
events: Why was President Kennedy assassinated? We want to explain current 
situations: Why do so many college students binge drink? And of course we 
also want to predict the future: Will the economy improve if there is a tax cut? 
All three questions seek a causal explanation, including the last one. If you 
answer the last question with a yes, you are claiming that a tax cut is a cause of 
economic improvement. 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF CAUSAL ARGUMENTS 
 Causal arguments vary not only in subject matter but in structure. Here are the 
four most typical patterns: 
 One cause produces one effect. 
Dissolve zinc in sulfuric acid 
zinc sulfate forms
One cause leads to several effects. 
Heavy TV viewing 
increase in stereotyping
 
decrease in time spent reading
 
decrease in sensitivity to violence
 
increase in junk food eating
One effect is the result of several causes. 
Less reading assigned 
Lower SAT scores
Less writing assigned 
Simplifying of textbooks 
 Several causes form a chain of causes leading to a final effect. 
 The desire for more land for farming 
 decision to cut 
down trees 
 more carbon dioxide trapped in Earth’s 
atmosphere 
 one cause of current climate changes. 

226 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 These models lead to several key points about causal arguments:
 •  Most causal arguments are highly complex.  Except for some simple chemi-
cal reactions, most arguments about cause are difficult, can involve many 
steps, and are often open to challenge. Even arguments based in science 
lead to shrill exchanges. Think, then, how much more open to debate are 
arguments about the worldwide economic downturn or arguments about 
human behavior. Many people think that “it’s obvious” that violent TV and 
video games lead to more aggressive behavior. And yet, psychologists, in 
study after study, have not demonstrated conclusively that there is a clear 
causal connection. One way to challenge this causal argument is to point to 
the majority of people who do not perform violent acts even though they 
have watched television and played video games while growing up.  
 •  Because of the multiple and intertwined patterns of causation in many com-
plex situations, the best causal arguments keep focused on their  purpose. 
For example, you are concerned with global warming. Cows contribute to 
global warming. Are we going to stop cattle farming? Not likely. Factories 
contribute to global warming. Are we going to tear down factories? Not 
likely—but we can demand that smokestacks have filters to reduce harmful 
emissions. Focus your argument on the causes that readers are most likely to 
accept because they are most likely to accept the action that the causes imply. 
 •  Learn and use the specific terms and concepts that provide useful guides 
to thinking about cause. First, when looking for the cause of an event, we 
look for an  agent —a person, situation, another event that led to the effect. 
For example, a lit cigarette dropped in a bed caused the house fire—the lit 
cigarette is the agent. But why, we ask, did someone drop a lit cigarette on a 
bed? The person, old and ill, took a sleeping pill and dropped the cigarette 
when he fell asleep. Where do we stop in the chain of causes? 
   
 Second, most events do not occur in a vacuum with a single cause. 
There are  conditions  surrounding the event. The man’s age and health were 
conditions. Third, we can also look for  influences. The sleeping pill certainly 
influenced the man to drop the cigarette. Some conditions and influences 
may qualify as  remote causes. Proximate causes are more immediate, usually 
closer in time to the event or situation. The man’s dozing off is a proximate 
cause of the fire. Finally, we come to the  precipitating cause, the triggering 
event—in our example, the cigarette’s igniting the combustible mattress 
fabric. Sometimes we are interested primarily in the precipitating cause; 
in other situations, we need to go further back to find the remote causes or 
conditions that are responsible for what has occurred. 
 •  Be alert to the difference between cause and correlation. First, be certain 
that you can defend your pattern of cause and effect as genuine causa-
tion, not as correlation only. Married people are better off financially, are 
 healthier, and report happier sex lives than singles or cohabiting couples. 
Is this a correlation only? Or, does marriage itself produce these effects? 
Linda Waite is one sociologist who argues that marriage is the cause. 
Another example: Girls who participate in after-school activities are much 
less likely to get pregnant. Are the activities a cause? Probably not. But 

 
CHAPTER 10  Arguments about Cause  
227
there are surely conditions and influences that have led to both the decision 
to participate in activities and the decision not to become pregnant. 
 An Example of Causal Complexity: 
Lincoln’s Election and the Start of the Civil War 
 If Stephen Douglas had won the 1860 presidential election instead of Abraham 
Lincoln, would the Civil War have been avoided? An interesting question posed 
to various American history professors and others, including Waite Rawls, pres-
ident of the Museum of the Confederacy. Their responses were part of an article 
that appeared in the  Washington Post  on November 7, 2010. 
 Obviously, this is a question that cannot be answered, but it led Rawls to 
discuss the sequence of causes leading to the breakout of the war. Rawls orga-
nizes his brief causal analysis around a great metaphor: the building and filling 
and then lighting of a keg of powder. Let’s look at his analysis. 
 Existing Conditions  
“The wood for the keg was shaped by the inability of the founding fathers to 
solve the two big problems of state sovereignty and slavery in the shaping of 
the Constitution.” 
 More Recent Influences 
 1. 
“[T]he economics of taxes and the politics of control of the westward expansion 
were added to those two original issues as the keg was filled with powder.”  
 2. 
“By the time of the creation of the Republican Party in 1856, the powder keg 
was almost full and waiting for a fuse. And the election of any candidate 
from the Republican Party—a purely sectional party—put the fuse in the 
powder keg, and the Deep South states seceded. But there was still no war.” 
 Proximate Causes  
“Two simultaneous mistakes in judgment brought the matches out of the 
pocket—the Deep South mistakenly thought that Lincoln, now elected, would 
not enforce the Union, and Lincoln mistakenly thought that the general popula-
tion of the South would not follow the leadership” of the Deep South states. 
 Precipitating Causes 
 1. 
“Lincoln struck the match when he called the bluff of the South Carolinians 
and attempted to reinforce Fort Sumter, but that match could have gone out 
without an explosion.” 
 2. 
“Lincoln struck a second, more fateful match, when he called for troops to 
put down the ‘insurrection.’ That forced the Upper South and Border States 
into a conflict that they had vainly attempted to avoid.” (Reprinted by 
 permission of Waite Rawls.)
 Rawls concludes that the election of Lincoln did not start the war; it was only 
one step in a complex series of causes that led to America’s bloodiest war. His 
analysis helps us see the complexity of cause/effect analysis. 

228 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 Mill’s Methods for Investigating Causes 
 John Stuart Mill, a nineteenth-century British philosopher, explained in detail 
some important ways of investigating and demonstrating causal relationships: 
commonality, difference, and process of elimination. We can benefit in our 
study of cause by understanding and using his methods.
 1. 
 Commonality. One way to isolate cause is to demonstrate that one agent is 
 common to similar outcomes. For instance, twenty-five employees attend a 
company luncheon. Late in the day, ten report to area hospitals, and another 
four complain the next day of having experienced vomiting the night 
before. Public health officials will soon want to know what these people ate 
for lunch. Different people during the same twelve-hour period had similar 
physical symptoms of food poisoning. The common factor may well have 
been the tuna salad they ate for lunch. 
 2. 
 Difference. Another way to isolate cause is to recognize one key  difference. 
If two situations are alike in every way but one, and the situations result in 
different outcomes, then the one way they differ must have caused the 
 different outcome. 
  
 
 Studies in the social sciences are often based on the single-difference 
method. To test for the best teaching methods for math, an educator could set 
up an experiment with two classrooms similar in every way except that one 
class devotes fifteen minutes three days a week to instruction by drill. If the 
class receiving the drill scores much higher on a standard test given to both 
groups of students, the educator could argue that math drills make a measur-
able difference in learning math. But the educator should be prepared for 
skeptics to challenge the assertion of only one difference between the two 
classes. Could the teacher’s attitude toward the drills also make a difference in 
student learning? If the differences in student scores are significant, the educa-
tor probably has a good argument.  
 3. 
 Process of elimination. We can develop a causal argument around a tech-
nique we all use for problem solving:  the process of elimination. When some-
thing happens, we examine all possible causes and eliminate them, one by 
one, until we are satisfied that we have isolated the actual cause (or causes). 
  
 
 When the Federal Aviation Administration has to investigate a plane 
crash, it uses this process, exploring possible causes such as mechanical 
failure, weather, human error, or terrorism. Sometimes the process isolates 
more than one cause or points to a likely cause without providing abso-
lute proof.  
   EXERCISE: Understanding Causal Patterns 
 From the following events or situations, select the one you know best and list as many 
conditions, influences, and causes—remote, proximate, precipitating—as you can 
think of.  You may want to do this exercise with your class partner or in small groups. 
Be prepared to explain your causal pattern to the class.
■ ■

 
CHAPTER 10  Arguments about Cause  
229
 1. Decrease in marriage rates in the United States 
 2. Arctic ice melt 
 3. Increase in the numbers of women elected to public office 
 4. High salaries of professional athletes 
 5. Increased interest in soccer in the United States 
 6. Comparatively low scores by U.S. students on international tests in math and 
science 
 7. Majority of 2012 U.S. Olympians were women  
■ ■
 When analyzing causal arguments, what should you look for? The basics of 
good argument apply to all arguments: a clear statement of claim, qualiﬁ ed 
if appropriate; a clear explanation of reasons and evidence; and enough rel-
evant evidence to support the claim. How do we recognize these qualities in 
a causal argument? Use these points as guides to analyzing:
 •  Does the writer carefully distinguish among types of causes? Word 
choice is crucial. Is the argument that A and A alone caused B or that A 
was one of several contributing causes?  
 •  Does the writer recognize the complexity of causation and not rush 
to assert only one cause for a complex event or situation?  The credi-
bility of an argument about cause is quickly lost if readers find the argu-
ment oversimplified.  
 •  Is the argument’s claim clearly stated, with qualifications as appropri-
ate? If the writer wants to argue for one cause, not the only cause, of an 
event or situation, then the claim’s wording must make this limited goal clear 
to readers. For example, one can perhaps build the case for heavy television 
viewing as  one  cause of stereotyping, loss of sensitivity to violence, and 
increased fearfulness. But we know that the home environment and neigh-
borhood and school environments also do much to shape attitudes.  
 •  What reasons and evidence are given to support the argument?  Can 
you see the writer’s pattern of development? Does the reasoning seem 
logical? Are the data relevant? This kind of analysis of the argument will 
help you evaluate it.  
 •  Does the argument demonstrate causality, not just a time relationship 
or correlation? A causal argument needs to prove  agency: A is the cause 
of B, not just something that happened before B or something that is 
present when B is present. March precedes April, but March does not 
cause April to arrive.  
 •  Does the writer present believable causal agents, agents consistent 
with our knowledge of human behavior and scientific laws? Most edu-
cated people do not believe that personalities are shaped by astrological 
signs or that scientific laws are suspended in the Bermuda Triangle, allow-
ing planes and ships to vanish or enter a fourth dimension.  
GUIDELINES for    Analyzing 
Causal 
Arguments 

230 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
   PREPARING A CAUSAL ARGUMENT 
 In addition to the guidelines for writing arguments presented in Chapter 4, you 
can use the following advice specific to writing causal arguments. 
   Planning 
 1. 
 Think: What are the focus and limits of your causal argument? Do you 
want to argue for one cause of an event or situation? Do you want to argue 
for several causes leading to an event or situation? Do you want to argue 
for a cause that others have overlooked? Do you want to show how one 
cause is common to several situations or events? Diagramming the rela-
tionship of cause to effect may help you see what you want to focus on. 
 2. 
 Think: What reasons and evidence do you have to support your tentative 
claim? Consider what you already know that has led to your choice of 
topic. A brainstorming list may be helpful. 
 3. 
 Think: How, then, do you want to word your claim? As we have discussed, 
wording is crucial in causal arguments. Review the discussion of character-
istics of causal arguments if necessary. 
 4. 
 Reality check: Do you have a claim worth defending in a paper? Will read-
ers care?  
 5. 
 Think: What, if any, additional evidence do you need to develop a convinc-
ing argument? You may need to do some reading or online searching to 
obtain data to strengthen your argument. Readers expect relevant, reliable, 
current statistics in most arguments about cause. Assess what you need 
and then think about what sources will provide the needed information.  
 6.  Think:  What assumptions (warrants) are you making in your causal 
 reasoning? Are these assumptions logical? Will readers be likely to agree 
with your assumptions, or will you need to defend them as part of your 
argument? For example: One reason to defend the effects of heavy TV 
watching on viewers is the commonsense argument that what humans 
devote considerable time to will have a significant effect on their lives. Will 
your readers be prepared to accept this commonsense reasoning, or will 
they remain skeptical, looking for stronger evidence of a cause/effect 
relationship?  
 •  What are the implications for accepting the causal argument?  If A and 
B clearly are the causes of C, and we don’t want C to occur, then we pre-
sumably must do something about A and B—or at least we must do 
something about either A or B and see if reducing or eliminating one of 
the causes significantly reduces the incidence of C.  
 •  Is the argument convincing? After analyzing the argument and answer-
ing the questions given in the previous points, you need to decide if, 
finally, the argument works.  

 
CHAPTER 10  Arguments about Cause  
231
 Drafting 
 1. 
Begin with an opening paragraph or two that introduces your topic in an inter-
esting way. Lester Thurow in “Why Women Are Paid Less Than Men” writes:
 In the 40 years from 1939 to 1979 white women who work full time have with 
monotonous regularity made slightly less than 60 percent as much as white 
men. Why?  
  
 This opening establishes the topic and Thurow’s purpose in examining 
causes. The statistics get the reader’s attention. 
 2. 
Do not begin by announcing your subject. Avoid openers such as: In this 
essay I will explain the causes of teen vandalism.  
 3. 
Decide where to place your claim statement. You can conclude your open-
ing paragraph with it, or you can place it in your conclusion, after you have 
shown readers how best to understand the causes of the issue you are 
examining.  
 4. 
Present reasons and evidence in an organized way. If you are examining a 
series of causes, beginning with background conditions and early influences, 
then your basic plan will be time sequence. Readers need to see the chain of 
causes unfolding. Use appropriate terms and transitional words to guide 
readers through each stage in the causal pattern. If you are arguing for an 
overlooked cause, begin with the causes that have been put forward and 
show what is flawed in each one. Then present and defend your explanation 
of cause. This process of elimination structure works well when readers are 
likely to know what other causes have been offered in the past. You can also 
use one of Mill’s other two approaches, if one of them is relevant to your topic. 
 5. 
Address the issue of correlation rather than cause, if appropriate. After pre-
senting the results of a study of marriage that reveals many benefits (emo-
tional, physical, financial) of marriage, Linda Waite examines the question 
that she knows skeptical readers may have: Does marriage actually  cause 
the benefits, or is the relationship one of  correlation  only—that is, the bene-
fits of marriage just happen to come with being married; they are not caused 
by being married.  
 6. 
Conclude by discussing the implications of the causal pattern you have 
argued for, if appropriate. Lester Thurow ends by asserting that if he is 
right about the cause of the gender pay gap, then there are two approaches 
society can take to remove the pay gap. If, in explaining the causes of teen 
vandalism, you see one cause as “group behavior,” a gang looking for 
something to do, it then follows that you can advise young readers to stay 
out of gangs. Often with arguments about cause, there are personal or pub-
lic policy implications in accepting the causal explanation.  
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION  
 u   Do I have a clear statement of my claim? Is it appropriately qualified and 
focused? Is it about an issue that matters? 

232 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 u   Have I organized my argument so that readers can see my pattern for exam-
ining cause? 
 u   Have I used the language for discussing causes correctly, distinguishing 
among conditions and influences and remote and proximate causes? Have I 
selected the correct word—either  affect or  effect —as needed? 
 u   Have I avoided the  post hoc fallacy and the confusing of correlation and cause? 
 u   Have I carefully examined my assumptions and convinced myself that they 
are reasonable and can be defended? Have I defended them when neces-
sary to clarify and thus strengthen my argument?  
 u   Have I found relevant facts and examples to support and develop my 
argument?  
 u   Have I used the basic checklist for revision in Chapter 4 (see p. 111)? 
 FOR ANALYSIS AND DEBATE 
WHY YOUR OFFICE NEEDS 
MORE BRATTY MILLENNIALS  
 EMILY   MATCHAR  
 The author, a graduate of Yale University, is a freelance writer whose articles focus on 
culture, food, travel, and women’s issues. Her first book is  Homeward Bound: The 
New Cult of Domesticity (2013). 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Who are the millennials? What do you think they might 
be able to contribute to the office?  
 Have you heard the one about the kid who got his mom to call his boss 
and ask for a raise? Or about the college student who quit her summer intern-
ship because it forbade Facebook in the office? 
 Yep, we’re talking about Generation Y—loosely defined as those born 
between 1982 and 1999—also known as millennials. Perhaps you know them 
by their other media-generated nicknames: teacup kids, for their supposed 
emotional fragility; boomerang kids, who always wind up back home; trophy 
kids—everyone’s a winner!; the Peter Pan generation, who’ll never grow up. 
 Now this pampered, over-praised, relentlessly self-confident generation 
(at age 30, I consider myself a sort of older sister to them) is flooding the work-
place. They’ll make up 75 percent of the American workforce by 2025—and 
they’re trying to change everything. 
 These are the kids, after all, who text their dads from meetings. They think 
“business casual” includes skinny jeans. And they expect the company presi-
dent to listen to their “brilliant idea.” 
 When will they adapt? 
 They won’t. Ever. Instead, through their sense of entitlement and inflated 
self-esteem, they’ll make the modern workplace adapt to them. And we 
should thank them for it. Because the modern workplace frankly stinks, and 
the changes wrought by Gen Y will be good for everybody. 
1
2
3
4
5
6

 
CHAPTER 10  Arguments about Cause  
233
 Few developed countries demand as much from their workers as the United 
States. Americans spend more time at the office than citizens of most other 
developed nations. Annually, we work 408 hours more than the Dutch, 374 hours 
more than the Germans and 311 hours more than the French. We even work 59 
hours more than the stereotypically nose-to-the-grindstone Japanese. Though 
women make up half of the American workforce, the United States is the only 
country in the developed world without guaranteed paid maternity leave. 
 All this hard work is done for less and less reward. Wages have been stag-
nant for years, benefits shorn, opportunities for advancement blocked. While 
the richest Americans get richer, middle-class workers are left to do more with 
less. Because jobs are scarce and we’re used to a hierarchical workforce, we 
accept things the way they are. Worse, we’ve taken our overwork as a badge 
of pride. Who hasn’t flushed with a touch of self-importance when turning 
down social plans because we’re “too busy with work”? 
 Into this sorry situation strolls the self-esteem generation, printer-fresh 
diplomas in hand. And they’re not interested in business as usual. 
 The current corporate culture simply doesn’t make sense to much of 
 middle-class Gen Y. Since the cradle, these privileged kids have been offered 
autonomy, control and choices (“Green pants or blue pants today, sweetie?”). 
They’ve been encouraged to show their creativity and to take their extracur-
ricular interests seriously. Raised by parents who wanted to be friends with 
their kids, they’re used to seeing their elders as peers rather than authority 
figures. When they want something, they’re not afraid to say so. 
 And what the college-educated Gen Y-ers entering the workforce want is 
engaging, meaningful, flexible work that doesn’t take over their lives. The 
grim economy and lack of job opportunities don’t seem to be adjusting their 
expectations downward much, either. According to a recent AP analysis, more 
than 53 percent of recent college grads are unemployed or underemployed, 
but such numbers don’t appear to keep these new grads from thinking their 
job owes them something. 
 In a March MTV survey of about 500 millennials, called “No Collar 
Workers,” 81 percent of respondents said they should be able to set their own 
hours, and 70 percent said they need “me time” on the job (compared with 39 
percent of baby boomers). Ninety percent think they deserve their “dream 
job.” They expect to be listened to when they have an idea, even when they’re 
the youngest person in the room. 
 “Why do we have to meet in an office cross-country when we can call in 
remotely via Skype?” asks Megan Broussard, a 25-year-old New Yorker who 
worked at a large PR firm for three years before quitting to become a free-
lance writer and career adviser. “Why wouldn’t my opinion matter as much as 
someone else’s who only has a few more years of experience than I do?” 
 These desires are not exactly radical. Who wouldn’t want flexibility, auton-
omy and respect? 
 What’s different, says Lindsey Pollak, the author of “Getting From College 
to Career: Your Essential Guide to Succeeding in the Real World,” is how Gen 
Y-ers are asking for those things. Pollak, a consultant who advises companies 
on how to deal with Gen Y, says these workers—at least, the well-educated 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

234 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
ones who can afford to make demands—want what everyone wants out of a 
job, they’re just asking for it in a more aggressive way. “And they’re the first 
ones to leave when they don’t get it,” Pollak says. 
 According to surveys, 50 percent of Gen Y-ers would rather be unem-
ployed than stay in a job they hate. Unlike their child- and mortgage-saddled 
elders, many can afford to be choosy about their jobs, given their notorious 
reliance on their parents. After all, they can always move back in with Mom 
and Dad (40 percent of young people will move home at least once, per Pew 
research), who are likely to be giving them financial help well into their 20s 
(41 percent of Gen Y-ers receive financial support from their parents after col-
lege, according to research from Ameritrade). 
 In fact, it’s possible that a bad economy can make being choosy even 
easier—if more people are struggling to find work and living at home, there’s 
no stigma to it. 
 Nancy Sai, a 25-year-old who works at a nonprofit in Manhattan, spent a 
year living with her parents and working at a gas station while trying to snag 
her dream job. Her mom kept bugging her to look for something different—
teaching! government! anything!—but Sai held firm. While it took her a year to 
find the ideal gig, she’s glad she waited. Her job is meaningful, the office envi-
ronment friendly and welcoming, her bosses forthcoming with feedback. 
Some of her friends have not been so lucky—one quit her job in politics when 
her boss refused to give her any time off. 
 “She couldn’t separate her work life from her personal life at all,” Sai says. 
“She quit without another job lined up. She said she felt the most liberated 
she had in two years.” 
 Despite the recession, or perhaps because of it, corporations are eager to 
hire and retain the best, most talented Gen Y workers. “In this risky economic 
environment, the energy, insight and high-tech know-how of Gen Yers will be 
essential for all high-performing organizations,” said a 2009 study on Gen Y 
from Deloitte, the professional services giant. 
 Companies are beginning to heed Gen Y’s demands. Though flextime and 
job-sharing have been staples of the workforce for a few decades, they are 
becoming more accepted, even in rigid corporate culture, says Laura Schild-
kraut, a career counselor specializing in the needs of Gen Y. There has also 
been a rise in new work policies, such as ROWE, or “results only work environ-
ment,” a system in which employees are evaluated on their productivity, not 
the hours they keep. In a ROWE office, the whole team can take off for a 
4 p.m. “Spider-Man” showing if they’ve gotten enough done that day. 
 Radical-sounding perks such as unlimited paid vacation—assuming you’ve 
finished your pressing projects—are more common among companies con-
cerned with attracting and retaining young talent. By 2010, 1 percent of U.S. 
companies had adopted this previously unheard-of policy, largely in response 
to the demands of Generation Y. 
 The Deloitte study warns that, to retain Gen Y-ers, companies “must foster 
a culture of respect that extends to all employees, regardless of age or level in 
the organization.” In other words: Treat your Gen Y workers nicely. But we 
should be treating everyone nicely already, shouldn’t we? 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

 
CHAPTER 10  Arguments about Cause  
235
 Beyond that, Gen Y’s demands may eventually help bring about the family-
friendly policies for which working mothers have been leading the fight. 
Though the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 afforded some protections 
for working parents, genuine flexibility is still a privilege of the lucky few, and 
parents who try to leave the office at 5:30 p.m. are often accused of not  pulling 
their weight. Well, guess what? Now everybody wants to leave the office at 
5:30. Because they’ve got band practice. Or dinner with their grandma. Or 
they need to walk their rescue puppy. 
 The American workplace has been transformed during economic upswings 
and downturns. The weekend was a product of labor union demands during 
the relative boom of the early 20th century. The Great Depression led to the 
New Deal’s Fair Labor Standards Act, which introduced the 40-hour workweek 
and overtime pay to most Americans. But now, workplace change is coming 
from unadulterated, unorganized worker pushiness. 
 So we could continue to roll our eyes at Gen Y, accuse them of being 
spoiled and entitled and clueless little brats. We could wish that they’d get 
taken down a peg by the “school of hard knocks” and learn to accept that this 
is just the way things are. 
 But if we’re smart, we’ll cheer them on. Be selfish, Gen Y! Be entitled! 
Demand what you want. Because we want it, too. 
Source: Washington Post, August 19, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What is the age range for millennials? What other term is used for this group? 
 2. 
How has this group been raised? How do they view their elders? Themselves? 
 3. 
What details describe the current middle-class work world in the United States? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
What changes does Matchar want to see in the workplace? 
 5. 
What upbringing, according to the author, has caused the Gen Y-ers to hold 
their attitudes toward work? 
 6. 
What, then, is the author’s claim? State it so that you have made a cause/effect 
statement. 
 7. 
What  kinds of grounds does Matchar provide in support of her claim? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Do you agree with the author that the Gen Y-ers’ desired changes would be 
good for the workplace? Why or why not?  
 9. 
The descriptions of various generations are, of course, generalizations. ( You 
might not be “bratty”!) Do you basically accept the characteristics of Gen Y-ers 
as described in the essay? And the upbringing that has shaped them? If you 
disagree, how would you challenge these generalizations? (Remember that 
these generalizations are not the author’s alone; Matchar is expressing a widely 
shared analysis of this generation.)  
24
25
26
27

236 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 “DARING TO DISCUSS WOMEN IN 
SCIENCE”: A RESPONSE TO JOHN TIERNEY   
 CAROLINE   SIMARD  
 Caroline Simard is a board member of the Ada Initiative and research consultant to 
the Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology, at the Stanford University School 
of Medicine. She holds a PhD in communication and social science and works to find 
ways to increase the number of women and underrepresented minorities in science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and business fields. Simard’s essay, 
a response to an article by John Tierney, was posted at  Huffington Post, June 9, 2010. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    What type of argument do you anticipate, given the title 
and headnote information? What other type of argument should you anticipate, 
given the essay’s location in this text?  
 On Monday [June 2010], John Tierney of the  New York Times published a pro-
vocative article, “Daring to Discuss Women in Science,” in which he argues that 
biology may be a factor to explain why women are not reaching high-level posi-
tions. He suggests that boys are innately more gifted at math and science and that 
the dearth of women in science may point to simple biological differences. If this is 
the case, why would we waste our time trying to get more women in science? 
 Mr. Tierney, let’s indeed discuss women in science. 
 First, let me start by saying that I applaud the discussion—all potential 
explanations for a complex issue and all evidence need to be considered, 
even the ones that are not popular in the media or not “politically correct.” I 
also believe that Larry Summer’s now infamous comments about the possibil-
ity that biological differences account for the dearth of women scientists and 
technologists was, similarly, in the spirit of intellectual debate. 
 The problem with the biology argument that “boys are just more likely to 
be born good at math and science” isn’t that it’s not “politically correct”—it’s 
that it assumes that we can take away the power of societal influences, which 
have much more solid evidence than the biology hypothesis. Tierney makes 
the point himself in his article—in order to provide evidence for biological dif-
ferences, he cites a longitudinal Duke [University] study which shows that the 
highest achievers in SAT math tests (above 750), which counted 13 boys for 
every girl in the early 80s, became a ratio of 4 boys to 1 girls in 1991, “presum-
ably because of sociocultural factors.” Hmm, isn’t this actual evidence that 
biology is not what is at play here? If it is possible to reduce the gender 
achievement gap in math by 3 thanks to “sociocultural factors,” I rest my case. 
Sociocultural factors are indeed extremely powerful. 
 The Duke study also notes that the 4/1 achievement gap at the highest score 
hasn’t changed in the last 20 years despite ongoing programs to encourage girls 
in math and science, whereas the highest achievers in writing ability (SAT above 
700) shows a ratio of 1.2 girls for every boy, slightly favoring girls. However, if the 
premise is that boys are inherently “better” at math, and girls are inherently better 
at writing, why would the achievement gap be so large in math and negligible in 
writing? The stagnant 4 to 1 ratio is not evidence that there is an innate biological 
difference in math aptitude, but rather confirmation that persistent sociocultural 
barriers remain—that is, science and math are still thought of as male domains. 
1
2
3
4
5

 
CHAPTER 10  Arguments about Cause  
237
 Research shows that math and science are 
indeed thought of as stereotypically male 
domains. Project Implicit at Harvard University 
studied half a million participants in 34 coun-
tries and found that 70 percent of respon-
dents worldwide have implicit stereotypes 
associating science with male more than with 
female. Years of research by Claude Steele 
and Joshua Aronson and their colleagues 
show that implicit stereotypes affect girls’ 
performance in math—a phenomenon called 
“stereotype threat.” When girls receive cues 
that “boys are better at math,” their scores in 
math suffer. One study in a classroom setting 
showed that the difference in performance 
between boys and girls in math SAT scores 
was eliminated by simply having a mentor 
telling them that math is learned over time rather is “innate.” 
 The problem is, girls are routinely getting the message that they don’t 
belong in math and science, further undermining their performance (and Mr. 
Tierney’s article isn’t exactly helping in changing the stereotype for the gen-
eral public). The result of this implicit (unconscious) stereotype is that parents, 
teachers, and school counselors are less likely to encourage girls to pursue 
math and science than they are boys. These girls are then less likely to seek 
advanced math classes and would be unlikely, without those opportunities, to 
make it to the above 700 SAT math score regardless of ability. 
 Anecdotally, I had this experience with my daughter a couple of years ago. 
At age 10, she had somehow decided that she wasn’t good at math (despite 
being raised in a household with 2 PhDs). With her self-confidence plummet-
ing, math homework became very painful in our household. When I dug deeper, 
I found that she mistakenly believed that you were either born with math ability 
or you weren’t—that this was an innate biological ability as opposed to some-
thing you could learn, and that somehow she hadn’t been “born with it.” Once 
I actively dispelled that notion and provided her with additional mentoring, her 
math performance significantly improved. I never hear her say that she isn’t 
good at math anymore, and her math homework is flawless. 
 The Duke article, and Tierney, raises an important question about prefer-
ence, however, that research suggests that boys are more interested in 
“things” and girls are more interested in “people” and thus gravitate towards 
fields reflecting that interest. In this research too, there is debate about what 
in this difference is “nature” versus “nurture”—there are powerful socializa-
tion forces at play. Regardless, we have to dispel the notion that science is 
only about “things” and not about people or somehow disconnected from all 
social relevance. Indeed, some of the most successful interventions to increase 
girls’ interest in math and science have been to reframe the curriculum to pro-
vide examples and projects that are grounded in the interests of a diverse 
population of students. The EPICS program at Purdue University is a great 
6
7
8
9

238 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
example of grounding engineering disciplines in socially relevant contexts and 
has been shown to engage a diversity of students. 
 What we need, to put this debate to rest, is to replicate these findings in a 
country where science and math are not viewed as stereotypically male. The 
most recent cross-national comparison study, published in 2010 in  Psychological 
Bulletin by Nicole Else-Quest and her colleagues and comparing 43 countries, 
shows that the achievement difference in math between girls and boys varies 
broadly across countries. 
 Their research shows that country-by-country variation is correlated with 
gender differences in self-confidence in math, which is compounded by ste-
reotype threat. One of the strongest predictors of the gender gap in math 
achievement is a given country’s level of gender equity in science jobs, consis-
tent with socialization arguments: “if girls’ mothers, aunts, and sisters do not 
have STEM careers, they will perceive that STEM is a male domain and thus 
feel anxious about math, lack the confidence to take challenging math courses, 
and underachieve on math tests.” 
 Until girls stop getting the signal that math is for boys, the 4 to 1 gender 
gap in highest achievement categories of math and science will persist. This 
has nothing to do with innate ability. 
 Mr. Tierney, I look forward to your subsequent articles on this issue. Let’s 
indeed dare to discuss women in science and continue to bring to bear the 
most relevant research on this issue.  
Source: HuffPostTech, June 9, 2010. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What is the occasion for Simard’s posting? What is her topic? 
 2. 
What is Tierney’s position on the issue? 
 3. 
What sociocultural factors are the causes of the gender gap in math and science, 
in Simard’s view?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
What is Simard’s claim? (Try to state it with precision.) 
 5. 
What  kinds  of grounds does Simard present? What point about Tierney’s war-
rant does the author want to make with the evidence she includes?  
 6. 
Examine Simard’s style and tone; how do they help her argument ?
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
In the debate over women in science, there are two related assumptions: (1) 
Math ability is inborn and (2) Boys are innately better at math than girls. Have 
you heard either one—or both—of these views? Has Simard convinced you 
that the evidence challenges these ideas? Why or why not?  
 8. 
Why can stereotypes be a “threat”? How can ideas “threaten” us? Explain and 
illustrate to answer these questions.  
10
11
12
13

239
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
Think about your educational experiences as a basis for generating a topic for a 
causal argument. For example: What are the causes of writer’s block? Why do some 
apparently good students (based on class work, grades, etc.) do poorly on standard-
ized tests? How does pass/fail grading affect student performance? What are the 
causes of high tuition and fees? What might be some of the effects of higher college 
costs? What are the causes of binge drinking among college students? What are the 
effects of binge drinking? 
 2. 
 Star Trek, in its many manifestations, continues to play on television—why? What 
makes it so popular a series? Why are horror movies popular? What are the causes 
for the great success of the Harry Potter books? If you are familiar with one of these 
works, or another work that has been amazingly popular, examine the causes for 
that popularity. 
3. 
The gender pay gap (see Figure 5.3 in Chapter 5) reflects earnings differences 
between all working men and all working women. It is not a comparison of earn-
ings by job. What might be some of the causes for women continuing to earn less 
than men—in spite of the fact that more women than men now earn BA degrees? 
Consider what you know about women in the workforce who work full time. (The 
pay gap is also not about full- versus part-time work; both men and women work 
part time as well as full time.) Look at other graphics in Chapter 5 and think about 
what you have learned from Caroline Simard regarding women in STEM fields. Be 
prepared to discuss some causes of the pay gap or prepare an essay on the topic. (Be 
sure to qualify your claim as appropriate, based on what you know.)

 READ: What is the subject of this cartoon?
REASON: How does the cartoon visualize the subject?  What do you see 
between the primary sign and the “exit” sign?
REFLECT/WRITE: Toles illustrates a problem but not solutions. What have 
some states done to address the problem? What solutions can you suggest?
 Presenting Proposals: The 
Problem/Solution Argument 
 CHAPTER 11 
TOLES © 2013 The Washington Post. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL 
UCLICK. All rights reserved.

241
 Y
 ou think that there are several spots on campus that need additional light-
ing at night. You are concerned that the lake near your hometown is green, 
with algae floating on it. You believe that bikers on the campus need to have 
paths and a bike lane on the main roads into the college. These are serious local 
issues; you should be concerned about them. And, perhaps it is time to act on 
your concerns—how can you do that? You can write a proposal, perhaps a let-
ter to the editor of your college or hometown newspaper. 
 These three issues invite a recommendation for change. And to make that 
recommendation is to offer a solution to what you perceive to be a problem. 
Public policy arguments, whether local and specific (lampposts or bike lanes), 
or more general and far-reaching (e.g., the federal government must stop the 
flow of illegal drugs into the country) can best be understood as arguments 
over solutions to problems. If there are only 10 students on campus who bike to 
class or only 200 Americans wanting to buy cocaine, then most people would 
not agree that we have two serious problems in need of debate over the best 
solutions. But, when the numbers become significant, then we see a problem 
and start seeking solutions. 
 Consider some of these issues stated as policy claims:
 • The college needs bike lanes on campus roads and more bike paths across 
the campus. 
 • We need to spend whatever is necessary to stop the flow of drugs into this 
country.  
 Each claim offers a solution to a problem, as we can see:
 • Bikers will be safer if there are bike lanes on main roads and more bike 
paths across the campus. 
 • The way to address the drug problem in this country is to eliminate the 
supply of drugs.  
 The basic idea of policy proposals looks like this:
Somebody 
should (or should not) 
do X – because:
(Individual, organization, government) 
 
(solve this problem) 
 Observe that proposal arguments recommend action. They look to the 
future. And, they often advise the spending of someone’s time and/or money. 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF PROBLEM/
SOLUTION ARGUMENTS 
 •  Proposal arguments may be about local and specific problems or about broader, 
more general public policy issues. We need to “think globally” these days, but 
we still often need to “act locally,” to address the problems we see around 
us in our classrooms, offices, and communities. 

GUIDELINES for
 When analyzing problem/solution arguments, what should you look for? 
In addition to the basics of good argument, use these points as guides to 
 analyzing:
 •  Is the writer’s claim not just clear but also appropriately qualified and 
focused? For example, if the school board in the writer’s community is 
not doing a good job of communicating its goals as a basis for its funding 
package, the writer needs to focus just on that particular school board, 
not on school boards in general.  
 Analyzing Problem/Solution Arguments 
242 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 •  Proposal arguments usually need to define the problem. How we define a 
 problem has much to do with what kinds of solutions are appropriate. For 
example, many people are concerned about our ability to feed a growing 
world population. Some will argue that the problem is not an agricultural 
one—how much food we can produce. The problem is a political one—
how we distribute the food, at what cost, and how competent or fair some 
governments are in handling food distribution. If the problem is agri-
cultural, we need to worry about available farmland, water supply, and 
farming technology. If the problem is political, then we need to concern 
ourselves with price supports, distribution strategies, and embargoes for 
political leverage. To develop a problem/solution argument, you first need 
to define the problem.  
 •  How we define the problem also affects what we think are the causes of the prob-
lem. Cause is often a part of the debate, especially with far-reaching policy 
issues, and may need to be addressed, particularly if solutions are tied to 
eliminating what we consider to be the causes. Why are illegal drugs com-
ing into the United States? Because people want those drugs. Do you solve 
the problems related to drug addicts by stopping the supply? Or, do you 
address the demand for drugs in the first place? 
 •  Proposal arguments need to be developed with an understanding of the processes 
of government, from college administrations to city governments to the federal 
bureaucracy. Is that dying lake near your town on city property or state 
land? Are there conservation groups in your area who can be called on to 
help with the process of presenting proposals to the appropriate people? 
 •  Proposal arguments need to be based on the understanding that they ask for 
change—and many people do not like change, period.  Probably all but the 
wealthiest Americans recognize that our health-care system needs fixing. 
That doesn’t change the fact that many working people struggling to pay 
premiums are afraid of any changes introduced by the federal government. 
 •  Successful problem/solution arguments offer solutions that can realistically be 
accomplished. Consider Prohibition, for example. This was a solution to 
problem drinking—except that it did not work, could not be enforced, 
because the majority of Americans would not abide by the law.  

 •  Does the writer show an awareness of the complexity of most public 
policy issues?  There are many different kinds of problems with American 
schools and many more causes for those problems. A simple solution—a 
longer school year, more money spent, vouchers—is not likely to solve the 
mixed bag of problems. Oversimplified arguments quickly lose credibility.  
 •  How does the writer define and explain the problem? Is the way the 
problem is stated clear? Does it make sense to you? If the problem is 
being defined differently than most people have defined it, has the writer 
argued convincingly for looking at the problem in this new way?  
 •  What reasons and evidence are given to support the writer’s 
 solutions? Can you see how the writer develops the argument? Does the 
reasoning seem logical? Are the data relevant? This kind of analysis will 
help you evaluate the proposed solutions.  
 •  Does the writer address the feasibility of the proposed solutions?  
Does the writer make a convincing case for the realistic possibility of 
achieving the proposed solutions?  
 •  Is the argument convincing?  Will the solutions solve the problem as it 
has been defined? Has the problem been defined accurately? Can the 
solutions be achieved?  
 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
243
 Read and study the following annotated argument. Complete your  analysis 
by answering the questions that follow. 
WANT MORE SCIENTISTS? TURN GRADE 
SCHOOLS INTO LABORATORIES  
      PRIYA   NATARAJAN  
 A professor in both the astronomy and physics departments at Yale University, Priya 
Natarajan is a theoretical astrophysicist. Her areas of investigation include black hole phys-
ics and  gravitational  lensing. Interested as well in enhancing general science  literacy, 
Natarajan serves on the Advisory Board of NOVA ScienceNow, speaks at  conferences, and 
writes newspaper articles. The following op-ed essay was published on February 5, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   When you were in grade school, did you like to “discover 
things” in the natural world? How would you encourage early study of science? 
 “What’s your major?” Ask a college freshman this question, and the 
answer may be physics or chemistry. Ask a sophomore or a junior, however, 
and you’re less likely to hear about plans to enter the “STEM” fields—science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics. America’s universities are not 
graduating nearly enough scientists, engineers and other skilled professionals 
to keep our country globally competitive in the decades ahead.  
 And this is despite evidence such as a recent Center on Education and the 
Workforce report that forecasts skill requirements through 2018 and clearly 
shows the importance of STEM fields. The opportunities for those with just a 
high school education are restricted, it says—many high-paying jobs are open 
only to people with STEM college degrees.  
1
Author states 
problem.
2
States serious-
ness of problem.

244 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 Still, as many as 60 percent of stu-
dents who enter college with the inten-
tion of majoring in science and math 
change their plans. Because so many stu-
dents intend to major in a STEM subject 
but don’t follow through, many observers 
have assumed that universities are where 
the trouble starts. I beg to differ.  
 I am a professor of astronomy and 
physics at Yale University, where I teach 
an introductory class in cosmology. I see 
the deficiencies that first-year students 
show up with. My students may have dex-
terity with the equations they’re required 
to know, but they lack the capacity to 
apply their knowledge to real-life prob-
lems. This critical shortcoming appears in 
high school and possibly in elementary 
grades—long before college. If we want 
more Americans to pursue careers in 
STEM professions, we have to intervene much earlier than we imagined.  
 Many efforts are underway to get younger students interested in science 
and math. One example is the Tree of Life’s online “treehouse” project, a col-
lection of information about biodiversity compiled by hundreds of experts and 
amateurs. Students can use this tool to apply what they are learning in the 
classroom to the world around them. Starting early in children’s education, we 
need to provide these types of engaging, interactive learning environments 
that link school curricula to the outside world.  
 My own schooling is an example. Growing up in Delhi, India, I did puzzles, 
explored numbers and searched for patterns in everyday settings long before I 
ever saw an equation. One assignment I vividly remember asked us to find 
examples of hexagons. I eagerly pointed out hexagons everywhere: street tiles, 
leaves, flowers, signs, buildings. I was taught equations only after I learned what 
they meant and how to think about them. As a result, I enjoyed math, and I 
became good at it. 
 Not all American children have this experience, but they can. The Khan 
Academy, for example, has pioneered the use of technology to encourage 
unstructured learning outside the classroom and now provides teaching sup-
plements in 36 schools around the country. For instance, recent reports 
describe a San Jose charter school using Khan’s instructional videos in ninth-
grade math classes to tailor lessons to each student’s pace. 
 Perhaps more than English or history, STEM subjects require an enormous 
amount of foundational learning before students can become competent. 
Students usually reach graduate school before they can hope to make an origi-
nal contribution. They can experiment in high school labs, but the U.S. schools’ 
approach to math and science lacks, in large part, a creative element. We 
need  to help students understand that math and science are cumulative 
3
A cause author 
will refute.
4
Author’s 
solution.
5
Specific strate-
gies for solving 
problem.
6
7
8

 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
245
disciplines, and help them enjoy learning even as they gradually build a base of 
knowledge. 
 One way to do this is to encourage students to engage in self-guided or 
collaborative research projects—something the Internet has made much more 
feasible. An example from my own field is Zooniverse, a collection of experi-
mental projects in which students can classify galaxies and search for new 
planets or supernovae using real data collected by NASA. Taking part in such 
explorations early will help students understand that science and math aren’t 
just abstract equations, but tools we use to understand our world. By the time 
they get to college, they will have mastered the rhythm of the scientific 
method—learn, apply, learn, apply—and enjoy the process. 
 Six years ago, I had a student in an introductory cosmology class for non 2 
science majors who had entered Yale as an economics major, a choice based 
primarily on pressure from his parents. After one summer researching gamma-
ray bursts—the most energetic explosions in the universe—he is currently 
 finishing up a PhD in physics at Berkeley. He was hooked by the opportunity to 
apply what he learned in the classroom to a challenging scientific problem. He 
loved the thrill of figuring something out. 
 Without firsthand experience of the scientific method and its eventual pay-
off, students will continue to flock to other majors when their science and math 
courses become too demanding. If we want more scientists and engineers 
later, we need to teach children about the joys of hard work and discovery now.  
Source: Washington Post, February 5, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What are the STEM fields? Why are these fields important? 
 2. 
What percentage of college students planning to major in math or science end 
up changing fields?  
 3. 
What do many college students lack, leading them to have trouble in advanced 
STEM courses?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
What is the problem Natarajan examines? What has caused this problem, in the 
author’s view? What, then, is her claim?  
 5. 
How does the author support her claim? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 6. 
Few would question the reality of the problem Natarajan addresses; the issue is 
how to solve it. Do you agree that at least much of the cause rests with the early 
teaching of math and science? If yes, why? If no, why not?  
 7. 
From your experience, can you suggest other ways to improve early education 
in math and science?  
9
10
11
 Author states 
her claim. 

246 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 PREPARING A PROBLEM/SOLUTION ARGUMENT 
 In addition to the guidelines for writing arguments presented in Chapter 4, you 
can use the following advice specific to defending a proposal.  
 Planning 
 1. 
 Think: What should be the focus and limits of your argument? There’s a 
big difference between presenting solutions to the problem of physical 
abuse of women by men and presenting solutions to the problem of date 
rape on your college campus. Select a topic that you know something 
about, one that you can realistically handle.  
 2. 
 Think: What reasons and evidence do you have to support your tentative 
claim? Think through what you already know that has led you to select 
your particular topic. Suppose you want to write on the issue of campus 
rape. Is this choice due to a recent event on the campus? Was this event the 
first in many years or the last in a trend? Where and when are the rapes 
occurring? A brainstorming list may be helpful. 
 3. 
 Reality check: Do you have a claim worth defending? Will readers care? 
Binge drinking and the polluting of the lake near your hometown are seri-
ous problems. Problems with your class schedule may not be—unless your 
experience reveals a college-wide problem. 
 4. 
 Think:  Is there additional evidence that you need to obtain to develop your 
argument? If so, where can you look for that evidence? Are there past issues of 
the campus paper in your library? Will the campus police grant you an 
interview?  
 5. 
 Think: What about the feasibility of each solution you plan to present? Are 
you thinking in terms of essentially one solution with several parts to it or 
several separate solutions, perhaps to be implemented by different people? 
Will coordination be necessary to achieve success? How will this be accom-
plished? For the problem of campus rape, you may want to consider sev-
eral solutions as a package to be coordinated by the counseling service or 
an administrative vice president. 
 Drafting 
 1. 
Begin by either reminding readers of the existing problem you will address 
or arguing that a current situation should be recognized as a problem. In 
many cases, you can count on an audience who sees the world as you do 
and recognizes the problem you will address. But in some cases, your first 
task will be to convince readers that a problem exists that should worry 
them. If they are not concerned, they won’t be interested in your solutions. 
 2. 
Early in your essay define the problem—as you see it—for readers. Do not 
assume that they will necessarily accept your way of seeing the issue. You 
may need to defend your understanding of the problem before moving on 
to solutions. 

 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
247
 3. 
If appropriate, explain the cause or causes of the problem. If your proposed 
solution is tied to removing the cause or causes of the problem, then you 
need to establish cause and prove it early in your argument. If cause is 
important, argue for it; if it is irrelevant, move to your solution.  
 4. 
Explain your solution. If you have several solutions, think about how best 
to order them. If several need to be developed in a sequence, then present 
them in that necessary sequence. If you are presenting a package of diverse 
actions that together will solve the problem, then consider presenting them 
from the simplest to the more complex. With the problem of campus rape, 
for example, you may want to suggest better lighting on campus paths at 
night plus an escort service for women who are afraid to walk home alone 
plus sensitivity training for male students. Adding more lampposts is much 
easier than getting students to take sensitivity classes. 
   5. 
Explain the process for achieving your solution. If you have not thought 
through the political or legal steps necessary to implement your solution, 
then this step cannot be part of your purpose in writing. However, antici-
pating a skeptical audience that says “How are we going to do that?” you 
would be wise to have precise steps to offer your reader. You may have 
obtained an estimate of costs for new lighting on your campus and want to 
suggest specific paths that need the lights. You may have investigated escort 
services at other colleges and can spell out how such a service can be imple-
mented on your campus. Showing readers that you have thought ahead to 
the next steps in the process can be an effective method of persuasion.  
 6. 
Support the feasibility of your solution. Be able to estimate costs. Show that 
you know who would be responsible for implementation. Specific informa-
tion strengthens your argument.  
 7. Show how your solution is better than others. Anticipate challenges by 
including reasons for adopting your program rather than another pro-
gram. Explain how your solution will be more easily adopted or more 
effective when implemented than other possibilities. Of course, a less 
practical but still viable defense is that your solution is the right thing to 
do. Values also belong in public policy debates, not just issues of cost and 
acceptability.   
 A CHECKLIST FOR REVISION  
 u   Do I have a clear statement of my policy claim? Is it appropriately qualified 
and focused? 
 u   Have I clearly explained how I see the problem to be solved? If necessary, 
have I argued for seeing the problem my way? 
 u   Have I presented my solutions—and argued for them—in a clear and logi-
cal structure? Have I explained how these solutions can be implemented 
and why they are better than other solutions that have been suggested? 
 u   Have I used data that are relevant and current? 
 u   Have I used the basic checklist for revision in Chapter 4? (See p. 111.) 

248 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 FOR ANALYSIS AND DEBATE 
POVERTY IN AMERICA: 
WHY CAN’T WE END IT?  
 PETER   EDELMAN  
 A professor of law at Georgetown University, Peter Edelman is faculty director of the 
Center on Poverty, Inequality, and Public Policy at Georgetown and the author of numer-
ous articles and books. His areas of specialty include constitutional law, legislation, and 
welfare law. His most recent book is  So Rich, So Poor: Why It’s So Hard to End Poverty in 
America (2012). The following essay appeared July 29, 2012 in the  New York Times.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What percentage of Americans do you think live below the 
poverty line? Do you think the numbers are great enough to be considered a problem? 
 Ronald Reagan famously said, “We fought a war on poverty and poverty 
won.” With 46 million Americans—15 percent of the population—now counted 
as poor, it’s tempting to think he may have been right. 
 Look a little deeper and the temptation grows. The lowest percentage in 
poverty since we started counting was 11.1 percent in 1973. The rate climbed 
as high as 15.2 percent in 1983. In 2000, after a spurt of prosperity, it went 
back down to 11.3 percent, and yet 15 million more people are poor today. 
 At the same time, we have done a lot that works. From Social Security to 
food stamps to the earned-income tax credit and on and on, we have enacted 
programs that now keep 40 million people out of poverty. Poverty would be 
nearly double what it is now without these measures, according to the Center 
on Budget and Policy Priorities. To say that “poverty won” is like saying the 
Clean Air and Clean Water Acts failed because there is still pollution. 
 With all of that, why have we not achieved more? Four reasons: An astonish-
ing number of people work at low-wage jobs. Plus, many more households are 
headed now by a single parent, making it difficult for them to earn a living 
income from the jobs that are typically available. The near disappearance of cash 
assistance for low-income mothers and children—i.e., welfare—in much of the 
country plays a contributing role, too. And persistent issues of race and gender 
mean higher poverty among minorities and families headed by single mothers. 
 The first thing needed if we’re to get people out of poverty is more jobs 
that pay decent wages. There aren’t enough of these in our current economy. 
The need for good jobs extends far beyond the current crisis; we’ll need a full-
employment policy and a bigger investment in 21st-century education and 
skill development strategies if we’re to have any hope of breaking out of the 
current economic malaise. 
 This isn’t a problem specific to the current moment. We’ve been drowning 
in a flood of low-wage jobs for the last 40 years. Most of the income of people 
in poverty comes from work. According to the most recent data available from 
the Census Bureau, 104 million people—a third of the population—have 
annual incomes below twice the poverty line, less than $38,000 for a family of 
three. They struggle to make ends meet every month. 
1
2
3
4
5
6

 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
249
 Half the jobs in the 
nation pay less than $34,000 
a year, according to the 
Economic Policy Institute. A 
quarter pay below the pov-
erty line for a family of four, 
less than $23,000 annually. 
Families 
that 
can 
send 
another adult to work have 
done better, but single 
mothers (and fathers) don’t 
have that option. Poverty 
among families with children 
headed by single mothers 
exceeds 40 percent. 
 Wages for those who work on jobs in the bottom half have been stuck 
since 1973, increasing just 7 percent. 
 It’s not that the whole economy stagnated. There’s been growth, a lot of 
it, but it has stuck at the top. The realization that 99 percent of us have been 
left in the dust by the 1 percent at the top (some much further behind than 
others) came far later than it should have—Rip Van Winkle and then some. It 
took the Great Recession to get people’s attention, but the facts had been 
accumulating for a long time. If we’ve awakened, we can act. 
 Low-wage jobs bedevil tens of millions of people. At the other end of the 
low-income spectrum we have a different problem. The safety net for single 
mothers and their children has developed a gaping hole over the past dozen 
years. This is a major cause of the dramatic increase in extreme poverty during 
those years. The census tells us that 20.5 million people earn incomes below 
half the poverty line, less than about $9,500 for a family of three—up eight 
million from 2000. 
 Why? A substantial reason is the near demise of welfare—now called 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or TANF. In the mid-90s more than 
two-thirds of children in poor families received welfare. But that number has 
dwindled over the past decade and a half to roughly 27 percent. 
 One result: six million people have no income other than food stamps. 
Food stamps provide an income at a third of the poverty line, close to $6,300 
for a family of three. It’s hard to understand how they survive. 
 At least we have food stamps. They have been a powerful antirecession 
tool in the past five years, with the number of recipients rising to 46 million 
today from 26.3 million in 2007. By contrast, welfare has done little to counter 
the impact of the recession; although the number of people receiving cash 
assistance rose from 3.9 million to 4.5 million since 2007, many states actually 
reduced the size of their rolls and lowered benefits to those in greatest need. 
 Race and gender play an enormous part in determining poverty’s continu-
ing course. Minorities are disproportionately poor: around 27 percent of 
African-Americans, Latinos and American Indians are poor, versus 10 percent 
7
8
 9
10
11
12
13
14
This classic picture of poverty is old; sadly, as 
Edelman explains, poverty is still with us.

250 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
of whites. Wealth disparities are even wider. At the same time, whites consti-
tute the largest number among the poor. This is a fact that bears emphasis, 
since measures to raise income and provide work supports will help more 
whites than minorities. But we cannot ignore race and gender, both because 
they present particular challenges and because so much of the politics of pov-
erty is grounded in those issues. 
 We know what we need to do—make the rich pay their fair share of run-
ning the country, raise the minimum wage, provide health care and a decent 
safety net, and the like. But realistically, the immediate challenge is keeping 
what we have. Representative Paul Ryan and his ideological peers would slash 
everything from Social Security to Medicare and on through the list, and would 
hand out more tax breaks to the people at the top. Robin Hood would turn 
over in his grave. 
 We should not kid ourselves. It isn’t certain that things will stay as good as 
they are now. The wealth and income of the top 1 percent grows at the 
expense of everyone else. Money breeds power and power breeds more 
money. It is a truly vicious circle. 
 A surefire politics of change would necessarily involve getting people in 
the middle—from the 30th to the 70th percentile—to see their own economic 
self-interest. If they vote in their own self-interest, they’ll elect people who are 
likely to be more aligned with people with lower incomes as well as with them. 
As long as people in the middle identify more with people on the top than 
with those on the bottom, we are doomed. The obscene amount of money 
flowing into the electoral process makes things harder yet. 
 But history shows that people power wins sometimes. That’s what hap-
pened in the Progressive Era a century ago and in the Great Depression as 
well. The gross inequality of those times produced an amalgam of popular 
unrest, organization, muckraking journalism and political leadership that 
attacked the big—and worsening—structural problem of economic inequality. 
The civil rights movement changed the course of history and spread into the 
women’s movement, the environmental movement and, later, the gay rights 
movement. Could we have said on the day before the dawn of each that it 
would happen, let alone succeed? Did Rosa Parks know? 
 We have the ingredients. For one thing, the demographics of the elector-
ate are changing. The consequences of that are hardly automatic, but they 
create an opportunity. The new generation of young people—unusually dis-
trustful of encrusted power in all institutions and, as a consequence, tending 
toward libertarianism—is ripe for a new politics of honesty. Lower-income 
people will participate if there are candidates who speak to their situations. 
The change has to come from the bottom up and from synergistic leadership 
that draws it out. When people decide they have had enough and there are 
candidates who stand for what they want, they will vote accordingly. 
 I have seen days of promise and days of darkness, and I’ve seen them 
more than once. All history is like that. The people have the power if they will 
use it, but they have to see that it is in their interest to do so.
 Source: New York Times, July 29, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
15
16
17
18
19
20

 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
251
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. How many Americans live in poverty today? 
 2. What programs keep more from living in poverty? 
 3. What are the four causes Edelman lists that account for this poverty? 
 4. What solutions does Edelman present? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What is Edelman’s claim? (State it as a problem/solution issue.) 
 6. One cause of poverty is the continued low incomes of women and minorities. 
Why, in examining solutions, does the author point out that extending aid will 
actually help more whites than minorities? What does he want readers to start 
thinking about?  
 7. Edelman makes clear that his call for some specific changes won’t happen 
unless there is a more general change of attitude among voters. What change in 
thinking is essential in his view? Why?  
 8. Does the author believe that change is possible, that we could “win a war” on 
poverty? How optimistic does he seem to you?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. What numbers surprise you the most in this essay? Why? 
 10. Do you agree with Edelman that the change in attitude must come before the 
country will be able to decrease the numbers of poor in America? If you dis-
agree, how would you rebut Edelman—that is, how can we reduce poverty 
without the attitude change?  
 11. Do you think that our poverty rate is a problem that we should address? Why 
or why not? Explain your position.  
   A MODEST PROPOSAL   
 JONATHAN   SWIFT 
 For Preventing the Children of Poor People in Ireland from Being a 
Burden to Their Parents or Country, and for Making Them Beneficial to 
the Public
 Born in Dublin, Jonathan Swift (1667–1745) was ordained in the Anglican Church and 
spent many years as dean of St. Patrick’s in Dublin. Swift was also involved in the 
political and social life of London for some years, and throughout his life he kept busy 
writing. His most famous imaginative work is  Gulliver’s Travels (1726). Almost as well 
known is the essay that follows, published in 1729. Here you will find Swift’s usual bit-
ing satire but also his concern to improve humanity.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS Swift was a minister, but he writes this essay as if he 
were in a different job. What “voice” or persona do you hear? Does Swift agree 
with the views of this persona?  

252 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 It is a melancholy object to 
those who walk through this great 
town  1 or travel in the country, 
where they see the streets, the 
roads, and cabin doors crowded 
with beggars of the female sex, 
followed by three, four, or six chil-
dren, all in rags, and importuning 
every passenger for an alms. 
These mothers, instead of being 
able to work for their honest live-
lihood, are forced to employ all 
their time in strolling to beg sus-
tenance for their helpless infants, 
who, as they grow up, either turn 
thieves for want of work, or leave 
their dear native country to fight 
for the pretender  2 in Spain or sell 
themselves to the Barbados.
 I think it is agreed by all par-
ties that this prodigious number 
of children in the arms, or on the 
backs, or at the heels of their 
mothers, and frequently of their fathers, is in the present deplorable state of 
the kingdom a very great additional grievance; and therefore, whoever could 
find out a fair, cheap, and easy method of making these children sound and 
useful members of the commonwealth would deserve so well of the public as 
to have his statue set up for a preserver of the nation. 
 But my intention is very far from being confined to provide only for the 
children of professed beggars; it is of a much greater extent, and shall take in 
the whole number of infants at a certain age who are born of parents in effect 
as little able to support them as those who demand our charity in the streets. 
 As to my own part, having turned my thoughts for many years upon this 
important subject, and maturely weighed the several schemes of other projec-
tors, 3 I have always found them grossly mistaken in the computation. It is true a 
child just dropped from its dam may be supported by her milk for a solar year 
with little other nourishment; at most not above the value of two shillings, which 
the mother may certainly get, or the value in scraps, by her lawful occupation of 
begging; and, it is exactly at one year that I propose to provide for them in such 
a manner as instead of being a charge upon their parents or the parish, or want-
ing food and raiment for the rest of their lives, they shall on the contrary con-
tribute to the feeding, and partly to the clothing, of many thousands.
1
2
3
4
 Jonathan Swift 
1 Dublin.—Ed.
 2  James Stuart, claimant to the British throne lost by his father, James II, in 1688.—Ed. 
 3  Planners.—Ed. 

 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
253
 There is likewise another great advantage in my scheme, that it will pre-
vent those voluntary abortions, and that horrid practice of women murdering 
their bastard children, alas, too frequent among us, sacrificing the poor inno-
cent babes, I doubt, more to avoid the expense than the shame, which would 
move tears and pity in the most savage and inhuman breast. 
 The number of souls in this kingdom being usually reckoned one million 
and a half, of these I calculate there may be about two hundred thousand 
couples whose wives are breeders; from which number I subtract thirty thou-
sand couples who are able to maintain their own children, although I appre-
hend there cannot be so many, under the present distress of the kingdom; but 
this being granted, there will remain a hundred and seventy thousand breed-
ers. I again subtract fifty thousand for those women who miscarry, or whose 
children die by accident or disease within the year. There only remain a hun-
dred and twenty thousand children of poor parents annually born. The ques-
tion therefore is, how this number shall be reared and provided for, which, as I 
have already said, under the present situation of affairs, is utterly impossible 
by all the methods hereto proposed. For we can neither employ them in handi-
craft or agriculture; we neither build houses (I mean in the country) nor culti-
vate land. They can very seldom pick up a livelihood by stealing until they 
arrive at six years old, except where they are of towardly parts  4 ; although I 
confess they learn the rudiments much earlier, during which time they can, 
however, be properly looked upon only as probationers, as I have been 
informed by a principal gentleman in the country of Cavan, who protested to 
me that he never knew above one or two instances under the age of six, even 
in the part of the kingdom renowned for the quickest proficiency in that art.
 I am assured by our merchants that a boy or girl before twelve years old is 
no saleable commodity; and even when they come to this age they will not 
yield above three pounds, or three pounds and a half a crown at most, on the 
exchange; which cannot turn to account either to the parents or the kingdom, 
the charge of nutriment and rags having been at least four times that value. 
 I shall now therefore humbly propose my own thoughts, which I hope will 
not be liable to the least objection. 
 I have been assured by a very knowing American of my acquaintance in 
London that a young healthy child well nursed is at a year old a most delicious, 
nourishing, and wholesome food, whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled; 
and I make no doubt that it will equally serve in a fricassee or ragout. 
 I do therefore humbly offer it to public consideration that of the hundred 
and twenty-thousand children, already computed, twenty thousand may be 
reserved for breed, whereof only one fourth part to be males, which is more 
than we allow to sheep, black cattle, or swine; and my reason is that these chil-
dren are seldom the fruits of marriage, a circumstance not much regarded by 
our savages, therefore one male will be sufficient to serve four females. That 
the remaining hundred thousand may at a year old be offered in sale to the 
persons of quality and fortune, through the kingdom, always advising the 
5
6
7
8
9
10
 4  Innate abilities.—Ed.  

254 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
mother to let them suck plentifully in the last month, so as to render them 
plump and fat for the table. A child will make two dishes at an entertainment 
for friends; and when the family dines alone, the fore or hind quarter will make 
a reasonable dish, and seasoned with a little pepper or salt will be very good 
boiled on the fourth day, especially in winter. 
 I have reckoned upon a medium that a child just born will weigh twelve 
pounds, and in a solar year if tolerably nursed increaseth to twenty-eight 
pounds. 
 I grant this food will be somewhat dear, and therefore very proper for 
landlords, who, as they have already devoured most of the parents, seem to 
have the best title to the children. 
 Infant’s flesh will be in season throughout the year, but more plentiful in 
March, and a little before and after. For we are told by a grave author, an emi-
nent French physician,  5 that fish being a prolific diet, there are more children 
born in Roman Catholic countries about nine months after Lent than at any 
other season; therefore reckoning a year after Lent, the markets will be more 
gutted than usual, because the number of popish infants is at least three to 
one in this kingdom; and therefore it will have one other collateral advantage, 
by lessening the number of Papists among us.
 I have already computed the charge of nursing a beggar’s child (in which 
list I reckon all cottagers, laborers, and four-fifths of the farmers) to be about 
two shillings per annum, rags included; and I believe no gentleman would 
repine to give ten shillings for the carcass of a good fat child, which, as I have 
said, will make four dishes of excellent nutritive meat, when he hath only some 
particular friend or his own family to dine with him. Thus the squire will learn to 
be a good landlord, and grow popular among his tenants; the mother will have 
eight shillings net profit, and be fit for work until she produces another child. 
 Those who are more thrifty (as I must confess the times require) may flay 
the carcass; the skin of which artificially dressed will make admirable gloves for 
ladies and summer boots for fine gentlemen. 
 As to our city of Dublin, shambles  6 may be appointed for this purpose, in 
the most convenient parts of it, and butchers we may be assured will not be 
wanting; although I rather recommend buying the children alive, and dressing 
them hot from the knife as we do roasting pigs.
 A very worthy person, a true lover of his country, and whose virtues I highly 
esteem, was lately pleased in discoursing on this matter to offer a refinement 
upon my scheme. He said that many gentlemen of this kingdom, having of late 
destroyed their deer, he conceived that the want of venison might be well sup-
plied by the bodies of young lads and maidens, not exceeding fourteen years 
of age nor under twelve, so great a number of both sexes in every county 
being now ready to starve for want of work and service; and these to be dis-
posed of by their parents, if alive, or otherwise by their nearest relations. But 
with due deference to so excellent a friend and so deserving a patriot, I 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
 5  François Rabelais.—Ed. 
 6  Butcher shops.—Ed. 

 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
255
cannot be altogether in his sentiments. For as to the males, my American 
acquaintance assured me from frequent experience that their flesh was gener-
ally tough and lean, like that of our school-boys, by continual exercise, and 
their taste disagreeable; and to fatten them would not answer the charge. 
Then as to the females, it would, I think with humble submission, be a loss to 
the public, because they soon would become breeders themselves; and 
besides, it is not probable that some scrupulous people might be apt to cen-
sure such a practice (although indeed very unjustly) as a little bordering upon 
cruelty; which, I confess, hath always been with me the strongest objection 
against any project, how wellsoever intended. 
 But in order to justify my friend, he confessed that this expedient was put 
into his head by the famous Psalmanazar,  7 a native of the island Formosa who 
came from thence to London above twenty years ago, and in conversation 
told my friend that in his country when any young person happened to be put 
to death, the executioner sold the carcass to persons of quality as a prime 
dainty; and that in his time the body of a plump girl of fifteen, who was cruci-
fied for an attempt to poison the emperor, was sold to his Imperial Majesty’s 
prime minister of state, and other great mandarins of the court, in joints from 
the gibbet, at four hundred crowns. Neither indeed can I deny that if the same 
use were made of several plump young girls in this town, who without one 
single groat to their fortunes cannot stir abroad without a chair, and appear at 
the playhouse and assemblies in foreign fineries which they never will pay for, 
the kingdom would not be the worse.
 Some persons of a desponding spirit are in great concern about that vast 
number of poor people who are aged, diseased, or maimed, and I have been 
desired to employ my thoughts what course may be taken to ease the nation 
of so grievous an incumbrance. But I am not in the least pain upon that matter, 
because it is very well known that they are every day dying and rotting by cold 
and famine, and filth and vermin, as fast as can be reasonably expected. And 
as to the younger laborers, they are now in almost as hopeful a condition. 
They cannot get work, and consequently pine away for want of nourishment 
to a degree that if at any time they are accidentally hired to common labor, 
they have not strength to perform it; and thus the country and themselves are 
in a fair way of being soon delivered from the evils to come. 
 I have too long digressed, and therefore shall return to my subject. I think 
the advantages by the proposal which I have made are obvious and many, as 
well as of the highest importance. 
 For, first, as I have already observed, it would greatly lessen the number of 
Papists, with whom we are yearly overrun, being the principal breeders of the 
nation as well as our most dangerous enemies; and who stay at home on pur-
pose with a design to deliver the kingdom to the pretender, hoping to take 
their advantage by the absence of so many good Protestants, who have cho-
sen rather to leave their country than stay at home and pay tithes against their 
conscience to an idolatrous Episcopal curate. 
18
19
20
21
 7  A known imposter who was French, not Formosan as he claimed.—Ed.  

256 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
 Secondly, the poorer tenants will have something valuable of their own, 
which by law may be made liable to distress,  8 and help their landlord’s rent; 
their corn and cattle being already seized, and money a thing unknown.
 Thirdly, whereas the maintenance of a hundred thousand children, from 
two years old upwards, cannot be computed at less than ten shillings a piece 
per annum, the nation’s stock will be thereby increased fifty thousand pounds 
per annum, besides the profit of a new dish introduced to the tables of all 
gentlemen of fortune in the kingdom who have any refinement in taste. And 
the money will circulate among ourselves, the goods being entirely of our own 
growth and manufacture. 
 Fourthly, the constant breeders, besides the gain of eight shillings sterling 
per annum by the sale of their children, will be rid of the charge of maintaining 
them after the first year. 
 Fifthly, this food would likewise bring great custom to taverns, where the 
vintners will certainly be so prudent as to procure the best receipts for dress-
ing it to perfection, and consequently have their houses frequented by all the 
fine gentlemen, who justly value themselves upon their knowledge in good 
eating; and a skillful cook, who understands how to oblige his guests, will con-
trive to make it as expensive as they please. 
 Sixthly, this would be a great inducement to marriage, which all wise 
nations have either encouraged by rewards or enforced by laws and penalties. 
It would increase the care and tenderness of mothers towards their children, 
when they were sure of a settlement for life to the poor babes, provided in 
some sort by the public; to their annual profit instead of expense. We should 
soon see an honest emulation among the married women, which of them 
could bring the fattest child to the market. Men would become as fond of 
their wives during the time of their pregnancy as they are now of their mares 
in foal, their cows in calf, or sows when they are ready to farrow; nor offer to 
beat or kick them (as it is too frequent a practice) for fear of a miscarriage. 
 Many other advantages might be enumerated. For instance, the addition 
of some thousand carcasses in our exportation of barrelled beef, the propaga-
tion of swine’s flesh, and improvement in the art of making good bacon, so 
much wanted among us by the great destruction of pigs, too frequent at our 
tables, which are no way comparable in taste or magnificence to a well-grown 
fat, yearling child, which roasted whole will make a considerable figure at a 
lord mayor’s feast or any other public entertainment. But this and many others 
I omit, being studious of brevity. 
 Supposing that one thousand families in this city would be constant cus-
tomers for infants’ flesh, besides others who might have it at merry meetings, 
particularly weddings and christenings, I compute that Dublin would take off 
annually about twenty thousand carcasses, and the rest of the kingdom (where 
probably they will be sold somewhat cheaper) the remaining eighty thousand. 
 I can think of no one objection that will possibly be raised against this pro-
posal, unless it should be urged that the number of people will be thereby 
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
 8  Can be seized by lenders.—Ed.  

 
CHAPTER 11 Presenting Proposals: The Problem/Solution Argument 
257
much lessened in the kingdom. This I freely own, and it was indeed one princi-
pal design in offering it to the world. I desire the reader will observe that I 
calculate my remedy for this one individual kingdom of Ireland and for no 
other that ever was, is, or I think ever can be upon earth. Therefore let no man 
talk to me of other expedients: of taxing our absentees at five shillings a 
pound: of using neither clothes nor household furniture except what is of our 
own growth and manufacture: of utterly rejecting the materials and instru-
ments that promote foreign luxury: of curing the expensiveness or pride, van-
ity, idleness, and gaming in our women: of introducing a vein of parsimony, 
prudence and temperance: of learning to love our country, wherein we differ 
even from Laplanders and the inhabitants of Topinamboo  9 : of quitting our ani-
mosities and factions, nor act any longer like the Jews, who were murdering 
one another at the very moment their city was taken  10 : of being a little cau-
tious not to sell our country and consciences for nothing: of teaching landlords 
to have at least one degree of mercy towards their tenants. Lastly, of putting a 
spirit of honesty, industry, and skill into our shopkeepers; who, if a resolution 
could now be taken to buy only our native goods, would immediately unite to 
cheat and exact upon us in the price, the measure, and the goodness, nor 
could ever yet be brought to make one fair proposal of just dealing, though 
often and earnestly invited to it.
 Therefore I repeat, let no man talk to me of these and the like expedients, 
till he hath at least a glimpse of hope that there will ever be some hearty and 
sincere attempt to put them in practice. 
 But as to myself, having been wearied out for many years with offering 
vain, idle, visionary thoughts, and at length utterly despairing of success, I for-
tunately fell upon this proposal, which, as it is wholly new, so it hath something 
solid and real, of no expense and little trouble, full in our own power, and 
whereby we can incur no danger in disobliging England. For this kind of com-
modity will not bear exportation, the flesh being of too tender a consistence 
to admit a long continuance in salt, although perhaps I could name a country 
which would be glad to eat up our whole nation without it. 
 After all, I am not so violently bent upon my own opinion as to reject any 
offer proposed by wise men, which shall be found equally innocent, cheap, 
easy, and effectual. But before something of that kind shall be advanced in 
contradiction to my scheme, and offering a better, I desire the author, or 
authors, will be pleased maturely to consider two points. First, as things now 
stand, how they will be able to find food and raiment for a hundred thousand 
useless mouths and backs. And secondly, there being a round million of crea-
tures in human figure throughout this kingdom, whose whole subsistence put 
into a common stock would leave them in debt two million of pounds sterling, 
adding those who are beggars by profession to the bulk of farmers, cottagers, 
and laborers, with their wives and children who are beggars, in effect; I desire 
30
31
32
9 An area in Brazil.—Ed.
 10  Some Jews were accused of helping the Romans and were executed during the Roman siege 
of Jerusalem in  A.D. 70—Ed. 

258 
SECTION 3 STUDYING SOME ARGUMENTS BY GENRE
those politicians who dislike my overture, and may perhaps be so bold to 
attempt an answer, that they will first ask the parents of these mortals whether 
they would not at this day think it a great happiness to have been sold for food 
at a year old in the manner I prescribe, and thereby have avoided such a per-
petual scene of misfortunes as they have since gone through by the oppres-
sion of landlords, the impossibility of paying rent without money or trade, the 
want of common sustenance, with neither house nor clothes to cover them 
from the inclemencies of weather, and the most inevitable prospect of entail-
ing the like or greater miseries upon their breed forever. 
 I profess, in the sincerity of my heart, that I have not the least personal 
interest in endeavoring to promote this necessary work, having no other 
motive than the public good of my country, by advancing our trade, providing 
for infants, relieving the poor, and giving some pleasure to the rich. I have no 
children by which I can propose to get a single penny, the youngest being nine 
years old, and my wife past childbearing.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
How is the argument organized? What is accomplished in paragraphs 1–7? In 
paragraphs 8–16? In paragraphs 17–19? In paragraphs 20–28? In paragraphs 
29–33? 
 2. 
What specific advantages does the writer offer in defense of his proposal? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 3. 
What specific passages and connotative words make us aware that this is a 
satirical piece using irony as its chief device?  
 4. 
After noting Swift’s use of irony, what do you conclude to be his purpose in 
writing? 
 5. 
What can you conclude to be some of the problems in eighteenth-century 
Ireland? Where does Swift offer direct condemnation of existing conditions in 
Ireland and attitudes of the English toward the Irish? 
 6. 
What actual reforms would Swift like to see? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
What are some of the advantages of using irony? What does Swift gain by this 
approach? What are possible disadvantages in using irony? Reflect on irony as 
a persuasive strategy. 
 8. 
What are some current problems that might be addressed by the use of irony? 
Make a list. Then select one and think about what “voice” or persona you might 
use to bring attention to that problem. Plan your argument with irony as a 
strategy. 
33

259
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
Think of a problem on your campus or in your community for which you have a 
workable solution. Organize your argument to include all relevant steps as 
described in this chapter. Although your primary concern will be to present your 
solution, depending on your topic you may need to begin by convincing readers of 
the seriousness of the problem or the causes of the problem—if your solutions 
involve removing those causes.  
   2. 
Think of a problem in education—K–12 or at the college level—that you have a 
solution for and that you are interested in. You may want to begin by brainstorming 
to develop a list of possible problems in education about which you could write—or 
look through Chapter 19 for ideas. Be sure to qualify your claim and limit your 
focus as necessary to work with a problem that is not so broad and general that your 
“solutions” become general and vague comments about “getting better  teachers.” 
(If one problem is a lack of qualified teachers, then what specific proposals do you 
have for solving that particular problem?) Include as many steps as are  appropriate 
to develop and support your argument.  
 3. 
Think of a situation that you consider serious but that apparently many people do 
not take seriously enough. Write an argument in which you emphasize, by provid-
ing evidence, that the situation is a serious problem. You may conclude by suggest-
ing a solution, but your chief purpose in writing will be to alert readers to a 
problem. 


 The Researched and 
Formally Documented 
Argument 
 SECTION4 

 Locating, Evaluating, and 
Preparing to Use Sources 
 CHAPTER 12 

263
 W
 e do research all the time. You would not select a college or buy a car 
without doing research: gathering relevant information, analyzing that 
information, and drawing conclusions from your study. You may already 
have done some research in this course, using sources in this text or finding 
data online to strengthen an argument. Then you acknowledged your sources 
either informally in your essay or formally, following the documentation 
guidelines in this section. So, when you are assigned a more formal research 
essay, remember that you are not facing a brand-new assignment. You are just 
doing a longer paper with more sources, and you have this section to guide 
you to success. 
 SELECTING A GOOD TOPIC 
 To get started you need to select and limit a topic. One key to success is finding 
a workable topic. No matter how interesting or clever the topic, it is not work-
able if it does not meet the guidelines of your assignment. Included in those 
guidelines may be a required length, a required number of sources, and a due 
date. Understand and accept all of these guidelines as part of your writing 
context. 
 What Type of Paper Am I Preparing? 
 Study your assignment to understand the type of project. Is your purpose 
expository, analytic, or argumentative? How would you classify each of the fol-
lowing topics?
 1. 
Explain the chief solutions proposed for increasing the Southwest’s water 
supply. 
 2. 
Compare the Freudian and behavioral models of mental illness. 
 3. 
Find the best solutions to a current environmental problem. 
 4. 
Consider: What twentieth-century invention has most dramatically changed 
our personal lives?  
 Did you recognize that the first topic calls for a report? The second topic requires 
an analysis of two schools of psychology, so you cannot report on only one, but 
you also cannot argue that one model is better than the other. Both topics 3 and 
4 require an argumentative paper: You must select and defend a claim.  
 Who Is My Audience? 
 If you are writing in a specific discipline, imagine your instructor as a represen-
tative of that field, a reader with knowledge of the subject area. If you are in a 
composition course, your instructor may advise you to write to a general reader, 
someone who reads newspapers but may not have the exact information and 
perspective you have. For a general reader, specialized terms and concepts 
need definition. 

264 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 How Can I Select a Good Topic? 
 Choosing from assigned topics.  At times students are unhappy with topic restric-
tion. Looked at another way, your instructor has eliminated a difficult step in 
the research process and has helped you avoid the problem of selecting an 
unworkable topic. If topics are assigned, you will still have to choose from the 
list and develop your own claim and approach. 
 Finding a course-related topic.  This guideline gives you many options and requires 
more thought about your choice. Working within the guidelines, try to write 
about what interests you. Here are examples of assignments turned into topics 
of interest to the student:
ASSIGNMENT
INTEREST
TOPIC
1.  Trace the influence of any 
twentieth-century event, 
development, invention.
Music
The influence of the Jazz 
Age on modern music
2.  Support an argument on 
some issue of pornography 
and censorship.
Computers
Censorship of pornography 
on the Internet
3.  Demonstrate the popularity 
of a current myth and then 
discredit it.
Science fiction
The lack of evidence for the 
existence of UFOs
 Selecting a topic without any guidelines.  When you are free to write on any topic, 
you may need to use some strategies for topic selection.
 • Look through your text’s table of contents or index for subject areas that 
can be narrowed or focused. 
 • Look over your class notes and think about subjects covered that have 
interested you.  
 • Consider college-based or local issues. 
 • Do a subject search in an electronic database to see how a large topic can be 
narrowed—for example, type in “dinosaur” and observe such subheadings 
as  dinosaur behavior and  dinosaur extinction. 
 • Use one or more invention strategies to narrow and focus a topic:
 — Freewriting 
 — Brainstorming 
 —  Asking questions about a broad subject, using the reporter’s  who, what, 
where, when,  and  why. 
NOTE: Consider the expectations of your readers. A research essay is not 
a personal essay. It is not about you; it is about a subject. Keep yourself 
in  the background and carefully evaluate any use of the personal 
pronoun “I.”

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
265
 What Kinds of Topics Should I Avoid? 
 Here are several kinds of topics that are best avoided because they usually pro-
duce disasters, no matter how well the student handles the rest of the research 
process:
 1. 
 Topics that are irrelevant to your interests or the course. If you are not inter-
ested in your topic, you will not produce a lively, informative paper. If you 
select a topic far removed from the course content, you may create some 
hostility in your instructor, who will wonder why you are unwilling to 
become engaged in the course. 
 2. 
 Topics that are broad subject areas.  These result in general surveys that lack 
appropriate detail and support. 
 3. 
 Topics that can be fully researched with only one source.  You will produce a 
summary, not a research paper. 
 4. 
 Biographical studies.  Short undergraduate papers on a person’s life usually 
turn out to be summaries of one or two major biographies. 
 5. 
 Topics that produce a strong emotional response in you.  If there is only one 
“right” answer to the abortion issue and you cannot imagine counterargu-
ments, don’t choose to write on abortion. Probably most religious topics are 
best avoided. 
 6. 
 Topics that are too technical for you at this point in your college work. If you 
do not understand the complexities of the federal tax code, then arguing for 
a reduction in the capital gains tax may be an unwise topic choice.  
 WRITING A TENTATIVE CLAIM 
OR RESEARCH PROPOSAL 
 Once you have selected and focused a topic, write a tentative claim, research 
question, or research proposal. Some instructors will ask to see a  statement—
from a sentence to a paragraph long—to be approved before you proceed. 
Others may require a one-page proposal that includes a tentative claim, a basic 
organizational plan, and a description of types of sources to be used. Even if 
your instructor does not require anything in writing, you need to write some-
thing for your benefit—to direct your reading and thinking. Here are two 
possibilities:
 1. 
SUBJECT: 
Computers
 
TOPIC: 
The impact of computers on the twentieth century
 
CLAIM: 
 Computers had the greatest impact of any technological 
 development in the twentieth century.
 
 RESEARCH
PROPOSAL: 
 I propose to show that computers had the greatest impact 
of any technological development in the twentieth century. 

266 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
I will show the influence of computers at work, in daily 
 living, and in play to emphasize the breadth of influence. 
I will argue that other possibilities (such as cars) did not 
have the same impact as computers. I will check the 
library’s book catalog and databases for sources on 
 technological developments and on computers specifically. 
I will also interview a family friend who works with 
 computers at the Pentagon. 
 This example illustrates several key ideas. First, the initial subject is both too 
broad and unfocused ( What about computers?). Second, the claim is more 
focused than the topic statement because it asserts a position, a claim the stu-
dent must support. Third, the research proposal is more helpful than the claim 
only because it includes some thoughts on developing the thesis and finding 
sources. 
 2. 
Less sure of your topic? Then write a research question or a more open-
ended research proposal. Take, for example, a history student studying the 
effects of Prohibition. She is not ready to write a thesis, but she can write a 
research proposal that suggests some possible approaches to the topic:
TOPIC: 
The effect of Prohibition
RESEARCH 
QUESTION: 
What were the effects of Prohibition on the United States?
RESEARCH 
PROPOSAL: 
 I will examine the effects of Prohibition on the United 
States in the 1920s (and possibly consider some long-term 
effects, depending on the amount of material on the topic). 
Specifically, I will look at the varying effects on urban and 
rural areas and on different classes in society. 
 PREPARING A WORKING BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 To begin this next stage of your research, you need to know three things:
 •  Your search strategy.  If you are writing on a course-related topic, your start-
ing place may be your textbook for relevant sections and possible sources 
(if the text contains a bibliography). For this course, you may find some 
potential sources among the readings in this text. Think about what you 
already know or have in hand as you plan your search strategy. 
 •  A method for recording bibliographic information.  You have two choices: the 
always reliable 3  3  5 index cards or a bibliography file in your personal 
computer. 
 •  The documentation format you will be using.  You may be assigned the 
Modern Language Association (MLA) format, or perhaps given a choice 

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
267
between MLA and the American Psychological Association (APA) doc-
umentation styles. Once you select the documentation style, skim the 
appropriate pages in Chapter 14 to get an overview of both content and 
style.  
 A list of possible sources is only a  working bibliography because you do not 
yet know which sources you will use. (Your final bibliography will include only 
those sources you cite—actually refer to—in your paper.) A working bibliogra-
phy will help you see what is available on your topic, note how to locate each 
source, and contain the information needed to document. Whether you are 
using cards or computer files, follow these guidelines:
 1. 
Check all reasonable catalogs and indexes for possible sources. (Use more 
than one reference source even if you locate enough sources there; you are 
looking for the best sources, not the first ones you find.) 
 2. 
Complete a card or prepare an entry for every potentially useful source. 
You won’t know what to reject until you start a close reading of sources. 
 3. 
Copy (or download from an online catalog) all information needed to com-
plete a citation and to locate the source. (When using an index that does not 
give all needed information, leave a space to be filled in when you actually 
read the source.) 
 4. 
Put bibliographic information in the correct format for every possible 
source; you will save time and make fewer errors. Do not mix or blend 
styles. When searching for sources, have your text handy and use the 
appropriate models as your guide. 
 The following brief guide to correct form will get you started. Illustrations 
are for cards, but the information and order will be the same in your PC file. 
(Guidelines are for MLA style.) 
 Basic Form for Books 
 As  Figure 12.1 shows, the basic MLA form for books includes the following 
information in this pattern:
 1. 
The author’s full name, last name first. 
 2. 
The title (and subtitle if there is one) of the book, in italics (underlined in 
handwriting). 
 3. 
The facts of publication: the city of publication (followed by a colon), the 
publisher (followed by a comma), and the date of publication. 
 4. 
The publication medium—Print. 
 Note that periods are placed after the author’s name, after the title, and at the 
end of the citation. Other information, when appropriate (e.g., the number of 
volumes), is added to this basic pattern. (See pp. 318–29 for many sample cita-
tions.) Include, in your working bibliography, the book’s classification number 
so that you can find it in the library. 

classiﬁcation
number
facts of
publication
author
title and subtitle
publication
medium
FIGURE 12.1  Bibliography Card for a Book 
FIGURE 12.2  Bibliography Card for a Magazine Article 
268 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 Basic Form for Articles 
 Figure 12.2 shows the simplest form for magazine articles. Include the follow-
ing information, in this pattern:
 1. 
The author’s full name, last name first. 
 2. 
The title of the article, in quotation marks. 
 3. 
The facts of publication: the title of the periodical in italics (underlined in 
handwriting), the volume number (if the article is from a scholarly journal), 
the date (followed by a colon), and inclusive page numbers. 
 4. 
The publication medium—Print. 

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
269
 You will discover that indexes rarely present information in MLA format. 
Here, for example, is a source on problems with zoos, found in an electronic 
database: 
 BAD DAY AT THE ZOO. 
 Wooten,  Anne. Popular Science, Sep2007, Vol. 271 Issue 3, p. 14–15, 2p. 
 If you read the article in the magazine itself, then the correct citation, for MLA, 
will look like that in the sample bibliography card in  Figure 12.2.  (Because 
 Popular Science is a magazine, not a scholarly journal, you provide month and 
year but not volume and issue numbers.) However, if you obtain a copy of the 
article from one of your library’s electronic databases, then your citation will 
need additional information to identify your actual source of the article: 
 Wooten, Anne. “Bad Day at the Zoo.”  Popular Science Sept. 2007: 14–15.
 Academic Search Complete.  Web. 8 Sept. 2008. 
 Note that the medium of publication is now “Web,” not “Print,” and the name 
of the database is italicized as if it were a book containing the article. 
NOTE: A collection of printouts, slips of paper, and backs of envelopes is 
not a working bibliography! You may have to return to the library for 
 missing information, and you risk making serious errors in documentation. 
Know the basics of your documentation format and follow it faithfully when 
collecting possible sources.
 LOCATING SOURCES 
  All libraries contain books and periodicals and a system for accessing them. A 
library’s  book collection includes the general collection, the reference collection, 
and the reserve book collection. Electronic materials such as tapes and CDs will 
also be included in the general “book” collection. The  periodicals collection consists 
of popular magazines, scholarly journals, and newspapers. Electronic databases 
with texts of articles provide alternatives to the print periodicals collection. 
 The Book Catalog 
 Your chief guide to books and audiovisual materials is the library catalog, usu-
ally an electronic database accessed from computer stations in the library or, 
with an appropriate password, from your personal computer. 
REMEMBER: All works, regardless of their source or the format in which 
you obtain them—and this includes online sources—must be fully docu-
mented in your paper.

One of the famous lions sitting in front of the New York Public Library.
270 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 In the catalog there will be at least four ways to access a specific book: the 
author entry, the title entry, one or more subject entries, and a keyword option. 
When you pull up the search screen, you will probably see that the keyword 
option is the default. If you know the exact title of the work you want, switch to 
the title option, type it in, and hit submit. If you want a list of all of the library’s 
books on Hemingway, though, click on author and type in “Hemingway.” Keep 
these points in mind:
 • With a title search, do not type any initial article (a, an, the). To locate  The 
Great Gatsby,  type in “Great Gatsby.” 
 • Use correct spelling. If you are unsure of spelling, use a keyword instead of 
an author or title search. 
 • If you are looking for a list of books on your subject, do a keyword or sub-
ject search. 
 • When screens for specific books are shown, either print screens of potential 
sources or copy all information needed for documentation—plus the call 
number for each book. 
 The Reference Collection 
 The research process often begins with the reference collection. You will find 
atlases, dictionaries, encyclopedias, general histories, critical studies, and biog-
raphies. In addition, various reference tools such as bibliographies and indexes 
are part of the reference collection. 

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
271
 Many tools in the reference collection once only in print form are now also 
online. Some are now only online. Yet online is not always the way to go. Let’s 
consider some of the advantages of each of the formats: 
 Advantages of the Print Reference Collection 
 1. 
The reference tool may be only in print—use it. 
 2. 
The print form covers the period you are studying. (Most online indexes 
and abstracts cover only from 1980 to the present.) 
 3. 
In a book, with a little scanning of pages, you can often find what you need 
without getting spelling or commands exactly right. 
 4. 
If you know the best reference source to use and are looking for only a few 
items, the print source can be faster than the online source. 
 Advantages of Online Reference Materials 
 1. 
Online databases are likely to provide the most up-to-date information. 
 2. 
You can usually search all years covered at one time. 
 3. 
Full texts (with graphics) are sometimes available, as well as indexes with 
detailed summaries of articles. Both can be printed or e-mailed to your PC.  
 4. 
Through links to the Internet, you have access to an amazing amount of 
material. (Unless you focus your keyword search, however, you may be 
overwhelmed.) 
 Before using any reference work, take a few minutes to check its date, pur-
pose, and organization. If you are new to online searching, take a few minutes 
to learn about each reference tool by working through the online tutorial. 
 A Word about Wikipedia  
Many researchers go first to a general encyclopedia, in the past in print in the 
reference collection, today more typically online. This is not always the best 
strategy. Often you can learn more about your topic from a current book or a 
more specialized reference source—which your reference librarian can help 
you find. Both may give you additional sources for your project. If—or when—
you turn to a general encyclopedia, make it a good one that is available online 
through your library. Some colleges have told their students that  Wikipedia is 
not an acceptable source for college research projects. 
 Electronic Databases 
 You will probably access electronic databases by going to your library’s home 
page and then clicking on the appropriate term or icon. (You may have found 
the book catalog by clicking on “library catalog”; you may find the databases 
by clicking on “library resources” or some other descriptive label.) You will 
need to choose a particular database and then type in your keyword for a basic 

272 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
search or select “advanced search” to limit that search by date or periodical or 
in some other way. Each library will create somewhat different screens, but the 
basic process of selecting among choices provided and then typing in your 
search commands remains the same.  Figure 12.3 shows a partial list of articles 
that resulted from a keyword search for “zoos and animal rights.” 
FIGURE 12.3  Partial List of Articles Found on Search Topic 
GUIDELINES for
 Keep these points in mind as you use online databases:
 •  Although some online databases provide full texts of all articles, oth-
ers provide full texts of only some of the articles indexed.  The articles 
not in full text will have to be located in a print collection of periodicals.  
 •  Articles indexed but not available in full text often come with a brief 
summary or abstract.  This allows you to decide whether the article looks 
useful for your project.  Do not treat the abstract as the article. Do not use 
material from it and cite the author. If you want to use the article, find it in 
your library’s print collection or obtain it from another library.  
 •  The information you need for documenting material used from an arti-
cle is not in correct format for any of the standard documentation 
styles.  You will have to reorder the information and use the correct style 
for writing titles. If your instructor wants to see a list of possible sources in 
MLA format, do not hand in a printout of articles from an online database.  
 •  Because no single database covers all journals, you may want to 
search several databases that seem relevant to your project.  Ask your 
reference librarian for suggestions of various databases in the sciences, 
social sciences, public affairs, and education.  
 Using Online Databases 

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
273
 The Internet 
 In addition to using electronic databases to find sources, you can search the 
Internet directly. 
 Keep in mind these facts about the Internet:
 • The Internet is both disorganized and huge, so you can waste time trying to 
find information that is easily obtained in a library reference book or database. 
 • The Internet is best at providing current information, such as news and 
movie reviews. It is also a great source of government information.  
 • Because anyone can create a website and put anything on it, you will have 
to be especially careful in evaluating Internet sources. Remember that articles 
in magazines and journals have been selected by editors and are often peer 
reviewed as well, but no editor selects or rejects material on a personal website.  
 The Internet will provide useful sources for many research projects. It will 
be much less useful than books or online databases for others. One task of 
the good researcher is to think about the best places to go to get the best 
material for a speciﬁ c project. If you think the Internet will be useful for you, 
keep these general guidelines in mind to aid your research:
 • Bookmark sites you expect to use often so that you do not have to 
remember a complex URL or do another Google search.  
 • Make your research terms as precise as possible to avoid getting over-
whelmed with hits.  
 • If you are searching for a specific phrase, put quotation marks around the 
words. This will reduce the number of hits and lead to more useful sites. 
Example: “Rainforest depletion.” Without the quotation marks, you will 
get lots of information about rainforests, but not necessarily about their 
depletion. You will also get information on the concept of depletion that 
has nothing to do with rainforests.  
 • Complete a bibliography card—including the date you accessed the 
source—for each separate site from which you take material (see Chapter 
14 for documentation guidelines).    
GUIDELINES for Searching 
the Web
 FIELD RESEARCH 
 Field research can enrich many projects. The following sections offer some 
suggestions. 
 Federal, State, and Local Government Documents 
 In addition to federal documents you may obtain through  PAIS or  GPO Access, 
 department and agency websites, or the Library of Congress’s good legislative 
site,  Thomas ( http://thomas.loc.gov ), consider state and county archives, maps, 

274 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
and other published materials. Instead of selecting a national or global topic, 
consider examining the debate over a controversial bill introduced in your state 
legislature. Use online databases to locate articles on the bill and the debate and 
interview legislators and journalists who participated in or covered the debates 
or served on committees that worked with the bill. 
 You can also request specific documents from appropriate state or county 
agencies and nonprofit organizations. One student, given the assignment of 
examining solutions to an ecological problem, decided to study the local prob-
lem of preserving the Chesapeake Bay. She obtained issues of the Chesapeake 
Bay Foundation newsletter and brochures prepared by them advising home-
owners about hazardous household waste materials that end up in the bay. 
Added to her sources were bulletins on soil conservation and landscaping tips 
for improving the area’s water quality. Local problems can lead to interesting 
research topics because they are current and relevant to you and because they 
involve uncovering different kinds of source materials. 
 Correspondence 
 Business and government officials are usually willing to respond to written 
requests for information. Make your letter brief and well written. Either include 
a self-addressed, stamped envelope for the person’s convenience or e-mail your 
request. If you are not e-mailing, write as soon as you discover the need for 
information and be prepared to wait several weeks for a reply. It is appropriate 
to indicate your deadline and ask for a timely response. Three guidelines for 
either letters or e-mails to keep in mind are:
 1. 
Explain precisely what information you need. 
 2. 
Do not request information that can be found in your library’s reference 
collection. 
 3. 
Explain how you plan to use the information. Businesses especially are 
understandably concerned with their public image and will be disinclined 
to provide information that you intend to use as a means of attacking them. 
 Use reference guides to companies and government agencies or their web-
sites to obtain addresses and the person to whom your letter or e-mail should 
be sent. 
 Interviews 
 Some experts are available for personal interviews. Call or write for an appoint-
ment as soon as you recognize the value of an interview. Remember that inter-
views are more likely to be scheduled with state and local officials than with the 
president of General Motors. If you are studying a local problem, also consider 
leaders of the civic association with an interest in the issue. In many communities, 
the local historian or a librarian will be a storehouse of information about the com-
munity. Former teachers can be interviewed for papers on education. Interviews 
with doctors or nurses can add a special dimension to papers on medical issues. 

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
275
 If an interview is appropriate for your topic, follow these guidelines:
 1. 
Prepare specific questions in advance. 
 2. 
Arrive on time, properly dressed, and behave in a polite, professional 
manner. 
 3. 
Take notes, asking the interviewee to repeat key statements so that your 
notes are accurate.  
 4. 
Take a tape recorder with you but ask permission to use it before taping. 
 5. 
If you quote any statements in your paper, quote accurately, eliminating 
only such minor speech habits as “you know’s” and “uhm’s.” (See Chapter 
14 for proper documentation of interviews.)  
 6. 
Direct the interview with your prepared questions, but also give the inter-
viewee the chance to approach the topic in his or her own way. You may 
obtain information or views that had not occurred to you.  
 7. 
Do not get into a debate with the interviewee. You are there to learn. 
 Lectures 
 Check the appropriate information sources at your school to keep informed of 
visiting speakers. If you are fortunate enough to attend a lecture relevant to a 
current project, take careful, detailed notes. Because a lecture is a source, use of 
information or ideas from it must be presented accurately and then docu-
mented. (See Chapter 14 for documentation format.) 
 Films, DVDs, Television 
 Your library will have audiovisual materials that provide good sources for 
some kinds of topics. For example, if you are studying  Death of a Salesman,  view 
a videotaped version of the play. Also pay attention to documentaries on public 
television and to the many news and political talk shows on both public and 
commercial channels. In many cases transcripts of shows can be obtained from 
the TV station. Alternatively, tape the program while watching it so that you 
can view it several times. The documentation format for such nonprint sources 
is illustrated in Chapter 14. 
 Surveys, Questionnaires, and Original Research 
 Depending on your paper, you may want to conduct a simple survey or write 
and administer a questionnaire. Surveys can be used for many campus and 
local issues, for topics on behavior and attitudes of college students and/or 
faculty, and for topics on consumer habits. Explore surveymonkey.com for help 
administering an online survey.  Simple ones are free!  Remember: Surveying 50 
of your Facebook friends will not produce a random sample. When writing 
questions, keep these guidelines in mind:

276 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 • Use simple, clear language. 
 • Devise a series of short questions rather than only a few that have several 
parts to them. (You want to separate information for better analysis.)  
 • Phrase questions to avoid wording that seeks to control the answer. For 
example, do  not ask “Did you perform your civic duty by voting in the last 
election?” This is a loaded question.  
 In addition to surveys and questionnaires, you can incorporate some origi-
nal research. As you read sources on your topic, be alert to reports of studies 
that you could redo and update in part or on a smaller scale. Many topics on 
advertising and television give opportunities for your own analysis. Local-
issue topics may offer good opportunities for gathering information on your 
own, not just from your reading. One student, examining the controversy over 
a proposed new shopping mall on part of the Manassas Civil War Battlefield in 
Virginia, made the argument that the mall served no practical need in the com-
munity. He supported his position by describing existing malls, including the 
number and types of stores each contained and the number of miles each was 
from the proposed new mall. How did he obtain this information? He drove 
around the area, counting miles and stores. Sometimes a seemingly unglamor-
ous approach to a topic turns out to be an imaginative one.  
 EVALUATING SOURCES, MAINTAINING 
CREDIBILITY 
 As you study your sources, keep rethinking your purpose and approach. Test 
your research proposal or tentative claim against what you are learning. 
Remember: You can always change the direction and focus of your paper as 
new approaches occur to you, and you can even change your position as you 
reflect on what you are learning. 
 You will work with sources more effectively if you keep in mind why you 
are using them. What you are looking for will vary somewhat, depending on 
your topic and purpose, but there are several basic approaches:
 1. 
 Acquiring information and viewpoints firsthand.  Suppose that you are con-
cerned about the mistreatment of animals kept in zoos. You do not want to 
just read what others have to say on this issue. First, visit a zoo, taking 
notes on what you see. Second, before you go, plan to interview at least one 
person on the zoo staff, preferably a veterinarian who can explain the zoo’s 
guidelines for animal care. Only after gathering and thinking about these 
 primary sources  do you want to add to your knowledge by reading articles 
and books— secondary sources.  Many kinds of topics require the use of both 
primary and secondary sources. If you want to study violence in children’s 
TV shows, for example, you should first spend some time watching specific 
shows and taking notes.  
 2. 
 Acquiring new knowledge.  Suppose you are interested in breast cancer 
research and treatment, but you do not know much about the choices of 

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
277
treatment and, in general, where we are with this medical problem. You 
will need to turn to sources first to learn about the topic. Begin with sources 
that will give you an overview, perhaps a historical perspective. Begin with 
sources that provide an overview of how knowledge and treatment have 
progressed in the last thirty years. Similarly, if your topic is the effects of 
Prohibition in the 1920s, you will need to read first for knowledge but also 
with an eye to ways to focus the topic and organize your paper. 
 3. 
 Understanding the issues.  Suppose you think that you know your views on 
illegal immigration, so you intend to read only to obtain some useful statis-
tical information to support your argument. Should you scan sources 
quickly, looking for facts you can use? This approach may be too hasty. As 
explained in Chapter 3, good arguments are built on a knowledge of counter-
arguments. You are wise to study sources presenting a variety of attitudes 
on your issue so that you understand—and can refute—the arguments of 
others.  Remember: that with controversial issues often the best argument is a con-
ciliatory one that presents a middle ground and seeks to bring people together. 
 When you use facts and opinions from sources, you are saying to readers 
that the facts are accurate and the ideas credible. If you do not evaluate your 
sources before using them, you risk losing your credibility as a writer. 
(Remember Aristotle’s idea of  ethos,  how your character is judged.) Just because 
they are in print does not mean that a writer’s “facts” are reliable or ideas 
worthwhile. Judging the usefulness and reliability of potential sources is an 
essential part of the research process. 
 Today, with access to so much material on the Internet, the need to evalu-
ate is even more crucial. Here are some strategies for evaluating sources, 
with special attention to Internet sources:
 •  Locate the author’s credentials.  Periodicals often list their writers’ 
degrees, current position, and other publications; books, similarly, con-
tain an “about the author” section. If you do not see this information, 
check various biographical dictionaries ( Biography Index, Contemporary 
Authors ) or look for the author’s website for information. For articles on 
the web, look for the author’s e-mail address or a link to a home page. 
 Never use a web source that does not identify the author or the organiza-
tion responsible for the material. Critical question:  Is this author qualified 
to write on this topic? How do I know?  
 •  Judge the credibility of the work.  For books, read how reviewers evalu-
ated the book when it was first published. For articles, judge the respect-
ability of the magazine or journal. Study the author’s use of documentation 
as one measure of credibility. Scholarly works cite sources. Well-
researched and reliable pieces in quality popular magazines will also 
make clear the sources of any statistics used or the credentials of any 
GUIDELINES for  Evaluating 
Sources 

278 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
authority who is quoted. One good rule: Never use undocumented statis-
tical information. Another judge of credibility is the quality of writing. Do 
not use sources filled with grammatical and mechanical errors. For web 
sources, find out what institution hosts the site. If you have not heard of 
the company or organization, find out more about it.  Critical question: 
 Why should I believe information/ideas from this source?  
 •  Select only those sources that are at an appropriate level for your 
research.  Avoid works that are either too specialized or too elementary for 
college research. You may not understand the former (and thus could misrep-
resent them in your paper), and you gain nothing from the latter.  Critical ques-
tion:  Will this source provide a sophisticated discussion for educated adults?  
 •  Understand the writer’s purpose.  Consider the writer’s intended audi-
ence. Be cautious using works designed to reinforce biases already shared 
by the intended audience. Is the work written to persuade rather than to 
inform and analyze? Examine the writing for emotionally charged language. 
For Internet sources, ask yourself why this person or institution decided to 
have a website or contribute to a newsgroup.  Critical question:  Can I trust 
the information from this source, given the apparent purpose of the work?  
 •  In general, choose current sources.  Some studies published years ago 
remain classics, but many older works are outdated. In scientific and tech-
nical fields, the “information revolution” has outdated some works pub-
lished only five years ago. So look at publication dates (When was the 
website page last updated?) and pass over outdated sources in favor of 
current studies.  Critical question:  Is this information still accurate?  
PREPARING AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
 An annotated bibliography is a list of sources on a topic that includes a summary of 
each source. As part of your research process, you may be required to prepare either 
a partial or a complete annotated bibliography. Instructors include this assignment 
to keep you moving forward in your study of sources; it is a way of checking that 
you have found and read useful sources in good time to complete your project. 
Annotating each source also demands careful reading and analysis; it provides a 
check against skimming a source for some information without taking time to read 
and understand the context in which the information is presented and the author’s 
position on the topic. You may find that your research paper is more focused and 
better written if you take the time to write a brief summary statement about each 
source you plan to use, even if an annotated bibliography is not required. 
 When preparing an annotated bibliography, list sources alphabetically and in 
correct MLA (or APA) format (see Chapter 14). Then, immediately after each cita-
tion, place a two-to-five-sentence summary of that source. Use hanging indenta-
tion, just as you would for your list of works cited at the end of your paper. 
 Warning: Do not confuse an annotated bibliography with a Works Cited list.  When you 
complete your research essay, list all sources used  without  the summaries. 
 A partial annotated bibliography follows, based on the sample student 
research essay in Chapter 13. Use this as your model. 

 
CHAPTER 12 Locating, Evaluating, and Preparing to Use Sources 
279
 Tell Us What You Really Are:  The Debate over 
Labeling Genetically Modified Food
Selected Annotated Bibliography
David  Donaldson 
 MacDonald, Chris, and Melissa  Whellams. “Corporate Decisions about Labeling 
Genetically Modified Foods.”  Journal of Business Ethics  75.2 (2007): 181–89.  
 JSTOR.  Web. 8 June 2011. MacDonald and  Whellams examine the ethical obligation 
of companies to label genetically modified foods.  The authors explain that there is no 
evidence that such products pose a health risk and that the FDA sees no reason to 
require special labeling.  The authors explain that such labeling would impose a hard-
ship on the companies preparing GM foods.  Although the authors assert that they 
do not necessarily oppose required labeling, they conclude that food companies are 
not ethically obligated to voluntarily label GM foods.  
 U.S.  Chamber of  Commerce.  “Precautionary Principle.” U.S.  Chamber of  Commerce. 2011. 
Web. 9  June 2011.  The U.S. Chamber of  Commerce has posted on its website a 
statement regarding the  “precautionary principle.”  The Chamber asserts that it has 
always supported regulatory decisions based on good science and sound risk assessment. 
The Chamber opposes the use of the  “precautionary principle”—assume the worst and 
regulate risks that are uncertain or unknown—as a guide for U.S. regulatory decisions.  
 U.S.  Food and Drug  Administration.  “Bioengineered Foods.” Statement of  Robert E. Brackett to 
the FDA. U.S. Food and Drug  Administration. 12 J uly 2009. Web. 18  June 2011. Robert E. 
Brackett’s statement to the Senate Committee on  Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry is a 
lengthy, detailed review of the FDA’s responsibilities in determining food safety in general and 
its specific procedures for approving foods developed by hybridization and bioengineering. 
Brackett explains that GM foods could conceivably create one of three problems: cause new 
allergies, cause toxicity, or produce anti-nutrients (e.g., result in a decrease in Vitamin C). The 
FDA has the power to screen new foods for all three potential problems and to disapprove or 
require labeling, as appropriate. Brackett assures the Committee that the FDA works closely 
with companies developing GM foods and that they carefully test for all three potential 
problems to maintain a safe food supply for consumers.  

Writing the Researched Essay
CHAPTER 13

281
Y
ou have agonized over your topic choice, searched for good sources, read 
and thought about your topic, seeking a way to put together a compelling 
argument—while not forgetting documentation. Whew! Don’t rush now. Study 
this chapter’s writing points and apply the guidelines to the writing of a con-
vincing essay. Here are some general guidelines for studying sources.
AVOIDING PLAGIARISM
Documenting sources accurately and fully is required of all researchers. Proper 
documentation distinguishes between the work of others and your ideas, 
shows readers the breadth of your research, and strengthens your credibility. In 
Western culture, copyright laws support the ethic that ideas, new information, 
and wording belong to their author. To borrow these without acknowledgment 
is against the law and has led to many celebrated lawsuits. For students who 
plagiarize, the consequences range from an F on the paper to suspension from 
college. Be certain, then, that you know what the requirements for correct docu-
mentation are; accidental plagiarism is still plagiarism and will be punished.
 1. Read first; take notes later. First, do background reading, selecting the 
most general sources that provide an overview of the topic.
 2. Skim what appear to be your chief sources. Learn what other writers on 
the topic consider the important facts, issues, and points of debate.
 3. Annotate photocopies—do not highlight endlessly. Instead, carefully bracket 
material you want to use. Then write a note in the margin indicating how and 
where you might use that material.
 4. Either download Internet sources or take careful notes on the  material. 
Before preparing a note on content, be sure to copy all necessary infor-
mation for documenting the material—including the date you accessed 
the website.
 5. Initially mark key passages in books with Post-Its. Write on the Post-It 
how and where you might use the material. Alternatively, photocopy 
book pages and then annotate them. Be sure to record for yourself the 
source of all copied pages.
 6. As you study and annotate, create labels for source materials that will 
help you organize your essay. For example, if you are writing about the 
problem of campus rape, you might label passages as: “facts showing 
there is a problem,” “causes of the problem,” and “possible solutions to 
the problem.”
 7. Recognize that when you are working with many sources, note taking 
rather than annotating copies of sources is more helpful. Notes, whether 
on cards or typed on separate sheets of paper, provide an efficient method 
for  collecting and organizing lots of information.
GUIDELINES for Studying 
Sources

282 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
In sum, you are required to document the following:
 • Direct quotations from sources
 • Paraphrased ideas and opinions from sources
 • Summaries of ideas from sources
 • Factual information, except common knowledge, from sources
Understand that putting an author’s ideas in your own words in a paraphrase 
or summary does not eliminate the requirement of documentation. To illus-
trate, consider the following excerpt from Thomas R. Schueler’s report 
Controlling Urban Runoff (Washington Metropolitan Water Resources Planning 
Board, 1987: 3–4) and a student paragraph based on the report.
SOURCE
The aquatic ecosystems in urban headwater streams are particularly 
 susceptible to the impacts of urbanization. . . . Dietemann (1975), Ragan and 
Dietemann (1976), Klein (1979) and WMCOG (1982) have all tracked trends in 
fish diversity and abundance over time in local urbanizing streams. Each of 
the studies has shown that fish communities become less diverse and are 
 composed of more tolerant species after the surrounding watershed is 
 developed. Sensitive fish species either disappear or occur very rarely. In most 
cases, the total number of fish in urbanizing streams may also decline.
Similar trends have been noted among aquatic insects which are the major 
food resource for fish. . . . Higher post-development sediment and trace  metals 
can interfere in their efforts to gather food. Changes in water temperature, 
oxygen levels, and substrate composition can further reduce the species 
 diversity and abundance of the aquatic insect community.
PLAGIARIZED STUDENT PARAGRAPH
Studies have shown that fish communities become less diverse as the 
amount of runoff increases. Sensitive fish species either disappear or occur 
very rarely, and, in most cases, the total number of fish declines. Aquatic 
insects, a major source of food for fish, also decline because sediment and 
trace metals interfere with their food-gathering efforts. Increased water 
 temperature and lower oxygen levels can further reduce the species diver-
sity and abundance of the aquatic insect community.
NOTE: MLA documentation requires precise page references for all ideas, 
opinions, and information taken from sources—except for common knowl-
edge. Author and page references provided in the text are supported by 
complete bibliographic citations on the Works Cited page.

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
283
The student’s opening words establish a reader’s expectation that the  student 
has taken information from a source, as indeed the student has. But where is the 
documentation? The student’s paraphrase is a good example of plagiarism: an 
unacknowledged paraphrase of borrowed information that even collapses into 
copying the source’s exact wording in two places. For MLA style, the author’s 
name and the precise page numbers are needed throughout the paragraph. 
Additionally, most of the first sentence and the final phrase must be put into the 
student’s own words or placed within quotation marks. The following revised 
paragraph shows an appropriate acknowledgment of the source used.
REVISED STUDENT PARAGRAPH TO REMOVE PLAGIARISM
In Controlling Urban Runoff, Thomas Schueler explains that studies have 
shown “that fish communities become less diverse as the amount of runoff 
increases” (3). Sensitive fish species either disappear or occur very rarely 
and, in most cases, the total number of fish declines. Aquatic insects, a major 
source of food for fish, also decline because sediment and trace metals 
 interfere with their food-gathering efforts. Increased water temperature and 
lower oxygen levels, Schueler concludes, “can further reduce the species 
 diversity and abundance of the aquatic insect community” (4).
What Is Common Knowledge?
In general, common knowledge includes
 • undisputed dates,
 • well-known facts, and
 • generally known facts, terms, and concepts in a field of study when you 
are writing in that field
So, do not cite a source for the dates of the American Revolution. If you are 
writing a paper for a psychology class, do not cite your text when using terms 
such as ego or sublimation. However, you must cite a historian who analyzes the 
causes of England’s loss to the Colonies or a psychologist who disputes Freud’s 
ideas. Opinions about well-known facts must be documented. Discussions of 
debatable dates, terms, or concepts must be documented. When in doubt, 
defend your integrity and document.
USING SIGNAL PHRASES TO AVOID 
CONFUSION
If you are an honest student, you do not want to submit a paper that is plagia-
rized, even though that plagiarism was unintentional on your part. What leads 
to unintentional plagiarism?

284 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 • A researcher takes careless notes, neglecting to include precise page num-
bers on the notes, but uses the information anyway, without documentation.
 • A researcher works in material from sources in such a way that, even 
with page references, readers cannot tell what has been taken from the 
sources.
Good note-taking strategies will keep you from the first pitfall. Avoiding the 
second problem means becoming skilled in ways to include source material in 
your writing while still making your indebtedness to sources absolutely clear 
to readers. The way to do this: Give the author’s name in the essay. You can also 
include, when appropriate, the author’s credentials (“According to Dr. Hays, a 
geologist with the Department of Interior, . . .”). These introductory tags or signal 
phrases give readers a context for the borrowed material, as well as serving as 
part of the required documentation of sources. Make sure that each signal phrase 
clarifies rather than distorts an author’s relationship to his or her ideas and your rela-
tionship to the source.
NOTE: Putting a parenthetical page reference at the end of a paragraph is 
not sufficient if you have used the source throughout the paragraph. Use 
introductory tags or signal phrases to guide the reader through the material.
GUIDELINES for
Here are three guidelines to follow to avoid misrepresenting borrowed 
material:
 • Pay attention to verb choice in signal phrases. When you vary such 
standard wording as “Smith says” or “Jones states,” be careful that you 
do not select verbs that misrepresent “Smith’s” or “Jones’s” attitude 
toward his or her own work. Do not write “Jones wonders” when in fact 
Jones has strongly asserted her views. (See pp. 294–95 for a discussion of 
varying word choice in signal phrases.)
 • Pay attention to the location of signal phrases. If you mention Jones 
after you have presented her views, be sure that your reader can tell 
 precisely which ideas in the passage belong to Jones. If your entire 
 paragraph is a paraphrase of Jones’s work, you are plagiarizing to con-
clude with “This idea is presented by Jones.” Which of the several ideas in 
your paragraph comes from Jones? Your reader will assume that only the 
last idea comes from Jones.
 • Paraphrase properly. Be sure that paraphrases are truly in your own 
words. To use Smith’s words and sentence style in your writing is to 
plagiarize.
Appropriately Using Sources

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
285
EXERCISES: Acknowledging Sources to Avoid Plagiarism
 1. The following paragraph (from Franklin E. Zimring’s “Firearms, Violence and 
Public Policy” [Scientific American, Nov. 1991]) provides material for the exam-
ples that follow of adequate and inadequate acknowledgment of sources. After 
reading Zimring’s paragraph, study the three examples with these questions in 
mind: (1) Which example represents adequate acknowledgment? (2) Which 
examples do not represent adequate acknowledgment? (3) In exactly what ways 
is each plagiarized paragraph flawed?
SOURCE
Although most citizens support such measures as owner screening, public 
opinion is sharply divided on laws that would restrict the ownership of hand-
guns to persons with special needs. If the U.S. does not reduce handguns and 
current trends continue, it faces the prospect that the number of handguns in 
circulation will grow from 35 million to more than 50 million within 50 years. 
A national program limiting the availability of handguns would cost many 
 billions of dollars and meet much resistance from citizens. These costs would 
likely be greatest in the early years of the program. The benefits of supply 
reduction would emerge slowly because efforts to diminish the availability of 
handguns would probably have a cumulative impact over time. (page 54)
STUDENT PARAGRAPH 1
One approach to the problem of handgun violence in America is to severely 
limit handgun ownership. If we don’t restrict ownership and start the costly task 
of removing handguns from our society, we may end up with around 50 million 
handguns in the country by 2040. The benefits will not be apparent right away 
but will eventually appear. This idea is emphasized by Franklin Zimring (54).
STUDENT PARAGRAPH 2
One approach to the problem of handgun violence in America is to 
restrict the ownership of handguns except in special circumstances. If we do 
not begin to reduce the number of handguns in this country, the number will 
grow from 35 million to more than 50 million within 50 years. We can agree 
with Franklin Zimring that a program limiting handguns will cost billions and 
meet resistance from citizens (54).
STUDENT PARAGRAPH 3
According to law professor Franklin Zimring, the United States needs to 
severely limit handgun ownership or face the possibility of seeing handgun 
■ ■

286 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
ownership increase “from 35 million to more than 50 million within 50 years” 
(54). Zimring points out that Americans disagree significantly on restricting 
handguns and that enforcing such laws would be very expensive. He con-
cludes that the benefits would not be seen immediately but that the restric-
tions “would probably have a cumulative impact over time” (54). Although 
Zimring paints a gloomy picture of high costs and little immediate relief from 
gun  violence, he also presents the shocking possibility of 50  million guns by 
the year 2040. Can our society survive so much fire power?
  
Clearly, only the third student paragraph demonstrates adequate acknowledgment 
of the writer’s indebtedness to Zimring. Notice that the placement of the last paren-
thetical page reference acts as a visual closure to the student’s borrowing. She then 
turns to her response to Zimring and her own views on the problem of handguns.
 2. 
Read the following passage and then the three plagiarized uses of the passage. 
Explain why each one is plagiarized and how it can be corrected.
Original Text: Stanley Karnow, Vietnam, A History. The First Complete Account 
of Vietnam at War. New York: Viking, 1983, 319.
 
Lyndon Baines Johnson, a consummate politician, was a kaleidoscopic 
personality, forever changing as he sought to dominate or persuade or 
 placate or frighten his friends and foes. A gigantic figure whose extravagant 
moods matched his size, he could be cruel and kind, violent and gentle, petty, 
 generous, cunning, naïve, crude, candid, and frankly dishonest. He 
 commanded the blind loyalty of his aides, some of whom worshipped him, 
and he sparked  bitter derision or fierce hatred that he never quite fathomed.
a.  LBJ’s vibrant and changing personality filled some people with adoration 
and others with bitter derision that he never quite fathomed (Karnow 319).
b.  LBJ, a supreme politician, had a personality like a kaleidoscope, continually 
changing as he tried to control, sway, appease, or intimidate his enemies 
and supporters (Karnow 319).
c.  Often, figures who have had great impact on America’s history have been 
dynamic people with powerful personalities and vibrant physical presence. 
LBJ, for example, was a huge figure who polarized those who worked for 
and with him. “He commanded the blind loyalty of his aides, some of whom 
 worshipped him, and he sparked bitter derision or fierce hatred” from many 
others (Karnow 319).
 3. 
Read the following passage and then the four sample uses of the passage. Judge 
each of the uses for how well it avoids plagiarism and if it is documented cor-
rectly. Make corrections as needed.
Original Text: Stanley Karnow, Vietnam, A History. The First Complete Account of 
Vietnam at War. New York: Viking, 1983, 327.
 
On July 27, 1965, in a last-ditch attempt to change Johnson’s mind, 
Mansfield and Russell were to press him again to “concentrate on finding a 

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
287
way out” of Vietnam—“a place where we ought not be,” and where “the situ-
ation is rapidly going out of control.” But the next day, Johnson announced his 
decision to add forty-four American combat battalions to the relatively small 
U.S. contingents already there. He had not been deaf to Mansfield’s pleas, nor 
had he simply swallowed the Pentagon’s plans. He had waffled and agonized 
during his nineteen months in the White House, but eventually this was his 
final judgment. As he would later explain: “There are many, many people who 
can recommend and advise, and a few of them  consent. But there is only one 
who has been chosen by the American people to decide.”
a.  Karnow writes that Senators Mansfield and Russell continued to try to con-
vince President Johnson to avoid further involvement in Vietnam, “a place 
where we ought not to be” they felt. (327).
b.  Though Johnson received advice from many, in particular Senators 
Mansfield and Russell, he believed the weight of the decision to become 
further engaged in Vietnam was solely his as the one “ ‘chosen by the 
American people to decide’ ”(Karnow 327).
c.  On July 28, 1965, Johnson announced his decision to add forty-four battal-
ions to the troops already in Vietnam, ending his waffling and agonizing of 
the past nineteen months of his presidency. (Karnow 357)
d.  Karnow explains that LBJ took his responsibility to make decisions about 
Vietnam seriously (327). Although Johnson knew that many would offer sug-
gestions, only he had  “ ‘been chosen by the American people to decide’ ” 
(Karnow 327). 
■ ■
ORGANIZING THE PAPER
Armed with an understanding of writing strategies to avoid plagiarism, you are 
now almost ready to draft your essay. Follow these steps to get organized 
to write:
 1. 
Arrange notes (or your annotated sources) by the labels you have used and read 
them through. You may discover that some notes or marked sections of 
sources now seem irrelevant. Set them aside, but do not throw them away 
yet. Some further reading and note taking may also be necessary to fill in 
gaps that have become apparent.
 2. 
Reexamine your tentative claim or research proposal. As a result of reading and 
reflection, do you need to alter or modify your claim in any way? Or, if you 
began with a research question, what now is your answer to the question? 
Is, for example, TV violence harmful to children?
 3. 
Decide on the claim that will direct your writing. To write a unified essay with 
a “reason for being,” you need a claim that meets these criteria:
 
• It is a complete sentence, not a topic or statement of purpose.
TOPIC: 
Rape on college campuses.
CLAIM: 
 There are steps that both students and administrators 
can take to reduce incidents of campus rape.

288 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 
• It is limited and focused.
UNFOCUSED: 
Prohibition affected the 1920s in many ways.
FOCUSED: 
 Prohibition was more acceptable to rural than urban 
areas because of differences in values, social patterns, 
cultural backgrounds, and the economic result of pro-
hibiting liquor sales.
 
•  It establishes a new or interesting approach to the topic that makes your 
research meaningful.
NOT INVENTIVE: 
 A regional shopping mall should not be built next to 
the Manassas Battlefield.
INVENTIVE: 
 Putting aside an appeal to our national heritage, one 
can say, simply, that there is no economic justification 
for the building of a shopping mall next to the 
Manassas Battlefield.
 4. 
Write down the organization that emerges from your labels and grouping of 
sources, and compare this with your preliminary plan. If there are differences, 
justify those changes to yourself. Consider: Does the new, fuller plan pro-
vide a complete and logical development of your claim?
DRAFTING THE ESSAY
Plan Your Time
How much time will you need to draft your essay? Working with sources and tak-
ing care with documentation make research paper writing more  time-consuming 
than writing an undocumented essay. You also need to allow time between com-
pleting the draft and revising. Do not try to draft, revise, and proof an essay all in 
one day.
Handle In-Text Documentation as You Draft
The Modern Language Association (MLA) recommends that writers prepare 
their Works Cited page(s) before drafting their essay. With this important infor-
mation prepared correctly and next to you as you draft, you will be less likely 
to make errors in documentation that will result in a plagiarized essay. Although 
you may believe that stopping to include parenthetical documentation as you 
write will cramp your writing, you really cannot try to insert the documenta-
tion after completing the writing. The risk of failing to document accurately is 
too great to chance. Parenthetical documentation is brief; listen to the experts 
and take the time to include it as you compose.
You saw some models of documentation in Chapter 12. In Chapter 14, you 
have complete guidelines and models for in-text (parenthetical) documenta-
tion and then many models for the complete citations of sources. Study the 

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
289
information in Chapter 14 and then draft your Works Cited page(s) as part of 
your preparation for writing.
Choose an Appropriate Writing Style
Specific suggestions for composing the parts of your paper follow, but first here 
are some general guidelines for research essay style.
Use the Proper Person
Research papers are written primarily in the third person (she, he, it, they) to cre-
ate objectivity and to direct attention to the content of the paper. The question is 
over the appropriateness of the first person (I, we). Although you want to avoid 
writing “as you can see,” do not try to avoid the use of I if you need to distin-
guish your position from the views of others. It is better to write “I” than “it is 
the opinion of this writer” or “the researcher learned” or “this project ana-
lyzed.” On the other hand, avoid qualifiers such as “I think.” Just state your 
ideas.
Use the Proper Tense
When you are writing about people, ideas, or events of the past, the appropri-
ate tense is the past tense. When writing about current times, the appropriate 
tense is the present. Both tenses may occur in the same paragraph, as the fol-
lowing paragraph illustrates:
Fifteen years ago “personal” computers were  all but unheard of. 
Computers were regarded  as unknowable, building-sized mechanized 
 monsters that required  a precise 68 degree air-conditioned environment 
and eggheaded technicians with thick glasses and white lab coats scurrying 
about to keep the temperamental and fragile egos of the electronic brains 
mollified. Today’s generation of computers is  accessible, affordable, com-
monplace, and much less mysterious. The astonishing progress made in com-
puter technology in the last few years has made computers practical, 
attainable, and  indispensable. Personal computers are here to stay.
In the above example, when the student moves from computers in the past to 
computers in the present, he shifts tenses accurately.
When writing about sources, the convention is to use the present tense even 
for works or authors from the past. The idea is that the source, or the author, 
continues to make the point or use the technique into the present—that is, every 
time there is a reader. So, write “Lincoln selects the biblical expression 
‘Fourscore and seven years ago’ ” and “King echoes Lincoln when he writes 
‘five score years ago.’ ”

290 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Avoid Excessive Quoting
Many students use too many direct quotations. Plan to use your own words 
most of the time for these good reasons:
 • Constantly shifting between your words and the language of your sources 
(not to mention all those quotation marks) makes reading your essay 
difficult.
 • This is your paper and should sound like you.
 • When you take a passage out of its larger context, you face the danger of 
misrepresenting the writer’s views.
 • When you quote endlessly, readers may begin to think either that you are 
lazy or that you don’t really understand the issues well enough to put them 
in your own words. You don’t want to present either image to your readers.
 • You do not prove any point by quoting another person’s opinion. All you 
indicate is that there is someone else who shares your views. Even if that 
person is an expert on the topic, your quoted material still represents the 
view of only one person. You support a claim with reasons and evidence, 
both of which can usually be presented in your own words.
When you must quote, keep the quotations brief, weave them carefully into 
your own sentences, and be sure to identify the author in a signal phrase. Study 
the guidelines for handling quotations on pages 25–28 for models of correct 
form and style.
Write Effective Beginnings
The best introduction is one that presents your subject in an interesting way to 
gain the reader’s attention, states your claim, and gives the reader an indication 
of the scope and limits of your paper. In a short research essay, you may be able 
to combine an attention-getter, a statement of subject, and a claim in one para-
graph. More typically, especially in longer papers, the introduction will expand 
to two or three paragraphs. In the physical and social sciences, the claim may 
be withheld until the conclusion, but the opening introduces the subject and 
presents the researcher’s hypothesis, often posed as a question. Since students 
sometimes have trouble with research paper introductions in spite of knowing 
these general guidelines, several specific approaches are illustrated here:
 1. 
In the opening to her study of car advertisements, a student, relating her topic 
to what readers know, reminds readers of the culture’s concern with image:
Many Americans are highly image conscious. Because the “right” look is 
essential to a prosperous life, no detail is too small to overlook. Clichés about 
first impressions remind us that “you never get a second chance to make a 
first impression,” so we obsessively watch our weight, firm our muscles, sculpt 

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
291
our hair, select our friends, find the perfect houses, and buy our automobiles. 
Realizing the importance of image, companies compete to make the “right” 
products, that is, those that will complete the “right” image. Then advertisers 
direct specific products to targeted groups of consumers. Although targeting 
may be labeled as stereotyping, it has been an effective strategy in advertising.
 2. 
Terms and concepts central to your project need defining early in your 
paper, especially if they are challenged or qualified in some way by your 
study. This opening paragraph demonstrates an effective use of definition:
William Faulkner braids a universal theme, the theme of initiation, into 
the fiber of his novel Intruder in the Dust. From ancient times to the present, a 
prominent focus of literature, of life, has been rites of passage, particularly 
those of childhood to adulthood. Joseph Campbell defines rites of passage as “dis-
tinguished by formal, and usually very severe, exercises of severance.” A “candi-
date” for initiation into adult society, Campbell explains, experiences a 
shearing away of the “attitudes, attachments and life patterns” of childhood 
(9). This severe, painful stripping away of the child and installation of the adult 
is  presented somewhat differently in several works by American writers.
 3. 
Begin with a thought-provoking question. A student, arguing that the 
media both reflect and shape reality, started with these questions:
Do the media just reflect reality, or do they also shape our perceptions of real-
ity? The answer to this seemingly “chicken-and-egg” question is:  They do both.
 4. 
Beginning with important, perhaps startling, facts, evidence, or statistics is 
an effective way to introduce a topic, provided the details are relevant to 
the topic. Observe the following example:
Teenagers are working again, but not on their homework. Over 
40  percent of teenagers have jobs by the time they are juniors (Samuelson 
A22). And their jobs do not support academic learning since almost two-
thirds of teenagers are employed in sales and service jobs that entail mostly 
carrying, cleaning, and wrapping (Greenberger and Steinberg 62–67), not 
reading, writing, and computing. Unfortunately, the negative effect on learn-
ing is not offset by improved opportunities for future careers.

292 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Avoid Ineffective Openings
Follow these rules for avoiding openings that most readers find ineffective or 
annoying.
 1. 
Do not restate the title or write as if the title were the first sentence in para-
graph 1. It is a convention of writing to have the first paragraph stand inde-
pendent of the title.
 2. 
Do not begin with “clever” visuals such as artwork or fancy lettering.
 3. 
Do not begin with humor unless it is part of your topic.
 4. 
Do not begin with a question that is just a gimmick, or one that a reader may 
answer in a way you do not intend. Asking “What are the advantages of solar 
energy?” may lead a reader to answer “None that I can think of.” A straight-
forward research question (“Is Death of a Salesman a tragedy?”) is 
appropriate.
 5. 
Do not open with an unnecessary definition quoted from a dictionary. “According 
to Webster, solar energy means . . .” is a tired, overworked beginning that 
does not engage readers.
 6. 
Do not start with a purpose statement: “This paper will examine . . .” Although 
a statement of purpose is a necessary part of a report of empirical research, 
a report still needs an interesting introduction.
Compose Solid, Unified Paragraphs
As you compose the body of your paper, keep in mind that you want to 
(1) maintain unity and coherence, (2) guide readers clearly through source 
material, and (3) synthesize source material and your own ideas. Do not settle 
for paragraphs in which facts from notes are just loosely run together. Review 
the following discussion and study the examples to see how to craft effective 
body paragraphs.
Provide Unity and Coherence
You achieve paragraph unity when every sentence in a paragraph relates to and 
develops the paragraph’s main idea. Unity, however, does not automatically 
produce coherence; that takes attention to wording. Coherence is achieved 
when readers can follow the connection between one sentence and another and 
between each sentence and the main idea. Strategies for achieving coherence 
include repetition of key words, the use of pronouns that clearly refer to those 
key words, and the use of transition and connecting words. Observe these strat-
egies at work in the following paragraph:
Perhaps the most important differences between the initiations of Robin 
and Biff and that experienced by Chick are the facts that Chick’s epiphany does 
not come all at once and it does not devastate him. Chick 
learns about adulthood —and enters adulthood—piecemeal and with support. 

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
293
His first eye-opening experience occurs as he tries to pay Lucas for dinner and 
is rebuffed (15–16). Chick learns,  after trying again  to buy a clear conscience, 
the impropriety and affront of his actions (24). Lucas teaches Chick  how he 
should resolve his dilemma by setting him “free” (26–27). Later, Chick feels out-
rage at the adults crowding into the town, presumably to see a lynching, then 
disgrace and shame as they eventually flee (196–97, 210).
Coherence is needed not only within paragraphs but between paragraphs 
as well. You need to guide readers through your paper, connecting paragraphs 
and showing relationships by the use of transitions. The following opening sen-
tences of four paragraphs from a paper on solutions to rape on the college cam-
pus illustrate smooth transitions:
¶ 3 Specialists have provided a number of reasons  why men rape.
¶ 4  Some of the causes of rape  on the college campus originate with the 
 colleges themselves and with how they handle the problem.
¶ 5  Just as there are a number of causes  for campus rapes, there are a 
 number of ways to help solve  the problem of these rapes.
¶ 6  If these seem like commonsense solutions, why, then, is it so difficult to 
significantly reduce the number of campus rapes?
Without awkwardly writing “Here are some of the causes” and “Here are some 
of the solutions,” the student guides her readers through a discussion of causes 
for and solutions to the problem of campus rape.
Guide Readers Through Source Material
To understand the importance of guiding readers through source material, con-
sider first the following paragraph from a paper on the British coal strike in the 
1970s:
The social status of the coal miners was far from good.  The country 
blamed them for the dimmed lights and the three-day workweek.  They had 
been placed in the position of social outcasts and were beginning to “con-
sider themselves another country.” Some businesses and shops had even 
gone so far as to refuse service to coal miners ( Jones 32).
Who has learned that the coal miners felt ostracized or that the country blamed 
them? As readers we cannot begin to judge the validity of these assertions with-
out some context provided by the writer. Most readers are put off by an unat-
tached direct quotation or some startling observation that is documented 

294 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
correctly but given no context within the paper. Using signal phrases that iden-
tify the author of the source and, when useful, the author’s credentials helps 
guide readers through the source material. The following revision of the para-
graph above provides not only context but also sentence variety:
The social acceptance of coal miners, according to Peter Jones, British  
correspondent for Newsweek, was far from good. From interviews both in 
London shops and in pubs near Birmingham, Jones concluded  that Britishers 
blamed the miners for the dimmed lights and three-day workweek. Several 
striking miners, in a pub on the outskirts of Birmingham, asserted that some 
of their friends had been denied service by shopkeepers and that they 
“consider[ed] themselves another country” (32).
Select Appropriate Signal Phrases
When you use signal phrases, try to vary both the words you use and their 
place in the sentence. Look, for example, at the first sentence in the sample 
paragraph above. The signal phrase is placed in the middle of the sentence and 
is set off by commas. The sentence could have been written two other ways:
The social acceptance of coal miners was far from good, according to Peter 
Jones, British correspondent for Newsweek.
OR
According to Peter Jones, British correspondent for Newsweek, the social 
acceptance of coal miners was far from good.
Whenever you provide a name and perhaps credentials for your source, you 
have these three sentence patterns to choose from. Make a point to use all three 
options in your paper. Word choice can be varied as well. Instead of writing 
“Peter Jones says” throughout your paper, consider some of these verb choices:
Jones asserts 
Jones contends 
Jones attests to
Jones states 
Jones thinks 
Jones points out
Jones concludes 
Jones stresses 
Jones believes
Jones presents 
Jones emphasizes 
Jones agrees with
Jones argues 
Jones confirms 
Jones speculates
NOTE: Not all the words in this list are synonyms; you cannot substitute 
 confirms for  believes.  First, select the verb that most accurately conveys 
the writer’s relationship to his or her material. Then, when appropriate, vary 
word choice as well as sentence structure.

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
295
Readers need to be told how to respond to the sources used. They need 
to know which sources you accept as reliable and which you disagree with, 
and they need you to distinguish clearly between fact and opinion. Ideas 
and opinions from sources need signal phrases and then some discussion 
from you.
Synthesize Source Material and Your Own Ideas
A smooth synthesis of source material is aided by signal phrases and paren-
thetical documentation because they mark the beginning and ending of mate-
rial taken from a source. But a complete synthesis requires something more: 
your ideas about the source and the topic. To illustrate, consider the problems 
in another paragraph from the British coal strike paper:
Some critics believed that there was enough coal in Britain to maintain 
enough power to keep industry at a near-normal level for thirty-five weeks 
( Jones 30). Prime Minister Heath, on the other hand, had placed the coun-
try’s usable coal supply at 15.5 million tons ( Jones 30). He stated that this 
would have fallen to a critical 7 million tons within a month had he not 
declared a three-day workweek ( Jones 31).
This paragraph is a good example of random details strung together for no 
apparent purpose. How much coal did exist? Whose figures were right? And 
what purpose do these figures serve in the paper’s development? Note that the 
entire paragraph is developed with material from one source. Do sources other 
than Jones offer a different perspective? This paragraph is weak for several rea-
sons: (1) It lacks a controlling idea (topic sentence) to give it purpose and direc-
tion; (2) it relies for development entirely on one source; (3) it lacks any 
discussion or analysis by the writer.
By contrast, the following paragraph demonstrates a successful synthesis:
Of course, the iridium could have come from other extraterrestrial 
sources besides an asteroid. One theory, put forward by Dale Russell, is that 
the  iridium was produced outside the solar system by an exploding star (500).
Such an explosion, Russell states, could have blown the iridium either off the 
surface of the moon or directly from the star itself (500–01), while also pro-
ducing a deadly blast of heat and gamma rays (Krishtalka 19).  This theory seems 
to explain the traces of iridium in the mass extinction, but it does not explain 
why smaller mammals, crocodiles, and birds survived (Wilford 220). 
So the supernova theory took a backseat to the other extraterrestrial theories: 
those of asteroids and comets colliding with the Earth. The authors of the  

296 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
book The Great Extinction, Michael Allaby and James Lovelock, subtitled their 
work The Solution to . . . the Disappearance of the Dinosaurs. Their theory: an 
asteroid or comet collided with Earth around sixty-five million years ago, killing 
billions of organisms, and thus altering the course of evolution (157).  The fact 
that the theory of collision with a cosmic body warrants a book calls for some 
thought: Is the asteroid or comet theory merely sensationalism, or is it rooted 
in fact? Paleontologist Leonard Krishtalka declares that few paleontologists 
have accepted the asteroid theory, himself calling “some catastrophic theo-
ries . . . small ideas injected with growth hormone” (22). However, 
other scientists, such as Allaby and Lovelock, see the cosmic catastrophic 
theory as a solid one based on more than guesswork (10–11).
This paragraph’s synthesis is accomplished by several strategies: (1) The para-
graph has a controlling idea; (2) the paragraph combines information from sev-
eral sources; (3) the information is presented in a blend of paraphrase and short 
quotations; (4) information from the different sources is clearly indicated to 
readers; and (5) the student explains and discusses the information.
You might also observe the different lengths of the two sample paragraphs 
just presented. Although the second paragraph is long, it is not unwieldy 
because it achieves unity and coherence. By contrast, body paragraphs of only 
three sentences are probably in trouble.
Write Effective Conclusions
Sometimes ending a paper seems even more difficult than beginning one. You 
know you are not supposed to just stop, but every ending that comes to mind 
sounds more corny than clever. If you have trouble, try one of these types of 
endings:
 1. 
Do not just repeat your claim exactly as it was stated in paragraph 1, but 
expand on the original wording and emphasize the claim’s significance. 
Here is the conclusion of the solar energy paper:
The idea of using solar energy is not as far-fetched as it seemed years 
ago. With the continued support of government plus the enthusiasm of 
research groups, environmentalists, and private industry, solar energy may 
become a household word quite soon. With the increasing cost of fossil fuel, 
the time could not be better for exploring this use of the sun.
 2. End with a quotation that effectively summarizes and drives home the 
point of your paper. Researchers are not always lucky enough to find the 

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
297
ideal quotation for ending a paper. If you find a good one, use it. Better 
yet, present the quotation and then add your comment in a sentence or 
two. The conclusion to a paper on the dilemma of defective newborns is a 
good example:
Dr. Joseph Fletcher is correct when he says that “every advance in medi-
cal capabilities is an increase in our moral responsibility” (48). In a world of 
many gray areas, one point is clear. From an ethical point of view, medicine is 
a victim of its own success.
 3. 
If you have researched an issue or problem, emphasize your proposed 
solutions in the concluding paragraph. The student opposing a mall 
 adjacent to the Manassas Battlefield concluded with several solutions:
Whether the proposed mall will be built is clearly in doubt at the 
moment. What are the solutions to this controversy? One approach is, of 
course, not to build the mall at all.  To accomplish this solution, now, with the 
re-zoning  having been approved, probably requires an act of Congress to buy 
the land and make it part of the national park.  Another solution, one that 
would please the county and the developer and satisfy citizens objecting to 
traffic problems, is to build the needed roads before the mall is completed. 
A third approach is to allow the office park of the original plan to be built, 
but not the mall.  The local preservationists had agreed to this original devel-
opment proposal, but now that the issue has received national attention, 
they may no longer be  willing to compromise.  Whatever the future of the 
William Center, the present plan for a new regional mall is not acceptable.
Avoid Ineffective Conclusions
Follow these rules to avoid conclusions that most readers consider ineffective 
and annoying.
 1. 
Do not introduce a new idea. If the point belongs in your paper, you should 
have introduced it earlier.
 2. 
Do not just stop or trail off, even if you feel as though you have run out of 
steam. A simple, clear restatement of the claim is better than no conclusion.
 3. 
Do not tell your reader what you have accomplished: “In this paper I have 
explained the advantages of solar energy by examining the costs. . . .” If 
you have written well, your reader knows what you have accomplished.

298 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 4. 
Do not offer apologies or expressions of hope. “Although I wasn’t able to find as 
much on this topic as I wanted, I have tried to explain the advantages of 
solar energy, and I hope that you will now understand why we need to use 
it more” is a disastrous ending.
Choose an Effective Title
Give some thought to your paper’s title since that is what your reader sees first 
and what your work will be known by. A good title provides information and 
creates interest. Make your title informative by making it specific. If you can 
create interest through clever wording, so much the better. But do not confuse 
“cutesiness” with clever wording. Review the following examples of acceptable 
and unacceptable titles:
VAGUE: 
A Perennial Issue Unsolved
(There are many; which one is this paper about?)
BETTER: 
The Perennial Issue of Press Freedom Versus Press 
Responsibility
TOO BROAD: 
Earthquakes
(What about earthquakes? This title is not informative.)
BETTER: 
The Need for Earthquake Prediction
TOO BROAD: 
The Scarlet Letter 
(Never use just the title of the work under  discussion; 
you can use the work’s title as a part of a longer title of your own.)
BETTER: 
Color Symbolism in The Scarlet Letter
CUTESY: 
Babes in Trouble
(The slang “Babes”makes this title seem  insensitive rather than 
clever.)
BETTER: 
The Dilemma of Defective Newborns
REVISING THE PAPER: A CHECKLIST
After completing a first draft, catch your breath and then gear up for the next 
step in the writing process: revision. Revision actually involves three separate 
steps: rewriting—adding or deleting text, or moving parts of the draft around; 
editing—a rereading to correct errors from misspellings to incorrect documenta-
tion format; and then proofreading the typed copy. If you treat these as separate 
steps, you will do a more complete job of revision—and get a better grade on 
your paper!
Rewriting
Read your draft through and make changes as a result of answering the follow-
ing questions:

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
299
Purpose and Audience 
 u  Is my draft long enough to meet assignment requirements and my purpose?
 u  Are terms defined and concepts explained appropriately for my audience?
Content
 u  Do I have a clearly stated thesis—the claim of my argument?
 u  Have I presented sufficient evidence to support my claim?
 u  Are there any irrelevant sections that should be deleted?
Structure
 u  Are paragraphs ordered to develop my topic logically?
 u  Does the content of each paragraph help develop my claim?
 u  Is everything in each paragraph on the same subtopic to create paragraph 
unity?
 u  Do body paragraphs have a balance of information and analysis, of source 
material and my own ideas?
 u  Are there any paragraphs that should be combined? Are there any very 
long paragraphs that should be divided? (Check for unity.)
Editing
Make revisions guided by your responses to the questions, make a clean copy, 
and read again. This time, pay close attention to sentences, words, and docu-
mentation format. Use the following questions to guide editing.
Coherence
 u  Have connecting words been used and key terms repeated to produce para-
graph coherence?
 u  Have transitions been used to show connections between paragraphs?
Sources
 u  Have I paraphrased instead of quoted whenever possible?
 u  Have I used signal phrases to create a context for source material?
 u  Have I documented all borrowed material, whether quoted or paraphrased?
 u  Are parenthetical references properly placed after borrowed material?
Style
 u  Have I varied sentence length and structure?
 u  Have I avoided long quotations?
 u  Do I have correct form for quotations? For titles?

300 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 u  Is my language specific and descriptive?
 u  Have I avoided inappropriate shifts in tense or person?
 u  Have I removed any wordiness, deadwood, trite expressions, or clichés?
 u  Have I used specialized terms correctly?
 u  Have I avoided contractions as too informal for most research papers?
 u  Have I maintained an appropriate style and tone for academic work?
Proofreading
When your editing is finished, prepare a completed draft of your paper accord-
ing to the format described and illustrated below. Then proofread the  completed 
copy, making any corrections neatly in ink. If a page has several errors, print a 
corrected copy. Be sure to make a copy of the paper for yourself before submit-
ting the original to your instructor.
THE COMPLETED PAPER
Your research paper should be double-spaced throughout (including the Works 
Cited page) with 1-inch margins on all sides. Your project will contain the fol-
lowing parts, in this order:
 1. A title page, with your title, your name, your instructor’s name, the 
course name or number, and the date, neatly centered, if an outline fol-
lows. If there is no outline, place this information at the top left of the 
first page.
 2. 
An outline, or statement of purpose, if required.
 3. 
The body or text of your paper. Number all pages consecutively, including 
pages of works cited, using arabic numerals. Place numbers in the upper 
right-hand corner of each page. Include your last name before each page 
number.
 4. 
A list of works cited, placed on a separate page(s) after the text. Title the first 
page “Works Cited.” (Do not use the title “Bibliography.”)
SAMPLE STUDENT ESSAY IN MLA STYLE
The following paper illustrates an argumentative essay using sources docu-
mented in MLA style.

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
301
 Donaldson 1 
 David Donaldson  
 Professor Princiotto-Gorrell/Professor Stevens  
 English 203U—Research Process  
 7 July 2011 
 Tell Us What You Really Are:  The Debate over 
Labeling Genetically Modified Food 
 The decision to eat—or not to eat—genetically modified (GM) food is a 
relatively new dilemma for consumers. People have been going to the grocery 
store for years, and up until the mid-1990s there was little question as to what 
they were buying. Consumers knew that when they picked up a tomato, that 
product was in fact a tomato, not a tomato that had been spliced, or merged, 
with the genes of some other organism in an attempt to get it to behave like 
an entirely different fruit.  There were most definitely food additives, 
preservatives, and other questionable ingredients up until then, but before 
1994, a tomato was still a tomato. Food additives, preservatives, potentially 
allergenic ingredients, and possibly toxic ingredients must be labeled on each 
product. Until GM food is proven to be safe it is essential that the federal 
government also require labeling to denote the presence of genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs). Safety is not the only factor in the GM food 
debate. Religious and cultural concerns, as well as the consumer’s freedom of 
choice, must be considered when deciding whether to label GM foods. 
 The genetic modification of food is defined by MacDonald and 
Whellams as “any change to the heritable traits of an organism achieved by 
intentional manipulation” (181). Or, more specifically, defined by Sarah Kirby 
as “the process of removing individual genes from one organism and 
transplanting them into another organism,” it is the basis of contemporary 
bioengineering (352).  Although there are scientists and government officials 
who want to equate genetic modification with genetic hybridization, the 
Provide last name 
with page number 
at top right of each 
page.
Use heading on top 
left when a separate 
title page is not used.
Center title.
Double-space 
throughout.
Clear opening leads 
to student’s thesis.
Key term defined.
Indent paragraphs 5 
spaces.

302 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Donaldson 2
definitions given for genetic modification do not match the definition of 
genetic hybridization.  
 It is true that plant and animal hybridization has been going on for a long 
time. That is how many of the flora and fauna here today were conceived.  They 
did not just show up as they are today; rather, over time they evolved into 
what they are now due to progressive variations in their genes.  As explained 
by Gundorf and Huchingson, scientists used selective breeding to achieve a 
desired trait, or to suppress a trait deemed undesirable (233). Kirby expands 
on Gudorf and Huchingson’s idea by adding that selective breeding was more 
natural since “it was restricted to two organisms that are able to breed 
together” (352). In “A Defense of the U.S. Position on Labeling Genetically 
Modified Organisms,” Sally Kirsch adds that the United States Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) even cites the longevity of selective breeding to justify 
their stance that nothing is wrong or unsafe about GM food (25). 
 Bioengineering has been seen as the answer to many of the 
environmental issues related to climate change, to help feed growing 
populations in developing countries. Scientists have created “drought resistant 
corn and soybeans,” rice with increased nutrients, and “pest resistant plants” 
(Kirsch 21). However, for more cosmetic reasons, they have also created the 
FLAVR SAVR™ tomato.  This tomato would eventually become the first GM 
food available to consumers. The  Gale Encyclopedia of Science article “Plant 
Breeding” explains that it was not until 1992 that “a tomato with delayed 
ripening became the first genetically modified (GM) commercial food crop” 
(3375).  Two years later, the company Calgene received approval from the 
FDA to sell their FLAVR SAVR™ tomatoes (Martineau 189). Kirsch notes 
that there was a lukewarm public greeting for Calgene’s tomato, and the 
underwhelming sales further emphasized that the general public was 
apprehensive about GM food (21). However, in their article, “‘Does Contain’ 
vs. ‘Does Not Contain’: Does it Matter Which GMO Label is Used?” Crespi 
Paragraph devel-
oped using para-
phrase and direct 
quotations from 
 several sources.

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
303
Donaldson 3
and Marette argue that “Americans are much more accepting of GMOs than 
the rest of the world” (328).  
 This is no longer a process simply by which plants are being spliced with 
plant genes and animals are being spliced with animal genes.  Today, 
bioengineers can create a plant that has been spliced with animal genes (Kirby 
357).  The health and safety results of the GM process are still relatively 
unknown as this technology is still new.  The uncertainty of this process is 
fueling the public outcry for GMO labeling in the United States. Anne 
MacKenzie builds on Kirby’s point, arguing that because consumers have 
become more knowledgeable about food and health, more concerned about 
the safety of the food supply, have developed a greater desire to know about 
how their food is made, and have mounted a growing distrust of biotech 
companies and the government, they want more information about what is 
going into their food (52). 
 The most noted possible health hazard linked to GM foods is the 
potential for new or heightened food allergies. MacKenzie, Gudorf and 
Huchingson, and Kirby all mention new food allergies as one of the more 
obvious reasons to require the mandatory labeling of GM food. MacKenzie 
states:  “Allergenicity is an important consideration for foods derived through 
biotechnology because of the possibility of a new protein introduced into a 
food could be an allergen” (51). She adds that when a food such as soy, a 
common allergen, is used in the genetic modification process,  “life-
threatening” results are more likely to occur (51). Gudorf and Huchingson 
suggest that GM food could be held responsible for the increase in the 
number of people who have developed food-related allergies in the last 
decade (233).  They also point out that, for example, people do not know 
specifically which peanut gene may spark their allergy (233). It could be the 
gene for color, the gene for oil production, or the gene that makes peanuts 
viable underground that contains the protein that sets off their allergy.  If a 
Student estab-
lishes difference 
between hybridiza-
tion and genetic 
modification.
Here and below 
 student examines 
possible problems 
with GM foods.

304 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Donaldson 4
scientist wants to make a strawberry that grows underground, and inserts 
that gene from the peanut into a strawberry’s DNA, the same individuals who 
are allergic to peanuts could now become allergic to that particular 
strawberry (Gudorf and Huchingson 233).  
 Kirby acknowledges that GM foods may “set-off” allergies, but she adds 
that genetic modification could also “produce dangerous toxins, increase 
cancer risks, produce antibiotic-resistant pathogens, and damage food quality” 
(359).  Specifically related to allergies, Kirby explains that “people have never 
before been exposed to several of the foreign proteins currently being 
genetically spliced into foods” (360). Conversely,  Robert  Bracket,  Director of 
the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, testified before the FDA 
that if the genetic modification process were to merge one organism with an 
organism that is considered a common food allergen, soy, milk, egg, etc., then 
that product would indeed be labeled as containing a common food allergen 
as is required by law (FDA).  Otherwise, Bracket says,  “GM food is safe and 
no different than its conventionally grown counterpart,” which echoes the 
FDA spokesman quoted by MacDonald and  Whellams (FDA). 
 Aside from health concerns, there are also religious and cultural 
motives that should be considered when deciding whether to label GM food. 
Theologically speaking,  Christianity does not necessarily reject GM food. In 
“Some Christian Reflections on GM Food,” Donald Bruce suggests that the 
concern within Christianity is more a moral obligation to God’s creation 
rather than a dietary issue (119).  However, multiple interpretations are 
present. Genesis 1: 26–28 basically states that  “Christian thinking has 
generally seen intervention in the natural world as ordained by God in the 
creation of ordinances that grant humans dominion over all the rest of 
creation”  (Bruce 119). Conversely,  there are also Christians who think 
that  GM food is the result of humans  “playing God in wrongly changing what 
God has created” (Bruce 121). For Christians who believe that genetically 

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
305
Donaldson 5
modifying food is wrong, mandatory labeling of GM food would guide them in 
their food choices.  
 For those of the Muslim or Jewish faith, GM food presents dietary 
concerns as well as potential moral objections. Ebrahim Moosa cites the splicing 
of animal genes into plants as one of the biggest worries Muslims face from GM 
food (135). He says that “a tomato containing a gene harvested from a flounder 
may not generate repugnance in an observant Muslim, since fish is permissible 
for adherents of this tradition, but a potato with a pig gene may well trigger 
visceral repugnance” (135).  This is the same reason cited by Kirby (357). 
To emphasize his point, Moosa tells a story of  Muhammad when he lived in 
Medina. In the story,  Muhammad comes across farmers splicing different 
species of date-palm seedlings to increase their crop yields. Muhammad asks 
why they did it that way, and they reply:  “That was the way they had always 
done it.” The prophet then replies:  “Well, perhaps, it would be better if you 
did not” (138). Kirby suggests that animal to plant genetic splicing is also the 
reason for those of the Jewish faith, or any vegetarian or vegan, to be 
concerned about the absence of mandatory GM food labeling (357). Peter 
Sand concurs, stating that providing consumers with information  “irrespective 
of health concerns,” such as labeling halal or kosher food, is essential in 
allowing consumers to have genuine freedom of choice (190). 
 Currently, although about “80% of processed food in the United States 
has a component  from a genetically modified crop, a new survey finds that 
only 26% of  Americans think they have ever eaten such food” (Krebs).  This 
same United States Department of  Agriculture (USDA) poll found that 94% of 
respondents felt that labeling items that contained GMOs would be a good 
idea (Krebs).  This figure is up from a 2000 MSNBC poll that shows that  “81% 
of people who responded were in favor of labeling genetically engineered 
products” (Kirsch 21). Kirsch follows that statement by confirming that the 
FDA and the biotech industry feel the opposite (21). Kirby repeats this view, 
Current FDA position 
on GM foods.

306 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Donaldson 6
adding that the FDA recognizes  “no material difference in nutrition, 
composition, or safety between genetically modified food and food that has 
not been genetically modified” (qtd. in Kirby 353).  Additionally, as long as the 
plant or animal that DNA is taken from and the plant or animal that the DNA 
is being spliced into are generally recognized as safe (GRAS), then the product 
is not subject to any sort of review prior to being released to consumers 
(Kirby 354).  The FDA assumes that all products in the current food supply are 
GRAS.  However, the current system does not take into account that the end 
result of tomato DNA and trout DNA is not simply a “tomato fish,” but 
rather an entirely new entity that could bring with it unforeseen health risks 
ranging from food allergies to death.  
 Currently, according to Crespi and Marette, the United States has no 
mandatory GMO labeling requirement (328). Sand adds that the United States 
is not alone (187). He lists Canada and  Argentina specifically,  because 
combined the three countries are responsible for approximately 80% of the 
world’s GM crops (187). Crespi and Marette add that much of the rest of the 
world currently recognizes the “precautionary principle,” and the potentially 
deleterious effects of GMOs, and those governments do not want their citizens 
to be exposed to what might result from the consumption of GMOs (328).  
 To date, there have been no documented health risks related to GM 
foods. Proponents of GM food, such as the FDA, use this as the basis for their 
argument that GM foods pose no threat to consumers, and why mandatory 
labeling of GM food is unnecessary.   An FDA spokesman says:   “We have seen 
no evidence that the bioengineered foods now on the market pose any human 
health concerns or that they are in any way less safe than crops produced 
through traditional breeding” (qtd. in MacDonald and Whellams 184–185).  
While the tone throughout their article suggests that they disagree, MacDonald 
and Whellams argue that there is nothing unethical about GM foods that should 
result in mandatory labeling (184).  Anne MacKenzie, the Associate Vice-

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
307
Donaldson 7
President of Science Evaluation for The Canadian Food Inspection  Agency, 
concurs by saying that regulators have not yet noticed a “significant toxic or 
allergenic harm” (52). However, as stated by MacDonald and  Whellams, 
many other countries choose to adopt the “precautionary principle” 
(185).  This principle states that if something, like GM food, presents a 
potential threat to health or the environment, it is best to be cautious and to 
take action even if science hasn’t demonstrated harmful effects (MacDonald 
and Whellams 185). 
 Because there may be serious, long-term negative implications on 
consumer health as a result of the continued consumption of GMOs, biotech 
companies, governments, and consumers should all be more wary of GM 
foods (MacDonald and Whellams 185).  The “precautionary principle” is law in 
the European Union, as they consider unknown risk sufficient to require 
further study before approval.   The United States takes the position that if 
something is not demonstrated to be harmful, then there is no problem in 
moving forward with implementation (“Precautionary Principle”).  There is 
strong opposition from the United States’s Chamber of Commerce to the 
Precautionary Principle; the Chamber argues that potential but unknown risk 
should not stand in the way of progress (“Precautionary Principle”).  
 The United States currently operates under a voluntary labeling 
program (Sand 187), including labeling of foods with GMOs and those without 
GMOs. However, when Marion Nestle searched for labeling of foods with 
GMOs, she was not surprised that her search was unsuccessful. Nestle states: 
“Scientifically based or not, the motivation of the biotechnology companies 
for opposing labeling is obvious: if the foods are labeled as GM, you might 
choose not to buy them” (57).  The FDA’s voluntary labeling program for 
products that do not contain GMOs can be seen at the grocery store today in 
products that carry a GMO-free label. The question that remains is whether 
“GMO-free” labels offer consumers a fully informed choice. 

308 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Donaldson 8
 The lack of a mandatory labeling system in the U.S. is not because no 
one has tried. In 1999, Congressman Dennis Kucinich (D-OH) introduced into 
Congress the “Genetically Engineered Food Right to Know  Act” (Kirsch 
26–27).  The aim of this bill was to require food that contained GM material, 
or was comprised of GM material, to be labeled as such (Kirsch 27). Kirby 
explains that this bill would have required that  “food produced with GM 
material be labeled at each stage of the food production process,” in order to 
mitigate cross contamination (367).   This bill would have made it necessary to 
put a label on GM products that reads: “GENETICALLY ENGINEERED 
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT NOTICE: THIS PRODUCT CONTAINS A 
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED MATERIAL OR WAS PRODUCED WITH A 
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED MATERIAL” (Kirsch 27). Heather Carr adds 
that Congressman Kucinich has introduced this bill into multiple sessions of 
Congress, including as recently as 2010, never to make it out of committee. 
Although support increased in the House of Representatives, it has never 
been enough to move the bill through. 
 In 2000, Senator Barbara Boxer (D-CA) introduced a similar bill that 
would have required a label stating:   “GENETICALLY ENGINEERED. THIS 
PRODUCT CONTAINS A GENETICALLY ENGINEERED MATERIAL” 
(Kirsch 27).  Like the House bill, this bill never came to fruition.  The FDA 
maintains that GM food is safe, and because of this, biotech companies say 
that there is no need to liken their products to potentially dangerous 
products (such as cigarettes or alcohol) with what resembles a warning label. 
 Anne MacKenzie disagrees with the biotech companies, arguing that 
“consumers have a right to know” what they are eating, and how it was made 
(50).  She suggests that mandatory consumer-friendly labeling be used, but 
that the labels should communicate in a way that does not mislead consumers 
into thinking that GM food is any different from non-GM food (50–52).     She 
also asserts that the label “should not imply that the consumption of food 
Attempts to get GM 
foods labeled.

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
309
Donaldson 9
derived through biotechnology has implications for public health,” since 
currently there is no concrete evidence that GM food is either good or bad 
for human consumption (52). MacDonald and Whellams proffer that if this 
were done properly, it would be possible to label GM food while at the same 
time addressing the biotech companies’ concern that GM food labels would 
“be seen as a warning” (183). 
 While MacKenzie is in favor of mandatory labeling,  Lars Bracht 
Andersen remains apprehensive. Andersen, while supporting a consumer’s 
right to know, also understands the biotech industry’s view that “mandatory 
labeling, given predominantly negative consumer perceptions, is likely to 
effectively remove GM foods from the market” (143). He argues for voluntary 
labeling, stating that it would have the  “least negative impact on the diversity of 
the market” (143). However, since voluntary labeling alone seems unlikely to 
protect consumers and provide adequate choice, mandatory labeling of GMO-
free products and of those products that contain GMOs is essential.  
Student rejects vol-
untary labeling and 
repeats his thesis 
that GM foods need 
mandatory labeling.

310 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Donaldson 10
 Works Cited 
 Andersen, Lars Bracht. “The EU Rules on Labeling of Genetically Modified 
Foods: Mission Accomplished?”  European Food & Feed Law Review 5.3 
(2010): 136–43.  Academic Search Complete.  Web. 2 June 2011. 
 Bruce, Donald. “Some Christian Reflections on GM Food.”  Boundaries: 
Religious Traditions And Genetically Modified Foods.  Ed. Conrad G. Brunk and 
Harold Coward. Albany: State U of New York P, 2009. Print. 
 Carr, Heather. “Genetically Engineered Organism Liability Act of 2010 H.R. 5579.” 
 Eat Drink Better.  Important Media Network, 4 Aug. 2010. Web. 18 June 2011. 
 Clemmitt, M. “Global Food Crisis: What’s Causing the Rising Prices?”  CQ 
Researcher 18.24 (2008): 553–76.  CQ Researcher.  Web. 29 May 2011. 
 Crespi, John M., and Stephan Marette. “‘Does Contain’ vs. ‘Does Not 
Contain’: Does It Matter Which GMO Label Is Used?”  European Journal of 
Law and Economics 16.3 (2003): 327–44.  SpringerLink.  Web. 12 June 2011. 
 Davison, John. “GM Plants: Science, Politics, and EC Regulations.”  Plant 
Science 178.2 (2010): 94–98.  ScienceDirect.  Web. 8 June 2011. 
 Gudorf, Christine E., and James E. Huchingson.  Boundaries: A Casebook in 
Environmental Ethics.  Washington D.C.: Georgetown UP, 2010. Print. 
 Kirby, Sarah. “Genetically Modified Foods: More Reasons to Label Than Not.” 
 Drake Journal of Agricultural Law 6.2 (2001): 351–68.  HeinOnline.  Web. 12 June 
2011.  
 Kirsch, Sally R. “A Defense of the U.S. Position on Labeling Genetically 
Modified Organisms.”  International and Comparative Environmental Law 1.1 
(2000): 21–28.  HeinOnline.  Web. 9 June 2011. 
 Krebs, Al. “New Poll—94% of Americans Want Labels on GE Food.”  Organic 
Consumers Association.  Oct. 2003. Web. 9 June 2011. 
 MacDonald, Chris, and Melissa Whellams. “Corporate Decisions about 
Labeling Genetically Modified Foods.”  Journal of Business Ethics 75.2 
(2007): 181–89.  JSTOR.  Web. 8 June 2011. 
Continue to number 
pages consecutively.
Start a new page for 
Works Cited.
Double-space 
throughout.
List sources 
alphabetically.
Use hanging 
indentation.

 
CHAPTER 13  Writing the Researched Essay  
311
Donaldson 11
 Mackenzie, Anne A. “International Efforts to Label Food Derived Through 
Biotechnology.”  Governing Food: Science, Safety, and Trade.  Ed. Peter W. B. 
Phillips and Robert Wolfe. Montreal: McGill–Queen’s UP, 2001. 
49–61. Print. 
 Martineau, Belinda.  First Fruit: The Creation of the Flavr Savr ™  Tomato and the 
Birth of Genetically Engineered Food.  New York: McGraw, 2001. Print. 
 Moosa, Ebrahim. “Genetically Modified Foods and Muslim Ethics.”  Boundaries: 
Religious Traditions and Genetically Modified Foods.  Ed. Conrad G. Brunk and 
Harold Coward. Albany: State U of New York P, 2009. Print. 
 Nestle, Marion.  What to Eat.  New York: North Point, 2006. Print. 
 “Plant Breeding.”  The Gale Encyclopedia of Science.  Ed. K. Lee Lerner and 
Brenda Wilmoth Lerner. 4th ed. Vol. 4. Detroit: Gale, 2008. 3370–75. 
 Gale Virtual Reference Library.  Web. 29 May 2011. 
 Sand, Peter H. “Labelling Genetically Modified Food: The Right to Know.” 
 Review of European Community & International Environmental Law 15.2 
(2006): 185–92.  Wiley Online Library.  Web. 9 June 2011. 
 U.S. Chamber of Commerce. “Precautionary Principle.” U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce, 2011. Web. 9 June 2011. 
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “Bioengineered Foods.” Statement of 
Robert E. Brackett to the FDA. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 15 
July 2009. Web. 18 June 2011. 
 Weasel, Lisa H.  Food Fray.  New York: AMACOM, 2009. Print.  

 CHAPTER 14 
 Formal Documentation: 
ML A Style, APA Style 

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
313
 I
 n Chapter 12 you were shown, in sample bibliography cards, what informa-
tion about a source you need to prepare the documentation for a researched 
essay. In Chapter 13 you were shown in-text documentation patterns as part 
of the discussion of avoiding plagiarism and writing effective paragraphs. The 
format shown is for MLA (Modern Language Association) style, the documen-
tation style used in the humanities. APA (American Psychological Association) 
style is used in the social sciences. The sciences and other disciplines also have 
style sheets, but the most common documentation patterns used by undergrad-
uates are MLA and APA, the two patterns explained in this chapter. 
 Remember that MLA recommends that writers prepare their Works Cited 
list—a list of all sources they have used—before drafting the essay. This list can 
then be used as an accurate guide to the in-text/parenthetical documentation 
that MLA requires along with the Works Cited list at the end of the essay. Heed 
this good advice. This chapter begins with guidelines for in-text documentation 
and then provides many models of full documentation for a Works Cited list. 
 REMEMBER:  Never guess at documentation! Always consult this chapter 
to make each in-text citation and your Works Cited page(s) absolutely 
correct.  
 As you now know, MLA documentation style has two parts: in-text refer-
ences to author and page number and then complete information about each 
source in a Works Cited list. Because parenthetical references to author and 
page are incomplete—readers could not find the source with such limited 
 information—all sources referred to by author and page number in the essay 
require the full details of publication in a Works Cited list that concludes the 
essay. General guidelines for in-text citations are given below. 
NOTE: You need a 100 percent correspondence between the sources listed 
in your Works Cited and the sources you actually cite (refer to) in your essay. 
Do not omit from your Works Cited any sources you refer to in your essay. Do 
not include in your Works Cited any sources not referred to in your paper.
 •  The purpose of documentation is to make clear exactly what material 
in a passage has been borrowed and from what source the borrowed 
material has come.  
 •  Parenthetical in-text documentation requires specific page references 
for borrowed material—unless the source is not a print one.  
GUIDELINES for  Using 
Parenthetical 
Documenta-
tion 
MLA Style

314 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 THE SIMPLEST PATTERNS OF PARENTHETICAL 
DOCUMENTATION 
 The simplest in-text citation can be prepared in one of three ways:
 1. 
Give the author’s last name (full name in your first reference to the writer) 
in the text of your essay and put the appropriate page number(s) in paren-
theses following the borrowed material.
 Frederick Lewis Allen observes that, during the 1920s, urban tastes spread 
to the country (146) . 
 2. 
Place the author’s last name and the appropriate page number(s) in paren-
theses immediately following the borrowed material.
 During the 1920s, “not only the drinks were mixed, but the company as well”  
(Allen 82). 
 3. 
On the rare occasion that you cite an entire work rather than borrowing 
from a specific passage, give the author’s name in the text and omit any 
page numbers.
 Leonard Sax explains, to both parents and teachers, the specific ways in 
which gender matters.  
 Each one of these in-text references is complete  only  when the full citation is 
placed in the Works Cited section of your paper: 
 Allen, Frederick Lewis.  Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the Nineteen-
Twenties.  New York: Harper, 1931. Print. 
 Sax, Leonard.   Why Gender Matters. New York: Random, 2005. Print.  
 The three patterns just illustrated should be used in each of the following 
situations:
 1. 
The source referred to is not anonymous—the author is known. 
 2. 
The source referred to is by one author. 
 3. 
The source cited is the only work used by that author. 
 4. 
No other author in your list of sources has the same last name. 
 •  Parenthetical documentation is required for both quoted and para-
phrased material and for both print and nonprint sources.  
 •  Parenthetical documentation provides as brief a citation as possible 
consistent with accuracy and clarity.  
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
315
 PLACEMENT OF PARENTHETICAL 
DOCUMENTATION 
 The simplest placing of an in-text reference is at the end of the sentence  before 
the period. When you are quoting, place the parentheses  after the final quota-
tion mark but still before the period that ends the sentence. 
 During the 1920s, “not only the drinks were mixed, but the company as well” 
(Allen 82). 
 If the borrowed material forms only a part of your sentence, place the par-
enthetical reference  after the borrowed material and  before any subsequent 
punctuation. This placement more accurately shows readers what is borrowed 
and what are your own words. 
 Sport, Allen observes about the 1920s, had developed into an obsession (66), 
another similarity between the 1920s and the 1980s.  
 If a quoted passage is long enough to require setting off in display form 
(block quotation), then place the parenthetical reference at the end of the passage, 
 after the final period. Remember: Long quotations in display form  do not have 
quotation marks. 
 It is hard to believe that when he writes about the influence of science Allen 
is describing the 1920s, not the 1980s: 
 The prestige of science was colossal. The man in the street and the
woman in the kitchen, confronted on every hand with new machines and 
devices which they owed to the laboratory, were ready to believe that
science could  accomplish almost anything. (164)
  And to complete the documentation for all three examples: 
 Works Cited 
 Allen, Frederick Lewis.  Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the Nineteen-
Twenties.  New York: Harper, 1931. Print.  
NOTE: Do not put any punctuation between the author’s name and the 
page number.
MLA Style

316 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 PARENTHETICAL CITATIONS 
OF COMPLEX SOURCES 
 Not all sources can be cited in one of the three patterns illustrated above, for not 
all meet the four criteria listed on p. 314. Works by two or more authors, for 
example, will need somewhat fuller references. Each sample form of in-text 
documentation given below must be completed with a full Works Cited refer-
ence, as shown above. 
 Two Authors, Mentioned in the Text 
 Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray contend that it is “consistently . . . 
advantageous to be smart” (25).  
 Two Authors, Not Mentioned in the Text 
 The advantaged smart group forms a “cognitive elite” in our society 
(Herrnstein and Murray 26–27).  
 A Book in Two or More Volumes 
 Sewall analyzes the role of Judge Lord in Dickinson’s life (2: 642–47). 
 OR 
 Judge Lord was also one of Dickinson’s preceptors (Sewall 2: 642–47).  
 A Book Listed by Title—Author Unknown 
 According to  The Concise Dictionary of American Biography,  William Jennings 
Bryan’s 1896 campaign stressed social and sectional conflicts (117). 
 The  New York Times ’ editors were not pleased with some of the changes in 
 welfare programs (“Where Welfare Stands” 4: 16)  .
 Always cite the title of the article, not the title of the journal, if the author is 
unknown. In the second example, the number before the page number is the 
newspaper’s section number. 
NOTE: The number before the colon always signifies the volume number. 
The number(s) after the colon represents the page number(s).
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
317
 A Work by a Corporate Author 
 A report by the Institute of Ecology’s Global Ecological Problems Workshop 
argues that the civilization of the city can lull us into forgetting our 
 relationship to the total ecological system on which we depend (13). 
 Although corporate authors may be cited with the page number within the 
parentheses, your writing will be more graceful if corporate authors are intro-
duced in the sentence. Then only page numbers go in parentheses. 
 Two or More Works by the Same Author 
 During the 1920s, “not only the drinks were mixed, but the company as well” 
(Allen,  Only Yesterday 82). 
Frederick Lewis Allen contends that the early 1900s were a period of 
 complacency in America (The Big Change 4–5).
 In  The Big Change, Allen asserts that the early 1900s were a period of 
 complacency (4–5). 
 If your list of sources contains two or more works by the same author, the full-
est parenthetical citation includes the author’s last name, followed by a comma, 
the work’s title, shortened if possible, and the page number. If the author’s 
name appears in the text—or the author and title both appear as in the third 
example above—omit these items from the parenthetical citation. When you 
have to include the title to distinguish among sources, it is best to put the 
author’s name in the text. 
 Two or More Works in One Parenthetical Reference 
 Several writers about the future agree that big changes will take place in 
work patterns (Toffler 384–87; Naisbitt 35–36).  
 Separate each author with a semicolon. But, if the parenthetical reference becomes 
disruptively long, cite the works in a “See also” note rather than in the text.  
 A Source Without Page Numbers  
It is usually a good idea to name the nonprint source within your sentence so 
that readers will not expect to see page numbers. 
 Although some still disagree, the  Oxford English Dictionary Online  defines 
global warming as “thought to be caused by various side-effects of modern 
energy consumption.”  
MLA Style

318 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 Complete Publication Information in Parenthetical Reference  
At times you may want to give complete information about a source within 
parentheses in the text of your essay. Then a Works Cited list is not used. Use 
square brackets for parenthetical information within parentheses. This approach 
may be a good choice when you use only one source that you refer to several 
times. Literary analyses are one type of essay for which this approach to cita-
tion may be a good choice. For example: 
 Edith Wharton establishes the bleakness of her setting, Starkfield, not just 
through description of place but also through her main character, Ethan, 
who is described as “bleak and unapproachable” ( Ethan Frome  [New York:
Scribner’s, 1911, Print] 3. All subsequent references are to this edition). Later 
Wharton describes winter as “shut[ting] down on Starkfield” and negating 
life there (7).  
 Additional-Information Footnotes or Endnotes  
At times you may need to provide additional information that is not central to 
your argument. These additions belong in a content note. However, use these 
sparingly and never as a way of advancing your thesis. Many instructors object 
to content notes and prefer only parenthetical citations.  
 “See Also” Footnotes or Endnotes  
More acceptable is the note that refers to other sources of evidence for or against 
the point to be established. These notes are usually introduced with “See also” 
or “Compare,” followed by the citation. For example: 
 Chekhov’s debt to Ibsen should be recognized, as should his debt to other 
playwrights of the 1890s who were concerned with the inner life of their 
characters.  1 
1 See also Eric Bentley,  In Search of Theater (New York: Vintage, 1959) 330; Walter Bruford,  Anton 
Chekhov (New Haven: Yale UP, 1957) 45.
 PREPARING MLA CITATIONS FOR 
A WORKS CITED LIST 
 The partial in-text citations described and illustrated above must be completed 
by a full reference in a list given at the end of the essay. To prepare your Works 
Cited list, alphabetize, by author last name, the sources you have actually 
referred to and complete each citation according to the forms explained and 
illustrated in the following pages. The key is to find the appropriate model for 
each of your sources and then follow the model exactly. (Guidelines for 
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
319
formatting a finished Works Cited page are found on pp. 310–11.) But, you will 
make fewer errors if you also understand the basic pieces of information needed 
in citations and the order of that information. 
 Books require the following information, in the order given, with periods 
after each of the four major elements:
 • Author, last name first. 
 • Title—and subtitle if there is one—in italics. 
 • Facts of publication: city of publication, followed by a colon, shortened 
publisher’s name (Norton for W. W. Norton, for example), followed by a 
comma, and the year of publication, followed by a period. 
 • Medium of publication: Print.  
Author
Title
Facts of Publication
Medium of 
Publication
Bellow, Saul.
A Theft.
New York: Viking-Penguin, 1989.
Print.
 Forms for Books: Citing the Complete Book 
 A Book by a Single Author 
 Schieff, Stacy.  Cleopatra: A Life. New York: Little, Brown, 2010. Print.  
 The subtitle is included, preceded by a colon, even if there is no colon on the 
book’s title page. 
 A Book by Two or Three Authors 
 Adkins, Lesley, and Ray Adkins.  The Keys of Egypt: The Race to Crack the 
Hieroglyph Code. New York: HarperCollins, 2000. Print.  
 Second (and third) authors’ names appear in normal signature order. 
 A Book with More Than Three Authors 
 Baker, Susan P., et al.  The Injury Fact Book.  Oxford: Oxford UP, 1992. Print.  
 Use the name of the first person listed on the title page. The English “and 
 others” may be used instead of “et al.” Shorten “University Press” to “UP.” 
 Two or More Works by the Same Author 
 Goodall, Jane.  In the Shadow of Man.  Boston: Houghton, 1971. Print. 
 ---.  Through a Window: My Thirty Years with the Chimpanzees of Gombe.  Boston: 
Houghton, 1990. Print.  
MLA Style

320 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 Give the author’s full name with the first entry. For the second (and additional 
works), begin the citation with three hyphens followed by a period. Alphabetize 
the entries by the books’ titles.  
 A Book Written Under a Pseudonym with Name Supplied 
 Wrighter, Carl P. [Paul Stevens].  I Can Sell You Anything.  New York: Ballantine, 
1972. Print.  
 An Anonymous Book 
 Beowulf: A New Verse Translation.  Trans. Seamus Heaney. New York: Farrar, 
2000. Print.  
 An Edited Book 
 Hamilton, Alexander, James Madison, and John Jay.  The Federalist Papers.  Ed. 
Isaac Kramnick. New York: Viking-Penguin, 1987. Print. 
 Lynn, Kenneth S., ed.  Huckleberry Finn: Text, Sources, and Critics. New York: 
Harcourt, 1961. Print.  
 If you cite the author’s work, put the author’s name first and the editor’s name 
after the title, preceded by “Ed.” If you cite the editor’s work (an introduction 
or notes), then place the editor’s name first, followed by a comma and “ed.”  
 A Translation 
 Schulze, Hagen.  Germany: A New History.  Trans. Deborah Lucas Schneider. 
Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1998. Print. 
 Cornford, Francis MacDonald, trans.  The Republic of Plato.  New York: Oxford 
UP, 1945. Print.  
 If the author’s work is being cited, place the author’s name first and the transla-
tor’s name after the title, preceded by “Trans.” If the translator’s work is the 
important element, place the translator’s name first, as in the second example 
above. If the author’s name does not appear in the title, give it after the title. For 
example: By Plato. 
 A Book in Two or More Volumes 
 Spielvogel, Jackson J.  Western Civilization.  2 vols. Minneapolis: West, 
1991. Print.  
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
321
 A Book in Its Second or Subsequent Edition 
 O’Brien, David M.  Storm Center: The Supreme Court and American Politics.  
2nd ed. New York: Norton, 1990. Print.  
 A Book in a Series 
 Parkinson, Richard.  The Rosetta Stone.  British Museum Objects in Focus. 
London: British Museum, 2005. Print.  
 The series title—and number, if there is one—follows the book’s title but is not 
put in italics. 
 A Reprint of an Earlier Work 
 Twain, Mark.  Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.  1885. Centennial Facsimile 
Edition. Introd. Hamlin Hill. New York: Harper, 1962. Print. 
 Faulkner, William.  As I Lay Dying. 1930. New York: Vintage-Random, 1964. Print.  
 Provide the original date of publication as well as the facts of publication for the 
reprinted version. Indicate any new material, as in the first example. The second 
example illustrates citing a reprinted book, by the same publisher, in a paper-
back version. (Vintage is a paperback imprint of the publisher Random House.) 
 A Book with Two or More Publishers 
 Green, Mark J., James M. Fallows, and David R. Zwick.  Who Runs Congress?  Ralph 
Nader Congress Project. New York: Bantam; New York: Grossman, 1972. Print.  
 Separate the publishers with a semicolon. 
 A Corporate or Governmental Author 
 California State Department of Education.  American Indian Education 
Handbook. Sacramento: California Department of Education, Indian 
Education Unit, 1991. Print.  
 The Bible 
 The Bible [Always refers to the King James Version.] Print. 
 The Reader’s Bible: A Narrative. Ed. with introd. Roland Mushat Frye. Princeton: 
Princeton UP, 1965. Print.  
 In the first example do not put the title in italics. Indicate the version if it is not 
the King James Version. Provide facts of publication for versions not well 
known. 
MLA Style

322 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 Forms for Books: Citing Part of a Book 
 A Preface, Introduction, Foreword, or Afterword 
 Sagan, Carl. Introduction.  A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black 
Holes. By Stephen Hawking. New York: Bantam, 1988, ix–x. Print.  
 Use this form if you are citing the author of the Preface, Introduction, Foreword, 
or the like. Use an identifying word after the author’s name and give inclusive 
page numbers for the part of the book by the author you are citing. 
 An Encyclopedia Article 
 Ostrom, John H. “Dinosaurs.”  McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and 
Technology. 1957 ed. Print. 
 “Benjamin Franklin.”  Concise Dictionary of American Biography.  Ed. Joseph 
E. G. Hopkins. New York: Scribner’s, 1964. Print.  
 Give complete publication facts for less well-known works or first editions. 
 One or More Volumes in a Multivolume Work 
 James, Henry.  The Portrait of a Lady.  Vols. 3 and 4 of  The Novels and Tales of 
Henry James.  New York: Scribner’s, 1908. Print.  
 A Work in an Anthology or Collection 
 Hurston, Zora Neale.  The First One. Black Female Playwrights: An Anthology of 
Plays Before 1950. Ed. Kathy A. Perkins. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1989. 
80–88. Print. 
 Comstock, George. “The Medium and the Society: The Role of Television in 
American Life.”  Children and Television: Images in a Changing Sociocultural 
World. Ed. Gordon L. Berry and Joy Keiko Asamen. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage, 1993. 117–31. Print.  
 Give inclusive page numbers for the particular work you have used. 
 An Article in a Collection, Casebook, or Sourcebook 
 MacKenzie, James J. “The Decline of Nuclear Power.”  engage/social  April 1986. 
Rpt. as “America Does Not Need More Nuclear Power” in  The 
Environmental Crisis: Opposing Viewpoints.  Ed. Julie S. Bach and Lynn Hall. 
Opposing Viewpoints Series. St. Paul: Greenhaven, 1986. 136–41. Print.  
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
323
 Many articles in collections have been previously published, so a complete cita-
tion needs to include the original facts of publication (excluding page numbers 
if they are not readily available) as well as the facts of publication for the collec-
tion. Include inclusive page numbers for the article used.  
 Cross-References  
If you are citing several articles from one collection, you can cite the collection 
and then provide only the author and title of specific articles used, with a cross-
reference to the editor(s) of the collection. 
 Head, Suzanne, and Robert Heinzman, eds.  Lessons of the Rainforest.  San 
Francisco: Sierra Club, 1990. Print. 
 Bandyopadhyay, J., and Vandana Shiva. “Asia’s Forest, Asia’s Cultures.” Head 
and Heinzman 66–77. Print.  
 Forms for Periodicals: Articles in Journals 
and Magazines Accessed in Print 
 Articles from the various forms of periodicals, when read in their print format, 
require the following information, in the order given, with periods after each of 
the four major elements:
 • Author, last name first. 
 • Title of the article, in quotation marks. 
 • Facts of publication: title of the journal (magazine or newspaper) in ital-
ics, volume and issue number  for scholarly journals only, date followed by a 
colon and inclusive page numbers, and then a period. 
 • Medium of publication: Print.  
 The following models show the variations in the details of publication, 
depending on the type of publication. 
 Article in a Journal Paged by Year 
 Brown, Jane D., and Carol J. Pardun. “Little in Common: Racial and Gender 
Differences in Adolescents’ Television Diets.”  Journal of Broadcasting and 
Electronic Media 48.2 (2004): 266–78. Print.  
 Note that there is  no punctuation between the title of the periodical and the 
volume number and date. 
 Article in a Journal Paged by Issue 
 Lewis, Kevin. “Superstardom and Transcendence.”  Arete: The Journal of Sport 
Literature  2.2 (1985): 47–54. Print.  
MLA Style

324 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 Provide both volume and issue number regardless of the journal’s choice of paging. 
 Article in a Monthly Magazine 
Wegner, Mary-Ann Pouls. “Gateway to the Netherworld.” Archaeology Jan./
     Feb. 2013: 50–53. Print.
 Do not use volume or issue number. Cite the month(s) and year followed by a 
colon and inclusive page numbers. Abbreviate all months except May, June, 
and July. 
 Article in a Weekly Magazine 
 Stein, Joel. “Eat This, Low Carbers.”  Time 15 Aug. 2005: 78. Print. 
 Provide the complete date, using the order of day, month, year. 
 An Anonymous Article 
 “Death of Perestroika.”  Economist 2 Feb. 1991: 12–13. Print. 
 The missing name indicates that the article is anonymous. Alphabetize under D. 
 A Published Interview 
 Angier, Natalie. “Ernst Mayr at 93.” Interview.  Natural History  May 1997: 8–11. Print.  
 Follow the pattern for a published article, but add the descriptive label 
“Interview” (followed by a period) after the article’s title.  
 A Review 
Whitehead, Barbara D. “The New Segregation.” Rev. of Coming Apart: The 
State of  White America, 1960–2010, by Charles Murrary. Commonweal 4 
May 2012. Print.
 If the review is signed, begin with the author’s name and then the title of the 
review article. Also provide the title of the work being reviewed and its author, 
preceded by “Rev. of.” For reviews of art shows, videos, or computer software, 
provide place and date or descriptive label to make the citation clear. 
 Forms for Periodicals: Articles in Newspapers Accessed in Print 
 An Article from a Newspaper 
 Arguila, John. “What Deep Blue Taught Kasparov—and Us.”  Christian Science 
Monitor 16 May 1997: 18. Print.  
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
325
 A newspaper’s title should be cited as it appears on the masthead, excluding 
any initial article, thus  New York Times, not  The New York Times. 
 An Article from a Newspaper with Lettered Sections 
 Ferguson, Niall. “Rough Week, but America’s Era Goes On.”  Washington Post  
21 Sept. 2008: B1 1 . Print.  
 Place the section letter immediately before the page number without any spac-
ing. If the paging is not consecutive, give the first page and the plus sign. 
 An Article from a Newspaper with a Designated Edition 
 Pereria, Joseph. “Women Allege Sexist Atmosphere in Offices Constitutes 
Harassment.”  Wall Street Journal 10 Feb. 1988, eastern ed.: 23. Print.  
 Cite the edition used after the date and before the page number. 
 An Editorial 
 “Japan’s Two Nationalisms.” Editorial.  Washington Post  4 June 2000: B6. Print.  
 Add the descriptive label “Editorial” after the article title. 
 A Letter to the Editor 
 Wiles, Yoko A. “Thoughts of a New Citizen.” Letter.  Washington Post  27 Dec. 
1995: A22. Print.  
 Forms for Web Sources 
 Remember that the purpose of a citation is to allow readers to obtain the source 
you have used. To locate online sources, more information is usually needed 
than for printed sources. Include as many of the items listed below, in the order 
given here, as are relevant—and available—for each source. Take time to search 
a website’s home page to locate as much of the information as possible. AND: 
Always include the date you accessed the source, as the web remains ever fluid 
and changing.
 • Author (or editor, compiler, translator), last name first. 
 • Title of the work, in quotation marks if it is part of a site, in italics if it is a 
complete and separate work, such as an online novel. 
 • Facts of publication of the print version if the item was originally published 
in print. 
 • Title of the website, in italics—unless it is the same as item 2 above. 
 • Publisher or sponsor of the site (possibly a university, company, or 
organization). 
MLA Style

326 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 • Date of publication. (If none is available, use n.d.)  
 • Medium of publication: Web. 
 • Your date of access: day, month, and year.  
 Study this annotated citation as a general model: 
 A Published Article from an Online Database 
 Shin, Michael S. “Redressing Wounds: Finding a Legal Framework to Remedy 
Racial Disparities in Medical Care.”  California Law Review  90.6 (2002): 
2047–2100.  JSTOR. Web. 10 Sept. 2008. 
 Kumar, Sanjay. “Scientists Accuse Animal Rights Activists of Stifling Research.” 
 British Medical Journal  23 Nov. 2002: 1192.  EBSCOhost.  Web. 12 Sept. 2008. 
 No posting date is used with databases of printed articles. Postings are 
ongoing. 
 An Article from a Reference Source 
 “Prohibition.”  Encyclopaedia Britannica Online. Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2007. 
Web. 16 July 2008. 
 An Online News Source 
 Associated Press. “Parents: Work Hinders Quality Time with Kids.”   CNN.com  . 
Cable News Network. 31 July 2003. Web. 31 July 2003.  
 An Article in an Online Magazine 
 Kinsley, Michael. “Politicians Lie. Numbers Don’t.”   Slate.com . Washington Post 
Company. 16 Sept. 2008. Web. 21 Sept. 2008.  
NOTE: MLA discourages the use of URLs as a way to access a web source.  
URLs invite errors by both writers and readers. A search for the title of the 
website is both faster and safer.
   ”.k
o
o
B
 a 
d
a
e
R
—
r
o
v
a
F a fle
sr
u
o
Y 
o
D
“ .rJ ,
d
r
a
n
o
e
L ,stti
P
MiamiHerald.com .  
  Miami Herald. 
 .
8
0
0
2 .t
p
e
S 1
2  .b
e
W
  .
8
0
0
2 .t
p
e
S 1
2  
 k
r
o
w
 fo eltit 
date of publication
author
sponsor 
of site
medium
date of access
title of website
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
327
 A Poem from a Scholarly Project 
 Keats, John. “Ode to a Nightingale.”  Poetical Works.  1884.  Bartleby.com  :   Great 
Books. Ed. Steven van Leeuwen. Web. 2 Oct. 2008.  
 Information from a Government Site 
 United States Department of Health and Human Services. “The 2008 HHS 
Poverty Guidelines.” 23 Jan. 2008. Web. 23 Sept. 2008.  
 Information from a Professional Site 
 “Music Instruction Aids Verbal Memory.” APA Press Release. Reporter: Agnes 
S. Chan.  APA Online. American Psychological Association. 27 July 2003. Web. 
16 Sept. 2008. 
 Information from a Professional Home Page or Blog 
 Sullivan, Andrew.  “America: The Global Pioneer of Torture.”  The Daily Dish. 
The Atlantic Monthly Group. 14 Sept. 2008. Web. 23 Sept. 2008.  
 For information from an untitled personal home page, use the label “Home 
page” (but not in italics or quotation marks). 
 Forms for Other Print and Nonprint Sources 
 The materials in this section, although often important to research projects, do 
not always lend themselves to documentation by the forms illustrated above. 
Follow the basic order of author, title, facts of publication, and medium of pub-
lication as much as possible. Add more information as needed to make the cita-
tion clear and useful to a reader. 
 An Article Published in Print and on CD or DVD 
 Detweiler, Richard A. “Democracy and Decency on the Internet.”  Chronicle of 
Higher Education  28 June 1996: A40.  General Periodicals Ondisc. UMI-
ProQuest.  Apr. 1997. CD. 
 A Work or Part of a Work on CD-ROM, DVD-ROM, Etc. 
 Eseiolonis, Karyn. “Georgio de Chirico’s  Mysterious Bathers. ”  A Passion for Art: 
Renoir, Cezanne, Matisse and Dr. Barnes.  Corbis Productions, 1995.  CD.
MLA Style

328 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 Kloss, William. “Donatello and Padua.”  Great Artists of the Italian Renaissance. 
DVD. Chantilly, VA: The Teaching Company, 2004.  
 An Audio (or Video) from a Website 
 Vachss, Andrew. “Dead and Gone.” Interview by Bill Thompson.  Aired on  Eye 
on Books, 24 Oct. 2000.  The Zero.  Home page. Web. 25 Sept. 2008.  
 A Recording 
 Stein, Joseph.  Fiddler on the Roof. Jerry Bock, composer. Original-Cast 
Recording with Zero Mostel. RCA, LSO-1093. 1964. LP.  
 The conductor and/or performers help identify a specific recording. 
 Plays or Concerts 
 Mourning Becomes Electra.  By Eugene O’Neill. Shakespeare Theater. 
Washington, DC. 16 May 1997. Performance.  
 Principal actors, singers, musicians, and/or the director can be added as 
appropriate. 
 A Television or Radio Program 
 “Breakthrough: Television’s Journal of Science and Medicine.” PBS series 
hosted by Ron Hendren. 10 June 1997. Television.  
 An Interview 
 Plum, Kenneth. Personal interview. 5 Mar. 2012.  
 A Lecture 
 Bateson, Mary Catherine. “Crazy Mixed-Up Families.” Northern Virginia 
Community College, 26 Apr. 1997. Lecture.  
 An Unpublished Letter or E-mail 
 Usick, Patricia. Message to the author. 26 June 2005. E-mail.  
 Maps and Charts 
 Hampshire and Dorset.  Map. Kent, UK: Geographers’ A–Z, n.d. Print.  
MLA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
329
 Cartoons and Advertisements 
 Halleyscope. “Halleyscopes Are for Night Owls.” Advertisement.  Natural 
History  Dec. 1985: 15. Print. 
 United Airlines Advertisement. ESPN. 8 Aug. 2008. Television.  
 A Published Dissertation 
 Brotton, Joyce D.  Illuminating the Present Through Literary Dialogism: From the 
Reformation Through Postmodernism.  Diss. George Mason U, 2002.  Ann 
Arbor: UMI, 2002. Print.  
 Government Documents 
 United States. Senate. Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. 
Subcommittee on Energy Research and Development.  Advanced Reactor 
Development Program: Hearing.  Washington: GPO, 24 May 1988. Print. 
 ---. Environmental Protection Agency.  The Challenge of the Environment: A 
Primer on EPA’s Statutory Authority. Washington: GPO, 1972. Print.  
 If the author is not given, cite the name of the government first followed by 
the name of the department or agency. If you cite more than one document 
published by the same government, use the standard three hyphens fol-
lowed by a period. If you cite a second document prepared by the EPA, use 
another three hyphens and period. Abbreviate the U.S. Government Printing 
Office: GPO. 
 If the author is known, follow this pattern: 
 Geller, William.  Deadly Force.  U.S. Dept. of Justice National Institute of Justice 
Crime File Study Guide. Washington: Dept. of Justice, n.d. Print.  
 Legal Documents 
 U.S. Const.  Art. 1, sec. 3. Print.  
 The Constitution is referred to by article and section. Abbreviations are used. 
Do not use italics. 
 When citing a court case, give the name of the case, the volume, name, and 
page of the report cited, and the date. Italicize the name of the case in your text 
but not in the Works Cited. 
 Turner v.  Arkansas. 407 U.S. 366. 1972. Print.  
MLA Style

330 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 AUTHOR/YEAR OR APA STYLE 
 The  author/year system identifies a source by placing the author’s last name and 
the publication year of the source within parentheses at the point in the text 
where the source is cited. The in-text citations are supported by complete cita-
tions in a list of sources at the end of the paper. Most disciplines in the social 
sciences, biological sciences, and earth sciences use some version of the author/
year style. The guidelines given here follow the style of the  Publication Manual 
of the American Psychological Association (6th ed., 2010). 
 APA Style: In-Text Citations 
 The simplest parenthetical reference can be presented in one of three ways:
 1. 
Place the year of publication within parentheses immediately following the 
author’s name in the text.
 In a typical study of preference for motherese,  Fernald (1985)  used an 
operant auditory preference procedure.  
 Within the same paragraph, additional references to the source do not need to 
repeat the year, if the researcher clearly establishes that the same source is 
being cited.
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
331
 Because the speakers were unfamiliar subjects, Fernald’s work eliminates the 
possibility that it is the mother’s voice per se that accounts for the preference.  
 2. 
If the author is not mentioned in the text, place the author’s last name fol-
lowed by a comma and the year of publication within parentheses after the 
borrowed information.
 The majority of working women are employed in jobs that are at least 
75 percent female ( Lawrence & Matsuda, 1997 ).  
 3. 
Cite a specific passage by providing the page, chapter, or figure number 
following the borrowed material.  Always give specific page references for 
quoted material.
  • A brief quotation:
 Deuzen-Smith (1988)  believes that counselors must be involved with cli-
ents and “deeply interested in piecing the puzzle of life together” (p. 29).  
  • A quotation in display form:
 Bartlett (1932)  explains the cyclic process of perception:
 Suppose I am making a stroke in a quick game, such as tennis or cricket. 
How I make the stroke depends on the relating of certain new experi-
ences, most of them visual, to other immediately preceding visual experi-
ences, and to my posture, or balance of posture, at the moment. (p. 201)  
 Indent a block quotation five spaces from the left margin, do not use quotation 
marks, and double-space throughout. To show a new paragraph within the 
block quotation, indent the first line of the new paragraph an additional five 
spaces. Note the placing of the year after the author’s name, and the page num-
ber at the end of the direct quotation. 
 More complicated in-text citations should be handled as follows: 
 Two Authors, Mentioned in the Text 
 Kuhl and Meltzoff (1984)  tested 4- to 5-month-olds in an experiment . . .  
 Two Authors, Not Mentioned in the Text 
 . . . but are unable to show preference in the presence of two mismatched 
modalities (e.g., a face and a voice; see  Kuhl & Meltzoff, 1984 ).  
 Give both authors’ last names each time you refer to the source. Connect their 
names with “and” in the text. Use an ampersand (&) in the parenthetical 
citation. 
APA Style

332 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 More Than Two Authors  
For works coauthored by three, four, or five people, provide all last names in 
the first reference to the source. Thereafter, cite only the first author’s name 
 followed by “et al.” 
 As Price-Williams, Gordon, and Ramirez have shown (1969), . . . 
 OR 
 Studies of these children have shown (Price-Williams, Gordon,  & Ramirez, 
1969) . . . 
 THEN 
 Price-Williams et al. (1969)  also found that . . .  
 If a source has six or more authors, use only the first author’s last name fol-
lowed by “et al.” every time the source is cited. 
 Corporate Authors  
In general, spell out the name of a corporate author each time it is used. If a 
corporate author has well-known initials, the name can be abbreviated after the 
first citation.
FIRST IN-TEXT CITATION: 
(National Institutes of Health [NIH], 1989)
SUBSEQUENT CITATIONS: 
(NIH, 1989) 
 Two or More Works Within the Same Parentheses  
When citing more than one work by the same author in a parenthetical refer-
ence, use the author’s name only once and arrange the years mentioned in order, 
thus: 
 Several studies of ego identity formation (Marcia,  1966, 1983 ) . . .  
 When an author, or the same group of coauthors, has more than one work 
published in the same year, distinguish the works by adding the letters  a, b, c, 
and so on, as needed, to the year. Give the last name only once, but repeat the 
year, each one with its identifying letter; thus: 
 Several studies (Smith, 1990 a , 1990 b  , 1990 c ) . . . 
 When citing several works by different authors within the same parentheses, 
list the authors alphabetically; alphabetize by the first author when citing coau-
thored works. Separate authors or groups of coauthors with semicolons, thus: 
 Although many researchers (Archer  &  Waterman, 1983 ;  Grotevant, 1983 ;  
Grotevant & Cooper, 1986 ;  Sabatelli & Mazor, 1985) study identity 
formation . . .  
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
333
 Personal Communication  
Cite information obtained via interview, phone, letter, and e-mail communication. 
 According to Sandra Haun (personal interview, September 7, 2008) . . .  
 Because readers cannot retrieve information from these personal sources, do 
 not include a citation in your list of references. 
 APA STYLE: PREPARING A LIST 
OF REFERENCES 
 Every source cited parenthetically in your paper needs a complete bibliographic 
citation. These complete citations are placed on a separate page (or pages) after 
the text of the paper and before any appendices included in the paper. Sources 
are arranged alphabetically, and the first page is titled “References.” Begin each 
source flush with the left margin and indent second and subsequent lines five 
spaces. Double-space throughout the list of references. Follow these rules for 
alphabetizing:
 1. 
Organize two or more works by the same author, or the same group of 
coauthors, chronologically.
 Beck, A. T. (1991). 
 Beck, A. T. (1993).  
 2. 
Place single-author entries before multiple-author entries when the first of 
the multiple authors is the same as the single author.
 Grotevant, H. D. (1983). 
 Grotevant, H. D., & Cooper, C. R. (1986).  
 3. 
Organize multiple-author entries that have the same first author but differ-
ent second or third authors alphabetically by the name of the second author 
or third and so on.
 Gerbner, G., & Gross, L. 
 Gerbner, G., Gross, L.,  Jackson-Beeck , M., Jeffries-Fox, S., & Signorielli, N. 
 Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N.  
 4. 
Organize two or more works by the same author(s) published in the same 
year alphabetically by title. 
 Form for Books 
 A book citation contains these elements in this form: 
publisher
author
date
title 
place of 
publication
Seligman, (M. E. P.) (1991). Learned optimism. New York: Knopf.
APA Style

334 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
 Authors  
Give all authors’ names, last name first, and initials. Separate authors with 
commas, use the ampersand (&) before the last author’s name, and end with a 
period. For edited books, place the abbreviation “Ed.” or “Eds.” in parentheses 
following the last editor’s name. 
 Date of Publication  
Place the year of publication in parentheses followed by a period. 
 Title  
Capitalize only the first word of the title and of the subtitle, if there is one, and 
any proper nouns. Italicize the title and end with a period. Place additional 
information such as number of volumes or an edition in parentheses after the 
title, before the period. 
Burleigh, N. (2007). Mirage: Napoleon’s scientists and the unveiling of Egypt.
 Publication Information  
Cite the city of publication; add the state (using the Postal Service abbreviation) 
or country if necessary to avoid confusion; then give the publisher’s name, after 
a colon, eliminating unnecessary terms such as  Publisher, Co.,  and  Inc.  End the 
citation with a period. 
 Mitchell, J. V. (Ed.). (1985).  The ninth mental measurements yearbook.  Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 
 National Institute of Drug Abuse. (1993, April 13).  Annual national high school 
senior survey. Rockville, MD: Author. 
 Newton, D. E. (1996).  Violence and the media.  Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio.  
 Give a corporate author’s name in full. When the organization is both author 
and publisher, place the word  Author after the place of publication. 
 Form for Articles 
 An article citation contains these elements in this form: 
 Date of Publication  
Place the year of publication for articles in scholarly journals in parentheses, 
followed by a period. For articles in newspapers and popular magazines, give 
the year followed by month and day (if appropriate). 
 (1997, March).  
date
Changeaux, J.P. (1993). Chemical signaling in the brain. Scientific American, 
269, 58–62.
author
title of article
title of journal
volume
page 
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
335
 Title of Article  
Capitalize only the title’s first word, the first word of any subtitle, and any 
proper nouns. Place any necessary descriptive information in square brackets 
immediately after the title. 
 Scott, S. S. (1984, December 12). Smokers get a raw deal [Letter to the Editor].  
 Publication Information  
Cite the title of the journal in full, capitalizing according to conventions for 
titles. Italicize the title and follow it with a comma. Give the volume number, 
italicized, followed by a comma, and then inclusive page numbers followed by 
a period.  If a journal begins each issue with a new page 1, then also cite the 
issue number in parentheses immediately following the volume number. Do 
not use “p.” or “pp.” before page numbers when citing articles from scholarly 
journals; do use “p.” or “pp.” in citations to newspaper and magazine articles. 
 Martin, C. L., Wood, C. H., & Little, J. K. (1990). The development of gender 
stereotype components.  Child Development, 61, 1891–1904. 
 Leakey, R. (2000, April/May). Extinctions past and present.  Time, p. 35. 
 An Article or Chapter in an Edited Book 
 Goodall, J. (1993). Chimpanzees—bridging the gap. In P. Cavalieri & P. Singer 
(Eds.),  The great ape project: Equality beyond humanity (pp. 10–18). New 
York: St. Martin’s.  
 Cite the author(s), date, and title of the article or chapter. Then cite the name(s) 
of the editor(s) in signature order after “In,” followed by “Ed.” or “Eds.” in 
parentheses; the title of the book; the inclusive page numbers of the article or 
chapter, in parentheses, followed by a period. End with the city of publication 
and the publisher of the book. 
 A Report 
 U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board. (1988).  Sexual harassment in the federal 
workplace: An update.  Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.  
 Form for Electronic Sources 
 As a minimum, an APA reference for any type of Internet source should include 
the following information: a document title or description, the date of publica-
tion, a way to access the document online, and, when possible, an author name.
When the Internet address (URL) is likely to be stable, you can cite that 
address. For example:  www.nytimes.com . However, a good source that you 
find during your research may not be found later by your readers with the URL 
APA Style

336 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
that you used. APA recommends, therefore, that such sources be documented 
with the item’s DOI (digital object identifier) instead of its URL. 
 Do not place URLs within angle brackets (< >). Do not place a period at the 
end of the URL, even though it concludes the citation. If you have to break a 
URL at the end of a line, break only after a slash. Introduce the URL at the end 
of the citation this way: Retrieved from  www.nytimes.com 
 DOIs are a series of numbers and letters that provide a link to a specific item, 
and this link does not change with time. Although DOIs are often on the first 
page of a document, they can, at times, be hard to locate. APA prefers that you 
always choose a source’s DOI over its URL, if you can find it. Place the DOI at the 
end of the citation, and introduce the number thus: doi: [number]. Do not end the 
citation with a period. 
 Here are a few examples of citations for Internet sources: 
 Journal Article Retrieved Online, with DOI Information 
 Habernas, Jurgen. (2006). Political communication in media society. 
 Communication Theory 16 (4), 411–426. doi: 10.1111/
j.l468-2885.2006.00280.x 
 Gardiner, K., Herault, Y., Lott, I., Antonarakis, S., Reeves, R., & Dierssen, M. 
(2010). Down syndrome: From understanding the neurobiology to ther-
apy.  Journal of Neuroscience 30 (45), 14943–14945. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3728-10.2010  
 Electronic Daily Newspaper Article Available by Search 
 Schwartz, J. (2002, September 13). Air pollution con game.  Washington Times.  
Retrieved from  http://www.washtimes.com  
 Journal Article Available from a Periodical Database  
Note that no URL is necessary; just provide the name of the database. 
 Dixon, B. (2001, December). Animal emotions.  Ethics & the Environment, 6 (2), 
22. Retrieved from Academic Search Premier database/EBSCOhost 
Research Databases.  
 U.S. Government Report on a Government Website 
 U.S. General Accounting Office. (2002, March).  Identity theft: Prevalence and 
cost appear to be growing. Retrieved from  http://www.consumer.gov/
idtheft/reports/gao-d02363.pdf  
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
337
 Cite a message posted to a newsgroup or electronic mailing list in the refer-
ence list. Cite an e-mail from one person to another  only in the essay, not in the 
list of references. 
 SAMPLE STUDENT ESSAY IN APA STYLE 
 The following student essay illustrates APA style. Use 1-inch margins and double-
space throughout, including any block quotations. Block quotations should be 
indented  five spaces from the left margin (in contrast to the ten spaces required 
by MLA style). Observe the following elements: title page, running head, 
abstract, author/year in-text citations, subheadings within the text, and a list of 
references. 
APA Style

338 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Running Head: Depression and Marital Status 1
 The Relationship Between Depression and Marital Status 
 Carissa   Ervine 
 Sociology of Mental Disorder: SOC 4714 
 Virginia Tech University  
Sample title page
for a paper in 
APA style.
Note placement of 
running head and 
page number.
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
339
Depression and Marital Status 2
 Abstract 
 Many studies have examined the relationship between mental disorders, 
specifically depression, and marital status. From the studies, several theories 
have developed to explain this relationship.   An examination of the studies’ 
findings and of the theories tested demonstrates that no one theory accounts 
for all patterns of marital status and mental health or disorder. 
 
Papers in APA style 
usually begin with 
an abstract.
APA Style

340 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Depression and Marital Status 3
 Many studies have evaluated the relationship between mental disorders, 
more specifically depression, and marital status. These studies consistently find 
that people who are divorced or have never been married have more 
depressive symptoms than those who are married. This paper explores both 
the causes of and the theories that seek to explain these findings. 
 Definition and Description of Depression 
 Depression is a mood disorder in which individuals experience loss of 
interest or of pleasure in nearly all activities. They feel extreme sadness, 
despair, and hopelessness. These feelings lead to a lack of motivation to do 
simple, daily tasks. Many people with depression also have low self-esteem. 
According to the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), a 
person must experience at least four of the symptoms listed in order to have 
depression: changes in appetite or weight, sleep, or psychomotor activity; 
decreased energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; difficulty concentrating or 
making decisions; or recurrent thoughts of death or suicide ideas or attempts.  
 Prevalence of Depression According to Marital Status 
Throughout epidemiological research, studies have consistently shown 
that those who are married have fewer depressed symptoms than those who
 are not married (Kim & McKenry, 2005; Wade & Pevalin, 2004), and many studies 
have sought to find the reasons. Some think it is because marriage offers certain 
benefits; therefore, married people have better overall health and less depression 
(Kim & McKenry, 2002). When a marriage dissolves, so does that person’s mental 
health. Marital disruption causes a significant increase in depression, even three 
years after a divorce (Aseltine & Kessler, 1993). It has also been found that 
people who are depressed before marriage have improved mental health once 
they are married (Lucas et al., 2003). Those who do get divorced have more 
depressive symptoms that may or may not disappear over time (Kim & McKenry, 
2002; Lucas et al., 2003). Kim and McKenry (2002) demonstrate, though, that 
getting remarried after a divorce leads to a decrease in depressive symptoms. 
Subheadings 
are often used in 
papers in the social 
sciences.
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
341
Depression and Marital Status 4
Studies have also evaluated whether people in marriages were happier 
because those who were not married, or who became divorced, got selected 
out of marriage due to psychological problems that make them undesirable 
partners. This idea is referred to as the social selection theory. Four years 
prior to getting divorced, people show higher rates of psychological problems 
than those who stayed married, although those who   were widowed did not 
(Wade & Pevalin, 2004). People who get married and stay married have fewer 
depressive symptoms and better psychological well-being years before they 
ever got married (Lucas et al., 2003). 
 Some researchers assert that marriage itself is good for mental health, 
but that it is the quality of the marriage that matters. High marital stress 
causes depressive symptoms that tend to dissipate after divorce (Aseltine & 
Kessler, 1993; Johnson & Wu, 2002). Gove, Hughes, and Style (1983) 
demonstrated that marital quality and happiness are strong predictors of 
mental health.  Actually, remaining unmarried can be more beneficial to one’s 
psychological health than being in a continuously unhappy marriage. 
Last, some studies suggest that marriage does not increase 
psychological well-being at all. These studies suggest that life satisfaction does 
change when   major events ensue, and then people gradually adapt over time 
until their psychological health reaches their baseline (Lucas et al., 2003). 
Initially, people react strongly to both good and bad events, but as time 
passes, their emotional reactions lessen, and they return to normal (Lucas 
et al., 2003). Booth and Amato (1991) found that before a divorce occurs 
there is a rise in stress, but then stress levels return to normal two years 
after the divorce.  
 Evaluation of the Evidence 
All these findings play some part in explaining why the married tend to 
have fewer depressive symptoms than their counterparts, but some studies 
were better conducted than others and used longitudinal data to explain
Use ampersand 
within parenthe-
ses; use “and” in 
sentences.
APA Style

342 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Depression and Marital Status 5
some of the differences found. The fact that married people have better health 
because they get benefits from marriage seems to be the best explanation. In 
many instances, the social selection perspective did not hold up. For example, 
some studies showed that the psychological health of divorced persons 
 improved once they remarried (Johnson & Wu, 2002). If the selection 
perspective held, those who remarried would not likely experience a decrease 
in depressive symptoms. The selection perspective would support the idea 
that those selected out of marriage would not even be likely to remarry. 
Johnson and Wu’s (2002) results consistently show that marriage is better for 
people because of the benefits they receive from it. 
 Frech and Williams (2007) found that those who were depressed before 
marriage had a decrease in depressive symptoms once they were married, 
supporting the idea that marriage offers benefits. This may occur because 
marriage provides economic and psychosocial benefits. Those who are married 
may have two incomes, resulting in less stress over financial matters. Marriage 
also offers day-to-day companionship, decreasing social isolation (Frech & 
Williams, 2007). These benefits do not support the fact that marital quality 
matters, because they are based on marital status per se. 
 Some researchers who favor the social selection theory believe that 
high rates of distress prior to a divorce indicate psychological problems in the 
individual (Wade & Pevalin, 2004), although this may not necessarily be the 
case. Higher stress levels are common in the years preceding a divorce. After 
all, divorce is not a discrete event; many problems lead up to it. Higher levels 
of distress in the years before a divorce may reflect anticipation of the marital 
disruption (Mastekaasa, 1995). While marriage can bring many benefits, the 
quality of the marriage is important. High stress levels because of an unhappy 
marriage are likely to explain the higher stress levels leading up to divorce. 
Booth and Amato (1991) also found a pre-divorce rise in stress, but then 
they also found that levels of stress in the individuals return to normal two years 
after the divorce. While this finding does appear to challenge the selection
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
343
Depression and Marital Status 6
perspective, it is not consistent with many other findings that marriage is 
better for psychological well-being. Johnson and Wu (2002) used the same 
waves of people in their study; they did not find that those remaining divorced 
experienced a decrease in depressive symptoms over time. Nor did
satisfaction levels  return to the original baselines after divorce. This difference 
in findings is likely to be caused by a difference in the number of times the 
participants were studied. Booth and Amato studied their respondents only 
every three years, whereas Johnson and Wu studied them more often. Johnson 
and Wu did not find that those remaining divorced experienced a decrease in 
depressive symptoms over time. Lucas (2005) argues that although some 
adaption does occur, normally it is not complete. Many people are likely to 
establish new baselines of psychological well-being that are slightly lower than 
they were before they were divorced (Lucas et al., 2003). 
While many studies find fewer depressive symptoms in married people, 
discrepancies in explanations still exist. The strongest evidence indicates that 
married people have less depression because marriage offers many benefits 
and social supports that the unmarried do not have. But marital quality is just 
as important as marital status, and this can account for why distress levels go 
up right before divorce occurs.  A bad marriage creates stress, and distress
 levels increase because of this, not because of poor psychological health that 
an individual brings to a marriage. 
 Review of Theories Relating to Marital Status and Depression 
 As noted, several theories explain why people who are married have 
better mental health than those who are not. First, the social selection theory 
asserts that those who are married have better psychological well-being than 
those who do not and that the unmarried have been “selected” out of 
marriage. That is, those who aren’t married have more mental illness, such as 
depression, so they are not considered to be suitable mates (Johnson & Wu, 
2002). These people either never marry or get married and then divorce. Their 
psychological characteristics predispose them to divorce (Mastekaasa, 1992). 
APA Style

344 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Depression and Marital Status 7
The crisis theory asserts that having a divorce is a life crisis that temporarily 
changes mental health. People encounter many stressors while going through a 
divorce. One of these is the adjustment to role changes. Once the transition is 
completed, stress levels go down and psychological well-being returns to normal 
 (Booth & Amato, 1991). Lucas et al. (2003) also found that after the marital 
transition of divorce, people adapted to their new set of circumstances. 
Depression went down and their psychological well-being returned. 
 Last, role theory asserts that the stress that the divorced experience is 
chronic. The new social role they must take on will cause them higher levels of 
distress because they have less social support, more economic responsibilities, and 
possibly more stress associated with raising children alone (Johnson & Wu, 2002). 
This theory also asserts that these chronic stress levels will not go down as long 
as the divorced remain single. If a divorced person decides to  remarry, then his or 
her stress levels begin to dissipate because there are now fewer stressful roles to 
fulfill. The social causation perspective also ties into this. With fewer stressful roles 
to take on, married people can enjoy many of the benefits that marriage offers. 
When a marriage dissolves, however, they no longer have these benefits.
 Evaluation of Theories 
 Role theory gives a good explanation of why married people have better 
psychological well-being and fewer depressive symptoms. It is well-known that 
stress increases the likelihood that someone will have a mental illness. It is also 
true that levels of depression increase when marital disruption occurs (Wade 
& Pevalin, 2004). The divorced are used to having a partner who can offer 
benefits such as greater financial security and a strong social network. With 
fewer resources to draw upon and more roles to take on, the divorced person 
is susceptible to depressive symptoms (Kim & McKerry, 2002). However, 
symptoms of distress and depression do decrease once a divorced person 
remarries and undergoes another role transition. With the new marriage, the  
APA Style

 
CHAPTER 14 Formal Documentation: MLA Style, APA Style 
345
Depression and Marital Status 8
number of required roles decreases and the increased resources of the new 
marriage ease depression.
In contrast, crisis theory asserts that depressive symptoms and distress 
decrease with time after a divorce. But crisis theory does not seem to hold 
up, since studies demonstrate that marriage and remarriage increase 
psychological well-being.  The fact that remarriage increases psychological well-
being also   contradicts the social selection perspective. If social selection did 
occur, people would be selected out from remarrying at all. None of these 
theories, however, effectively examines the effect of marital quality, an issue 
important to understanding the relationship between depression and 
marital status. 
 The best conclusion is that no one theory is complex enough to explain 
the relationship between marital status and mental health. It is likely that all 
theories have valid points and that the reason married people experience 
better mental health stems from a combination of causes. Further research 
should focus on finding a theory that can account for more, if not all, of the 
forces shaping the mental health of married people.  
APA Style

346 
SECTION 4 THE RESEARCHED AND FORMALLY DOCUMENTED ARGUMENT
Depression and Marital Status 9
 References 
 Aseltine, R. H., & Kessler, R.C. (1993). Marital disruption and depression in a 
community sample . Journal of Health and Social Behavior,  34, 237–251. 
 Booth,  A., & Amato, P. (1991). Divorce and psychological stress.  Journal of 
Health and Social Behavior,  32, 396–407. 
 Frech,  A., & Williams, K. (2007). Depression and the psychological benefits of 
entering marriage.  Journal of Health and Social Behavior,  48, 149–163. 
 Gove, W. R., Hughes, M., & Style, B. S. (1983). Does marriage have positive 
effects on the psychological well-being of the individual ? Journal of Health 
and Social Behavior,  24, 122–131. 
 Johnson, D. R., & Wu, J. (2002). An empirical test of crisis, social selection, and role  
explanations of the relationship between marital disruption and 
psychological distress: A pooled time-series analysis of four wave panel data. 
 Journal of Marriage and Family,  64, 211–224. 
 Kim, K. H., & McKenry, P. C. (2002).The relationship between marriage and 
psychological well-being.  Journal of Family Issues,  23 (8), 885–911. 
 Lucas, R. E. (2005). Time does not heal all wounds: A longitudinal study of 
reaction and adaption to divorce.  Psychological Science,  16 (12), 945–950. 
 Lucas, R. E., Clark,  A. E., Georgellis, Y., & Diener, E. (2003).  Reexamining 
adaptation and the set point model of happiness: Reactions to changes 
in marital status.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,  84 (3), 
527–538. 
 Mastekaasa,  A. (1992). Marriage and psychological well-being: Some evidence 
on selection into marriage.  Journal of Marriage and the Family,  54, 
901–911. 
 Mastekaasa,  A. (1995). Marital dissolution and subjective distress: Panel 
evidence.  European Sociological Review,  11 (20), 173–185. 
 Wade, T. J., & Pevalin, D. J (2004). Marital transitions and mental health.  Journal 
of Health and Social Behavior,  45, 155–170. 
For two or more 
sources by the 
same author, order 
by the year of 
publication.
Title the page 
“References.” 
Double-space 
throughout. In each 
citation, indent all 
lines, after the first, 
five spaces. Note 
APA style in plac-
ing dates.
APA Style

 A Collection of Readings 
5 
 SECTION

348
  This section is divided into eight chapters, each on a cur-
rent topic or set of interrelated issues open to debate. The 
chapters contain five or six articles, or a combination of arti-
cles and visuals, to remind us that complex issues  cannot 
be divided into simple “for” or “against” positions. This 
point remains true even for the chapters on a rather spe-
cific topic. It is not sound critical thinking to be simply for or 
against any complicated public policy issue. No one is “for” 
or “against” protecting our environment, for example. The 
debate begins with restrictions on factories (raising costs), 
restrictions on car manufacturers, restrictions on energy use. 
It is when we get into these sorts of policy decisions, and 
ways of funding those decisions, that people have opposing 
viewpoints. 
 Questions follow each article to aid reading, analysis, and 
critical responses. In addition, each chapter opens with a 
visual both to enjoy and consider seriously as a contribution 
to the ideas in the chapter.  Following each opening image 
is a brief introduction to the chapter and several general 
questions to focus your thinking as you read.  

 READ: What is the situation? Who speaks the lines? 
 REASON: Who, presumably, are the guys in suits sitting in front of the desk? 
Who, according to Wiley, must be controlling TV scheduling? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE: What is Wiley’s view of reality shows? Do you agree? Why 
or why not? 
    
NON SEQUITUR © 2008 Wiley Ink, 
Inc. Dist. by UNIVERSAL UCLICK. 
Reprinted with permission. 
All rights reserved.  
 The Media: Image and Reality 
 CHAPTER 15 

350
 A
 lthough we may not agree with Marshall McLuhan that the medium itself 
IS the message, we still recognize the ways that the various media influ-
ence us, touching our emotions, shaping our vision of the world, altering our 
lives. The essays in this chapter explore and debate the effects of film and tele-
vision, music and video games, advertising, and political speech on the ways 
we imagine the world and then construct our lives from those images. Surely 
we are influenced by media images, by the “reality” they reveal to us. The ques-
tions become how extensive is the influence, given the other influences in our 
lives, and what, if anything, can or should we do about it? 
 The chapter opens with a popular medium: the cartoon. Cartoons are not 
just a laugh; they present a view of life and seek to shape our thinking. 
Powerful messages also come to us in the print media—in the form of photo-
graphs and advertisements as well as from television, video games, movies, 
and the Internet. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS 
 1. 
How “real” are “reality” shows? Does it matter if they are scripted? 
 2. 
How accurate is our press coverage? Do media outlets around the world “see” 
and show the same worldview to their viewers? How do bloggers offer another 
useful way of seeing our world?  
 3. 
How do films reflect our world and also shape our image of that world? 
 4. 
What do the various forms of music (jazz, rock, gangsta rap) tell us about 
ourselves and our world? What does your music preference tell us about 
you? 
 5. 
How does advertising shape our images of the world? How realistic are 
those images? Do we want ads to be “realistic”? 
 6. 
What standards of reliability, objectivity, and fairness should be set for the 
media? What, if any, distortions are acceptable because they make the story 
more compelling? 
 OF LOSERS AND MOLES: YOU 
THINK REALITY TV JUST WRITES ITSELF?   
 DERRICK   SPEIGHT 
 Derrick Speight is, as he tells us in his essay, a reality TV writer based in Los Angeles, 
with a dozen TV series to his credit, as story writer or supervising story producer. His 
scoop on the reality of reality TV shows was published in the  Washington Post, July 
24, 2005.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Do you enjoy watching reality TV shows—or know 
people who do? Why do you—or they—like these shows? What are the reasons 
usually given for enjoying these types of TV shows? 
 A couple of summers ago, I found myself living out a high school fantasy. 
I was running across the hot white sands of a Mexican beach in Playa del 
1

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
351
Carmen, chasing after stunning Playboy playmate Angie Everhart. As her 
bright orange bikini disappeared into the Caribbean surf, I closed my eyes and 
smiled—then quickly snapped back to reality. I was there as a writer for ABC’s 
“Celebrity Mole: Yucatan,” and my job was to find out what Everhart was say-
ing about the show’s other beauty, former MTV VJ Ananda Lewis. Would they 
be dueling divas, headed for a catfight by day’s end? I needed to find out. So 
I sighed, put on the earpiece that picked up the two women’s microphones, 
and began taking notes. 
 Reality TV writers like me are at the heart of a lawsuit filed by the Writers 
Guild of America, West about two weeks ago. On behalf of 12 such scribes, 
the union is charging four reality production companies and four networks 
with unfair labor practices, including providing pay and benefits far below 
those earned by writers of traditional drama and sitcoms. The suit says a lot 
about the rise of reality TV, a formerly disreputable format that last year con-
tributed half of the 20 top-rated shows on TV. But in hearing about it, I imag-
ine that people across America were asking the same question members of 
my own family have voiced ever since I started down this career path: “How 
exactly do you  write reality? Isn’t it already real?” 
 Yes, Grandma, it is—in all its undigested, contextless, boring glory. What 
I do is shape that mass into something that’ll make viewers want to tune in 
week after week. Like a journalist, I sniff out what I  think  the story will be, then 
craft the interviews or situations that’ll draw it out. Like a paperback writer, I’m 
all about highlighting character and plot. Simply put, drama is the pursuit of a 
goal, with obstacles. Both by developing promising story lines and by pulling 
out the zingy moments burned in hours upon hours of ho-hum footage, reality 
TV writers like me—who go under various titles, including story editor and 
story producer—create it. As I tell my family, having a reality TV show without 
writers would be like having a countertop of cake ingredients but no idea how 
to put them together. So, yes, I consider myself a writer. 
 My voyage into reality TV began by accident. Seven years ago, I was new 
to Hollywood, and sure that I was destined to direct the next film version of 
 Superman.  But by the time I finished my first fresh-out-of-film-school intern-
ship with DreamWorks’ Mark Gordon Productions, I was both slightly peeved 
about not meeting Steven Spielberg and badly in need of a paying job. Luckily, 
a friend of a friend was looking for production assistants to work on  World’s 
Most Amazing Videos.  Hired for roughly $400 a week (and on top of the world 
about it), I was quickly promoted to logger—basically the guy who looks 
through all the footage and makes notes on what happens and when. That led 
to a job at a new company, Actual Reality Pictures, which would end up com-
pletely redirecting my career. 
 Actual Reality is the production company of Academy Award nominee 
R. J. Cutler, whose documentary  The War Room followed Bill Clinton’s 1992 
presidential campaign. The building was an intellectual hothouse, packed with 
scores of Ivy League grads who loved nothing more than to ruminate over the 
most minuscule story points. As we worked on Cutler’s latest project, a docu-
drama about suburban Chicago teens called  American High,  staff meetings 
2
3
4
5

352 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
were virtual master classes in narrative structure. Whole walls of multicolored 
index cards were dedicated to the deconstruction of an episode, inviting con-
stant rearranging until the optimal narrative was found. And through it all, 
Cutler, the faintly aloof, greatly admired genius among us, wandered the office 
hallways yelling, “What’s the story?!” My job was to rummage through film 
footage looking to answer that question. Apparently, our process worked: 
 American High went on to win an Emmy. 
 After I left Actual Reality, I would never again encounter that type of 
intense, academic scrutiny of story structure. I had risen through the ranks, 
though, from logger to story assistant to story producer, overseeing other 
writers. So I ended up going to work on a whole slew of reality TV shows, both 
Nielsen-topping and not, including  The Bachelor, The Mole, The Surreal Life, 
The Benefactor  and  The Biggest Loser.  On every one of them, whether I was 
dealing with desperately weeping single gals or former parachute pant wearer 
MC Hammer, the main question was always the same: “What is the story?” 
 Some of the crafting of these shows took place on set, as on “Celebrity 
Mole: Yucatan.” While filming is taking place, writers keep track of all the 
issues that may arise and anticipate which will yield the strongest narrative. 
Teams of us are on location, assigned to different characters. The uniform: a 
good pen, steno notepads, an audio monitoring device (to overhear com-
ments and conversations), a digital watch, walkie-talkies and a comfortable 
pair of shoes—in case anyone takes off running. We typically stand within ear-
shot of what’s being filmed, noting mumbled quips, telling looks and memo-
rable exchanges. At the end of the day, we all regroup, compare notes and 
decide which stories have evolved, or are evolving. These are the situations to 
which we’ll pay particular attention, and in the days following, we’ll make sure 
the right interview questions are asked to round out what appear to be the 
prominent stories. Like nonfiction writers, we do not script lines—but if we 
have a hunch, we ask the right questions to follow it up. 
 Preparation of this kind is, of course, half the battle, but the magic really 
happens after the filming is done, in post-production. In its one- to four-
week scripting phase, the story producers pinpoint scenes, moments and 
interviews from a mountain of VHS tapes, then structure them to tell the 
strongest story. After it’s approved by the executive producer, this script is 
given to an editor, who cuts it together. Six-day workweeks and long hours 
are expected—and get longer midway through editing, when a decision is 
invariably made to change the direction of the show. As story producers, the 
responsibility for that reshaping falls to us. Sometimes it’s for the better, but 
sometimes it’s for worse.  The Benefactor, for example, began as an exciting, 
conceptually strong show led by billionaire Mark Cuban and dubbed the 
“Anti-Apprentice,” to contrast with the Donald Trump hit. It was quickly 
mired by second guessing on all our parts, and we ended up giving in to 
some Trumpian gimmicks. In the end, the show floundered, suffering dismal 
ratings and was widely perceived as the very thing it was striving not to 
be . . . another  Apprentice.  
6
7
8

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
353
 The current lawsuit isn’t the Writer’s Guild’s first attempt to reach out to 
reality TV crew members. Since this spring, they’ve been on a major campaign 
to unionize, gathering up union authorization cards from over 1,000 writers, 
editors and producers. Despite the many logistics associated with unionizing, 
at the core, I believe the WGA’s gesture to be quite complimentary: By their 
actions, they are recognizing us as legitimate creative contributors, I like that. 
It’s also a sign that they expect reality TV to be more than just a passing fad. 
Reality is evolving, and I look forward to its next chapter. 
 Source: Washington Post, July 24, 2005. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
  1. Who has filed a lawsuit? What is their issue? 
     2. What do reality TV writers “do” for reality TV shows? What do they try to find? 
  3. What strategies do these writers use during the filming? After the filming? 
  4. What do the lawsuit and unionizing attempts suggest about the future of 
reality TV? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  5. The author gives much information about his job. Is providing information his 
primary purpose—or not? If not, why does he give us all of the details?  
  6. If this is not primarily or exclusively informative, then what is Speight’s claim? 
  7. What is effective about Speight’s opening paragraph? 
  8. Why does he include the information in the second half of paragraph 8? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  9. Are you surprised to learn about reality TV writers—and their complex jobs? 
Why or why not?  
 10. Are you shocked or disappointed in reading this essay? Why might some be 
disappointed?  
 11. Although some never watch them, many people are “hooked” on reality TV. 
Why? What is the appeal? Would the appeal be less if viewers understood how 
these shows are constructed? 
 ZERO DARK THIRTY AND THE NEW 
REALITY OF REPORTED FILMMAKING  
 ANN   HORNADAY  
 Hailing from Baltimore and a graduate of Smith College, Ann Hornaday is the chief 
film critic for the  Washington Post.  She has been a freelance journalist and film critic 
at the  Baltimore Sun.  Hornaday was a finalist in 2008 for a Pulitzer Prize in criticism. 
Her study of  Zero Dark Thirty was published December 13, 2012. 
9

354 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Have you seen this movie? If so, think about some of the 
film’s issues. What issues do you think a film critic would examine?  
 Screenwriter Mark Baol and director Kathryn Bigelow were talking about their 
new movie,  Zero Dark Thirty, and they were at a loss for words for what genre it 
belongs to. “Interpretive journalism?” Yuck. 
 “Docu-drama,” Boal   suggested. 
 “That term is so reductive,” Bigelow countered. 
 “But in a sense, so is taking a urinal and saying, ‘This is art,’” he said. 
 “That’s ‘found art,’” Bigelow replied, casting her vote for the term 
“reported film.” 
 “‘Reported film’ is like ‘found art’ to me,” she said definitely. “The event 
happens, then it’s reported on, and then there’s an imagistic version of that 
reportage.” 
 Zero Dark Thirty, which opens in limited release next week [December 2012], 
hasn’t even hit theaters and already it’s touched a nerve, largely because it occu-
pies such a strange new space in the cultural sphere. In many ways the film, 
about the 10-year manhunt for Osama bin Laden after the attacks of Sept. 11, 
2001, hews to the classical lines of a tense procedural, as a CIA  analyst, played by 
Jessica Chastain, systematically puts together a string of leads that finally con-
vince her the al-Qaeda leader is living in a compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan. 
 But  Zero Dark Thirty wasn’t created in the conventional way, whereby film-
makers option a series of articles or a book about the event and then dramatize 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Attack on bin Laden’s compound.

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
355
it for the screen. Instead Boal, a former embedded journalist who wrote the Iraq 
war movie  In the Valley of Elah and won an Oscar for Bigelow’s  The Hurt Locker, 
did his own reporting for  Zero Dark Thirty, interviewing military and intelligence 
officials and operatives with intimate knowledge of the operations that resulted 
in bin Laden’s death in May 2011. 
 Because of its unconventional provenance,  Zero Dark Thirty is arriving on 
the scene earlier than most feature-film accounts of recent history, subverting 
the usual rituals by which consensus is created, by journalists, politicians and 
pundits, and eventually by historians and purveyors of popular culture. 
 The upending of the opinion-making hierarchy has sent its denizens into 
a swivet. When he got wind of the project, House Homeland Security 
Committee chief Peter T. King (R-N.Y.) called for investigations into Boal’s 
access to classified information, expressing suspicion that  Zero Dark Thirty 
would be a thinly veiled endorsement of President Obama in an election year. 
Obama, it turns out, is barely mentioned in the film, which has no obvious 
partisan ax to grind. But now Boal and Bigelow are under scrutiny for their 
depiction of torture, which some observers think is shown as yielding crucial, 
high-value information in bin Laden’s eventual apprehension. (The film begins 
with a graphic scene of a prisoner being waterboarded, an episode that 
doesn’t yield actionable intelligence directly but possibly weakens him 
enough to be manipulated later.) 
 As  Zero Dark Thirty has begun to be screened in previews, it’s become 
something of a policy proxy, a vehicle for debate about Bush-era detainee pro-
grams, “enhanced interrogation” techniques and black sites that were ignored 
or never fully entertained by many Americans at the time. As Boal and Bigelow 
gather critics’ plaudits and awards ( Zero Dark Thirty earned four Golden Globe 
nominations Thursday, including best film), the movie itself has entered a fasci-
nating parallel conversation—part food fight for cable-news channels desper-
ate for post-election fodder, part valuable (if belated) civic debate. 
 “So . . . @annhornaday making Zero Dark Thirty her #1 movie of the year 
Makes her support torture and overall evil,” read a message that appeared on 
my Twitter feed this week, while my email inbox filled with offers to interview 
think-tankers and other experts on torture (who haven’t seen the movie). On 
the MSNBC show  Hardball, host Chris Matthews asked New York film critic 
David Edelstein whether terrorism can be defeated by “playing by gentle-
manly rules.” Edelstein hesitated. “You’re asking a film critic?” he inquired 
incredulously. 
 Well, yes. With  Zero Dark Thirty, a medium that has always occupied a 
liminal space—between art and entertainment, realism and spectacle, history 
and myth—has been pushed into yet one more indeterminate category, strad-
dling journalism and drama. And it’s asking viewers to develop a new set of 
standards by which to judge and process what’s on-screen—not just in terms 
of aesthetic, moral and entertainment values, but as a means of processing 
events we haven’t fully come to terms with, offering perhaps the first unifying 
narrative of a deeply contentious period. 
9
10
11
12
13

356 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 “What are the cultural criteria that get applied to this?” Boal asked last 
week in New York, where he joined Bigelow for a lunchtime interview. “You 
know how to evaluate a book, if it’s  The Looming Tower or  The Green Zone. 
 There’s this whole set of norms you can walk [them] through. And you know 
how to evaluate an article.” 
 For his part, he said, he wants  Zero Dark Thirty first and foremost to be 
evaluated as a movie. “Hopefully you view the work as what’s on the screen. 
Then you go outside and see how it lines up with the rest of the world. But it 
should start with what the work creates within you, the emotional, intellectual, 
moral experience.” 
 If he wants  Zero Dark Thirty to be judged simply as a movie, then why did 
Boal go to the trouble to do so much original reporting? “Because it’s new 
and it’s cool and it’s interesting,” he said simply. 
 For her part, Bigelow—who won best picture and best director Oscars 
two years ago for  The Hurt Locker, about a bomb technician in Iraq— Zero 
Dark Thirty provided her an opportunity to engage in the kind of visceral, 
immersive, action-driven filmmaking she’s spent a career refining, often within 
the context of mostly male subcultures. The facts that Boal amassed regarding 
the bin Laden mission, she said, created “longitudinal and latitudinal guide-
lines” that she was “thrilled” to work with.  
 “You’re working within these parameters that are kind of freeing and excit-
ing,” she said, because you’re trying to bring something to life to the best of 
your ability and make it live and breathe and feel credible.” 
 Much like  The Hurt Locker, Zero Dark Thirty puts viewers right into the 
action, in this case a dizzying needle-in-a-haystack search for the courier who 
led the CIA to bin Laden, and later the SEAL raid, which is reenacted in virtu-
ally real time. But rather than engaging in we-got-him triumphalism, Bigelow 
allows for ambiguity, with conflicting emotions playing out on the faces of 
Chastain and co-star Jason Clarke, who plays an agency interrogator. 
 The torture scenes, while ugly and graphic, aren’t presented in neat, ends-
justify-means terms. It’s the day-to-day tradecraft that’s shown to be more 
important in the intelligence hunt, as CIA operatives use deception, misdirec-
tion and resources to pursue and woo their leads. (Perhaps the most crucial 
piece of information leading Chastain’s character to bin Laden is a name that 
a colleague finds buried in old files; a crucial telephone number is obtained by 
buying a Lamborghini for a source.) If  Zero Dark Thirty justifies anything, it’s 
not torture but data mining, which might be sexy enough for  Moneyball but 
not for  Hardball. 
 If  Zero Dark Thirty makes an editorial statement, Boal and Bigelow say, it’s in 
an operative’s line about “the big breaks and the little people who make them 
happen.” In many ways, they’re paying tribute to the kind of career officials and 
government bureaucrats that are so often ridiculed and scorned outside 
Washington. Like  Lincoln, Zero Dark Thirty celebrates process, professionalism and 
continuity of government that transcends partisan bickering and policy changes. 
 “Bin Laden wasn’t killed by superheroes,” Boal said. “These are people 
doing their job, and in a sense that’s extraordinary and in a sense it’s not.”  
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
357
 With luck, when audiences finally get to see  Zero Dark Thirty, that nuance 
won’t be lost on them—even as they become swept up in the film’s taut sus-
pense (especially in the final 30 minutes). Rather than a simplistic, torture-good, 
terrorists-bad argument, they’ll find an absorbing, richly textured portrayal of a 
pivotal chapter of American life, one that’s not just clarifying but cathartic. 
 Is it problematic that, on the way to condensing a secret 10-year history 
into a 2 1/2-hour film,  Zero Dark Thirty takes some liberties with characters, 
timing and particular events? Will American viewers emerge feeling more 
ambivalent than certain about everything done on their behalf during the Bush 
administration and beyond? Are we willing—at the box office and through 
repeated viewing—to endorse  Zero Dark Thirty as a metonym for the war on 
terror, the same way we’ve accepted  All the President’s Men  as a symbolic 
catch-all for Watergate, which was a much larger and more complex episode 
than two dogged reporters bringing down a president? 
 We’d better be. In an era when legacy media are on the ropes and genu-
ine investigative reporting is becoming increasingly rare, journalism will surely 
keep migrating into other popular forms, creating a new audience of citizen-
spectators. At least Boal hopes so: Earlier this week he announced plans to 
form Page One Productions, through which he’ll work with reporters to create 
TV and feature films based on their stories. 
 “If news can be entertainment, which it is on certain cable channels, why 
can’t it be a two-way street?” he asked rhetorically when we met. “I can tell 
you that if movies don’t do it, video games are certainly going to.” Coming 
soon to a theater near you: “Unmanned Drone Strikes: The Movie.” Grab 
some popcorn and let another argument begin.  
Source: Washington Post, December 13, 2012. © 2012 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used 
by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
www.washingtonpost.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What is unconventional about the way the film was created? 
 2. What political debates have been connected to the film? 
 3. How does the scriptwriter want the movie to be judged? 
 4. What is Hornaday’s perception of the movie’s message? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. Hornaday begins with debates by Boal and Bigelow over how to characterize 
 Zero Dark Thirty. How does this opening aid the author’s approach to the film? 
 6. Why is the problem of classification significant? What do we gain from classify-
ing movies—and books and art works?  
 7. What is Hornaday’s primary purpose in writing? What is her claim? 
23
24
25
26

358 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. What kinds of moviegoers will find this a useful guide? What moviegoers 
might be less helped by Hornaday? Why?  
 9. If you haven’t seen the film, do these analyses and debates make you want to 
see it? Why or why not?  
 10. How did  Zero Dark Thirty fare with the Oscar awards in February 2013? What 
were the reactions to the results regarding this film? Do some research and see 
how all of the issues and debates played out for  Zero Dark Thirty. 
 WHAT’S UP DOC? A BLOODY 
OUTRAGE, THAT’S WHAT   
   KATHERINE   ELLISON  
 A Pulitzer Prize–winning former foreign correspondent for Knight-Ridder 
Newspapers, Katherine Ellison is the author of four nonfiction books, including  
The Mommy Brain: How Motherhood Makes Us Smarter  (2005) and  Buzz: A Year 
of Paying Attention  (2010). Her reaction to violent Internet cartoons appeared on 
October 23, 2005 .  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Do you use the Internet for “fun”: games, porn, violent 
cartoons? Do you see any problems with such Internet sites? 
 The other day I found my 6-year-
old son watching an Internet car-
toon called “Happy Tree Friends.” 
 Purple daisies danced, high-
pitched voices sang and animals 
with heart-shaped noses waved 
cheerily. But then the music 
changed, and a previously merry 
green bear, wearing dog tags and 
camouflage, suffered an apparent 
psychotic breakdown. 
 Crrrrrack!!  went the neck of a 
purple badger, as the bear snapped 
off its head. Blood splashed and 
continued flowing as the bear glee-
fully garroted a hedgehog, then fin-
ished off a whimpering squirrel 
already impaled on metal spikes by 
placing a hand grenade in its paw.
 Joshua turned to me with a 
sheepish grin. He clearly had a 
sense that I wasn’t happy about 
his new friends, but he couldn’t have known what I was really thinking. Which 
was this: I’m a longtime journalist who reveres the First Amendment, and I live 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
359
in California’s liberal bastion of Marin County. Yet I would readily skip my next 
yoga class to march with right-wing fundamentalists in a cultural war against 
“Happy Tree Friends.” 
 Just when parents thought we knew who our electronic enemies were—
the shoot-’em-up video games, the TVs hawking trans fats, the pedophile 
e-mail stalkers and teenage-boobs Web sites—here comes this new swamp-
thing mass entertainment: the Internet “Flash cartoon,” pared down to pure 
shock value. Its music and animation are tuned to the Teletubbies set—that’s 
its “joke.” Its faux warning, “Cartoon Violence: Not for Small Children or Big 
Babies” is pure come-on—for those who can read. And it’s easy to watch over 
and over again, reinforcing its empathy-dulling impact. That makes it particu-
larly harmful to young psyches, UCLA neuroscientist Marco Iacoboni told me, 
because children are prompted to copy what they see—especially what they 
see over and over again. “Not only do you get exposed and desensitized; 
you’re primed, facilitated, almost invited to act that way,” maintains Iacoboni, 
whose expertise in the brain dynamics of imitation makes him an outspoken 
critic of media mayhem. 
 “Happy Tree Friends” appears tailor-made to sneak under the radar of 
blocking software (which can’t filter images), unless parents are somehow 
Internet-savvy enough to know about the site and specifically ban it in advance. 
And it’s certainly suited for the kind of viral contagion that caught up with my 
6-year-old, who learned of the site from his 9-year-old brother, who first saw it 
over the shoulder of a teenage summer camp counselor. 
 But the bottom line is, well, the bottom line. In its web-cartoon class, 
“Happy Tree Friends” is a humongous moneymaker, as irresistible to big 
advertisers as it is to 6-year-olds. At last count, the site was drawing 15 million 
unique viewers a month, reaping $300,000 or more in ads for each new epi-
sode. It recently snagged a place on cable TV, while spawning DVDs, trade-
mark mints, T-shirts and, inevitably, a planned video game. 
 Internet cartoons had their defining moment with the hilarious “This 
Land Is Your Land” 2004 election-year parody, featuring George W. Bush 
calling John Kerry a “liberal wiener” and Kerry calling Bush a “right-wing nut 
job” to the famous Woody Guthrie tune. By then, the beaten-down Web ad 
industry was already starting to ride a dramatic recovery, thanks to burgeon-
ing new content and the increasing prevalence of high-quality, high-speed 
connections. The trend has brought some truly interesting material—and 
also such savage fare as the graphic cartoon “Gonads & Strife” and another 
inviting you to repeatedly electrocute a gerbil in a light socket. The Bush-
Kerry feature by some reports was the most popular cartoon ever. “Happy 
Tree Friends,” now in its fifth, most successful, year [2005] may well be the 
most lucrative. 
 Its narrative is as primitive as its business plan. In every episode, the cute 
creatures are introduced, after which something awful happens to them, either 
by gruesome accident, or at the paws of the psychopathic bear. The wordless 
content appeals to a global audience, enhancing an already remarkably 
5
6
7
8
9

360 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
efficient delivery system for advertising. There’s a running ad before each epi-
sode, while banners flash below and beside the cartoons. 
 The show itself reportedly began as a potential ad—ironically,  against 
media violence according to Kenn Navarro, its co-creator. Navarro came up 
with the idea while designing an eight-second spot for an educational com-
pany, to illustrate what kids  shouldn’t be watching. Indeed, 30 years of exten-
sive research underscores the link between TV violence and increased violent 
behavior among viewers. One study equates the impact as larger than that of 
asbestos exposure to cancer—a health risk that certainly moved our society to 
act. But try telling that to “Happy Tree Friends” Executive Producer John 
Evershed, CEO of Mondo Media in San Francisco. 
 Evershed, the father of three children, the youngest aged 2, told me dur-
ing a phone conversation that he wouldn’t let them watch “Happy Tree 
Friends.” But then he argued that the cartoon wasn’t really harmful. “It’s like 
‘Tom & Jerry,’” he said. “I grew up on ‘Tom & Jerry,’ and I don’t think I’m par-
ticularly aggressive.” 
 Aggressive? AGGRESSIVE? Much as I’d like to, I can’t fairly speak for 
Evershed on this point, but I certainly do worry about the impact on my chil-
dren. As for “Tom & Jerry,” I know “Tom & Jerry,” and this is no “Tom & Jerry.” 
“Tom & Jerry” never pulled knives or tore heads off or used someone’s intes-
tines to strangle a third party, just for starters. 
 “Tom & Jerry” also had creativity, with surprising plot twists and a richly 
emotive score. Most importantly, “Tom & Jerry” had a conscience. Routinely, 
Tom attacks Jerry and is punished for his aggression. In terms of human evolu-
tion, the 1940s classic is light-years ahead of “Happy Tree Friends,” whose 
authors, Navarro and Rhode Montijo, have been quoted as saying, “If we are 
in a room brainstorming episodes and end up laughing at the death scene, 
then it’s all good!” 
 Mad as I am, I’m actually not suggesting that the feds step in and ban this 
cartoon. The basic freedom of the Internet is too precious, and government 
censorship too risky and probably not even feasible. The current rules— 
restrictions on the major airwaves, but anything goes on the Web—will have 
to do. 
 But what about the big mainstream advertisers who’ve made “Happy Tree 
Friends” such a wild success? I was startled, while watching the cartoon, to see 
banner ads for companies including Toyota and Kaiser Permanente (which has 
a new campaign they call “Thrive.” Thrive, indeed!). Consumers ought to be 
able to raise a stink, threaten a reputation, even wage boycotts in the face of 
such irresponsibility. But many Internet ads enjoy the escape clause of being 
random and ephemeral, as I found out when I called Hilary Weber, Kaiser’s San 
Francisco–based head of Internet marketing. Weber said she couldn’t even 
confirm that her company’s ad had appeared. 
 “I can’t replicate it,” she said, adding that it would “take a lot of 
research” to establish whether Kaiser indeed had purchased such an ad. 
That, she explained, is because Kaiser, like many other big corporations, 
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
361
buys bulk ads through third parties—saving money, yet relinquishing con-
trol over where the ads end up. 
 Weber said she was concerned about Kaiser’s reputation and planned to 
investigate further, yet declined to tell me the names of the third-party com-
panies placing the firm’s ads. So I then turned to Mika Salmi, CEO of Atom 
Shockwave, which manages the ads on “Happy Tree Friends.” Salmi, on his 
cell phone, said he couldn’t, with confidence, name the third-party companies 
with whom he contracts, though he thought one “might” be  Advertising.com . 
But when I contacted Lisa Jacobson,   Advertising.com  ’s spokeswoman, she 
declined to name advertisers not already listed on her firm’s Web page. “We 
actually don’t think we’re the best fit for this piece,” Jacobson wrote me by 
e-mail. “You’ll probably need to speak with companies like Kaiser and Toyota 
directly. But thanks for thinking of us . . .” 
 In our brief telephone conversation, Evershed told me he thinks parents 
have the ultimate responsibility to shield their kids from media violence. In 
the abstract, I certainly agree with that, but I admit I sometimes wonder if 
I’m actually doing my kids a disservice by spending so much time and energy 
chasing them off the Internet, while coaching them in empathy, manners 
and the Golden Rule. Because if most of their peers, who lack the luxury of 
moms with time to meddle, are gorging on “Happy Tree Friends,” it would 
probably serve them better to be trained to defend themselves with fire-
arms and karate. 
 Still, for now at least, I refuse to be overwhelmed by the sheer magnitude 
of what society expects from parents, with so little support in return. 
 So I’d like to offer just two public suggestions. Why can’t summer camps 
and afterschool programs more closely supervise Internet use? And why can’t 
Kaiser and other big companies start crafting contracts that specifically stipu-
late that their ads never, ever end up on sites like “Happy Tree Friends”? 
 Meanwhile, I’m talking to other parents because the first step in this 
peaceful war is to realize we’re not alone. Together, we may even manage 
to subvert our culture’s embrace of shock for shock’s sake, one gory excess 
at a time. 
 Source: Washington Post, October 23, 2005. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. “Happy Tree Friends” is Ellison’s primary example; what is her subject? 
 2. What is the problem with “Happy Tree Friends”? How does it differ from “Tom 
& Jerry”?  
 3. How did the author’s 6-year-old discover the cartoon? 
 4. What did the author’s research reveal about the website’s advertisers? 
 5. What suggestions for change does Ellison propose? 
17
18
19
20
21

362 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 Sienna Walker 
 Professor Erik Nielson  
 FYS 100 Rap Music  
 12 September 2012  
 Big Pun’s Prophesy 
 Like many rap artists in the late 1990s, Big Punisher, also known as 
“Big Pun,” documented the challenges of life in the inner city.  He did so 
most notably in his track titled  “Capital Punishment” featuring Prospect, 
the New York City ghetto which he describes as a place of diminishing 
potential. Big Punisher depicts urban life as abandoned by an unjust political 
system, denying its responsibility to serve the people while systematically 
crushing opportunities for the city’s disadvantaged residents, and he 
calls for the minority citizens to abandon governmental constraints by 
representing themselves through class action.  The extended metaphor of 
capital punishment, the image of the judge, and various stylistic techniques 
including delivery and rhyme scheme, are the primary means by which Big 
Punisher expresses his criticism of the political system’s failure to address 
the needs of the people and his encouragement of collective response from 
the inner city. 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What does Ellison  not want to happen to the Internet? Why? 
 7. What is her claim? 
 8. In paragraph 18, Ellison writes that her sons might be better off with “firearms 
and karate” than encouragement in empathy and the Golden Rule. Does she 
really mean this? Why does she write it? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. Do you think that Ellison’s suggestions will be helpful? Why or why not? 
 10. Should there be federal controls on Internet content? Why or why not? 
 11. If there are no controls, how will we protect youngsters from unhealthy sites? Or, 
should we not worry about protecting them? Explain and defend your position.  

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
363
Walker 2
 Big Punisher harshly criticizes the government and its policies from 
the start. In the third line, he claims that he has seen young citizens “led 
astray by the liars, death glorifiers observin’ us,” portraying  “the Man,” or 
any governmental authority, as dishonest and almost satanic.  Additionally, 
from the first few lines of the first verse, the distinction between  “they,” 
presumably the establishment, and  “us,” the resilient minorities plagued by the 
struggles of street life, become apparent and will resurface throughout the 
track.  Subsequently in the first verse,  Big Pun rattles off the wrongs inflicted 
on his people, ranging from  “purposely overtaxing” to  “burning down the 
churches” to “million dollar bails,” implying that the government is a ruthlessly  
oppressive and money hungry establishment that intentionally neglects its 
citizens. Last, the most explicit attacks come from lines such as  “God ‘f’ the 
government and its fuckin’ capital punishment” and the choral refrain, “disable 
the Republicans.” Moreover, Big Punisher uses the death sentence to further 
depict the metaphorical death of opportunity for inner city dwellers at the 
hands of the tyrannical government. 
 One of the principal techniques Big Punisher employs in  “Capital 
Punishment” is the metaphor of  “death by gavel” to reinforce the idea that 
the governing system, by its employment of the death penalty, is deliberately 
suffocating street life.  The repetition of the song’s title  “Capital Punishment” 
blankets the track. In both the chorus and the verses, the phrase is chanted 
over and over, inundating the audience’s consciousness much like the death 
sentence would hang over the head of a guilty perpetrator. Big Punisher 
attacks capital punishment because, even today, it represents the utmost 
extent to which judicial law can be exercised.  This acute judicial power 
juxtaposed with the raw powerlessness that pervades the inner city creates 
distance between the two parties as expectations on both ends fail to be met. 
In verse three, Big Punisher raps  “the Man’s claws are diggin’ in my 

364 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
Walker 3
back / I’m tryin’ to hit him back,” arguing that it is this almighty  “Man,” flexing 
his muscles in the courthouse and neglecting his supportive civic duties, who 
should be held responsible for a fair share of the overwhelming hardship 
in the streets.  The image of claws in a human’s back visually captures the 
minorities’ struggles with the vicious, backstabbing authorities, represented 
much like a surprise attack where one opponent has an unfair advantage over 
another. These callous characterizations of the institution become more fully 
manifested through Big Punisher’s use of the image of the judge. 
 The image of the judge adds to the theme of discriminatory punishment 
debilitating any urban prospects of success. Big Punisher does not limit the 
corruption to the streets, claiming “everybody gettin’ they hustle on/judge 
singin’ death penalty like it’s his favorite fuckin’ song.” Instead, the way the 
lines are distinctly paired suggests that the “hustlin’” established on the streets 
seeps its way into the political system as well, corroding its responsibility to 
provide for its constituents. Furthermore, the judge is described with “the 
hammer in the palm, never shaky,” also physically suggesting a rigid removal 
from the adversities of street life and underscoring Big Pun’s previous 
indications of the intolerance of judicial discretion. 
 In addition to the content, Big Punisher’s style, consisting of intricate 
rhyme schemes and fast-paced delivery, also contributes to the thematic 
prevalence of oppression which permeates the track. From the opening 
verse, the audience is exposed to Big Punisher’s generous lyrical presentation, 
occasionally fitting 18 syllables in a single line. His breathless flow typifies the 
imaginable exhaustion of complying with the looming government, day in and 
day out.  The institution’s constant presence,  “watching us close,” may create 
the tendency to nervously rush out of view of the public eye, reminiscent of Big 
Punisher’s fast-paced delivery.  His rapid elocution can also be applied to the 
theme of the resiliency of the minority masses whose upbeat spirit cannot be 

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
365
Walker 4
suppressed.  What is more, Big Punisher raps,  “I’m stressin’ the issue here/ so we 
can cross the fiscal year/ tired of gettin’ fired and hired as a pistoleer” in which 
the end and internal rhymes illustrate the complexity and inter-connectedness 
that characterize the government-citizen relationship.  Similarly, the percussive 
emphasis on  “fired” then  “hired” within the larger end rhyme pattern beginning 
with “here,” reflects the inner turmoil that inevitably accompanies corruption 
both in the streets and in the government.  These stylistic sonic and literary 
devices serve to reinforce the underlying themes of  “Capital Punishment.” 
 However, in the midst of all the dark, oppressive policies imposed by 
the government, Big Punisher counters the idea of  “the government tryin’ to 
take out our sons” by declaring  “we benefit the Earth with infinite worth.” 
Although he accounts for the inevitable adversities of big city life with lines 
like “listen to me, shit is rough in the ghetto,” his real aggression in the song is 
channeled not through accusing the government of its overbearing regulations 
and impossible standards, but through a forceful calling for change.  Juxtaposed 
with the suicide of his cousin Juje who “lost it and turned on the oven,” Big 
Punisher praises his sister who “just bought a home without a loan.”  Thus, 
he narrates the unbearable burdens of the deadly streets while raising up the 
success stories of his people, however infrequent.  This praise also embraces 
Big Pun when he raps  “we laid in the slums, made a cake out of crumbs.” 
These examples pronounce the irrepressible ambition of the people.  After 
considering that his people, or inner-city minorities, are entrepreneurial 
(“open our own labels”) and charged (“my battery never die”), Big Punisher 
calls them to counteract. 
 Altogether, through the extended metaphor of the death penalty, 
the image of the unfazed judge, and various literary and sonic devices, Big 
Punisher describes the government as unjust and as targeted to bring about 
the demise of the project’s masses.  “Capital Punishment” renders the  “Man” 

366 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What is Walker’s subject? 
 2. What is Big Pun’s attitude toward government? 
 3. How are inner-city minorities depicted? 
 4. What does Big Pun want his listeners to do? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What is Walker’s purpose in writing? What is her claim? 
 6. What strategies does she analyze? 
 7. How does the death penalty serve as an extended metaphor? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND DEBATE 
 8. Evaluate Walker’s analysis: Is it specific? Is it clear? Does it connect elements of 
the rap song to the song’s theme?  
  9. Do you like rap? If so, why? If not, why not? 
 10. Has rap made a contribution to modern music? If yes, how? If no, why not? 
 WORDS WE REMEMBER   
 FRANK   LUNTZ  
 A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania with a doctorate in politics from Oxford 
University, Frank Luntz writes about, analyzes, and consults on the messages of adver-
tising and politics. He appears frequently on television, is a political consultant running 
focus groups and doing polling, and has written several books on language, including 
 What Americans Really Want . . . Really (2009) and  Words That Work: It’s Not What 
You Say, It’s What People Hear (2007), from which the following excerpt is taken. 
Walker 4
incapable of serving inner-city residents and thus transfers the responsibilities 
of the government from the authorities and into the hands of the people. 
Big Punisher’s call to action directed to those citizens living in the margins of 
society may have implications beyond the ghetto and into the present, raising 
the question of justice here and now.  
. . .  
 Work Cited 
 Big Punisher,  “Capital Punishment.”  Capital Punishment.  Terror Squad, Loud 
Records, 1998. MP3.  

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
367
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Given what you now know about the author—and the 
focus of this chapter—what “words” do you expect Luntz to examine?  
 “You talking to me?” 
 —  T AXI   D RIVER 
 “I’m going to make him an offer he can’t refuse.” 
 —  T HE  G  ODFATHER 
 “Here’s looking at you, kid.” 
 —  C ASABLANCA 
 “Rosebud.” 
 —  C ITIZEN  K  ANE * 
 I n a career spanning five decades, Larry King has interviewed quite literally 
thousands of celebrities, politicians, world leaders, and other famous and infa-
mous individuals of note. But when I ask him to pick out the one interview out 
of those thousands he won’t hesitate a second:  
 I was with Martin Luther King, Jr., in 1961 when he was trying to integrate a 
hotel in Tallahassee, Florida. The hotel won’t give him a room even though he has 
a reservation, and the police squad cars are coming because he’s blocking the 
entrance. He knows he’s going to be arrested. I’m there right next to him 
because I was invited there by his lawyer. So King sits down on this porch in front 
of this small twenty-room hotel. The owner of the hotel comes out, very 
straightforward but not belligerently, walks up to King and asks,  “What do you 
want?” King says nothing, so the owner asks again in the same direct tone, 
 “What do you want?” And Martin Luther King just looked up at him and said, 
 “My dignity.” And that word has stuck with me to this day.  
 That defines this chapter: words we remember. These are not the common 
words of common people. These are the political, corporate, and cultural 
words that have been burned into our brains. Some are serious, others frivo-
lous. We may forget our passport or our license plate number, but this chapter 
is about the words that will always be with us. Forever. 
 “Great movie quotes become part of our cultural vocabulary.” So said Jean 
Pickler Firstenberg, director and CEO of the American Film Institute, when in 2005 
AFI released its list of the top 100 memorable movie lines. The jury assembled 
(made up of directors, actors, screenwriters, critics, historians, and others in the cre-
ative community) to select the top quotations was instructed to make their picks 
based on a quotation’s “cultural impact” and legacy. It says something about 
American culture and priorities that a lot more of us can recite lines voiced in movies 
released fifty years ago than can tell you what our United States senator said this 
week, last week . . . ever. 
 When it comes to movie language, fiction is often more powerful than reality. 
Think about it. A lot more people know that Arnold Schwarzenegger delivered a 
defiant  “I’ll be back” (AFI rank #37) guarantee in the blockbuster film  The Terminator 
1
2
3
4
 *“Let’s get outta here” was the most common scripted line in all Hollywood productions. 
According to Filmsite.org, it was used at least once 84 percent of the time from the late 1930s 
through the mid 1970s. That said, it is the writers of these memorable lines, not the actors who 
spoke them, who deserve the credit.  

368 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
than know that General Douglas MacArthur declared  “I shall return” as he fled the 
Philippines from the advancing Japanese in that blockbuster military conflict World 
War II. Other than the infamous  “If it doesn’t fit, you must acquit,” *  no real court-
room language is more immediately recognizable than the make-believe  “You can’t 
handle the truth” (#29) outburst by Jack Nicholson in the Aaron Sorkin-penned  A 
Few Good Men.  How many people know that  “Keep your friends close but your 
enemies closer” from  The Godfather (#58) is almost identical to what philosopher 
John Stuart Mill wrote 150 years ago and what Machiavelli advised almost 500 
years ago? Surely not many. 
 My own favorite movie quote,  “What we’ve got here is failure to commu-
nicate,” from  Cool Hand Luke, came in at #11—but for many businesses, it 
should be Number One. That clip, which ends in the unfortunate death of the 
Paul Newman character, is quoted and occasionally played at corporate 
retreats because it accurately sums up the reoccurring problem: listening to 
customers and understanding employees.  Labor negotiations in particular 
have collapsed because of the failure to communicate. Wal-Mart even went so 
far as to shut down a store in Canada in early 2005 simply because company 
executives and local union leaders failed to properly communicate one anoth-
er’s positions.  And the disastrous four-month strike of supermarkets in 
Southern California in 2004 is seen primarily as a result of labor leaders com-
municating faulty information and corporate management communicating 
almost no information at all. 
 Then there’s the Howard Beale character in the film classic  Network, a 
movie that lays bare the never-ending pursuit of ratings and revenues. In the 
midst of an on-air nervous breakdown, he pleads with his viewers to “go to 
the window, open it, stick your head out and yell: ‘I’m mad as hell, and I’m not 
going to take this anymore.’ “That line ranks #19 on the AFI list, and it’s on the 
lips of every disgruntled employee even today. Yet while it comes from a 
make-believe movie, the words have been coopted by very real political 
groups angry with the status quo. From Ross Perot’s quixotic campaign in 
1992 to the Freedom Alliance founded by Col. Oliver North, who actually 
named an April 2006 policy memo on immigration  “I’m Mad As Hell and I’m 
Not Going to Take It Anymore,” that mad-as-hell language says exactly what 
you mean and means exactly what you say. 
 But those lines pale in impact to the top movie line of all time:  “Frankly, 
my dear, I don’t give a damn,” from  Gone with the Wind.  Short words, asser-
tive tone, delivered spectacularly by Clark Gable and repeated countless times 
ever since. But in addition to being a classic movie quotation,  “Frankly, my 
dear . . . ” is also a perfect example of  words that work.  Though it seems tame 
5
6
7
 *If Robert Shapiro had his way,  “If it doesn’t fit, you must acquit” would never have entered the 
public lexicon. The most memorable phrase from the O. J. Simpson trial was delivered by Johnnie 
Cochran, but it wasn’t spontaneous. In fact, they weren’t even his words. They were written for 
him by another lawyer on the Simpson defense team, Gerald Uelmen, and Shapiro hated the 
phrase. “When I first heard it. I thought. ‘Oh, God. I don’t like that.’ It’s not something I would 
have been comfortable saying. But it worked for Cochran.”  

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
369
by today’s standards, “I don’t give a damn” was considered extreme profanity 
in the cultural context of 1939. It was debated, condemned, ridiculed . . . and 
it helped to expand the American lexicon in new directions. 
 Profanity continues to make a point even in today’s coarsened lexicon. On 
the same day in 2004 that the Senate approved the Defense of Decency Act 
by a rather sizeable 99 to 1 vote, Vice President Dick Cheney told Vermont 
senator Patrick Leahy to  “go fuck yourself” on the Senate floor. Guess which 
got more publicity. Two years later, at the 2006 G-8 Summit, George W. Bush 
whispered to British prime minister Tony Blair near an open microphone that 
 “what they need to do is get Syria to get Hezbollah to stop doing this shit and 
it’s over” in reference to the escalating military conflict between Israel and 
Hezbollah. The media pounced on that one word, all but ignoring the much 
more significant political statement. In a rare moment of exactness and can-
dor, the  New York Times, the  Washington Post, and most major national news-
papers gave readers the unedited version.   This case was  “an exception,” 
according to  Pittsburgh Post executive editor David Shribman.  “The president 
was quoted in our paper and in others because the actual quote—the actual 
word—was incontrovertibly part of the story. Indeed, it was the story,” said Mr. 
Shribman. 1 But as comedian George Carlin would sadly note, both words are 
still among the seven that still cannot be said on broadcast television. All four 
networks bleeped it out. * 
 Other entries in AFI’s top 100 movie lines transcended their original cel-
luloid delivery into fields of impact well beyond their initial intentions.  “Go 
ahead, make my day,” #6 on the list, was delivered with clenched jaw by 
Clint Eastwood as Detective Harry Callahan in 1983’s  Sudden Impact.  That 
same expression of bravado and supreme confidence gave way to George 
H. W. Bush’s memorable  “Read my lips, no new taxes” line at the 1988 
Republican Convention and a surge in public support that propelled him 
from a seventeen-point deficit into an eight-point victory on election day. 
Bush the elder could have easily said that there won’t be any additional taxes 
while he’s in office. 
 Similarly, Bush the younger could have said that the terrorists who attacked 
the U.S. on 9/11 should either be captured or killed, but he didn’t. Instead, he 
drew his inspiration from popular culture; his  “Dead or Alive” comment about 
Osama bin Laden could have come right from a John Ford western. Even more 
memorable,  “Bring it on” conveyed a swagger that would have made John 
Wayne proud. But those three simple words,  “bring it on,” will also prove to 
be the worst three words of his entire presidency. Even former secretary of 
state Colin Powell admitted to me that those words made him cringe. It was 
unfortunate timing for Powell because he had worked feverishly and success-
fully to launch a $15 billion international HIV/AIDS relief program, one of the 
8
9
10
 *At the risk of losing a slot in the Conservative Book of the Month Club, the word  shit also appeared 
in the  New York Times on July 10, 1973, in the published transcript of the Watergate tape in which 
Nixon said,  “I don’t give a shit what happens. I want you to stonewall it, let them plead the Fifth 
Amendment, cover-up or anything else.”  But that word did not appear in the accompanying news 
stories about the tapes.  

370 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
largest humanitarian relief efforts in American history. But at the White House 
press conference to announce the naming of a global AIDS coordinator and 
lay out the details of the program, a much different story emerged: 
 WORDS THAT  DON’T WORK  
 Q: A posse of small nations, like Ukraine and Poland, are materializing to help 
keep the peace in Iraq, but with the attacks on U.S. forces and casualty rates 
rising, what does the administration do to get larger powers like France and 
Germany and Russia to join in? 
 BUSH: Well, first of all, you know, we’ll put together a force structure that meets 
the threats on the ground. And we got a lot of forces there ourselves. And as 
I said yesterday, anybody who wants to harm American troops will be found 
and brought to justice. 
 There are some who feel like that if they attack us that we may decide to 
leave prematurely. They don’t understand what they’re talking about, if that’s 
the case. 
 [ attempted interruption ] 
 Let me finish. 
 There are some who feel like that, you know, the conditions are such that 
they can attack us there. My answer is  BRING IT ON.  We got the force neces-
sary to deal with the security situation.  
 For the first time in the  “War on Terror,” Bush had the wrong words. Said 
Powell:  
 “Looking at Bush as he was speaking, it’s the kind of phrase that I immediately 
knew wouldn’t translate or play well in Europe. It came across as sharp, arrogant, 
and frankly, it had that cowboy aspect to it that I knew wouldn’t sound good to 
European cars.”  
 It didn’t sound good to American ears either. In my focus groups for 
MSNBC, even Republican women recoiled at the phrase. In a session I con-
ducted for MSNBC in Ohio, one Republican mom said in a quivering but firm 
voice,  “I don’t want them to bring it on. I don’t want them to target our boys. 
That could have been my son over there.” 
 Those same words that proved so disastrous for President Bush offered an 
unparalleled opportunity for his opponent. In an incredible act of political 
jujitsu. Andrei Cherny, John Kerry’s twenty-eight-year-old chief campaign 
speechwriter, captured that line and crafted an alternative refrain that chal-
lenged Bush to debate and defend his national security record, which took 
Kerry from boring presidential wannabe to dynamic frontrunner. But even 
though the partisan Democrat crowds loved it, Kerry eventually dropped it 
from his stump speech (and Cherny from the campaign) based on the faulty 
advice of campaign message-meister Bob Shrum who, according to  Newsweek, 
thought that attack was too  “undignified” and Cherny’s suggested rhetoric 
too  “punchy.” 
11
12
13

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
371
 And now, a word from our sponsor . . .  
 “Two all-beef patties—special sauce—lettuce—cheese—pickles—onions—on 
a sesame seed bun.”  
 “Fly the friendly skies.”  
 “They’re magically delicious.”  
 “Have it your way.”  
 Almost no adult in America would have the slightest trouble identifying 
these advertising slogans, yet they were created decades ago. If you’re a typi-
cal American today, you know these slogans—and the thousands like them—
the way you know your own name. They are second nature, embedded deep 
within every one of us—part of the ambient noise of our lives, surrounding us 
like wallpaper, inescapable. Some are funny. Some are matter-of-fact. Some 
are genuinely annoying. The best are truly unforgettable. 
 See how long it takes you to name the last six presidents—if you can. Now 
see how many of the following six top advertising slogans of the past forty 
years you can identify:  2 
 1.  “Just do it” 
 2.  “Tastes great, less filling” 
 3.  “Where’s the beef?” 
 4.  “Let your fingers do the walking” 
 5.  “Melts in your mouth, not in your hand” 
 6.  “We bring good things to life” *  
 These short, innocuous bursts of words are actually more memorable than 
the people who have occupied the most powerful position in the world, and 
they have convinced most of us, at one time or another in our lives, to buy one 
of the products they trumpet. Good advertising slogans and catchphrases are 
closely associated with their companies or products. But it is that rare combi-
nation of words, thoughts, and emotion that becomes an intrinsic part of the 
American idiom. And each of them abides by multiple rules of effective lan-
guage. Think about it. . . . 
 “Just do it.” has the values of simplicity, brevity, and is clearly 
aspirational. 
 “Tastes great, less filling” has all three of those characteristics as well as a 
fourth: novelty. “Wow,” thought consumers. “Finally, a light beer with fewer 
calories and more drinkable.” 
 “Where’s the beef?” finally asked out loud in a humorous way the simple 
rhetorical question that consumers had been thinking about for years. 
 “Let your fingers do the walking” is about as visual and relevant as you can 
get. To this day, older Americans still remember this ad even though it hasn’t 
run on television in decades. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
 *  1.  Nike  
  2.  Miller Lite  
  3.  Wendy’s  
  4.  Yellow Pages  
  5.  M&M’s  
  6.  General Electric  

372 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 “Melts in your mouth, not in your hand” is also about context and rele-
vance. Finally, a chocolate candy that doesn’t make a mess—and it earns its 
credibility every time you have one. 
 “We bring good things to life” is a simple definition of aspiration—a com-
pany that makes the good life possible for people like me. And the more one 
learned about GE products, the more credible the slogan became. 
 In fact, many of the most endearing homespun sayings began their lives as 
pitch lines for well-known products. For example, most people today don’t 
realize that  “When it rains, it pours” was popularized by Morton Salt in 1912 
and was not something your great uncle with the bum knee came up with.  3 
Some may remember that the phrase  “Loose lips sink ships” comes from a 
World War II public service campaign.  4 But do you know the origins of the 
expression,  “Always a bridesmaid, never a bride”? Would you believe it comes 
from a 1923 advertisement for Listerine?  5 
 Tonight, when you’re sitting at the dinner table, and someone states that they 
“can’t believe they ate the whole thing,” they’ll be paraphrasing an Alka-Seltzer 
advertisement from the 1970s.  6 Or tomorrow morning, when you pick up the 
newspaper to see an analysis of what makes Americans tick, know that Chevy’s 
 “heartbeat of America” campaign has led to the resurgence of the phrase.  7  
 Ad copy is conquering more and more of our brains’ territory. A decade 
ago, popular Yale history professor Jaroslav Pelikan would regale his students 
with the tale of how, at the age of twelve, he had memorized Homer’s 
 Odyssey —in  Greek. 8 Unfortunately, when they were twelve, most of his stu-
dents were busy memorizing:    “Two-all-beef-patties-special-sauce-lettuce-
cheese-pickles-onions-on-a-sesame-seed-bun.” Not exactly the language of 
 “wine-dark sea” or  “rosy-fingered Dawn.” 
 Much of this advertising language saturation—and our subsequent ability 
to recall it—is involuntary. That’s one of the definitions of words that work: We 
remember even when we’re not trying. Not that we seek to ignore them. 
Effective commercial jingles are lodged in our memories every bit as indelibly 
as the Pledge of Allegiance or the childhood alphabet song—and often, not 
surprisingly, carry the same nostalgic power. Like the lyrics of the Bugs Bunny 
version of  The Barber of Seville (my own personal favorite) or ABC’s  Schoolhouse 
Rock ( “Conjunction Junction, what’s your function?” —I bet you’re singing it 
now), they hibernate for decades in some seldom-visited alcove of our minds—
but it doesn’t take much for them to awaken and burst back into our conscious-
ness. Not that long ago I attended a performance of  The Barber of Seville in 
Moscow. During the overture, I began to sing the Bugs Bunny lyrics quietly. 
Several Americans within earshot turned, smiled, and nodded knowingly. Like 
magic, these words are truly  part of us, never to be forgotten. 
 There is no doubt that in the creation and dissemination of language, nothing 
in day-to-day life plays a more significant role than television. But the real ques-
tion for those who seek to understand and then apply the power of words is 
whether television mirrors society or leads it. From television pioneer Norman 
Lear’s perspective, his groundbreaking programming merely shined a bright light 
on words and situations that were all too familiar in real life, even if they had never 
been discussed on television. “There wasn’t anything on  All in the Family that 
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
373
Do the words in this ad meet Luntz’s guidelines for effective punch lines?  Why or why not?

374 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
I didn’t think one could hear in a schoolyard anywhere in the country. The accents 
would change, the inclination to certain phrases might change, but the basic sen-
timent was ‘people speak,’ ‘ordinary folk talking.’ You heard it either from the 
armchair from your favorite uncle or father or you heard it on the playground.” *  
 Lear may claim that his characters reflected the words of the people, but 
his shows clearly pushed the language limit to the breaking point—and 
beyond. He enjoys telling the story about the first time  “son-of-a-bitch” 
appeared on television:  
 We did an episode of  Maude where Walter comes close to committing some 
form of infidelity. The audience knows, and when Maude learns this at the very 
end, she embraces him and says “you son-of-a-bitch.” That was the tagline. 
 So I hear from the guy that runs Program Practices, and he says, “You’re kid-
ding Norman, you’re not going to do that.” We got into a long conversation about 
it, maybe a couple of conversations, and his argument to me was she could say 
something else just as successfully fitting and every bit as good. And I said. “Tell 
you what I’ll do, Bill. You find it, you call me and tell me ‘Norman, this is every bit 
as good,’ and if you can look me in the eye on the telephone, metaphorically, and 
say ‘I think it’s as good,’ I’ll do it.” 
 So he called me in a day or so and said “Goddamn, I can’t. I haven’t found it.” 
So he let me do it, and we did it, and nothing happened. The American public did 
not give a damn.  
 George Will may bemoan the dumbing down of America, but our frame of 
reference and common bond as Americans has become pop culture, not the 
classics.  † We are much more likely to bond over an episode of  The Sopranos 
than we are over a public reading of the  Federalist Papers.  Sadly, even the 
core democratic institutions and the people who gave birth to this country are 
less familiar to the next generation of American adults than the latest  American 
Idol/Survivor phenomenon. In a poll of teenagers I conducted for the 
Constitution Center in Philadelphia a few years ago:
 • 
Fewer than 2 percent of American teenagers knew that the man consid-
ered the father of the Constitution was James Madison, yet 90 percent 
knew that the male star of  Titanic was Leonardo DiCaprio.  
 • 
Fewer than 2 percent of American teenagers could name then–Chief 
Justice William Rehnquist—yet 95 percent could tell you that the Fresh 
Prince of Bel Air was Will Smith.  
 • 
Fewer than 9 percent of American teenagers knew the name of the town 
where Abraham Lincoln lived for most of his adult life and which he repre-
sented in Congress (Springfield)—yet 75 percent knew the name of the 
town where Bart Simpson “lives” (Springfield).  9 
29
30
 *From  All in the Family  to  Maude, Good Times,  and  The Jeffersons,  the shows Lear created in the 
1970s had an incredible impact on the American psyche. His insistence that he only  mirrored  
American culture is more a reflection of personal modesty than accuracy.  
 †I once invited Will to attend one of my focus groups to learn what’s on the minds of the American 
voter. His response: “Heavens no. What makes you think I want to know what ‘real people’ are 
thinking?”  

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
375
 We know so much about things that don’t really matter because we see 
them on television—and therefore it matters to us—yet we are so remarkably 
ignorant about what should matter—our own national heritage, culture, and 
traditions—because no one ever explained why we should care.  Relevance 
sells—and seeing it on television makes even the most obscure and trivial 
seem relevant. 
 Popular entertainment in general, and the thirty-second spot in particular, 
need not be corrosive of the lexicon or the culture. Truth is, not all ads are 
bad. From the ads promoting Radio Free Europe that dramatically captured 
life behind the Iron Curtain in the 1960s to the infamous frying egg  “This is 
your brain; this is your brain on drugs” in the 1980s and the fantastically suc-
cessful  “Know when to say when” campaign by Anheuser-Busch over the past 
decade, some promotional efforts have been enlightening, informative, and 
occasionally even influential. 
 And not all ads have to air hundreds of times for us to remember them. 
Two ads stand above all the rest for their impact, even though they were 
officially broadcast just once: the aforementioned “Daisy” spot that helped 
sink Barry Goldwater in 1964, and the infamous “1984” commercial for 
Apple that aired during that year’s Super Bowl—forever connecting 
Hollywood production with Madison Avenue creativity. That spot, designed 
to introduce the much-anticipated Macintosh computer, was put together 
by the dream of award-winning director Ridley Scott and advertising pow-
erhouse Chiat/Day—and  Advertising Age named it the top spot of 
the decade. 
 Advertising certainly didn’t start out to be corruptive or manipulative. The 
modern advertising age is said to have begun with the “creative revolution” 
touted by William Bernbach of the Doyle Dane Bernbach agency (DDB), who 
wrote, ambitiously, that: “good taste, good art, good writing can be good 
selling.” 10 
 DDB’s 1959 campaign for Volkswagen, titled  “Think Small,” was named 
by  Advertising Age as the top ad campaign ever.  11 Just two words, brief 
and simple, but the contextual surprise signaled a new sophistication in 
American advertising, marking a subtle but influential shift in the way 
products would be sold from then on. The most memorable ads of the 
past fifty years as chosen by the industry itself do indeed rely on Bernbach’s 
“good writing” equals “good selling” formulation.  12 And here’s the pleas-
ant surprise for family-oriented consumers: Almost all of the best of the 
best involve mainstream themes, everyday people, a positive outcome, 
and simple language. Among  Advertising Age ’s top 100 ad campaigns of 
all time:
 • 
Only eight involve sex.  
 • 
Only seven feature celebrities.  
 • 
Only four play on consumer fear and insecurities.  13 
 The  idea has primacy. Accessible language rules. 
31
32
33
34
35
36

376 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 The best advertising taglines abide by the Ten Rules of Effective 
Communication and are therefore easily remembered. In a recent national sur-
vey, the most recognized product and corporate taglines slogans included:
 • 
 “You’re in good hands,” overtly visual, aspirational, and therefore not surpris-
ingly recognized as Allstate’s slogan by 87 percent of the American public.  
 • 
 “Like a Good Neighbor,” again aspirational, and with a jingle written by 
Barry Manilow that enhances the memorability, recognized as State Farm’s 
tagline by 70 percent.  
 • 
 “Always Low Prices. Always.” Overtly repetitive and unquestionably cred-
ible, Wal-Mart’s tagline is identified by 67 percent.  
 • 
 “Obey Your Thirst,” a relatively new tagline for Sprite, recognized by 
35 percent of the population because of its novelty, twist of language, and 
visualization.  
 • 
 “Think Outside the Bun,” Taco Bell’s tagline, recognized by 34 percent, 
for reasons similar to Sprite’s.  
 • 
 “i’m lovin’ it,” the latest and greatest for McDonald’s, already at 33 per-
cent despite being less than a year old, because it hits more than half of 
the rules: simplicity, brevity, credibility, aspiration, and relevance.  
 • 
 “What’s in your wallet?” the rhetorical question from Capital One that 
earns a 27 percent recognition level.  14 
37
MEMORABLE COMMERCIALS, JINGLES, AND WORDS THAT WORK 
WRITTEN, PERFORMED, OR PRODUCED BY BARRY MANILOW
LANGUAGE 
PRODUCT
“You deserve a break today” 
McDonald’s
“Like a good neighbor, State Farm is there” 
State Farm Insurance
“I am stuck on Band-Aids . . .” 
Band-Aids
“Grab a bucket of chicken” 
KFC
“The most original soft drink ever” 
Dr Pepper
“Give your face somethin’ to smile about” 
Stridex Medicated Pads
“Feelin’ free” 
Pepsi
 These are all obviously attention-grabbing. The vast majority of advertis-
ing taglines—perhaps as high as 99 percent—never achieve widespread rec-
ognition or become part of the American lexicon because they lack creativity, 
simplicity, or relevance. For every jingle you can remember from childhood, or 
last year, you have probably forgotten a hundred of them. They simply didn’t 
contain the words that work or the catchy tunes that last. 
 Curiously, it’s not uncommon for companies to abandon incredibly success-
ful slogans for new ones that flop. Someone needs to ask senior corporate 
38
39

 
CHAPTER 15  The Media: Image and Reality  
377
management at General Electric and the marketing whizzes at the various ad 
agencies why they found it beneficial to abandon  “We bring good things to 
life” (recognized by 39 percent of Americans) in 2002 in favor of  “Imagination at 
work,” which is recognized by a scant 5 percent?  15 Yes, imagination is impor-
tant, vital, in the twenty-first century, but applying that imagination to everyday 
life is an even higher priority. Think about it: Do you have more respect for a 
company that is imagining the future, or making the future better for you 
personally? 
 Why did the U.S. Army jettison  “Be all that you can be,” surely one of the 
most widely known taglines in the world, for the rather odd and uninspiring 
 “An army of one”? Especially when an “army,” by definition, is more than one 
person. While it is understandable for an organization like the military to want 
to individualize and personalize what it does, that’s just not a believable or 
credible selling point. 
 Why did Burger King replace its successful  “Have it your way” slogan, 
devised in 1974, with immediately forgettable taglines such as  “Best darn 
burger” (1978),  “Burger King Town” (1986), and the  “The Whopper says” 
(2001), before finally returning to  “Have it your way” in 2004?  16 When it comes 
to fast food, or “QSR” (Quick Service Restaurants) as those in the industry like 
to call themselves, individualizing and personalizing the product really does 
matter. 
 NOTES 
  1.  Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, July 19, 2006, pg. C-1. 
 2. “Top 100 Advertising Campaigns,”  Ad Age  
 3. Ibid. 
 4. Ibid. 
 5. Ibid. 
 6.  http://www.inthe70s.com/generated/commercials.shtml  
 7.  http://www.inthe80s.com/tvcommercials/c.shtml  
 8. Directed Studies program, Yale University, autumn 1992. 
  9. Luntz Research “Constitutional Knowledge Survey,” August 30, 1998. 
 10.   Ad Age,  “Top 100 Advertising Campaigns of the Century,” by Bob Gar-
ﬁ eld. 
 11. Ibid. 
 12. Ibid. 
 13. Ibid. 
 14. Emergence Slogan Survey,  BusinessWeek, Kiley, Oct. 2004. 
 15. Emergence Slogan Survey,  BusinessWeek, Kiley, Oct. 2004. 
 16. “Ad Track,”  USA Today, May 23, 2005, by Michael McCarthy.  
Source: From Words That Work: It’s Not What You Say, It’s What People Hear. New York: Hyperion, 
2007, pp. 107-119. Copyright © 2007 Dr. Frank Luntz. Reprinted by permission of Rees Literary 
Agency.
40
41

378 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What is Luntz’s broad subject? 
 2. From what situations or “worlds” do Luntz’s examples come? 
 3. What is the top movie line? (Do you know the line? Are you surprised?) 
 4. Why were George W. Bush’s words memorable but not effective for him? 
 5. What are the general characteristics—Luntz’s “rules”—of the clever phrases 
we remember? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What is Luntz’s claim? How does he develop and support his claim? 
 7. In paragraph 31, the author asserts that what we see on TV we remember 
because it seems relevant to us, whereas what is really important we don’t 
remember because no one has explained its relevance. Do you agree with these 
assertions? Is it correct to assert that no one has told us why we should care 
about politics, history, and culture?  
 8. Earlier in his book, Luntz gives 10 rules of successful writing. From this selec-
tion, how many rules can you find? From these rules, what can you conclude 
about the characteristics of ineffectual writing?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  9. How many of Luntz’s memorable examples from film do you know? If you 
don’t know many, do you think that you should see the films and become more 
culturally knowledgeable? Why or why not? If you don’t recognize many of 
the ad slogans, do you think this is good (You don’t watch too much TV!) or 
bad (You are not part of this shared culture.)? Explain your views.  
 10. Luntz makes a case for brevity as a mark of effective writing—in movie lines 
and ad slogans at any rate. Should brevity also be a guide for politicians? Do 
we want leaders to speak or write in “sound bites”? Ponder these questions.  

 The Internet and Social Media: 
Their Impact on Our Lives 
 CHAPTER 16 
 READ:  Where is Rat? Why is he there? 
 REASON:  What are the differences in Rat’s poses as he reacts to the 
screen? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE:  What is the point of the story that the cartoon tells? 
PEARLS BEFORE SWINE © 2010 Stephan Pastis. Reprinted by permission of UNIVERSAL 
UCLICK for UFS. All rights reserved.

380
 T
he influence of computers today—especially as a source of information and 
social interaction—is so great, and so complex, that it warrants a chapter’s 
study. Virtually no one under 30 today turns first to a reference book. They 
“Google it.” Meanwhile people of all ages, although most typically young 
people, spend many hours e-mailing, twittering, and posting on Facebook. The 
time we devote to these activities demands that we pause and think about the 
effects of such dramatic changes in our lives. Consider the following questions 
as you read and study the five essays in this chapter. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS 
 1. 
Has e-mailing made us more—or less—productive? 
 2. 
Is Twitter a useful new form of communication—or a waste of time? 
 3. 
Is the Internet making us smarter—or interfering with the development of 
 critical thinking? 
 4. 
What is the difference between having access to knowledge and being 
knowledgeable?  
5. 
Should we fear the Internet’s data mining—or ignore it as simply an advertis-
ing strategy?
 I TWEET, THEREFORE I AM   
 PEGGY   ORENSTEIN  
 Peggy Orenstein is a contributing writer to the  New York Times Magazine, a popular 
speaker, and the author of several notable books concerning women’s issues. Her 
 latest is  Cinderella Ate My Daughter: Dispatches from the Front Lines of the New 
Girlie-Girl Culture (2011). The following  New York Times Magazine  essay was 
 published August 1, 2010.  
 PREREADING 
QUESTIONS  On what 
expression—what 
philosophical 
statement—does 
Orenstein play with in 
her title? What does 
this play on words tell 
you about her 
anticipated audience? 
 On a recent lazy 
Saturday 
morning, 
my daughter and I 
lolled on a blanket in 
our front yard, snack-
ing on apricots, lis-
tening to a download 
of E. B. White reading  The Trumpet of the Swan.  Her legs spraw led across mine; the 
1

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
381
grass tickled our ankles. It was the quintessential summer moment, and a year 
ago, I would have been fully present for it. But instead, a part of my consciousness 
had split off and was observing the scene from the outside: this was, I realized 
excitedly, the perfect opportunity for a tweet. 
 I came late to Twitter. I might have skipped the phenomenon altogether, 
but I have a book coming out this winter, and publishers, scrambling to pro-
mote 360,000-character tomes in a 140-character world, push authors to rally 
their “tweeps” to the cause. Leaving aside the question of whether that actu-
ally boosts sales, I felt pressure to produce. I quickly mastered the Twitterati’s 
unnatural self-consciousness: processing my experience instantaneously, pack-
aging life as I lived it. I learned to be “on” all the time, whether standing 
behind that woman at the supermarket who sneaked three extra items into 
the express check-out lane (you know who you are) or despairing over human 
rights abuses against women in Guatemala. 
 Each Twitter post seemed a tacit referendum on who I am, or at least who 
I believe myself to be. The grocery-store episode telegraphed that I was tuned 
in to the Seinfeldian absurdities of life; my concern about women’s victimiza-
tion, however sincere, signaled that I also have a soul. Together they suggest 
someone who is at once cynical and compassionate, petty yet deep. Which, in 
the end, I’d say, is pretty accurate. 
 Distilling my personality provided surprising focus, making me feel 
stripped to my essence. It forced me, for instance, to pinpoint the dominant 
feeling as I sat outside with my daughter listening to E. B. White. Was it my joy 
at being a mother? Nostalgia for my own childhood summers? The pleasures 
of listening to the author’s quirky, underinflected voice? Each put a different 
spin on the occasion, of who I was within it. Yet the final decision (“Listening to 
E. B. White’s  Trumpet of the Swan with Daisy. Slow and sweet.”) was not really 
about my own impressions: it was about how I imagined—and wanted— others 
to react to them. That gave me pause. How much, I began to wonder, was I 
shaping my Twitter feed, and how much was Twitter shaping me? 
 Back in the 1950s, the sociologist Erving Goffman famously argued that all 
of life is performance: we act out a role in every interaction, adapting it based 
on the nature of the relationship or context at hand. Twitter has extended that 
metaphor to include aspects of our experience that used to be considered 
 off-set: eating pizza in bed, reading a book in the tub, thinking a thought any-
where, flossing. Effectively, it makes the greasepaint permanent, blurring the 
lines not only between public and private but also between the authentic and 
contrived self. If all the world was once a stage, it has now become a reality TV 
show: we mere players are not just aware of the camera; we mug for it. 
 The expansion of our digital universe—Second Life, Facebook, MySpace, 
Twitter—has shifted not only how we spend our time but also how we con-
struct identity. For her coming book,  Alone Together,  Sherry Turkle, a pro-
fessor at M.I.T., interviewed more than 400 children and parents about their 
use of social media and cellphones. Among young people especially she 
found that the self was increasingly becoming externally manufactured 
rather than internally developed; a series of profiles to be sculptured and 
2
3
4
5
6

382 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
refined in response to public opinion. “On Twitter or Facebook you’re trying 
to express something real about who you are,” she explained. “But because 
you’re also creating something for others’ consumption, you find yourself 
imagining and playing to your audience more and more. So those moments 
in which you’re supposed to be showing your true self become a perfor-
mance. Your  psychology becomes a performance.” Referring to  The Lonely 
Crowd, the landmark description of the transformation of the American 
character from inner- to outer-directed, Turkle added, “Twitter is outer-
directedness cubed.” 
 The fun of Twitter and,  I suspect, its draw for millions of people, is its infi-
nite potential for connection, as well as its opportunity for self-expression. I 
enjoy those things myself. But when every thought is externalized, what 
becomes of insight? When we reflexively post each feeling, what becomes of 
reflection? When friends become fans, what happens to intimacy? The risk of 
the performance culture, of the packaged self, is that it erodes the very rela-
tionships it purports to create, and alienates us from our own humanity. 
Consider the fate of empathy: in an analysis of 72 studies performed on nearly 
14,000 college students between 1979 and 2009, researchers at the Institute 
for Social Research at the University of Michigan found a drop in that trait, 
with the sharpest decline occurring since 2000. Social media may not have 
instigated that trend, but by encouraging self-promotion over self-awareness, 
they may well be accelerating it. 
 None of this makes me want to cancel my Twitter account. It’s too late for 
that anyway: I’m already hooked. Besides, I appreciate good writing whatever 
the form: some “tweeple” are as deft as haiku masters at their craft. I am 
experimenting with the art of the well-placed “hashtag” myself (the symbol 
that adds your post on a particular topic, like #ShirleySherrod, to a stream. You 
can also use them whimsically, as in, “I am pretending not to be afraid of the 
humongous spider on the bed. #lieswetellourchildren”). 
 At the same time, I am trying to gain some perspective on the perpetual 
performer’s self-consciousness. That involves trying to sort out the line between 
person and persona, the public and private self. It also means that the next 
time I find myself lying on the grass, stringing daisy chains and  listening to E. B. 
White, I will resist the urge to trumpet about the swan. 
 Source:  New York Times Magazine,  August 1, 2010. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
Why did the author get into Twitter? How has tweeting affected her responses 
to experiences?  
 2. 
What, presumably, is Twitter’s appeal for many users? How does this social 
medium actually produce the opposite of what users are seeking?  
 3. 
What is the difference between  person and  persona? 
 4. 
What is meant by the term  empathy? What has happened to this trait among col-
lege students over the last thirty years?  
7
8
9

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
383
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
Describe the essay’s characteristics of style and tone. 
 6. 
Even though the “feel” of this essay may be personal, Orenstein still presents 
an argument. What is her claim? What does she want readers to know about 
Twitter? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
Is participation in social media like performing on a reality show? What is your 
response to this comparison? 
 8. 
Are there any advantages to trying on different personalities? What are the 
 possible disadvantages? 
   9. 
As you read, consider: What other writers in this chapter suggest that the 
Internet and social media encourage the superficial, keep us from contempla-
tion and insight? Do you agree with their analysis? If so, why? If not, 
why not?  
THE NEW DIGITAL DIVIDE  
 SUSAN   B. CRAWFORD  
 A specialist in communications law and privacy issues, Susan Crawford is a professor 
at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law. She holds her BA and JD. degrees from 
Yale University. Before returning to teach at Cardozo, she was special assistant to 
President Obama for Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy. Her article on the 
digital divide appeared December 4, 2011. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  To what kind of “digital divide” might the title refer? Do 
you think this might be a problem, at least in the author’s view?  
F or the second year in a row, the Monday after Thanksgiving—so-called Cyber 
Monday, when online retailers offer discounts to lure holiday shoppers—was 
the biggest sales day of the year, totaling some $1.25 billion and overwhelm-
ing the sales figures racked up by brick-and-mortar stores three days before, 
on Black Friday, the former perennial record-holder.
 Such numbers may seem proof that America is, indeed, online. But they 
mask an emerging division, one that has worrisome implications for our econ-
omy and society. Increasingly, we are a country in which only the urban and 
suburban well-off have truly high-speed Internet access, while the rest—the 
poor and the working class—either cannot afford access or use restricted wire-
less access as their only connection to the Internet. As our jobs, entertain-
ment, politics and even health care move online, millions are at risk of being 
left behind. 
 Telecommunications, which in theory should bind us together, has often 
divided us in practice. Until the late 20th century, the divide split those with 
phone access and those without it. Then it was the Web: in 1995 the Commerce 
Department published its first look at the “digital divide,” finding stark racial, 
economic and geographic gaps between those who could get online and 
those who could not. 
1
2
3

384 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 “While a standard telephone line can be an individual’s pathway to the 
riches of the Information Age,” the report said, “a personal computer and 
modem are rapidly becoming the keys to the vault.” If you were white, 
 middle-class and urban, the Internet was opening untold doors of information 
and opportunity. If you were poor, rural or a member of a minority group, you 
were fast being left behind. 
 Over the last decade, cheap Web access over phone lines brought mil-
lions to the Internet. But in recent years the emergence of services like video-
on-demand, online medicine and Internet classrooms have redefined the state 
of the art: they require reliable, truly high-speed connections, the kind avail-
able almost exclusively from the nation’s small number of very powerful cable 
companies. Such access means expensive contracts, which many Americans 
simply cannot afford. 
 While we still talk about “the” Internet, we increasingly have two separate 
access marketplaces: high-speed wired and second-class wireless. High-speed 
access is a superhighway for those who can afford it, while racial minorities 
and poorer and rural Americans must make do with a bike path. 
 Just over 200 million Americans have high-speed, wired Internet access at 
home, and almost two-thirds of them get it through their local cable company. 
The connections are truly high-speed: based on a technological standard 
called Docsis 2.0 or 3.0, they can reach up to 105 megabits per second, fast 
enough to download a music album in three seconds. 
 These customers are the targets for the next generation of Internet ser-
vices, technology that will greatly enhance their careers, education and quality 
of life. Within a decade, patients at home will be able to speak with their doc-
tors online and thus get access to lower-cost, higher-quality care. High-speed 
connections will also allow for distance education through real-time videocon-
ferencing; already, thousands of high school students are earning diplomas via 
virtual classrooms. 
 Households will soon be able to monitor their energy use via smart-grid 
technology to keep costs and carbon dioxide emissions down. Even the way 
that wired America works will change: many job applications are already pos-
sible only online; soon, job interviews will be held by way of videoconference, 
saving cost and time. 
 But the rest of America will most likely be left out of all this. Millions are still 
offline completely, while others can afford only connections over their phone lines 
or via wireless smartphones. They can thus expect even lower-quality health ser-
vices, career opportunities, education and entertainment options than they 
already receive. True, Americans of all stripes are adopting smartphones at break-
neck speeds; in just over four years the number has jumped from about 10 percent 
to about 35 percent; among Hispanics and African-Americans, it’s roughly 
44 percent. Most of the time, smartphone owners also have wired access at home: 
the Pew Internet and American Life Project recently reported that 59 percent of 
American adults with incomes above $75,000 had a smartphone, and a 2010 study 
by the Federal Communications Commission found that more than 90 percent 
of people at that income level had wired high-speed Internet access at home. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
385
 But that is not true for lower-income and minority Americans. According 
to numbers released last month by the Department of Commerce, a mere 4 
out of every 10 households with annual household incomes below $25,000 in 
2010 reported having wired Internet access at home, compared with the vast 
majority—93 percent—of households with incomes exceeding $100,000. Only 
slightly more than half of all African-American and Hispanic households 
(55 percent and 57 percent, respectively) have wired Internet access at home, 
compared with 72 percent of whites. 
 These numbers are likely to grow even starker as the 30 percent of 
Americans without any kind of Internet access come online. When they do, 
particularly if the next several years deliver subpar growth in personal income, 
they will probably go for the only option that is at all within their reach: wire-
less smartphones. A wired high-speed Internet plan might cost $100 a month; 
a smartphone plan might cost half that, often with a free or heavily discounted 
phone thrown in. 
 The problem is that smartphone access is not a substitute for wired. The vast 
majority of jobs require online applications, but it is hard to type up a résumé on a 
hand-held device; it is hard to get a college degree from a remote location using 
wireless. Few people would start a business using only a wireless connection. 
 It is not just inconvenient—many of these activities are physically impossi-
ble via a wireless connection. By their nature, the airwaves suffer from severe 
capacity limitations: the same five gigabytes of data that might take nine 
minutes to download over a high-speed cable connection would take an hour 
and 15 minutes to travel over a wireless connection. 
 Even if a smartphone had the technical potential to compete with wired, 
users would still be hampered by the monthly data caps put in place by AT&T 
and Verizon, by far the largest wireless carriers in America. For example, well 
before finishing the download of a single two-hour, high-definition movie from 
iTunes over a 4G wireless network, a typical subscriber would hit his or her 
monthly cap and start incurring $10 per gigabyte in overage charges. If you 
think this is a frivolous concern, for “movie” insert an equally large data stream, 
like “business meeting.” 
 Public libraries are taking up the slack and buckling under the strain. Nearly 
half of librarians say that their connections are insufficient to meet patrons’ 
needs. And it is hard to imagine conducting a job interview in a library. 
 I n the past, the cost of new technologies has dropped over time, and 
eventually many Americans could afford a computer and a modem to access a 
standard phone line. Phone service—something 96 percent of Americans 
have—was sold at regulated rates and the phone companies were forced to 
allow competing Internet access providers to share their lines. 
 But there is reason to believe this time is different. Today, the problem is 
about affording unregulated high-speed Internet service—provided, in the 
case of cable, by a few for-profit companies with very little local competition 
and almost no check on their prices. They have to bear all the cost of infra-
structure and so have no incentive to expand into rural areas, where potential 
customers are relatively few and far between. (The Federal Communications 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

386 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
Commission recently announced a plan to convert subsidies that once sup-
ported basic rural telephone services into subsidies for basic Internet access.) 
 The bigger problem is the lack of competition in cable markets. Though there 
are several large cable companies nationwide, each dominates its own frag-
mented kingdom of local markets: Comcast is the only game in Philadelphia, 
while Time Warner dominates Cleveland. That is partly because it is so expensive 
to lay down the physical cables, and companies, having paid for those networks, 
guard them jealously, clustering their operations and spending tens of millions of 
dollars to lobby against laws that might oblige them to share their infrastructure. 
 Cable’s only real competition comes from Verizon’s FiOS fiber-optic service, 
which can provide speeds up to 150 megabits per second. But FiOS is available to 
only about 10 percent of households. AT&T’s U-verse, which has about 4 percent 
of the market, cannot provide comparable speeds because, while it uses fiber-
optic cable to reach neighborhoods, the signal switches to slower copper lines to 
connect to houses. And don’t even think about DSL, which carries just a fraction of 
the data needed to handle the services that cable users take for granted. 
 Lacking competition from other cable companies or alternate delivery 
technologies, each of the country’s large cable distributors has the ability to 
raise prices in its region for high-speed Internet services. Those who can still 
afford it are paying higher and higher rates for the same quality of service, 
while those who cannot are turning to wireless. 
 I t doesn’t have to be this way, as a growing number of countries demon-
strate. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ranks 
America 12th among developed nations for wired Internet access, and it is safe to 
assume that high prices have played a role in lowering our standing. So America, 
the country that invented the Internet and still leads the world in telecommunica-
tions innovation, is lagging far behind in actual use of that technology. 
 The answer to this puzzle is regulatory policy. Over the last 10 years, we 
have deregulated high-speed Internet access in the hope that competition 
among providers would protect consumers. The result? We now have neither 
a functioning competitive market for high-speed wired Internet access nor 
government oversight. 
 By contrast, governments that have intervened in high-speed Internet 
markets have seen higher numbers of people adopting the technology, doing 
so earlier and at lower subscription charges. Many of these countries have 
required telecommunications providers to sell access to parts of their net-
works to competitors at regulated rates, so that competition can lower prices. 
 Meanwhile, they are working toward, or already have, fiber-optic networks 
that will be inexpensive, standardized, ubiquitous and equally fast for upload-
ing and downloading. Many of those countries, not only advanced ones like 
Sweden and Japan but also less-developed ones like Portugal and Russia, are 
already well on their way to wholly replacing their standard telephone connec-
tions with state-of-the-art fiber-optic connections that will even further reduce 
the cost to users, while significantly improving access speeds. 
 The only thing close is FiOS. But, according to Diffraction Analysis, a 
research firm, it costs six times as much as comparable service in Hong Kong, 
five times as much as in Paris and two and a half times as much as in Amsterdam. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
387
When it comes to the retail cost of fiber access in America, we do about as 
well as Istanbul. 
 The new digital divide raises important questions about social equity in an infor-
mation-driven world. But it is also a matter of protecting our economic future. Thirty 
years from now, African-Americans and Latinos, who are at the greatest risk of being 
left behind in the Internet revolution, will be more than half of our work force. If we 
want to be competitive in the global economy, we need to make sure every 
American has truly high-speed wired access to the Internet for a reasonable cost. 
Source: New York Times, December 4, 2011. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. How has online access created a divide in our society? 
 2. Who are those with access? What groups are, in general, left out? 
 3. To what do those with wired high-speed connections have access? 
 4. What percentage of Americans have smartphones? What group of Americans 
have wired high-speed Internet access at home? What percentage have no 
Internet access?  
 5. What are the limitations of smartphones? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. Explain how and where wired (cable) access is provided; why is this a problem? 
 7. How do our costs and availability compare to that in other countries? Why 
should this comparison bother us?  
 8. What is Crawford’s claim? Where does she state it? What does she gain with 
her choice of placement?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. Has the author convinced you that the digital divide is a problem? Why or 
why not?  
 10. Do you agree with her solution? If so, why? If not, how would you refute 
Crawford’s proposal?
DO NOT FEAR THE CYBERMIND  
 DANIEL  M. WEGNER  
 A professor of psychology at Harvard University since 2000, Daniel Wegner studies 
the role of thought in self-control and social life. Two of his books include the text-
book  Psychology (2nd ed., 2011, with coauthors) and  The Illusion of Conscious Will  
(2002). The following article, drawn from his research on transactive memory, was 
published August 5, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Given Professor Wegner’s areas of research, to what do 
you expect the “cybermind” refers? Based on the title, what genre of argument 
do you expect?  
27

388 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
T he line that separates my mind from the Internet is getting blurry. This has 
been happening ever since I realized how often it feels as though I know 
something just because I can find it with Google. Technically, of course, I don’t 
know it. But when there’s a smartphone or iPad in reach, I know everything the 
Internet knows. Or at least, that’s how it feels.
 This curious feeling of knowing has settled over most of us. In a group, 
someone always seems to be “checking” something in the conversation, pip-
ing up with handy facts culled from a rapid consultation with the Great and 
Powerful Man Behind the Curtain. I’ve attended more than one nerdy party 
where  everyone had a link open and we were all talking about things we didn’t 
know until we were prompted by our conversation to look them up. 
 Who knew that the king of hearts was the only one without a mustache? 
Well, I did—as soon as I checked. The Web is always there, an ever present 
cloud of intelligence. 
 The desire to consult the Web is almost like an itch. This was illustrated 
empirically in an experiment that Betsy Sparrow, Jenny Liu and I reported in 
the journal  Science last year. We asked people either a series of easy trivia 
questions or a series of hard ones, and then immediately checked to see if 
consulting the Web was on their minds. 
 To do this, we measured their reaction times as they tried quickly to name 
the colors in which various words—including computer-related words (like 
“computer” or “laptop” or “Google”)—were printed. The idea, based on an 
established principle in psychology, was that if computer-related thoughts were 
on people’s minds, computer-related words would interfere with color-naming. 
(For instance, it’s harder to identify the color that your own name is printed in 
than the color of some random name.) And after the batch of hard questions, 
people did indeed seem to have computers on their minds: many became espe-
cially slow to name the colors of computer-related words. When we’re faced 
with hard questions, we don’t search our minds—we first think of the Web. 
 Has this computer dependency made people stupid? In a further study, 
our group looked into the effect of computer availability on memory. We asked 
people to type into a computer 40 factoids they had each just been given. (For 
example, French fries are originally from Belgium, not France.) Those who 
were told the computer would not record these facts tended often to remem-
ber the facts themselves. But those told that the computer would record every-
thing were inclined promptly to forget them. Knowing we can fall back on our 
computers makes us fail to store information in our own memories. 
 How did this happen? How did we become so dependent on these gad-
gets? Some commentators on the growth of technology see this step as the 
beginning of a chilling new world in which we have uploaded everything we 
know quite out of our own heads, becoming fools in the bargain. Like those 
who feared the iron horse or the electric toothbrush, though, people with this 
neo-Luddité view of technology are quite likely to be left behind as the rest of 
us rush to keep plugged in. The more forward-looking view is to accept the 
role of the Web as a mind-expander and wonder not at the bad but at the 
good it can do us. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
389
 There’s nothing wrong, after all, with having our minds expanded. Each 
time we learn  who knows something or  where we can find information— 
without learning  what the information itself might be—we are expanding our 
mental reach. This is the basic idea behind so-called transactive memory. In 
1985, with my collaborators Toni Giuliano (who is also my wife) and Paula 
Hertél, I wrote a paper introducing the idea of transactive memory as a way to 
understand the group mind. We observed that nobody remembers everything. 
Instead, each of us in a couple or group remembers some things personally—
and then can remember much more by knowing who else might know what we 
don’t. In this way, we become part of a transactive memory system. 
 Toni and I noticed not long after we were married that we were sharing mem-
ory duties. I remembered where car and yard things were, she remembered 
where house things were, and we could each depend on the other to be an 
expert in domains we didn’t need to master. The car-washing sponge was a prob-
lem, as it was both a house thing and car thing—so naturally each of us thought 
it was the other’s job and we misplaced it. But usually, our transactive memory 
worked fine, and we got things done together. Never once did we get our assign-
ments confused and leave our daughter waiting at the curb at day care. 
 Groups of people commonly depend on one another for memory in this way—
not by all knowing the same thing, but by specializing. And now we’ve added our 
computing devices to the network, depending for memory not just on people but 
also on a cloud of linked people and specialized information-filled devices. 
We have all become a great cybermind. As long as we are connected to 
our machines through talk and keystrokes, we can all be part of the biggest, 
smartest mind ever. It is only when we are trapped for a moment without our 
Internet link that we return to our own humble little personal minds, tumbling 
back to earth from our flotation devices in the cloud.
Source: New York Times, August 5, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
Who is the “Great and Powerful Man Behind the Curtain”? 
 2. 
Explain the author’s experiment; what did it demonstrate? 
 3. 
What did subjects in the second experiment do? What did this experiment 
demonstrate?  
 4. 
Explain the term  neo-Luddite. 
 5. 
What is a transactive memory system? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. 
What does Wegner want to show by using his wife and himself as an example? 
 7. 
What is the author’s claim? 
 8. 
What kinds of evidence does Wegner provide? How does he refute those who 
think the Internet is making us stupid?  
8
9
10
11

390 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. What is your reaction to Wegner’s image of a great cybermind of which we are 
all a part?  
 10. Do you agree with the author’s rebuttal of the neo-Luddites? If yes, why? If no, 
how would you refute Wegner?
THE DEATH OF THE CYBERFLÂNEUR  
 EVGENY   MOROZOV  
 Originally from Belarus, Evgeny Morozov is a journalist who studies the social implica-
tions of technology. He writes a syndicated monthly column about the Internet for  Slate  
and for some European newspapers and is a contributing editor to  Foreign Policy. The 
New Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom was published in 2011 and updated 
with a new afterword in 2012. His article on the cyberflâneur appeared February 5, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    What is a flâneur? (If you don’t know the word, look it 
up.) What, then, would a  cyberflâneur be? 
The other day, while I was rummaging through a stack of oldish articles on the 
future of the Internet, an obscure little essay from 1998—published, of all places, 
on a Web site called  Ceramics Today —caught my eye. Celebrating the rise of the 
“cyberflâneur,” it painted a bright digital future, brimming with playfulness, intrigue 
and serendipity, that awaited this mysterious online type. This vision of tomorrow 
seemed all but inevitable at a time when “what the city and the street were to the 
Flâneur, the Internet and the Superhighway have become to the Cyberflâneur.”
 Intrigued, I set out to discover what happened to the cyberflâneur. While I 
quickly found other contemporaneous commentators who believed that 
flânerie would flourish online, the sad state of today’s Internet suggests that 
they couldn’t have been more wrong. Cyberflâneurs are few and far between, 
while the very practice of cyberflânerie seems at odds with the world of social 
media. What went wrong? And should we worry? 
 Engaging the history of flânerie may be a good way to start ans wering these 
questions. Thanks to the French poet Charles Baudelaire and the German critic 
Walter Benjamin, both of whom viewed the flâneur as an emblem of modernity, 
his figure (and it was predominantly a “he”) is now firmly associated with 19th-
century Paris. The flâneur would leisurely stroll through its streets and especially 
its arcades—those stylish, lively and bustling rows of shops covered by glass 
roofs—to cultivate what Honoré de Balzac called “the gastronomy of the eye.” 
 While not deliberately concealing his identity, the flâneur preferred to 
stroll incognito. “The art that the flâneur masters is that of seeing without 
being caught looking,” the Polish sociologist Zygmunt Bauman once remarked. 
The flâneur was not asocial—he needed the crowds to thrive—but he did not 
blend in, preferring to savor his solitude. And he had all the time in the world: 
there were reports of flâneurs taking turtles for a walk. 
 The flâneur wandered in the shopping arcades, but he did not give in to the 
temptations of consumerism; the arcade was primarily a pathway to a rich 
sensory experience—and only then a temple of consumption. His goal was to 
observe, to bathe in the crowd, taking in its noises, its chaos, its heterogeneity, its 
1
2
3
4
5

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
391
cosmopolitanism. Occasionally, he would narrate what he saw— surveying both his 
private self and the world at large—in the form of short essays for daily newspapers. 
 It’s easy to see, then, why cyberflânerie seemed such an appealing notion 
in the early days of the Web. The idea of exploring cyberspace as virgin terri-
tory, not yet colonized by governments and corporations, was romantic; that 
romanticism was even reflected in the names of early browsers (“Internet 
Explorer,” “Netscape Navigator”). 
 Online communities like GeoCities and Tripod were the true digital arcades of 
that period, trading in the most obscure and the most peculiar, without any sort of 
hierarchy ranking them by popularity or commercial value. Back then eBay was 
weirder than most flea markets; strolling through its virtual stands was far more 
pleasurable than buying any of the items. For a brief moment in the mid-1990s, it 
did seem that the Internet might trigger an unexpected renaissance of flânerie. 
 However, anyone entertaining such dreams of the Internet as a refuge for 
the bohemian, the hedonistic and the idiosyncratic probably didn’t know the 
reasons behind the disappearance of the original flâneur. 
 In the second half of the 19th century, Paris was experiencing rapid and 
profound change. The architectural and city planning reforms advanced by 
Baron Haussmann during the rule of Napoleon III were particularly consequen-
tial: the demolition of small medieval streets, the numbering of buildings for 
administrative purposes, the establishment of wide, open, transparent boule-
vards (built partly to improve hygiene, partly to hamper revolutionary block-
ades), the proliferation of gas street lighting and the growing appeal of 
spending time outdoors radically transformed the city. 
 Technology and social change had an effect as well. The advent of street 
traffic made contemplative strolling dangerous. The arcades were soon 
6
7
8
9
10

392 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
replaced by larger, utilitarian department stores. Such rationalization of city 
life drove flâneurs underground, forcing some of them into a sort of “internal 
flânerie” that reached its apogee in Marcel Proust’s self-imposed exile in his 
cork-lined room (situated, ironically, on Boulevard Haussmann). 
 Something similar has happened to the Internet. Transcending its original 
playful identity, it’s no longer a place for strolling—it’s a place for getting 
things done. Hardly anyone “surfs” the Web anymore. The popularity of the 
“app paradigm,” whereby dedicated mobile and tablet applications help us 
accomplish what we want without ever opening the browsér or visiting the 
rest of the Internet, has made cyberflânerie less likely. That so much of today’s 
online activity revolves around shopping—for virtual presents, for virtual pets, 
for virtual presents for virtual pets—hasn’t helped either. Strolling through 
Groupon isn’t as much fun as strolling through an arcade, online or off. 
 T he tempo of today’s Web is different as well. A decade ago, a concept 
like the “real-time Web,” in which our every tweet and status update is instan-
taneously indexed, updated and responded to, was unthinkable. Today, it’s 
Silicon Valley’s favorite buzz-word. 
 That’s no surprise: people like speed and efficiency. But the slowly loading 
pages of old, accompanied by the funky buzz of the modem, had their own 
weird poetics, opening new spaces for play and interpretation. Occasionally, 
this slowness may have even alerted us to the fact that we were sitting in front 
of a computer. Well, that turtle is no more. 
 Meanwhile, Google, in its quest to organize all of the world’s information, 
is making it unnecessary to visit individual Web sites in much the same way 
that the Sears catalog made it unnecessary to visit physical stores several gen-
erations earlier. Google’s latest grand ambition is to answer our questions—
about the weather, currency exchange rates, yesterday’s game—all by itself, 
without having us visit any other sites at all. Just plug in a question to the 
Google homepage, and your answer comes up at the top of the search results. 
 Whether such shortcuts harm competition in the search industry (as Google’s 
competitors allege) is beside the point; anyone who imagines  information-seeking 
in such purely instrumental terms, viewing the Internet as little more than a giant 
Q & A machine, is unlikely to construct digital spaces hospitable to cyberflânerie. 
 But if today’s Internet has a Baron Haussmann, it is Facebook. Everything 
that makes cyberflânerie possible—solitude and individuality, anonymity and 
opacity, mystery and ambivalence, curiosity and risk-taking—is under assault 
by that company. And it’s not just any company: with 845 million active users 
worldwide, where Facebook goes, arguably, so goes the Internet. 
 It’s easy to blame Facebook’s business model (e.g., the loss of online ano-
nymity allows it to make more money from advertising), but the problem resides 
much deeper. Facebook seems to believe that the quirky ingredients that make 
flânerie possible need to go. “We want everything to be social,” Sheryl Sandberg, 
Facebook’s chief operating officer, said on  Charlie Rose a few months ago. 
 What this means in practice was explained by her boss, Mark Zuckerberg, 
on that same show. “Do you want to go to the movies by yourself or do you 
want to go to the movies with your friends?” he asked, immediately answering 
his own question: “You want to go with your friends.” 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
393
 The implications are clear: Facebook wants to build an Internet where watch-
ing films, listening to music, reading books and even browsing is done not just 
openly but socially and collaboratively. Through clever partnerships with compa-
nies like Spotify and Netflix, Facebook will create powerful (but latent) incentives 
that would make users eagerly embrace the tyranny of the “social,” to the point 
where pursuing any of those activities on their own would become impossible. 
 Now, if Mr. Zuckerberg really believes what he said about cinema, there is 
a long list of films I’d like to run by his friends. Why not take them to see 
 Satantango, a seven-hour, black-and-white art-house flick by the Hungarian 
auteur Bela Tarr? Well, because if you took an open poll of his friends, or any 
large enough group of people,  Satantango would almost always lose out to 
something more mainstream, like  War Horse. It might not be everyone’s top 
choice, but it won’t offend, either—that’s the tyranny of the social for you. 
 Besides, isn’t it obvious that consuming great art alone is qualitatively dif-
ferent from consuming it socially? And why this fear of solitude in the first 
place? It’s hard to imagine packs of flâneurs roaming the streets of Paris as if 
auditioning for another sequel to  The Hangover. But for Mr. Zuckerberg, as he 
acknowledged on  Charlie Rose, “it feels better to be more connected to all 
these people. You have a richer life.” 
 I t’s this idea that the individual experience is somehow inferior to the col-
lective that underpins Facebook’s recent embrace of “frictionless sharing,” 
the idea that, from now on, we have to worry only about things we don’t want 
to share; everything else will be shared automatically. To that end, Facebook is 
encouraging its partners to build applications that automatically share every-
thing we do: articles we read, music we listen to, videos we watch. It goes 
without saying that frictionless sharing also makes it easier for Facebook to 
sell us to advertisers, and for advertisers to sell their wares back to us. 
 That might even be worth it if frictionless sharing enhanced our online experi-
ence; after all, even the 19th-century flâneur eventually confronted advertising 
posters and murals on his walks around town. Sadly, frictionless sharing has the 
same drawback as “effortless poetry”: its final products are often intolerable. It’s 
one thing to find an interesting article and choose to share it with friends. It’s quite 
another to inundate your friends with everything that passes through your browser 
or your app, hoping that they will pick something interesting along the way. 
 Worse, when this frictionless sharing scheme becomes fully operational, 
we will probably read all our news on Facebook, without ever leaving its con-
fines to visit the rest of the Web; several news outlets, including the  Guardian 
and the  Washington Post, already have Facebook applications that allow users 
to read their articles without even visiting their Web sites. 
 As the popular technology blogger Robert Scoble explained in a recent 
post defending frictionless sharing, “The new world is you; just open up 
Facebook and everything you care about will be streaming down the screen.” 
 This is the very stance that is killing cyberflânerie: the whole point of the flâ-
neur’s wanderings is that he does not know what he cares about. As the German 
writer Franz Hessel, an occasional collaborator with Walter Benjamin, put it, “in 
order to engage in flânerie, one must not have anything too definite in mind.” 
Compared with Facebook’s highly deterministic universe, even Microsoft’s 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

394 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
unimaginative slogan from the 1990s —“Where do you want to go today?” —
sounds excitingly subversive. Who asks that silly question in the age of Facebook? 
 According to Benjamin, the sad figure of the sandwich board man was the 
last incarnation of the flâneur. In a way, we have all become such sandwich 
board men, walking the cyber-streets of Facebook with invisible advertisements 
hanging off our online selves. The only difference is that the digital nature of 
information has allowed us to merrily consume songs, films and books even as 
we advertise them, obliviously. 
Source: New York Times, February 5, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What was the occasion for Morozov’s essay? 
 2. What are the characteristics of the flâneur? When and where did he flourish? 
 3. What characteristics of the early Web led observers to expect the cyberflâneur 
to flourish?  
 4. What led to the demise of the flâneur? 
 5. How did the Internet change in ways not hospitable to the cyberflâneur? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What is “frictionless sharing”? Does Morozov think this is a good thing? Explain. 
 7. How is Facebook like Baron Haussmann? What seems to be the author’s 
 attitude toward Facebook? 
 8. What is Morozov’s claim? What is his primary organizing strategy? How does 
it help him develop his argument? 
 9. Explain the author’s image of us all as sandwich-board people. 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. Do you want “everything to be social”? Why or why not? 
 11. Do you agree that many people today seem to fear solitude? Do you agree with 
Morozov that we should not fear it? Why or why not?  
 12. Which of Morozov’s comparisons, images, or metaphors strikes you the most? 
Why? 
FACEBOOK IS USING YOU  
 LORI   B. ANDREWS  
 Lori Andrews is a professor of law at Chicago-Kent College of Law and director of the 
Institute for Science, Law and Technology. She has been involved in setting policies 
for genetic technologies and is recognized as an expert on developing technologies. 
Her ten nonfiction books include  Genetics: Ethics, Law and Policy (2002; 2nd ed., 
2006) and  I Know Who You Are and I Saw What You Did: Social Networks and the 
Death of Privacy (2012). The following essay appeared on February 5, 2012. 
27

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
395
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Do you use Facebook? How can Facebook be using you?  
 L ast  week, Facebook filed docu-
ments with the government that 
will allow it to sell shares of stock 
to the public. It is estimated to 
be worth at least $75  billion. But 
unlike other big-ticket corpora-
tions, it doesn’t have an inven-
tory of widgets or gadgets, cars 
or phones. Facebook’s inventory 
consists of personal data—yours 
and mine. 
 Facebook makes money by selling ad space to companies that want to reach 
us. Advertisers choose key words or details—like relationship status, location, 
activities, favor ite books and employment—and then Face book runs the ads for 
the targeted subset of its 845 million users. If you indicate that you like cupcakes, 
live in a certain neighborhood and have invited friends over, expect an ad from a 
nearby bakery to appear on your page. The magnitude of online information 
Facebook has available about each of us for targeted marketing is stunning. In 
Europe, laws give people the right to know what data companies have about 
them, but that is not the case in the United States. 
 Facebook made $3.2 billion in advertising revenue last year, 85 percent of 
its total revenue. Yet Facebook’s inventory of data and its revenue from adver-
tising are small potatoes compared to some others. Google took in more than 
10 times as much, with an estimated $36.5 billion in advertising revenue in 
2011, by analyzing what people sent over Gmail and what they searched on 
the Web, and then using that data to sell ads. Hundreds of other companies 
have also staked claims on people’s online data by depositing software called 
cookies or other tracking mechanisms on people’s computers and in their 
browsers. If you’ve mentioned anxiety in an e-mail, done a Google search for 
“stress” or started using an online medical diary that lets you monitor your 
mood, expect ads for medications and services to treat your anxiety. 
 Ads that pop up on your screen might seem useful, or at worst, a nui-
sance. But they are much more than that. The bits and bytes about your life 
can easily be used against you. Whether you can obtain a job, credit or insur-
ance can be based on your digital doppelgänger—and you may never know 
why you’ve been turned down. 
 Material mined online has been used against people battling for child cus-
tody or defending themselves in criminal cases. LexisNexis has a product 
called Accurint for Law Enforcement, which gives government agents informa-
tion about what people do on social networks. The Internal Revenue Service 
searches Facebook and MySpace for evidence of tax evaders’ income and 
whereabouts, and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services has 
been known to scrutinize photos and posts to confirm family relationships or 
weed out sham marriages. Employers sometimes decide whether to hire peo-
ple based on their online profiles, with one study indicating that 70 percent of 
1
2
3
4
5

396 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
recruiters and human resource professionals in the United States have rejected 
candidates based on data found online. A company called Spokeo gathers 
online data for employers, the public and anyone else who wants it. The com-
pany even posts ads urging “HR Recruiters—Click Here Now!” and asking 
women to submit their boyfriends’ e-mail addresses for an analysis of their 
online photos and activities to learn “Is He Cheating on You?” 
 Stereotyping is alive and well in data aggregation. Your application for 
credit could be declined not on the basis of your own finances or credit his-
tory, but on the basis of aggregate data—what other people whose likes and 
dislikes are similar to yours have done. If guitar players or divorcing couples 
are more likely to renege on their credit-card bills, then the fact that you’ve 
looked at guitar ads or sent an e-mail to a divorce lawyer might cause a data 
aggregator to classify you as less credit-worthy. When an Atlanta man returned 
from his honeymoon, he found that his credit limit had been lowered to $3,800 
from $10,800. The switch was not based on anything he had done but on 
aggregate data. A letter from the company told him, “Other customers who 
have used their card at establishments where you recently shopped have a 
poor repayment history with American Express.” 
 Even though laws allow people to challenge false information in credit 
reports, there are no laws that require data aggregators to reveal what they 
know about you. If I’ve Googled “diabetes” for a friend or “date rape drugs” 
for a mystery I’m writing, data aggregators assume those searches reflect my 
own health and proclivities. Because no laws regulate what types of data these 
aggregators can collect, they make their own rules. 
 In 2007 and 2008, the online advertising company NebuAd contracted 
with six Internet service providers to install hardware on their networks that 
monitored users’ Internet activities and transmitted that data to NebuAd’s 
servers for analysis and use in marketing. For an average of six months, 
NebuAd copied every e-mail, Web search or purchase that some 400,000 
people sent over the Internet. Other companies, like Healthline Networks Inc., 
have in-house limits on which private information they will collect. Healthline 
does not use information about people’s searches related to H.I.V., impotence 
or eating disorders to target ads to people, but it will use information about 
bipolar disorder, overactive bladder and anxiety, which can be as stigmatizing 
as the topics on its privacy-protected list. 
 In the 1970s, a professor of communication studies at Northwestern University 
named John McKnight popularized the term “redlining” to describe the failure of 
banks, insurers and other institutions to offer their services to inner city neighbor-
hoods. The term came from the practice of bank officials who drew a red line on 
a map to indicate where they wouldn’t invest. But use of the term expanded to 
cover a wide array of racially discriminatory practices, such as not offering home 
loans to African-Americans, even those who were wealthy or middle class. 
 Now the map used in redlining is not a geographic map, but the map of 
your travels across the Web. The term Weblining describes the practice of 
denying people opportunities based on their digital selves. You might be 
refused health insurance based on a Google search you did about a medical 
6
7
8
9
10

 
CHAPTER 16 The Internet and Social Media: Their Impact on Our Lives 
397
condition. You might be shown a credit card with a lower credit limit, not 
because of your credit history, but because of your race, sex or ZIP code or the 
types of Web sites you visit. 
 Data aggregation has social implications as well. When young people in 
poor neighborhoods are bombarded with advertisements for trade schools, 
will they be more likely than others their age to forgo college? And when 
women are shown articles about celebrities rather than stock market trends, 
will they be less likely to develop financial savvy? Advertisers are drawing new 
redlines, limiting people to the roles society expects them to play. 
Data aggregators’ practices conflict with what people say they want. A 
2008  Consumer Reports poll of 2,000 people found that 93 percent thought 
Internet companies should always ask for permission before using personal 
information, and 72 percent wanted the right to opt out of online tracking. A 
study by Princeton Survey Research Associates in 2009 using a random sample 
of 1,000 people found that 69 percent thought that the United States should 
adopt a law giving people the right to learn everything a Web site knows about 
them. We need a do-not-track law, similar to the do-not-call one. Now it’s not 
just about whether my dinner will be interrupted by a telemarketer. It’s about 
whether my dreams will be dashed by the collection of bits and bytes over 
which I have no control and for which companies are currently unaccountable.
Source: New York Times, February 5, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. How many people use Facebook? 
 2. How does Facebook make most of its money? 
 3. What is a “digital doppelganger”? 
 4. How is “redlining” used today to describe Web activity? 
 5. What do studies reveal about our preferences with regard to the Internet’s 
tracking and data collecting?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What kinds of information are being collected about us from our Internet use? 
What is the author’s attitude toward Internet tracking?  
 7. What, then, is the claim of her argument? 
 8. How does Andrews develop and support her argument? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. Has Andrews convinced you that digital mining leads to more serious  problems 
than tailored pop-up ads? Why or why not?  
 10. Do you agree with the author’s solution to the problem she sees? If yes, why? If 
no, why not?
11
12

 READ: What happens in the cartoon? How does Marvin characterize the dog’s 
attitude? 
 REASON: What attitude is reflected in the way the dog is drawn in the first 
frame in the bottom row? What attitude is reflected in the way the cat is drawn in 
the middle frame in the bottom row? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE: What makes the cartoon a clever way of expressing the 
artist’s opposition to stereotyping? 
 © 2005 North America Syndicate, World rights reserved.  
 Marriage and Gender Issues: 
The Debates Continue 
 CHAPTER 17 

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
399
 S
ix writers provide much for readers to debate and reflect upon in this chap-
ter on marriage and gender issues. The writers examine the incredible—and 
in some cases still controversial—changes to the institution of marriage and—
by extension—to the family. And that extension immediately takes us to gender 
issues, to debates over “who’s up and who’s down,” men or women, and to 
changing views—and laws—regarding gay marriage and gay families. (About 
one-third of gay partnerships have one or more children, an important statistic 
in these discussions.)
 Here are a few more interesting statistics relevant to the debates in this 
chapter: In 2010, according to a Gallup poll, for the first time more than 50 per-
cent of Americans supported gay and lesbian relationships. And for the first 
time, more men than women supported gay partnerships, with the greatest 
shifts in support coming from both young adult men and older men. 
 Some of the writers in this chapter approach the changes in marriage and 
gender views—and their effects on our politics, our culture, and our personal 
lives—from a social science perspective; others take a more jocular or satiric 
approach. Some write from the perspective of research data; others develop 
arguments from emotion or from a legal perspective. Some express strongly held 
views; others seek common ground. But, whatever the writer’s specific topic, or 
the basis for the argument, or the values expressed, all would agree that the 
changes of the past thirty years have had a profound effect on our lives. All 
would probably also agree that while some issues will continue to benefit from 
both research and reflection, the reality is that the United States has accepted gay 
partnerships and is on the way to providing legal status for these partnerships. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS 
 1. 
Do you expect to have a career? To have a spouse and children? Should society 
support both men and women having these choices? If so, how?  
 2. 
What role, if any, should government and the courts have in defining marriage? 
 3. 
What has been meant by the “traditional family”? In what ways has the 
“family” been reshaped in the twenty-first century?  
 4. 
Do you have a position on gay marriage? On partnership recognition and 
rights? If you have a position, what is it, and what is its source?  
 5. 
Do you expect to live with someone prior to marriage? Do you think such 
arrangements will benefit the marriage that you assume will follow? Would it 
be a good idea to learn more about cohabiting?  
 6. 
Much has been written recently about women getting ahead at the expense of 
men; do you think this is the case? Would it be useful to look at some of the facts?  
 ABOLISH MARRIAGE   
 MICHAEL   KINSLEY 
 A member of the bar with a law degree from Harvard, Michael Kinsley is a former 
 editor of both  Harper’s and  The New Republic  and a former columnist for the 
 Washington Post.  He is the founding editor (1996) of  Slate, the online magazine, 

400 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
and has been a cohost of CNN’s  Crossfire.  He is currently a columnist for Bloomberg 
View. The following column appeared  July 3, 2003.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS What are the key issues in the debate over gay 
marriage? What are gay marriage proponents seeking? What are social 
conservatives seeking?  
 Critics and enthusiasts of  Lawrence v. Texas, last week’s Supreme Court 
decision invalidating state anti-sodomy laws, agree on one thing: The next 
argument is going to be about gay marriage. As Justice Antonin Scalia noted in 
his tart dissent, it follows from the logic of  Lawrence.  Mutually consenting sex 
with the person of your choice in the privacy of your own home is now a basic 
right of American citizenship under the Constitution. This does not mean that 
the government must supply it or guarantee it. But the government cannot for-
bid it, and the government also should not discriminate against you for choos-
ing to exercise a basic right of citizenship. Offering an institution as important 
as marriage to male-female couples only is exactly this kind of discrimination. 
Or so the gay rights movement will now argue. Persuasively, I think. 
 Opponents of gay rights will resist mightily, although they have been in 
retreat for a couple of decades. General anti-gay sentiments are now consid-
ered a serious breach of civic etiquette, even in anti-gay circles. The current 
line of defense, which probably won’t hold either, is between social toleration 
of homosexuals and social approval of homosexuality. Or between accepting 
the reality that people are gay, even accepting that gays are people, and 
endorsing something called “the gay agenda.” Gay marriage, the opponents 
will argue, would cross this line. It would make homosexuality respectable and, 
worse, normal. Gays are welcome to exist all they want, and to do their inex-
plicable thing if they must, but they shouldn’t expect a government stamp of 
approval. 
 It’s going to get ugly. And then it’s going to get boring. So we have two 
options here. We can add gay marriage to the short list of controversies—
abortion, affirmative action, the death penalty—that are so frozen and ritualis-
tic that debates about them are more like kabuki performances than intellectual 
exercises. Or we can think outside the box. There is a solution that ought 
to satisfy both camps, and may not be a bad idea even apart from the gay 
 marriage controversy. 
 That solution is to end the institution of marriage. Or rather (he hastens to 
clarify, dear) the solution is to end the institution of government-sanctioned 
marriage. Or, framed to appeal to conservatives: End the government monop-
oly on marriage. Wait, I’ve got it: Privatize marriage. These slogans all mean 
the same thing. Let churches and other religious institutions continue to offer 
marriage ceremonies. Let department stores and casinos get into the act if 
they want. Let each organization decide for itself what kinds of couples it 
wants to offer marriage to. Let couples celebrate their union in any way they 
choose and consider themselves married whenever they want. Let others be 
free to consider them not married, under rules these others may prefer. And, 
yes, if three people want to get married, or one person wants to marry herself, 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
401
and someone else wants to conduct a ceremony and declare them married, let 
‘em. If you and your government aren’t implicated, what do you care? 
 In fact, there is nothing to stop any of this from happening now. And a lot of it 
does happen. But only certain marriages get certified by the government. So, in 
the United States we are about to find ourselves in a strange situation where the 
principal demand of a liberation movement is to be included in the red tape of a 
government bureaucracy. Having just gotten state governments out of their bed-
rooms, gays now want these governments back in. Meanwhile,  social-
conservative anti-gays, many of them southerners, are calling on the government 
in Washington to trample states’ rights and nationalize the rules of marriage, if 
necessary, to prevent gays from getting what they want. The Senate majority 
leader, Bill Frist of Tennessee, responded to the Supreme Court’s  Lawrence deci-
sion by endorsing a constitutional amendment, no less, against gay marriage. 
 If marriage were an entirely private affair, all the disputes over gay mar-
riage would become irrelevant. Gay marriage would not have the official sanc-
tion of government, but neither would straight marriage. There would be 
official equality between the two, which is the essence of what gays want and 
are entitled to. And if the other side is sincere in saying that its concern is not 
what people do in private but government endorsement of a gay “lifestyle” or 
“agenda,” that problem goes away too. 
 Yes, yes, marriage is about more than sleeping arrangements. There are 
children, there are finances, there are spousal job benefits such as health insur-
ance and pensions. In all of these areas, marriage is used as a substitute for 
other factors that are harder to measure, such as financial dependence or devo-
tion to offspring. It would be possible to write rules that measure the real fac-
tors at stake and leave marriage out of the matter. Regarding children and 
finances, people can set their own rules, as many already do. None of this would 
be easy. Marriage functions as what lawyers call a “bright line,” which saves the 
trouble of trying to measure a lot of amorphous factors. You’re either married or 
you’re not. Once marriage itself becomes amorphous, who-gets-the-kids and 
who-gets-health-care become trickier questions. 
 So, sure, there are some legitimate objections to the idea of privatizing 
marriage. But they don’t add up to a fatal objection. Especially when you con-
sider that the alternative is arguing about gay marriage until death do us part.  
Source: Washington Post, July 3, 2003. Reprinted by permission.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What will the next argument be about? What ruling will bring on this argu-
ment? What about the ruling invites the argument? 
 2. Who will win the argument, in Kinsley’s view? 
   3. According to the author, where are we in the “tug-of-war” over gay rights? 
Where would allowing gay marriage put us in the battle?  
 4. What is the author’s solution to end the argument? 
5
6
7
8

402 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
  5. What is ironic about gays fighting for the right to marry? What is ironic about 
conservatives seeking a constitutional amendment against gay marriage?  
  6. What problems would emerge if governments stopped sanctioning marriage 
altogether? Are these problems insurmountable, in the author’s view? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  7. What is Kinsley’s claim? Where does he state it? 
  8. When Kinsley writes that the argument over gay marriage will “get boring,” 
what does he mean? How does his comparison to kabuki performances or to 
debates over abortion or the death penalty illustrate his point here? 
  9. How does Kinsley seek to convince both sides of the argument that his solution 
should please them?  
 10. The author anticipates counterarguments in his last two paragraphs. How 
effective is his rebuttal? 
 11. Analyze the essay’s tone. How serious do you think Kinsley is in presenting his 
solution to the argument over gay marriage? If he does not think his solution is 
viable, then why is he proposing it? What is his purpose in writing?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 12. What is your reaction to Kinsley’s proposal? Is the best solution to get govern-
ment out of certifying marriage? If we wanted to “think outside the box,” could 
we solve the other problems—of finances, child custody, and so forth—if we 
wanted to? How would you support the proposal or challenge it?  
 13. How will this issue end—and when—in your view? Why? 
 MY BIG FAT STRAIGHT WEDDING   
 ANDREW   SULLIVAN  
 British-born Andrew Sullivan graduated from Oxford and has a PhD from Harvard 
University. Writing for newspapers and magazines, he was editor of  The New Republic 
in the 90s, is a columnist for  Time magazine, and in 2000 started his blog,  The Daily 
Dish, first attached to  Time but now at the Atlantic online. Sullivan has written six 
books, including  The Conservative Soul (2006) and  Same-Sex Marriage: Pro and Con 
(2004). The following article appeared in the September 2008 issue of the  Atlantic.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  What is the “source” of Sullivan’s title? How does his 
title suggest his topic? 
 What if gays were straight? 
 The question is absurd—gays are defined as not straight, right?—yet 
increasingly central to the debate over civil-marriage rights. Here is how 
California’s Supreme Court put it in a key passage in its now-famous May 15 
[2008] ruling that gay couples in California must be granted the right to marry, 
with no qualifications or euphemisms:
1
2

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
403
 These core substantive rights include, most fundamentally, the opportunity of 
an individual to establish—with the person with whom the individual has chosen 
to share his or her life—an  officially recognized and protected family possessing 
mutual rights and responsibilities and entitled to the same respect and dignity 
accorded a union traditionally designated as marriage.  
 What’s notable here is the starting point of the discussion: an “individual.” 
The individual citizen posited by the court is defined as prior to his or her sex-
ual orientation. He or she exists as a person before he or she exists as straight 
or gay. And the right under discussion is defined as “the opportunity of an 
individual” to choose another “person” to “establish a family” in which repro-
duction and children are not necessary. And so the distinction between gay 
and straight is essentially abolished. For all the debate about the law in this 
decision, the debate about the terms under discussion has been close to non-
existent. And yet in many ways, these terms are at the core of the decision, and 
are the reason why it is such a watershed. The ruling, and the language it uses, 
represents the removal of the premise of the last generation in favor of a prem-
ise accepted as a given by the next. 
 The premise used to be that homosexuality was an activity, that gays were 
people who chose to behave badly; or, if they weren’t choosing to behave 
badly, were nonetheless suffering from a form of sickness or, in the words of 
the Vatican, an “objective disorder.” And so the question of whether to permit 
the acts and activities of such 
disordered individuals was a 
legitimate area of legislation 
and regulation. 
 But when gays are seen as 
the same as straights—as individ-
uals; as normal, well-adjusted, 
human individuals—the argument 
changes altogether. The question 
becomes a matter of how we treat 
a minority with an involuntary, 
defining characteristic along the 
lines of gender or race. And when 
a generation came of age that did 
not merely grasp this intellectu-
ally, but knew it from their own 
lives and friends and family mem-
bers, then the logic for full equal-
ity became irresistible. 
 This transformation in under-
standing happened organically. It 
began with the sexual revolution 
in the 1970s, and then came 
crashing into countless  previously 
unaware families, as their sons 
3
4
5
6

404 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
and uncles and fathers died in vast numbers from AIDS in the 1980s and 1990s. 
It emerged as younger generations came out earlier and earlier, and as their 
peers came to see gay people as fellows and siblings, rather than as denizens of 
some distant and alien  subculture. It happened as lesbian couples became par-
ents and as gay  soldiers challenged the discrimination against them. And it per-
colated up through the popular culture—from  Will & Grace  and  Ellen  to almost 
every reality show since  The Real World.  
 What California’s court did, then, was not to recognize a new right to 
same-sex marriage. It was to acknowledge an emergent cultural consensus. 
And once that consensus had been accepted, the denial of the right to marry 
became, for many, a constitutional outrage. The right to marry, after all, is, as 
the court put it, “one of the basic, inalienable civil rights guaranteed to an indi-
vidual.” Its denial was necessarily an outrage—and not merely an anomaly—
because the right to marry has such deep and inalienable status in American 
constitutional law. 
 The political theorist Hannah Arendt, addressing the debate over misce-
genation laws during the civil-rights movement of the 1950s, put it clearly 
enough:
 The right to marry whoever one wishes is an elementary human right compared 
to which “the right to attend an integrated school, the right to sit where one 
pleases on a bus, the right to go into any hotel or recreation area or place of 
amusement, regardless of one’s skin or color or race” are minor indeed. Even 
political rights, like the right to vote, and nearly all other rights enumerated in 
the Constitution, are secondary to the inalienable human rights to “life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness” proclaimed in the Declaration of Independence; 
and to this category the right to home and marriage unquestionably belongs.  
 Note that Arendt put the right to marry before even the right to vote. And 
this is how many gay people of the next generation see it. Born into straight 
families and reared to see homosexuality as a form of difference, not disability, 
they naturally wonder why they would be excluded from the integral  institution 
of their own families’ lives and history. They see this exclusion as unimaginable —
as unimaginable as straight people would if they were told that they could not 
legally marry someone of their choosing. No other institution has an equiva-
lent power to include people in their own familial narrative or civic history as 
deeply or as powerfully as civil marriage does. And the next generation see 
themselves as people first and gay second. 
 Born in a different era, I reached that conclusion through more pain and 
fear and self-loathing than my 20-something fellow homosexuals do today. 
But it was always clear to me nonetheless. It just never fully came home to me 
until I too got married. 
 It happened first when we told our families and friends of our intentions. 
Suddenly, they had a vocabulary to describe and understand our relationship. 
I was no longer my partner’s “friend” or “boyfriend”; I was his fiancé. 
Suddenly, everyone involved themselves in our love. They asked how I had 
proposed; they inquired when the wedding would be; my straight friends 
made jokes about marriage that simply included me as one of them. At that 
7
8
9
10
11

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
405
first post-engagement Christmas with my in-laws, I felt something shift. They 
had always been welcoming and  supportive. But now I was family. I  felt an 
end—a  sudden, fateful end—to an emotional displacement I had experienced 
since childhood. 
 The wedding occurred last August in Massachusetts in front of a small group 
of family and close friends. And in that group, I suddenly realized, it was the 
heterosexuals who knew what to do, who guided the gay couple and our friends 
into the rituals and rites of family. Ours was not, we realized, a different institu-
tion, after all, and we were not different kinds of people. In the doing of it, it was 
the same as my sister’s wedding and we were the same as my sister and brother-
in-law. The strange, bewildering emotions of the moment, the cake and recep-
tion, the distracted children and weeping mothers, the morning’s butterflies and 
the night’s drunkenness: this was not a gay marriage; it was a marriage. 
 And our families instantly and for the first time since our early childhood 
became not just institutions in which we were included, but institutions that 
we too owned and perpetuated. My sister spoke of her marriage as if it were 
interchangeable with my own, and my niece and nephew had no qualms in 
referring to my husband as their new uncle. The embossed invitations and the 
floral bouquets and the fear of fluffing our vows: in these tiny, bonding ges-
tures of integration, we all came to see an alienating distinction become a 
unifying difference. 
 It was a moment that shifted a sense of our own identity within our psyches 
and even our souls. Once this happens, the law eventually follows. In California 
this spring, it did. 
 Source: © 2008, The Atlantic Media Co. as first published in  The Atlantic, December 2008. All rights 
reserved. Distributed by Tribune Media Services.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What, according to Sullivan, is the key term in California’s Supreme Court 
 ruling in favor of gay marriage? How does it change the debate about gay 
marriage? 
 2. 
How did the change in thinking develop? 
 3. 
What does the author view the court’s decision as recognizing? 
 4. 
What does the institution of marriage offer? 
 5. 
How did Sullivan come to fully understand its significance? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. 
Although Sullivan uses his own experience, this is not primarily a personal 
narrative. What kind of argument is it?  
 7. 
What is the author’s claim? 
 8. 
What kind of evidence does he present? Explain his line of reasoning in your 
own words.    
12
13
14

406 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  9. Have you experienced the same shift in thinking about gays from Sullivan’s 
generation to those in their 20s? (Polls demonstrate the shift in attitude for the 
country as a whole.)  
 10. Would you have put the right to marry ahead of the right to vote as the more 
essential right? What is Hannah Arendt’s basis for this view? If you disagree, 
how would you refute Arendt’s position? 
 11. Has Sullivan given you a new way to think about gays and gay marriage? Is he 
convincing? If not, why not?  
THE MYTH OF MALE DECLINE  
 STEPHANIE   COONTZ  
 Stephanie Coontz has recently retired from Evergreen State College, where she 
taught history and family studies. She is the author of several books including 
 Marriage, a History: How Love Conquered Marriage (2006), and  A Strange Stirring: 
The Feminine Mystique and American Women at the Dawn of the 1960s  (2012). The 
following article appeared September 30, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What male decline do you think the title refers to? Do 
you think there has been a male decline?   
S croll through the titles and subtitles of recent books, and you will read that 
women have become The Richer Sex, that The Rise of Women Has Turned 
Men Into Boys, and that we may even be seeing The End of Men. Several of 
the authors of these books posit that we are on the verge of a “new majority 
of female breadwinners,” where middle-class wives lord over their 
husbands while demoralized single men take refuge in perpetual adolescence. 
 How is it, then, that men still control the most important industries, espe-
cially technology, occupy most of the positions on the lists of the richest 
Americans, and continue to make more money than women who have similar 
skills and education? And why do women make up only 17 percent of Congress? 
 These books and the cultural anxiety they represent reflect, but exaggerate, 
a transformation in the distribution of power over the past half-century. Fifty years 
ago, every male American was entitled to what the sociologist R. W. Connell 
called a “patriarchal dividend”—a lifelong affirmative-action program for men. 
 The size of that dividend varied according to race and class, but all men 
could count on women’s being excluded from the most desirable jobs and 
promotions in their line of work, so the average male high school graduate 
earned more than the average female college graduate working the 
same hours. At home, the patriarchal dividend gave husbands the right to 
decide where the family would live and to make unilateral financial decisions. 
Male privilege even trumped female consent to sex, so marital rape was not 
a crime. 
 The curtailment of such male entitlements and the expansion of women’s 
legal and economic rights have transformed American life, but they have 
1
2
3
4
5

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
407
hardly produced a matriarchy. Indeed, in many arenas the progress of women 
has actually stalled over the past 15 years. 
 Let’s begin by determining which is “the richer sex.” 
 Women’s real wages have been rising for decades, while the real wages of 
most men have stagnated or fallen. But women’s wages started from a much 
lower base, artificially held down by discrimination. Despite their relative 
improvement, women’s average earnings are still lower than men’s and women 
remain more likely to be poor. 
 Today women make up almost 40 percent of full-time workers in manage-
ment. But the median wages of female managers are just 73 percent of what 
male managers earn. And although women have significantly increased their 
representation among high earners in America over the past half-century, only 
4 percent of the C.E.O.’s in  Fortune ’s top 1,000 companies are female. 
 What we are seeing is a convergence in economic fortunes, not female 
ascendance. Between 2010 and 2011, men and women working full time year-
round both experienced a 2.5 percent decline in income. Men suffered roughly 
80 percent of the job losses at the beginning of the 2007 recession. But the 
ripple effect of the recession then led to cutbacks in government jobs that hit 
women disproportionately. As of June 2012, men had regained 46.2 percent 
of the jobs they lost in the recession, while women had regained 38.7 percent 
of their lost jobs. 
 The 1970s and 1980s brought an impressive reduction in job segregation 
by gender, especially in middle-class occupations. But the sociologists David 
Cotter, Joan Hermsen and Reeve Vanneman report that progress slowed in 
the 1990s and has all but stopped since 2000. For example, the percentage of 
female electrical engineers doubled in each decade in the 1960s, 1970s and 
1980s. But in the two decades since 1990 it has increased by only a single per-
centage point, leaving women at just 10 percent of the total. 
 Some fields have become even more gender-segregated. In 1980, 75 per-
cent of primary school teachers and 64 percent of social workers were women. 
Today women make up 80 and 81 percent of those fields. Studies show that as 
occupations gain a higher percentage of female workers, the pay for those 
jobs goes down relative to wages in similarly skilled jobs that remain bastions 
of male employment. 
 Proponents of the “women as the richer sex” scenario often note that in 
several metropolitan areas, never-married childless women in their 20s now 
earn more, on average, than their male age-mates. 
 But this is because of the demographic anomaly that such areas have excep-
tionally large percentages of highly educated single white women and young, 
poorly educated, low-wage Latino men. Earning more than a man with less edu-
cation is not the same as earning as much as an equally educated man. 
 Among never-married, childless 22- to 30-year-old metropolitan-area 
workers with the same educational credentials, males out-earn females in 
every category, according to a reanalysis of census data to be presented next 
month at Boston University by Philip Cohen, a sociologist at the University of 
Maryland. Similarly, a 2010 Catalyst survey found that female M.B.A.’s were 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

408 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
paid an average of $4,600 less than men in starting salaries and continue to be 
outpaced by men in rank and salary growth throughout their careers, even if 
they remain childless. 
 Among married couples when both partners are employed, wives earned 
an average of 38.5 percent of family income in 2010. In that year nearly 
30  percent of working wives out-earned their working husbands, a huge increase 
from just 4 percent in 1970. But when we include all married-couple families, 
not just dual-earner ones, the economic clout of wives looks a lot weaker. 
 In only 20 percent of all married-couple families does the wife earn half or 
more of all family income, according to Professor Cohen, and in 35 percent of 
marriages, the wife earns less than 10 percent. 
 Once they have children, wives usually fall further behind their husbands in 
earnings, partly because they are more likely to temporarily quit work or cut 
back when workplace policies make it hard for both parents to work full time 
and still meet family obligations. 
 But this also reflects prejudice against working mothers. A few years ago, 
researchers at Cornell constructed fake résumés, identical in all respects 
except parental status. They asked college students to evaluate the fitness of 
candidates for employment or promotion. Mothers were much less likely to be 
hired. If hired, they were offered, on average, $11,000 less in starting salary 
and were much less likely to be deemed deserving of promotion. 
 The researchers also submitted similar résumés in response to more than 
600 actual job advertisements. Applicants identified as childless received 
twice as many callbacks as the supposed mothers. 
 Much has been made of the gender gap in educational achievement. Girls 
have long done better in school than boys, and women have now pulled ahead 
of men in completing college. Today women earn almost 60 percent of col-
lege degrees, up from one-third in 1960. 
 The largest educational gender gap is among families in the top 25 per-
cent of the earnings distribution, where women lead men by 13 percent in 
graduation rates, compared to just a 2 percent advantage for women from the 
lowest income families. 
 But at all income levels, women are still concentrated in traditionally female 
areas of study. Gender integration of college majors has stalled since the mid-
1990s, and in some fields, women have even lost ground. Between 1970 and 
1985, women’s share of computer and information sciences degrees rose from 
14 percent to 37 percent. But by 2008 women had fallen back to 18 percent. 
 According to the N.Y.U. sociologist Paula England, a senior fellow at the 
Council on Contemporary Families, most women, despite earning higher 
grades, seem to be educating themselves for occupations that systematically 
pay less. 
 Even women’s greater educational achievement stems partly from con-
tinuing gender inequities. Women get a smaller payoff than men for earning a 
high school degree, but a bigger payoff for completing college. This is not 
because of their higher grade point averages, the economist Christopher 
Dougherty concludes, but because women seem to need more education 
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
409
simply to counteract the impact of traditional job discrimination and tradi-
tional female career choices. 
 If the ascent of women has been much exaggerated, so has the descent of 
men. Men’s irresponsibility and bad behavior is now a stock theme in popular 
culture. But there has always been a subset of men who engage in crude, 
coercive and exploitative behavior. What’s different today is that it’s harder for 
men to get away with such behavior in long-term relationships. Women no 
longer feel compelled to put up with it and the legal system no longer con-
dones it. The result is that many guys who would have been obnoxious hus-
bands, behaving badly behind closed doors, are now obnoxious singles, 
trumpeting their bad behavior on YouTube. 
 Their boorishness may be pathetic, but it’s much less destructive than the 
masculine misbehavior of yore. Most men are in fact behaving better than 
ever. Domestic violence rates have been halved since 1993, while rapes and 
sexual assaults against women have fallen by 70 percent in that time. In recent 
decades, husbands have doubled their share of housework and tripled their 
share of child care. And this change is not confined to highly educated men. 
 Among dual-earner couples, husbands with the least education do as 
much or more housework than their more educated counterparts. Men who 
have made these adjustments report happier marriages—and better sex lives. 
 O ne  thing standing in the way of further progress for many men is the 
same obstacle that held women back for so long: overinvestment in their gen-
der identity instead of their individual personhood. Men are now experiencing 
a set of limits—externally enforced as well as self-imposed—strikingly similar 
to the ones Betty Friedan set out to combat in 1963, when she identified a 
“feminine mystique” that constrained women’s self-image and options. 
 Although men don’t face the same discriminatory laws as women did 50 
years ago, they do face an equally restrictive gender mystique. 
 Just as the feminine mystique discouraged women in the 1950s and 1960s 
from improving their education or job prospects, on the assumption that a 
man would always provide for them, the masculine mystique encourages men 
to neglect their own self-improvement on the assumption that sooner or later 
their “manliness” will be rewarded. 
 According to a 2011 poll by the Pew Research Center, 77 percent of 
Americans now believe that a college education is necessary for a woman to 
get ahead in life today, but only 68 percent think that is true for men. And just 
as the feminine mystique exposed girls to ridicule and harassment if they 
excelled at “unladylike” activities like math or sports, the masculine mystique 
leads to bullying and ostracism of boys who engage in “girlie” activities like 
studying hard and behaving well in school. One result is that men account for 
only 2 percent of kindergarten and preschool teachers, 3 percent of dental 
assistants and 9 percent of registered nurses. 
 The masculine mystique is institutionalized in work structures, according to 
three new studies forthcoming in the  Journal of Social Issues. Just as women 
who display “masculine” ambitions or behaviors on the job are often penalized, 
so are men who engage in traditionally female behaviors, like  prioritizing family 
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

410 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
involvement. Men who take an active role in child care and housework at home 
are more likely than other men to be harassed at work. 
Men who request family leave are often viewed as weak or uncompetitive and 
face a greater risk of being demoted or downsized. And men who have ever quit 
work for family reasons end up earning significantly less than other male employ-
ees, even when controlling for the effects of age, race, education, occupation, 
seniority and work hours. Now men need to liberate themselves from the pressure 
to prove their masculinity. Contrary to the fears of some pundits, the ascent of 
women does not portend the end of men. It offers a new beginning for both. But 
women’s progress by itself is not a panacea for America’s inequities. The closer we 
get to achieving equality of opportunity between the sexes, the more clearly we 
can see that the next major obstacle to improving the well-being of most men and 
women is the growing socioeconomic inequality within each sex.
Source: New York Times, September 30, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
QUESTIONS FOR READING
 1. Explain the term “patriarchal dividend.” What advantages did it provide? 
 2. What are the specific ways that men outearn women? 
 3. Women get more BAs today than men. Why does this fact fail to lead to an 
 economic advantage for women? 
 4. How has the behavior of married men changed for the better? What has 
 happened to those men whose boorish behavior in the past continued into their 
marriages? 
 5. What does the author mean by a “masculine mystique”? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What is Coontz’s claim? Where does she state it? 
 7. In general, what has changed for women economically? Why does this change 
fail to support the myth of male decline?  
 8. For what reasons does Coontz reject the notion of “male decline”? The author 
devotes less space to this part of the argument; is she convincing nonetheless? 
Explain.  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. Has Coontz presented a convincing dismissal of the myth of male decline? If 
yes, what makes her argument compelling? If no, how would you refute her 
argument? 
 10. How does your experience correspond to Coontz’s analysis of men’s experi-
ences today? Are boys who behave and study often bullied? Are men who want 
to devote more time to family often penalized in their careers? Should boys and 
men have to “prove” their masculinity? Reflect on these issues.
33

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
411
THE DOWNSIDE OF LIVING TOGETHER   
MEG  JAY 
 A clinical psychologist, Meg Jay is an assistant clinical professor at the University of 
Virginia who also has a private practice in Charlottesville. She specializes in 
“twentysomethings.” She is the author of  The Defining Decade: Why Your Twenties 
Matter—and How to Make the Most of Them  (2012).  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Are you cohabiting or do you picture yourself cohabiting 
in the future? If so, do you see this lifestyle as “convenient” or as “a logical step 
to marriage”?  
A t 32, one of my clients (I’ll call her Jennifer) had a lavish wine-country wed-
ding. By then, Jennifer and her boyfriend had lived together for more than four 
years. The event was attended by the couple’s friends, families and two dogs. 
 When Jennifer started therapy with me less than a year later, she was look-
ing for a divorce lawyer. “I spent more time planning my wedding than I spent 
happily married,” she sobbed. Most disheartening to Jennifer was that she’d 
tried to do everything right. “My parents got married young so, of course, 
they got divorced. We lived together! How did this happen?” 
 Cohabitation in the United States has increased by more than 1,500 percent 
in the past half century. In 1960, about 450,000 unmarried couples lived together. 
Now the number is more than 7.5 million. The majority of young adults in their 
20s will live with a romantic partner at least once, and more than half of all mar-
riages will be preceded by cohabitation. This shift has been attributed to the 
sexual revolution and the availability of birth control, and in our current econ-
omy, sharing the bills makes cohabiting appealing. But when you talk to people 
in their 20s, you also hear about something else: cohabitation as prophylaxis. 
 In a nationwide survey conducted in 2001 by the National Marriage 
Project, then at Rutgers and now at the University of Virginia, nearly half of 
20-somethings agreed with the statement, “You would only marry someone if 
he or she agreed to live together with you first, so that you could find out 
whether you really get along.” About two-thirds said they believed that mov-
ing in together before marriage was a good way to avoid divorce. 
 But that belief is contradicted by experience. Couples who cohabit before mar-
riage (and especially before an engagement or an otherwise clear commitment) 
tend to be less satisfied with their marriages—and more likely to divorce—than 
couples who do not. These negative outcomes are called the cohabitation effect. 
 Researchers originally attributed the cohabitation effect to selection, or 
the idea that cohabitors were less conventional about marriage and thus more 
open to divorce. As cohabitation has become a norm, however, studies have 
shown that the effect is not entirely explained by individual characteristics like 
religion, education or politics. Research suggests that at least some of the 
risks may lie in cohabitation itself. 
 As Jennifer and I worked to answer her question, “How did this happen?” 
we talked about how she and her boyfriend went from dating to cohabiting. 
Her response was consistent with studies reporting that most couples say it 
“just happened.” 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

412 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 “We were sleeping over at each other’s places all the time,” she said. “We 
liked to be together, so it was cheaper and more convenient. It was a quick 
decision but if it didn’t work out there was a quick exit.” 
 She was talking about what researchers call “sliding, not deciding.” 
Moving from dating to sleeping over to sleeping over a lot to cohabitation can 
be a gradual slope, one not marked by rings or ceremonies or sometimes even 
a conversation. Couples bypass talking about why they want to live together 
and what it will mean. 
 W hen researchers ask cohabitors these questions, partners often have dif-
ferent, unspoken—even unconscious—agendas. Women are more likely to 
view cohabitation as a step toward marriage, while men are more likely to see 
it as a way to test a relationship or postpone commitment, and this gender 
asymmetry is associated with negative interactions and lower levels of com-
mitment even after the relationship progresses to marriage. One thing men 
and women do agree on, however, is that their standards for a live-in partner 
are lower than they are for a spouse. 
 Sliding into cohabitation wouldn’t be a problem if sliding out were as easy. 
But it isn’t. Too often, young adults enter into what they imagine will be low-
cost, low-risk living situations only to find themselves unable to get out 
months, even years, later. It’s like signing up for a credit card with 0 percent 
interest. At the end of 12 months when the interest goes up to 23 percent you 
feel stuck because your balance is too high to pay off. In fact, cohabitation can 
be exactly like that. In behavioral economics, it’s called consumer lock-in. 
 Lock-in is the decreased likelihood to search for, or change to, another 
option once an investment in something has been made. The greater the 
setup costs, the less likely we are to move to another, even better, situation, 
especially when faced with switching costs, or the time, money and effort it 
requires to make a change. 
 Cohabitation is loaded with setup and switching costs. Living together can 
be fun and economical, and the setup costs are subtly woven in. After years of 
living among roommates’ junky old stuff, couples happily split the rent on a 
nice one-bedroom apartment. They share wireless and pets and enjoy shop-
ping for new furniture together. Later, these setup and switching costs have an 
impact on how likely they are to leave. 
 Jennifer said she never really felt that her boyfriend was committed to her. 
“I felt like I was on this multiyear, never-ending audition to be his wife,” she 
said. “We had all this furniture. We had our dogs and all the same friends. It 
just made it really, really difficult to break up. Then it was like we got married 
because we were living together once we got into our 30s.” 
 I’ve had other clients who also wish they hadn’t sunk years of their 20s into 
relationships that would have lasted only months had they not been living 
together. Others want to feel committed to their partners, yet they are con-
fused about whether they have consciously chosen their mates. Founding rela-
tionships on convenience or ambiguity can interfere with the process of claiming 
the people we love. A life built on top of “maybe you’ll do” simply may not feel 
as dedicated as a life built on top of the “we do” of commitment or marriage. 
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
413
 The unfavorable connection between cohabitation and divorce does seem 
to be lessening, however, according to a report released last month by the 
Department of Health and Human Services. More good news is that a 2010 
survey by the Pew Research Center found that nearly two-thirds of Americans 
saw cohabitation as a step toward marriage. 
 This shared and serious view of cohabitation may go a long way toward 
further attenuating the cohabitation effect because the most recent research 
suggests that serial cohabitators, couples with differing levels of commitment 
and those who use cohabitation as a test are most at risk for poor relationship 
quality and eventual relationship dissolution. 
 Cohabitation is here to stay, and there are things young adults can do to 
protect their relationships from the cohabitation effect. It’s important to dis-
cuss each person’s motivation and commitment level beforehand and, even 
better, to view cohabitation as an intentional step toward, rather than a conve-
nient test for, marriage or partnership. 
 It also makes sense to anticipate and regularly evaluate constraints that 
may keep you from leaving. 
 I am not for or against living together, but I am for young adults knowing 
that, far from safeguarding against divorce and unhappiness, moving in with 
someone can increase your chances of making a mistake—or of spending too 
much time on a mistake. A mentor of mine used to say, “The best time to work 
on someone’s marriage is before he or she has one,” and in our era, that may 
mean before cohabitation. 
Source: Excerpted from Meg Jay, The Defining Decade: Why Your Twenties Matter—and How to Make 
the Most of Them Now. New York: Twelve, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
How popular has cohabiting become? What percentage of marriages will be 
preceded by cohabiting? 
 2. 
In the opinion of two-thirds of twentysomethings, what impact will cohabiting 
have on marriage or divorce? 
 3. 
How can cohabiting result in “lock-in”? 
 4. 
How has the connection between cohabitation and divorce recently changed? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Jay’s claim? Where does she state it? 
 6. 
What does the author gain by starting with a specific example of a client and 
holding her claim until later?  
 7. 
What is the author’s advice for protecting oneself from the “cohabitation 
effect”? Is this good advice for all couples at any stage in a relationship? 
Explain.  
16
17
18
19
20

414 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. Are you surprised by the “cohabitation effect”? Why or why not? 
 9. What is the most important idea in this article that you want to share with 
friends? Why?  
 10. Many young people today do more hooking up than long-term dating of one 
person. Could this new form of “dating” with so little commitment have the 
effect of leading to cohabitation with little commitment? Reflect on and be pre-
pared to discuss these relationship patterns.
UN-HITCHING THE MIDDLE CLASS  
 KATHLEEN  PARKER
 A columnist since 1987, Kathleen Parker became nationally syndicated in 1995 when 
she joined the  Washington Post. She is a regular commentator on  The Chris Matthews 
Show and the author of  Save the Males: Why Men Matter, Why Women Should Care 
(2008). The following column appeared December 15, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What does the title suggest about this column’s subject? 
Does the context of the chapter help to clarify Parker’s topic?  
 As politicians compete to prove who loves the middle class more, they’re 
missing the elephant  and the donkey in the room.
 The middle class needs not just tax breaks and jobs but also marriage.  
 This is the finding of a new University of Virginia and Institute for American 
Values report, “The State of Our 
Unions,” which tracks the decline of 
marriage 
among 
the 
nearly 
60 
 percent of Americans who have high 
school but not college educations. 
This has far-reaching repercussions 
that are not only societal but eco-
nomic as well. By one estimate cited 
in the report, which was written by 
five family scholars, the cost to tax-
payers when stable families fail to 
form is about $112 billion annually—
or more than $1 trillion per decade. 
 Obviously, marriage or the lack 
thereof isn’t the only cause of our 
 deficit spending, but neither is it irrele-
vant. Consider that in the 1980s, only 
13  percent of children were born out-
side of marriage among moderately 
educated mothers. By the end of this 
century’s first decade, the number had 
risen to 44 percent. 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
415
 That we seem unfazed by these numbers suggests a lack of attention to the 
reasons marriage matters in the first place. It isn’t so that wedding planners can 
bilk daydreamers out of $50 billion a year or so that bridezillas can have reality 
TV shows. Marriage matters because children do best when raised in a stable 
environment with two committed parents, exceptions not with standing. 
 For whatever reasons—a fear of appearing judgmental or hypocritical, 
perhaps—no one makes a peep. Many of us, after all, have divorced. But this 
fact doesn’t mean that marriage is no longer important or that children’s needs 
have changed. Furthermore, this report isn’t concerned with the well- 
educated, who are typically better equipped to cope with dysfunction, finan-
cial or otherwise. 
 What happens to the other 60 percent? And what happens to a society 
upon whose beneficence the offspring of these broken or never-formed fami-
lies ultimately may depend? Why isn’t anyone talking about this? 
 In the past, dramatic family changes have prompted calls to national 
action. The Moynihan Report of 1965 focused attention on the alarming rise of 
African American children born out of wedlock. In the 1990s, rising divorce 
rates and single motherhood spawned a fatherhood movement and welfare 
reform. Recently, same-sex marriage has dominated our interests. 
 The hollowing out of marriage in middle America cries out for similarly 
impassioned action. As lead author Elizabeth Marquardt writes in the report:
 Marriage is not merely a private arrangement; it is also a complex social institu-
tion. Marriage fosters small cooperative unions—also known as stable families—
that enable children to thrive, shore up communities, and help family members to 
succeed during good times and to weather the bad times. Researchers are finding 
that the disappearance of marriage in Middle America is tracking with the disap-
pearance of the middle class in the same communities, a change that strikes at the 
very heart of the American Dream.  
 Our current debate about the fiscal cliff and entitlement spending can’t be 
separated from the breakdown of marriage. In the absence of stable families, 
economic and societal need increases. And while most good-hearted souls 
wish to help those in distress, we are essentially plugging holes in leaky boats. 
Shouldn’t we build better boats?
The report’s scholars suggest doing this with a series of federal and state 
proposals. One is to change the tax and welfare system, which frequently 
imposes financial penalties—up to 20 percent of family income—on low-
income couples who choose to marry. 
 Another suggestion is to triple the tax credit for children under age 3, 
which would have the added benefit of encouraging married people to have 
more children—much needed in the longer term to support the nation’s elderly. 
 These are but two of many, which can be viewed online at stateofourunions
.org, along with an urgent plea that President Obama include some of these 
thoughts in his State of the Union address next month [January 2013]. It insults 
no one to encourage couples to marry before having children, thus making a 
public as well as private commitment to love and care for them. 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

416 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 Perhaps most important, to ignore the marriage deficit among America’s 
middle class is essentially to be complicit in perpetuating a society of winners 
and losers. Those born to married, well-educated parents are more likely to 
prosper, while those born to fragmented families are more likely to repeat the 
patterns of their parents. 
 There in is a national tragedy worthy of our attention. 
Source: Washington Post, December 15, 2012. © 2012 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used 
by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
www.washingtonpost.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What publication has led to Parker’s essay? Who was studied? What does the 
study reveal? 
 2. Why does Parker believe that marriage matters? 
 3. What has been the country’s response to family changes in the past, according 
to the author? What seems to be occupying us today?  
 4. What are some of Parker’s suggestions for addressing the problem? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What type (genre) of argument is this? 
 6. What is Parker’s claim? State it to reveal the argument’s genre. 
 7. What, for the author, is the necessary first step in response to the issue? 
 8. Has Parker presented a convincing argument? If you don’t think so, how would 
you refute her?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. The study’s authors assert that marriage is “a complex social institution,” not 
just a “private arrangement.” Sociologists would agree with this statement. 
Have you thought about marriage in this way? Does it make sense to you? If 
you agree, then do you accept Parker’s conclusion that problems with marriage 
for one part of society are problems for all of us? If you disagree, how would 
you argue that this conclusion does not follow?  
 10. Parker asserts that to ignore this problem is for all of us to be “complicit in per-
petuating a society of winners and losers.” Do you accept the concept that if 
you are aware of a problem and fail to act, then you contribute to the conse-
quences of that problem? Reflect on this concept.  
 11. Do we want a society in which there are winners and losers, and some of the 
losers are children who have to overcome problems not of their doing? Reflect 
on this issue as well—or prepare to write on this issue.
15
16

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
417
 SUPREMACY CRIMES  
 
 GLORIA   STEINEM 
 Editor, writer, and lecturer, Gloria Steinem has been cited in  World Almanac  as one of 
the twenty-five most influential women in America. She is the cofounder of  Ms. 
 magazine and of the National Women’s Political Caucus and is the author of a number 
of books and many articles. The following article appeared in  Ms.  in the August/
September 1999 issue.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Who are the teens who commit most of the mass 
shootings at schools? Who are the adults who commit most of the hate crimes and 
sadistic killings? What generalizations can you make about these groups based on 
your knowledge from media coverage? 
 You’ve seen the ocean of television coverage, you’ve read the headlines: 
“How to Spot a Troubled Kid,” “Twisted Teens,” “When Teens Fall Apart.” 
 After the slaughter in Colorado that inspired those phrases, dozens of 
copycat threats were reported in the same generalized way: “Junior high stu-
dents charged with conspiracy to kill students and teachers” (in Texas); “Five 
honor students overheard planning a June graduation bombing” (in New 
York); “More than 100 minor threats reported statewide” (in Pennsylvania). In 
response, the White House held an emergency strategy session titled 
“Children, Violence, and Responsibility.” Nonetheless, another attack was 
soon reported: “Youth With 2 Guns Shoots 6 at Georgia School.” 
 I don’t know about you, but I’ve been talking back to the television set, 
waiting for someone to tell us the obvious: it’s not “youth,” “our children,” or 
“our teens.” It’s our sons—and “our” can usually be read as “white,” “middle 
class,” and “heterosexual.” 
 We know that hate crimes, violent and otherwise, are overwhelmingly 
committed by white men who are apparently straight. The same is true for 
an even higher percentage of impersonal, resentment-driven, mass killings 
like those in Colorado; the sort committed for no economic or rational gain 
except the need to say, “I’m superior because I can kill.” Think of Charles 
Starkweather, who reported feeling powerful and serene after murdering 
ten women and men in the 1950s; or the shooter who climbed the University 
of Texas Tower in 1966, raining down death to gain celebrity. Think of the 
engineering student at the University of Montreal who resented females’ 
ability to study that subject, and so shot to death 14 women students in 
1989, while saying, “I’m against feminism.” Think of nearly all those who 
have killed impersonally in the workplace, the post office, McDonald’s. 
 White males—usually intelligent, middle class, and heterosexual, or 
trying desperately to appear so—also account for virtually all the serial, 
sexually motivated, sadistic killings, those characterized by stalking, impris-
oning, torturing, and “owning” victims in death. Think of Edmund Kemper, 
who began by killing animals, then murdered his grandparents, yet was 
released to sexually torture and dismember college students and other 
young women until he himself decided he “didn’t want to kill all the coeds 
in the world.” Or David Berkowitz, the Son of Sam, who murdered some 
1
2
3
4
5

418 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
women in order to feel in control of all women. Or consider Ted Bundy, the 
charming, snobbish young would-be lawyer who tortured and murdered as 
many as 40 women, usually beautiful students who were symbols of the 
economic class he longed to join. As for John Wayne Gacy, he was obsessed 
with maintaining the public mask of masculinity, and so hid his homosexu-
ality by killing and burying men and boys with whom he had had sex. 
 These “senseless” killings begin to seem less mysterious when you con-
sider that they were committed disproportionately by white, non-poor males, 
the group most likely to become hooked on the drug of superiority. It’s a drug 
pushed by a male-dominant culture that presents dominance as a natural 
right; a racist hierarchy that falsely elevates whiteness; a materialist society 
that equates superiority with possessions; and a homophobic one that 
 empowers only one form of sexuality. 
 As Elliott Leyton reports in  Hunting Humans: The Rise of the Modern 
Multiple Murderer, these killers see their behavior as “an appropriate—even 
‘manly’—response to the frustrations and disappointments that are a normal 
part of life.” In other words, it’s not their life experiences that are the problem, 
it’s the impossible expectation of dominance to which they’ve become addicted. 
 This is not about blame. This is about causation. If anything, ending the 
massive cultural cover-up of supremacy crimes should make heroes out of boys 
and men who reject violence, especially those who reject the notion of superior-
ity altogether. Even if one believes in a biogenetic component of male aggres-
sion, the very existence of gentle men proves that socialization can override it. 
6
7
8
Outdoor rally for Congresswoman Giffords where a mass shooting occurred.

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
419
 Nor is this about attributing such crimes to a single cause. Addiction to 
the drug of supremacy is not their only root, just the deepest and most ignored 
one. Additional reasons why this country has such a high rate of violence 
include the plentiful guns that make killing seem as unreal as a video game; 
male violence in the media that desensitized viewers in much the same way 
that combat killers are desensitized in training; affluence that allows maximum 
access to violence-as-entertainment; a national history of genocide and slav-
ery; the romanticizing of frontier violence and organized crime; not to mention 
extremes of wealth and poverty and the illusion that both are deserved. 
 But it is truly remarkable, given the relative reasons for anger at injustice in 
this country, that white, non-poor men have a near-monopoly on multiple killings 
of strangers, whether serial and sadistic or mass and random. How can we ignore 
this obvious fact? Others may kill to improve their own condition, in self-defense, 
or for money or drugs; to eliminate enemies; to declare turf in drive-by  shootings; 
even for a jacket or a pair of sneakers—but white males addicted to supremacy 
kill even when it worsens their condition or ends in suicide. 
 Men of color and females are capable of serial and mass killing, and commit 
just enough to prove it. Think of Colin Ferguson, the crazed black man on the 
Long Island Railroad, or Wayne Williams, the young black man in Atlanta who 
kidnapped and killed black boys, apparently to conceal his  homosexuality. Think 
of Aileen Carol Wuornos, the white prostitute in Florida who killed abusive johns 
“in self-defense,” or Waneta Hoyt, the upstate New York woman who strangled 
her five infant children between 1965 and 1971, disguising their cause of death 
as sudden infant death syndrome. Such crimes are rare enough to leave a haunt-
ing refrain of disbelief as evoked in Pat Parker’s poem  “jonestown”: “Black folks 
do not/Black folks do not/Black folks do not commit suicide.” And yet they did. 
 Nonetheless, the proportion of serial killings that are not committed by 
white males is about the same as the proportion of anorexics who are not 
female. Yet we discuss the gender, race, and class components of anorexia, but 
not the role of the same factors in producing epidemics among the powerful. 
 The reasons are buried deep in the culture, so invisible that only by 
 reversing our assumptions can we reveal them. 
 Suppose, for instance, that young black males—or any other men of 
color—had carried out the slaughter in Colorado. Would the media reports be 
so willing to describe the murderers as “our children”? Would there be so little 
discussion about the boys’ race? Would experts be calling the motive a mys-
tery, or condemning the high school cliques for making those young men feel 
like “outsiders”? Would there be the same empathy for parents who gave the 
murderers luxurious homes, expensive cars, even rescued them from brushes 
with the law? Would there be as much attention to generalized causes, such as 
the dangers of violent video games and recipes for bombs on the Internet? 
 As for the victims, if racial identities had been reversed, would racism 
remain so little discussed? In fact, the killers themselves said they were target-
ing blacks and athletes. They used a racial epithet, shot a black male student 
in the head, and then laughed over the fact that they could see his brain. What 
if that had been reversed? 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

420 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 What if these two young murderers, who were called “fags” by some of 
the jocks at Columbine High School, actually had been gay? Would they have 
got the same sympathy for being gay-baited? What if they had been lovers? 
Would we hear as little about their sexuality as we now do, even though only 
their own homophobia could have given the word “fag” such power to 
 humiliate them? 
 Take one more leap of the imagination: suppose these killings had been 
planned and executed by young women—of any race, sexuality, or class. Would 
the media still be so disinterested in the role played by  gender-conditioning? 
Would journalists assume that female murderers had suffered from being shut 
out of access to power in high school, so much so that they were pushed 
beyond their limits? What if dozens, even hundreds of young women around 
the country had made imitative threats—as young men have done—expressing 
admiration for a well-planned massacre and promising to do the same? Would 
we be discussing their youth more than their gender, as is the case so far with 
these male killers? 
 I think we begin to see that our national self-examination is ignoring some-
thing fundamental, precisely because it’s like the air we breathe: the white 
male factor, the middle-class and heterosexual one, and the promise of supe-
riority it carries. Yet this denial is self-defeating—to say the least. We will never 
reduce the number of violent Americans, from bullies to killers, without chal-
lenging the assumptions on which masculinity is based: that males are superior 
to females, that they must find a place in a male hierarchy, and that the ability 
to dominate someone is so important that even a mere insult can justify lethal 
revenge. There are plenty of studies to support this view. As Dr. James Gilligan 
concluded in  Violence: Reflections on a National Epidemic,  “If humanity is to 
evolve beyond the propensity toward violence . . . then it can only do so by 
recognizing the extent to which the patriarchal code of honor and shame 
 generates and obligates male violence.” 
 I think the way out can only be found through a deeper reversal: just as we 
as a society have begun to raise our daughters more like our sons—more like 
whole people—we must begin to raise our sons more like our daughters—that 
is, to value empathy as well as hierarchy; to measure success by other people’s 
welfare as well as their own. 
 But first, we have to admit and name the truth about supremacy crimes. 
 Source:  Ms. magazine, August/September 1999. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What kinds of crimes is Steinem examining? What kinds of crimes is she 
excluding from her discussion?  
 2. 
What messages, according to Steinem, is our culture sending to white,  non-poor 
males? 
 3. 
How does Elliott Leyton explain these killers’ behavior? 
16
17
18
19
20

 
CHAPTER 17 Marriage and Gender Issues: The Debates Continue 
421
     4. What is the primary reason we have not examined serial and random killings 
correctly, in the author’s view? What is keeping us from seeing what we need 
to see? 
     5. What do we need to do to reduce “the number of violent Americans, from 
 bullies to killers”? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What is Steinem’s claim? Where does she state it? 
 7. What is her primary type of evidence? 
   8. How does Steinem qualify her claim and thereby anticipate and answer 
 counterarguments? In what paragraphs does she present qualifiers and coun-
terarguments to possible rebuttals? 
     9. How does the author seek to get her readers to understand that we are not 
thinking soundly about the mass killings at Columbine High School? Is her 
strategy an effective one? Why or why not?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
    10. Steinem concludes by writing that we must first “name the truth” about 
supremacy violence before we can begin to address the problem. Does this 
make sense to you? How can this be good advice for coping with most prob-
lems? Think of other kinds of problems that this approach might help solve. 
 11. Do you agree with Steinem’s analysis of the causes of serial and random kill-
ings? If yes, how would you add to her argument? If no, how would you refute 
her argument? 

 CHAPTER 18 
 Sports Talk—Sports Battles 
       
Signe Wilkinson Editorial Cartoon used with the permission of Signe Wilkinson, 
King Features Syndicate and the Cartoonist Group. All rights reserved.
READ: What scene is depicted? Where are we? What details answer these 
questions?
REASON: Why is the lion hiding under the bench? Why are his eyes not 
really covered? What issues does the cartoon address?
RELFECT/WRITE: What is Wilkinson’s view of the issue? Is he on target?

423
 S
ports, at all levels, offer us so much. Sports can be a great equalizer. Many 
successful football and basketball players started at public schools, won 
scholarships to college, and made it to careers in the NFL or NBA. Sports also 
bring diverse people together, playing in amateur competition or cheering on 
their local professional teams. 
 And yet, controversies of one kind or another are never far from the front 
pages. Millionaire professional players make the news for assault, for arrang-
ing dogfights, for cheating with drugs. Should we expect superstar players to 
be role models? Or, just great players whose skills—but not whose  lifestyles—
we admire? Some would argue that they make their money because we support 
their play; shouldn’t they feel an obligation to give back to the community? Is 
there a cult of privilege for athletes, beginning in high school, that can feed 
arrogance and a sense of being above the “rules” that govern the behavior of 
most people? 
 We can also ask about the role of sports in college. Although the original 
idea may have been to build strong bodies as well as strong minds, the reality is 
that Division I football and basketball are big business, pulling in big bucks for 
the schools and giving 18-year-olds a national stage on which to perform. 
Should these players see some of the money they “earn” for their schools? 
 These are some of the questions that authors in this chapter explore. After 
remembering the excitement and joy of cheering for a winning team, or partici-
pating in a victory for one’s school, consider the following questions as you 
study this chapter’s six essays. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS 
 1. 
Should the NCAA demand higher academic credentials for would-be college 
athletes and expect college players to carry typical course loads leading to 
graduation?  
 2. 
Should Division I football and basketball players be paid a salary in addition to 
their college scholarships?  
 3. 
How are women in sports faring since Title IX was enacted? Should we care?
 4. 
How much “enhancement” of athletes is fair? Should doping be legalized? 
 5. 
Are young people with athletic ability given too many free passes on bad 
behavior? 
THE LESSON OF PENN STATE  
JOHN  FEINSTEIN 
One of the hosts of a CBS morning sports radio show and a commentator on the Golf 
Channel, John Feinstein is one of today’s best-known sports commentators. He has 
written more than 20 books on a variety of sports and sports figures, including  A 
Good Walk Spoiled: Days and Nights on the PGA Tour  (1996) and  One on One: 
Behind the Scenes with the Greats in the Game  (2011). A regular writer for  Golf 
Digest and the  Washington Post, Feinstein expressed his views on the Penn State 
scandal on July 15, 2012.

424 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What do you know about the Penn State scandal? What 
lessons would you emphasize?  
 W hen the University of North Carolina wanted to name its new arena after 
basketball Coach Dean Smith in 1986, Smith objected, saying that arenas 
shouldn’t be named for coaches. He was talked into it by university officials, 
who said that it was what most alumni wanted. Smith has lived an exemplary 
life, but he was right: When you put someone’s name on a building, you 
immortalize him. 
 The living shouldn’t be immortalized. Joe Paterno was proof of that. 
 The report by former FBI director Louis Freeh on the Penn State scandal 
that rocked all of college athletics confirmed, as many feared, that Paterno, 
Penn State’s Hall of Fame football coach, who had an NCAA Division I record 
409 victories, was guilty of concealing the accusations of rape and child moles-
tation made against his former assistant, Jerry Sandusky. 
 The Freeh report makes clear that those who rioted after Paterno was 
fired last year should be even more ashamed of themselves now. Paterno’s 
legacy is no longer stained or tarnished—it is destroyed. Regardless of how 
many good things he did during his 62 years as a Penn State employee, the 
tragedy that he failed to stop overwhelms all the good he did. 
 But this tragedy should do something else, too: remind everyone involved 
in college athletics that  no coach, regardless of how many games he wins, how 
many players he graduates or how much money he raises for the university, 
should be allowed to have the absolute power that Paterno wielded. Absolute 
power doesn’t always corrupt absolutely, but it absolutely can corrupt. 
 Penn State certainly isn’t the only school where a coach is the most power-
ful figure. Years ago, the president of the University of Oklahoma  commented—
perhaps half-jokingly—that he hoped to build a university worthy of the 
football program. Two years ago, when Ohio State’s football team was being 
investigated for multiple NCAA violations, President Gordon Gee was asked 
whether he had considered firing Coach Jim Tressel. “Fire him?” Gee 
responded. “I just hope he doesn’t fire  me. ” 
 That’s called kidding on the square. Only after it became clear that Tressel 
had been aware of many of the violations and covered them up was he finally 
removed. Even then, he was allowed to “resign.” 
 Coaches who win championships are huge moneymakers for their schools. 
Winning teams lead to more admissions applications and, far more important, 
massive contributions from alumni and boosters. Whenever Duke University 
mounts a major fundraising campaign, the centerpiece is men’s basketball 
Coach Mike Krzyzewski, who has won four national championships and is the 
winningest coach in men’s college basketball history. 
 Krzyzewski’s off-court record is at least as laudable as his on-court record. 
Virtually all of his players graduate and he has raised countless dollars for vari-
ous charitable causes as well as Duke. 
 That’s fine. But no college coach should be placed on the pedestal that 
Paterno was put on at Penn State. That pedestal is what prevented then- 
President Graham Spanier from stepping up in 2001, when a graduate 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
425
assistant coach told Paterno that he had seen Sandusky in a university shower 
sexually assaulting a 10-year-old boy. Instead of ruling that the  only option was 
to notify authorities, Spanier and the university’s athletic director allowed 
Paterno to dictate the school’s course of action—which was no action at all. 
 Many, if not most, iconic coaches are accorded that status merely because 
they win. Kentucky men’s basketball Coach John Calipari has built his national 
championship program around players who turn pro after one year in college. 
He’s not the only coach who recruits such “one-and-dones”; he just does it 
better than anyone. Calipari is easily the most powerful man in Kentucky. Very 
few people who follow Kentucky basketball care whether any of Calipari’s 
players graduate. That will be the case as long as his teams continue to con-
tend regularly for the national championship. 
 That shouldn’t be true anywhere, but it is true almost everywhere, espe-
cially those places where a coach has won for many years. 
 College presidents love to talk about the importance of academics and 
refer to football and basketball players as “student-athletes.” They set them-
selves up as bastions of righteousness even as they let coaches run amok in 
the name of winning games and making money. 
 This is an opportunity for presidents to do something other than preen. 
They should take steps to ensure that no coach can ever again have the abso-
lute power Paterno wielded. They should stop giving coaches multimillion-
dollar contracts. They should stop building statues and naming stadiums, 
arenas and basketball courts for them—especially while the coaches are still 
active. They should also stop asking them to raise funds. Tell them to coach 
their teams and try to see to it that their players graduate. Period. 
Source: Washington Post, July 15, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
How did Paterno become proof that living people ought not to be “immortalized”?  
 2. 
Who did what at Penn State? 
 3. 
What status have some college coaches achieved? Why? 
 4. 
What do some coaches ignore in the quest for successful teams? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What, for Feinstein, is the lesson of Penn State; that is, what is his claim? 
 6. 
Where does he state it? What does he gain by his placement? How does he sup-
port his claim?  
 7. 
What specific recommendations does the author list as a way to keep a coach’s 
power in check?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Do you agree that some college football and basketball coaches have been 
allowed too much power? If yes, why? If no, why not?  
11
12
13
14

426 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 9. Why did the Penn State situation develop? Who should be held accountable? 
 10. What suggestions do you have for changing the culture of winning at Division 
I colleges?
 SHOW THEM THE MONEY   
 DONALD H.   YEE 
 A graduate of UCLA and the University of Virginia School of Law, Donald Yee is a 
 partner in Yee & Dubin Sports, a Los Angeles–based sports management firm 
 representing many professional players and coaches. Yee is a frequent speaker on 
sports-related issues and is an adjunct professor of law at the University of Southern 
California. “Show Them the Money” was published August 22, 2010, in the 
 Washington Post.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Are the NCAA rules too strict? Are they unrealistic? 
 The Church of College Football is about to open for services. It is perhaps 
the most passionate religion we have in this country, a seductive blend of our 
most popular sport and the romantic notion that the young athletes are play-
ing for their schools, not for money. 
 Two championship coaches recently launched attacks on sports agents for 
allegedly defiling this house of worship by giving college players what the 
National Collegiate Athletic Association calls “impermissible benefits”— benefits 
that make those players pros and not amateurs. “The agents that do this, and I 
hate to say this, but how are they any better than a pimp?” Alabama’s Nick 
Saban so memorably put it last month. “I have no respect for people who do 
that to young people. None.” And Florida’s Urban Meyer said that the problem 
is “epidemic right now” and that agents and their associates need to be 
“severely punished.” 
 Yet, I suspect that virtually everyone in our industry—players, coaches, 
administrators, boosters, agents and fans—shed our naivete a long time ago. 
We know that the sole focus for many star college players is getting ready for 
pro ball, that coaches are looking for financial security on the backs of teenag-
ers and that boosters enjoy 
the ego stroke that comes 
with virtually owning a 
piece of a team. There isn’t 
anything inherently wrong 
with these goals, but there 
isn’t anything “amateur” 
about the process, either. 
 And we know that while 
college 
football 
players 
aren’t getting a W-2, they 
are getting paid to play the 
game. It’s a straightforward 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
427
business transaction: You play for us, we give you a one-year scholarship, renew-
able at the head coach’s discretion. In some cases, rules are broken by schools or 
other parties so that relatives and other associates of the players can be 
paid, too. 
 I’ve had the privilege of representing professional athletes and coaches 
for more than 20 years, and I’ve had a front-row seat to observe the NCAA’s 
brand of amateurism. I’ve heard many times about events that would consti-
tute NCAA rule violations—some were egregious, many weren’t. Some 
 athletes take money from agents, marketers or others simply because they are 
hungry (the scholarship is not always enough to buy food). Yes, there are some 
people out there with malicious agendas, but there are also many people who 
act in good faith with an  allegiance to the integrity of the sport.
 The primary culprit isn’t the people around the game; it’s the NCAA’s 
 legislated view of amateurism. It lacks intellectual integrity and is terribly 
unnecessary—particularly when better alternatives exist. 
 Two developments this spring demonstrate why the sham of amateurism 
should come to an end. 
 The Pacific-10 Conference’s luring of teams from the Mountain West 
and Big 12 conferences, which caused some scrambling in June, had  nothing 
to do with education or amateur sports. It really didn’t have anything to do 
with football or its traditions, either. It had everything to do with money. 
Saddled with expiring television contracts, the Pac-10 wanted to get bigger 
so it could command larger contracts in its next round of negotiating and 
possibly launch its own TV network. With the addition of the University of 
Utah and the University of Colorado, the Pac-10’s revenues will grow. Its 
coaches will make more money, and its players will get bigger and shinier 
facilities, fancier menus, cushier dorms, more stylish travel arrangements 
and other perks. 
 The average Pac-10 student will see none of this. 
 Around the same time as the realignment, the University of Southern 
California, home of one of the premier college football programs, suffered a 
major embarrassment when Reggie Bush, who starred at tailback for the 
Trojans in the mid-2000s, was found to have received lavish gifts from a sports 
marketer. According to the NCAA, Bush was, in effect, a pro while he was in 
college, and the university knew it. The NCAA concluded that USC demon-
strated a “lack of institutional control” over its football program. The team 
received a two-year postseason ban, lost 30 scholarships over three seasons 
and vacated its victories from the period when Bush was deemed to have 
been ineligible—including the 2004 national championship season. 
 Bush is long gone, now an NFL millionaire. His former USC head coach, Pete 
Carroll, is long gone, also now an NFL millionaire. Many of the assistant coaches 
who were there at the time are gone as well, and also became  millionaires (e.g. 
University of Washington head coach Steve Sarkisian). Some left and then came 
back as millionaires (e.g. new head coach Lane Kiffin). Left to suffer the penalties 
are the current players, many of whom were in middle school or high school 
when Bush played. 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

428 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 The controversy over USC continues: Are the findings accurate? Should 
Carroll have done more, earlier? Is the punishment excessive? The answers 
won’t matter, because I have no doubt that Bush-like situations will continue 
to emerge throughout college football. This sort of thing has been going on 
for years, and the incentives to keep it up are too strong in the current 
system. 
 What needs to change is the entire attitude toward college football. This 
is the perfect time to implement an honest approach to the combination of 
big-time football and higher education, an approach that eliminates the 
NCAA’s notion of amateurism. College football generates huge revenues, and 
there is plenty of money to create a win-win business model for players, 
coaches and universities. A big business deserves market-driven reform, free 
of hypocrisy. Here are 10 steps to accomplish that. 
 1. All of the major football-playing universities should lease the rights 
to operate a commercial football program on behalf of the university to 
an independent, outside company. For example, the University of Southern 
California would contract with USC Football Inc. Such leases would be open to 
bidding—schools such as Notre Dame, USC and Texas could generate  massive 
revenue. USC football could look exactly as it does now, except USC Football 
Inc. would have paid for the right to operate it. The university and the  company 
would share net profits from all revenue streams at a negotiated level. Can you 
imagine how much more revenue schools could garner if, for instance, they 
were allowed to sell more ad space on uniforms? 
 This would not be a new business structure for major universities; many 
already use similar arrangements for other ventures. For example, many major 
athletic departments now sell their marketing rights to outside companies, 
and the majority of schools (and the NCAA) contract with the Collegiate 
Licensing Company to market and license their trademarks. 
 Some universities would find that the marketplace doesn’t have any inter-
est in their programs. This means that business people think football is a 
money-loser for those schools. So those schools should drop football and 
 allocate the money to their core objective: educating students. 
 2. Each university’s football corporation could create leagues, 
whether long- or short-term, with other corporations.  There wouldn’t have 
to be any allegiance to geography, fan loyalties or tradition. For example, 
some of these leagues could be premised on budget size. To a large degree, 
this is already being done; it’s called the BCS. A group of conferences formed 
the BCS, or Bowl Championship Series, and decided to exclude other 
conferences. 
 Or the football corporations could decide to avoid joining a league,  simply 
scheduling games as a free agent. Again, this is hardly novel—Notre Dame 
has done it for years, and Brigham Young University is contemplating it now—
so this arrangement would simply formalize and spread the practice. 
 3. All of the players would be paid a salary, whatever the market 
would bear. Players would no longer receive scholarships. Just as in the pros, 
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
429
they would be paid based on their perceived value to their program. If an out-
standing high school player is coveted, he should be allowed to experience 
the fruits of American capitalism. Prominent high school players entering 
 college are no different than prominent college players entering the NFL—
they can bring excitement and new revenue to a program. No one, for 
instance, can deny the excitement, revenue and attention that Bush brought 
to USC. The players would pay income taxes; the football corporations would 
pay Social Security taxes; 401(k) plans could be established. 
 USC Football Inc. would be free to recruit a player any way it wants, with 
anything it wants, say, an iPhone and plane tickets for his parents. If a player 
feels misled in the recruiting process, he could sue for fraud. Each program 
would be reliant on the business acumen of its operators and subject to 
 whatever profit-margin goal it chooses. 
 4. The corporations could offer a range of educational opportunities.  
Academically gifted players could take regular university courses, if they could 
have gained admission on their own merit. Others may be more interested in 
vocational training or other specialty classes. Either way, average students 
would no longer lose a chance at admission because the university made an 
exception for an academically less qualified athlete. And athletes would have 
a broader array of course offerings. Some may even choose not to attend 
classes and simply focus on honing their football skills. 
 5. The NCAA can be eliminated, at least as it relates to football. Many 
of its rules are archaic and frankly gibberish. The NCAA itself states that it 
does not have subpoena power, which is one way of admitting that  enforcement 
of its rules is difficult. 
 6. Universities could scrap much of their athletic administrations, just 
as Vanderbilt University has done. The chief executive of, say, USC Football 
Inc. would make decisions, and her mandate would be to ensure that the 
operation was self-sufficient—no student fees (or taxpayer dollars, in the case 
of a public  university) would be used to subsidize the football program or 
facilities. Any profits flowing back to the university could go directly to sup-
port the general student body and faculty. As it stands now, large public 
 universities across the country employ sizable staffs in their athletic depart-
ments; these public employees (including the coaches) are entitled to public 
benefits and  pensions, which are a drain on public resources. 
 7. Congress and state legislatures wouldn’t have to waste time inves-
tigating or discussing the regulation of college football.  So long as these 
new corporations mind the same business laws that apply to Apple or General 
Electric, our representatives could devote their energies elsewhere. 
 8. Coaches could focus strictly on coaching.  They would be employees 
of the corporation, not the university. Lane Kiffin wouldn’t have to worry about 
monitoring every player’s vehicle of choice or whether a booster is buying 
meals for his quarterback. And Nick Saban wouldn’t have to waste his time 
discussing “pimps.” In this system, players could take money from agents or 
marketers because their amateurism wouldn’t be at stake. 
20
21
22
23
24
25

430 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 9. Universities could focus on their core mission of educating students. 
University presidents wouldn’t have to waste their time monitoring a football 
program, and they wouldn’t have to attend any more NCAA functions. 
 10. Finally, this system would end the tiresome sports media discus-
sions of whether this player or that player was paid. We could say without 
any hint of sarcasm, speculation or cynicism that yes, he was. 
 Source:  Washington Post, August 22, 2010. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What is Yee’s subject? 
 2. What two situations are used to illustrate the “sham of amateurism” in college 
football?  
  3. What would some colleges discover if they sought to lease their football 
 program to an outside management firm? 
  4. What options would athletes have under an outside corporation system? 
  5. What advantage would Yee’s recommendations have for both coaches and 
colleges?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  6. What is Yee’s claim? What is the core of his argument? 
  7. Examine the author’s introduction. What makes it clever? 
  8. What does Yee gain by presenting his proposal in a list of ten points? What 
effect on readers does he seek with this strategy? 
  9. Is it possible to agree with Yee that there is a problem and still reject his propos-
als? Is it possible to accept some of his suggestions? If so, which ones? If not, 
why not?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. Do you agree that we “worship” college football? Is that an accurate account of 
the country’s fall weekends? (Have you ever counted the number of televised 
games?) 
   11. Do you agree that, in spite of the romanticism surrounding college sports, most 
people are not naïve; most understand that it is big business and that NCAA 
rules are regularly ignored? If you disagree, how would you counter Yee? If 
you agree, then are you prepared to accept the author’s proposals? Why or 
why not?  
 12. In what sense is it incorrect to say that college athletes are unpaid? 
 13. Is it right to ask college athletes to pretend to be students, if that is not their 
interest? 
26
27

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
431
 RATHER THAN PAY ATHLETES, 
SHOW THEM RESPECT   
      SALLY   JENKINS 
 A sportswriter for the  Washington Post  for a number of years, Sally Jenkins left in 
1990 to work at  Sports Illustrated and write a number of books, mostly about sports 
figures. She has a book written with Dean Smith about his years in college basketball. 
In 2000 she published, with Lance Armstrong,  It’s Not About the Bike: My Journey 
Back to Life. Her 2007 book  The Real All Americans  narrates the story of Jim Thorpe 
and the football players of the Carlisle Indian School. In 2000 Jenkins returned to the 
 Post. The following column appeared there on November 4, 2011.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS What athletes is Jenkins probably writing about? How 
valuable is respect—for anyone?  
You may have noticed that the people in college football are the tiniest bit 
obsessed with money, from light-fingered bowl executives to numb-voiced 
university presidents droning about “impermissible benefits” while pocketing 
seven figures. Alabama’s $4 million coach, Nick Saban, looks like he should be 
cruising on a yacht sipping Bacardi to the soft throb of a marine engine. No 
wonder players are preoccupied with compensation, and the answer to every 
NCAA scandal or controversy lately amounts to, “Pay us.”
 Look, I  know the money is indecent and the NCAA system is blatantly unfair to 
athletes. The Southeastern Conference made $1 billion last year, and it would be 
nice if some of that reached the players at No. 1 LSU and No. 2 Alabama, whose 
individual sweat gives Saturday’s matchup its commercial value. But there seems to 
be a misconception that if we pry a couple thousand out of NCAA President Mark 
Emmert’s personal wallet and hand it to Alabama running back Trent Richardson, 
that will make everything right. It won’t. Though it would be satisfying. 
 Paying players isn’t the answer—not because it’s wrong or violates some 
creaking old amateur code, but because we have yet to devise a fair, feasible 
way that won’t create more inequities, killing scholarships in other sports, not 
to mention creating regulatory nightmares and legal uncertainties. In the mean-
time, we have a much deeper, underlying problem to solve. What college ath-
letes need from us, more than cash, is a fundamental shift in how we view them. 
 Pay them? We don’t even respect them. 
 When you watch LSU and Alabama this weekend, ask yourself what you 
really think about the players on the field, underneath your admiration for 
their physical skill. Deep down. Do you really believe they belong at a univer-
sity, or does some part of you think they’re just muscled-up entertainers and 
users, fake students who don’t think, read or aspire academically? 
 In 2007, Cal-Berkeley education professor Herbert D. Simons published a 
study of more than 500 college athletes entitled “The Athlete Stigma in Higher 
Education.” Here is what he found: 62 percent of them experienced negative 
perceptions and stereotyping. Athletes reported that their professors made 
negative comments about jocks in class, as did fellow students. When they 
asked professors for leeway to meet their practice schedules, 61.5 percent were 
refused, or suspected or accused of cheating, compared to 6 percent of whites. 
1
2
3
4
5
6

432 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 Generally, Simons concluded, athletes were perceived as having “low 
intelligence, little academic motivation, and receiving undeserved benefits 
and privileges,” and treated as if they harmed the academic reputation of the 
university. Just 15 percent felt they were positively perceived. 
 Before we can sort out how to close the gap in pay, we have to close this 
gap in perception. We can start by treating athletes as if they’re worth more 
than a licensing fee. 
 “There are some educational steps we could take that would be every bit 
as valuable, if not more, than trying to answer the problems with financial 
issues,” says Derek Van Rheenen, an education researcher and director of 
Cal’s Athletic Study Center who was an all-American soccer player. 
 When we watch Alabama and LSU, let’s try a thought experiment. Take a 
moment, at some point during the game, to think about Trent Richardson as 
an intelligent man with his helmet off who is majoring in business with a 3.26 
grade-point average, and carrying the expectations of his family back in a 
Pensacola, Fla., housing project. Think of the tension he must feel, barked at 
by coaches if he gets too distracted by books, yet sneered at by teachers if he 
falls asleep in class. Consider the 40 hours a week he puts into grueling physi-
cal practice and weightlifting, followed by film study and game-planning, an 
intellectual load comparable to any class he takes. 
 “It’s an absolute skill to read the game, it requires cognitive and intellec-
tual ability,” Van Rheenen says. Players “are literally looking at cues and 
prompts, like an avid reader does. People don’t give credit to athletes, 
because they think it’s instinctive. It’s not. It’s cognitive.” 
 When you watch players on both sides, imagine how it feels to do home-
work at midnight with head nodding and limbs throbbing from soreness or 
injury, a fatigue no one else understands. Yet despite this, they will graduate at 
a higher rate than their peers. The latest graduation success rate numbers for 
the ’Bama team was 69 percent last year; LSU’s 77 percent, both considerably 
higher than the national rate for all students. 
 Unmotivated? Low intelligence? Harmful to academic integrity? 
 The dirty little secret of college sports is not that Richardson and his team-
mates are on the bottom rung in compensation, driven into an underground 
economy. It’s that they are on the bottom rung of expectations. Too many 
NCAA presidents secretly believe they are unworthy of teaching, and should 
be grateful just to be on campus. 
 Ask yourself if one reason we jump at the idea of pay-for-play is because it 
sounds easier than actually educating them. Payment is a pain reliever; it 
would make some people, including athletes, feel a little better. But it’s an 
Anacin solution, not a cure, and we need to think more creatively. 
 The real crux of what plagues college athletics is this: A relatively small 
number of high-profile athletes, isolated in two commercial sports, enjoy 
scholarships (and some extracurricular benefits) while having what we con-
sider to be weak connections to their classrooms. Division I football and bas-
ketball have become so heavily commercialized and so demanding that we 
worry the value of a scholarship is not an equitable or genuine repayment-in-
kind for athletes any more. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
433
 But why isn’t enhancing their scholarship just as good an answer as hand-
ing them cash? 
 What if we gave them better tools and services, more academic credit 
toward degrees, and more support and incentives? 
 Tony Smith, the captain of the Cal football team in 1992, received his PhD 
in education and is now the superintendent of schools in Oakland. He sug-
gests that instead of cash payouts we talk about putting licensing money from 
jersey sales in an incentive fund that every graduating member of a team gets 
an equal cut of. A small account might coax them toward a degree and help 
them transition when they leave school. 
Money can be a mark of respect—or not. It can also be a form of dismissal. 
If you want a kid to feel less used, don’t just pay him. Try honoring him.   
Source: Washington Post, November 4, 2011. © 2011 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used 
by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. www.
washingtonpost.com
QUESTIONS FOR READING
 1. Why is paying college players a bad idea, in Jenkins’s view? 
 2. What attitudes toward football players does the author think many people hold?  
 3. What did Simons’s study of college athletes reveal about how they were 
perceived? 
 4. How do Alabama and LSU football players’ graduation rates compare to those 
of college students in general?  
 5. What realities of Division I college football and basketball contribute to the per-
ception that those who play are not likely to be serious students?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What type (genre) of argument is this? State Jenkins’s claim in a way that makes 
its type clear. 
 7. In addition to showing more respect to college players, what other actions does 
Jenkins recommend? Do you agree with some—or all or none—of these solu-
tions? Why? 
 8. The author suggests that paying the players might be an easy way to avoid 
seeking to teach and help the players, an easy way to paint over our attitudes 
toward the players. Do you agree with her analysis? Why or why not?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. What stats surprise you the most? Why? 
 10. Jenkins presents the views of an educator who argues that athletic prowess is 
not instinct as much as cognitive skill. Is this a new idea for you? Does it make 
sense? Why or why not?  
   11. Whose argument is more convincing, Yee’s or Jenkins’s? Why? Defend your choice.  
17
18
19
20

434 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 WHERE HAVE ALL THE GOOD 
COACHES GONE?  
        MEGAN  GREENWELL 
A former reporter at the  Washington Post, Megan Greenwell has been a sports col-
umnist at  Good magazine and is currently a senior editor at  ESPN the Magazine. She 
is also the cofounder and editor of  Tomorrow magazine. The following article was 
published July 29, 2012.
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Have you played for coaches who were supportive and 
good role models? How important are good coaches for young players?    
 I once had a soccer coach who stalked the sideline in cowboy boots, snarling 
helpful commentary such as “Man up!” and “Don’t be a sissy!” When I broke 
my arm diving for a ball during practice, he asked if I was going to “cry like a 
girl” or get back in position. Being a 14-year-old girl, I cried. 
 I have never played for anyone else who seemed to disdain girls quite like 
Coach Cowboy Boots, but he did have something in common with every other 
coach I had during 15 years of playing organized sports: a Y chromosome. 
From kindergarten rec-league soccer through two years of Division I college 
fencing, I never played for a female coach. 
 That puts me in good company. Female college athletes have never been 
less likely to have a female coach. The same trend holds in this [2012] sum-
mer’s Olympics: Of the five sports in which the United States is fielding a wom-
en’s team under a single head coach—basketball, field hockey, soccer, 
volleyball and water polo—only the soccer coach is a woman. 
 Surprised? After all, opportunities for female athletes have skyrocketed 
since Title IX prohibited gender-based discrimination in educational institutions 
1
2
3
4
Allyson Felix wins the 200-meter race at the 2012 Olympics.

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
435
40 years ago this summer. More than 200,000 women play college sports today, 
compared with 16,000 in 1972. When the Olympics opened on Friday, the U.S. 
team included more female athletes than male ones for the first time. 
 And there’s the dirty little secret of Title IX: Female coaches have become 
a casualty of the same law that provided such huge benefits to female athletes. 
In 1972, more than 90 percent of the people coaching women’s teams were 
women. Today, that number is 43 percent, according to data compiled by two 
retired Brooklyn College professors who have tracked the number of female 
college athletes and coaches in the United States since Title IX became law. 
 The explanation for the downward trend is as simple as it is discouraging. 
By legitimizing women’s sports, Title IX bestowed a new level of respect—and 
significantly higher salaries—on college coaching jobs, transforming them 
from passion projects for the most dedicated women’s sports advocates to 
serious career paths. When she began her career at the University of Tennessee 
in 1974, legendary basketball coach Pat Summitt earned $250 a month. Before 
retiring at the end of last season, she drew a salary of more than $2 million. 
 As soon as salaries began to rise, more men became interested in jobs 
coaching women, says Judy Sweet, a longtime athletics administrator who 
became the NCAA’s first-ever female athletic director of a combined men’s 
and women’s program at the University of California at San Diego in 1975. 
Assistant coaches of men’s teams saw a chance to be promoted faster by 
applying to head-coach jobs on the women’s side. Job opportunities doubled 
for graduating male athletes who weren’t going pro but wanted to stay in the 
game. Athletic directors, whose ranks have always been overwhelmingly male, 
increasingly hired other men for open positions. 
 The result has been a consistent decrease in the percentage of female 
coaches. In 1987, the share of women’s teams coached by women dipped 
below 50 percent for the first time. Since 2000, men have been hired for more 
than two-thirds of open jobs coaching women’s teams. 
 “In too many cases, athletic directors take the easy way out,” Sweet says. 
“Instead of actively recruiting outside of their networks, they hire the people 
they already know, and their networks are likely to be male-dominated.” 
 In other words, the institutional factors that have kept women out of 
 coaching in the Title IX era are the same ones that have kept them out of the 
ranks of executives and partners and board members. Study after study shows 
that men are more likely to hire other men across many professions, even 
when there are equally or better-qualified female candidates. That gradually 
discourages many women from applying for those positions, exacerbating the 
problem. 
 Meanwhile, women are almost never seriously considered for jobs 
 coaching men—not a single woman coaches male Division I athletes in a team 
sport—so the total proportion of female coaches is less than 20 percent. The 
percentage of female coaches increases slightly at schools where a woman 
heads the athletic department but remains under 50 percent. 
 When girls and young women don’t have the chance to be coached by 
women, they lose an opportunity to have strong female role models. Having 
exclusively male coaches sends female athletes the message that coaching jobs 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

436 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
aren’t for them. And when athletic directors consistently hire men over similarly 
qualified women, they send the message that men make better leaders. 
 Because I never had a female coach, my female sports role models were 
exclusively athletes, from Florence Griffith Joyner to Brandi Chastain. I was 15 
when Chastain scored the championship-winning penalty kick in the 1999 
World Cup, then ripped off her jersey in celebration. Though I was no longer 
playing soccer, I wanted to be just like her. 
 Chastain says that aside from serving as mentors, female coaches show their 
athletes a viable career path in the sport to which they’ve dedicated their lives. 
After the Women’s Professional Soccer league folded this year—the  second 
failed attempt to create a U.S. pro league—coaching college teams is one of 
the only ways for retired players to make a living in the game. And though the 
best female basketball players can get by in the WNBA, where salaries range 
from $36,570 to $105,000, coaching offers a much more stable option. Title IX 
was just the first step toward legitimizing women’s sports; fully leveling the play-
ing field means giving women a chance to make their game their career. 
 “Ultimately, I hope that women stay in sports if they’ve played their whole 
life and gained all this experience,” Chastain says. “I would hope that they 
would be able to share it.” 
 Chastain, 44, had a roughly equal number of male and female coaches during 
her soccer career, but she knows that’s increasingly rare for younger athletes. The 
generation gap is apparent among coaches as well—especially in basketball, the 
most prominent women’s college sport, which has seen the percentage of female 
coaches drop from 79.4 to 59.5 percent in the Title IX era. The most prominent 
female college coaches—Summitt, Stanford’s Tara VanDerveer and Rutger’s C. 
Vivian Stringer, among others—are either retired or in the twilight of their careers. 
Although Summitt was replaced by a female assistant coach, the percentage of paid 
female assistant coaches has dropped in the past 20 years, weakening the pipeline. 
 Sweet and an alliance of women are trying to reverse the trend. In 2003, 
Celia Slater, then the women’s basketball coach at Division II Lynn University in 
Boca Raton, FL, earned an NCAA sponsorship for a series of four-day workshops 
designed to boost female college coaches’ leadership and communication skills 
as well as their networks. Last year, Slater and Sweet expanded the effort into 
the Alliance of Women Coaches, a professional-development group for coaches 
at any level that aims to increase the number of women in sports leadership. 
 But Sweet says she’s not optimistic. “I wish I could say I think the numbers 
are about to stop going down, but the signs don’t point that way,” she says. 
“It requires breaking this cycle of male university presidents hiring male board 
members hiring male athletic directors hiring male coaches.” 
 Qualified female candidates are out there, agrees Chastian, who volun-
teers as an assistant coach under her husband, Santa Clara University women’s 
soccer coach Jerry Smith. Asked if she’s considered becoming a professional 
coach, she sighs. 
“ I’ve put myself out there to U.S. Soccer and others several times, and I 
haven’t heard back,” she says. “I’m hoping it will happen at some point.” 
Source: Washington Post, July 29, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
437
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What did all of the author’s coaches have in common? 
 2. How many women play college sports today? 
 3. When Title IX was passed, what percentage of coaches of women’s teams were 
women? What percentage of coaches of women’s teams today are women? For 
all collegiate teams—men’s and women’s—what percentage do women coach?  
 4. What has caused the big shift to more male coaches? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What type (genre) of argument is this? What is Greenwell’s claim? State it so 
that the argument type is clear. 
 6. What kinds of evidence does the author present? 
 7. Greenwell asks readers if we are surprised to learn how few female coaches 
there are. Are you surprised? What is ironic about the loss of female coaches 
during the Title IX era?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. Do you agree that the relatively small number of female coaches is a prob-
lem for female athletes—or for fairness in the workplace? If yes, why? If no, 
why not?  
 9. What has happened in college coaching is not unique. What other fields can 
you name that have seen an increase in male workers when incomes in those 
fields have increased? 
 10. What might be advantageous for both men and women when more men enter 
fields previously dominated by women? Are there also advantages to more 
women entering fields previously dominated by men? Ponder these questions 
and be prepared to discuss and write about them.  
 HOW TO GET DOPING OUT OF SPORTS  
JONATHAN  VAUGHTERS 
Jonathan Vaughters biked professionally for ten years, set the record up Mount 
Ventoux, and was a member of Lance Armstrong’s team. Now retired from 
 competing, Vaughters is CEO and General Manager of Slipstream Sports, a sports 
management company and the Garmin-Sharp cycling team. He has also confessed to 
doping and was a key witness against Armstrong at the United States Anti-Doping 
Agency’s hearings. His plea for keeping doping out of sports was published in the 
 New York Times on August 12, 2012.
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Do you think that anyone has the answer to controlling 
doping? Possibly a former professional cyclist? 
  W hy does an athlete dope? I know why, because I faced that choice. 
 My life on a bike started in middle school. When the buzzer on my Goofy 
clock snapped on at 5:30 a.m., I popped out of bed with excitement and 
1
2

438 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
purpose. Rushing down the stairs, I stretched 20 some odd layers of still 
baggy spandex onto my 90-pound skeleton and flew out of the garage. Into 
the dark, freezing Colorado morning I rode. For the next 30 miles, I pushed 
my heart rate as high as it would go and the pedals as fast as they would go, 
giving various extremities frostbite and giving my parents cause to question 
my sanity. 
 These early rides make up many of my memories from my teenage years; 
the crashes, the adrenaline and the discipline of training every day. But the 
most vivid memory from those rides was how I dreamed. 
 As I sped through the neighborhoods of suburban Denver, my mind was 
anywhere but. I was climbing the great alpine passes of the Tour de France. 
Erased from my mind were the bullies at school, the money troubles at home 
and the sad fact that no one wanted to go to homecoming with me. I found 
escape in this dream, and when I returned to reality, I decided there was no 
amount of hard work, suffering, discipline and sacrifice that would keep me 
from achieving this dream. Determination didn’t begin to describe what I felt 
inside. I felt destined. 
 Achieving childhood dreams is a hard road. I found that to be only truer as 
the years and miles passed. First, there is the physical effort of riding 20,000 
miles a year for 10 straight years to even get within spitting distance of ever rid-
ing the Tour de France. Then comes the strain on your family as they try to sup-
port, or at least understand, such a singular focus. Next, the loss of friends and 
social contact. While most of my friends were at prom, I was in bed early for a 
race the next day. During graduation, I drove my mom’s ’78 Oldsmobile across 
the country to a race where I might get “noticed.” And while most kids went on 
to college, I went to a cold-water apartment in Spain, hoping to make it big. 
 People who end up living their dreams are not those who are lucky and 
gifted, but those who are stubborn, resolute and willing to sacrifice. Now, 
imagine you’ve paid the dues, you’ve done the work, you’ve got the talent, 
and your resolve is solid as concrete. At that point, the dream is 98 percent 
complete but there is that last little bit you need to become great. 
 T hen, just short of finally living your childhood dream, you are told, either 
straight out or implicitly, by some coaches, mentors, even the boss, that you 
aren’t going to make it, unless you cheat. Unless you choose to dope. Doping 
can be that last 2 percent. It would keep your dream alive, at least in the eyes 
of those who couldn’t see your heart. However, you’d have to lie. Lie to your 
mother, your friends, your fans. Lie to the world. This has been the harsh real-
ity laid out before many of the most talented, hardest working and biggest 
dreaming athletes. 
 How much does that last 2 percent really matter? In elite athletics, 2  percent 
of time or power or strength is an eternity. It is the difference in time between 
running 100 meters in 9.8 seconds and 10 seconds. In swimming it’s between 
first and ninth place in the 100-meter breaststroke. And in the Tour de France, 
2 percent is the difference between first and 100th place in overall time. 
 To be clear, running a 9.8 (or faster), winning the 100-meter breaststroke 
or winning the Tour de France are all very possible and have been done 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
439
without doping. But it is also clear that winning isn’t possible if antidoping 
regulations aren’t enforced. If you just said no when the antidoping regula-
tions weren’t enforced, then you were deciding to end your dream, because 
you could not be competitive. It’s the hard fact of doping. The answer is not to 
teach young athletes that giving up lifelong dreams is better than giving in to 
cheating. The answer is to never give them the option. The only way to elimi-
nate this choice is to put our greatest efforts into antidoping enforcement. 
The choice to kiss your childhood dream goodbye or live with a dishonest 
heart is horrid and tearing. I’ve been there, and I know. I chose to lie over kill-
ing my dream. I chose to dope. I am sorry for that decision, and I deeply regret 
it. The guilt I felt led me to retire from racing and start a professional cycling 
team where that choice was taken out of the equation through rigorous test-
ing and a cultural shift that emphasized racing clean above winning. The 
choice for my athletes was eliminated. 
 I wasn’t hellbent on cheating; I hated it, but I was ambitious, a trait we, as 
a society, generally admire. I had worked for more than half my life for one 
thing. But when you’re ambitious in a world where rules aren’t enforced, it’s 
like fudging your income taxes in a world where the government doesn’t 
audit. Think of what you would do if there were no Internal Revenue Service. 
 And think about the talented athletes who did make the right choice and 
walked away. They were punished for following their moral compass and being 
left behind. How do they reconcile the loss of their dream? It was stolen from 
them. When I was racing in the 1990s and early 2000s, the rules were easily 
circumvented by any and all—and if you wanted to be competitive, you first 
had to keep up. This environment is what we must continuously work to pre-
vent from ever surfacing again. It destroys dreams. It destroys people. It 
destroys our finest athletes. 
 As I watched the Olympics these past two weeks, I was a bit envious, as I 
know that huge strides have been made by many since my time to rid sports 
of doping. Athletes have the knowledge and confidence that nowadays, the 
race can be won clean. 
 If the message I was given had been different, but more important, if the 
reality of sport then had been different, perhaps I could have lived my dream 
without killing my soul. Without cheating. I was 15 years younger then, 15 years 
less wise. I made the wrong decision, but I know that making that right deci-
sion for future generations must begin by making the right choice realistic. 
They want to make the right choice. This is the lesson I have learned from 
young athletes and why I have made it my life’s work to help make the right 
choice real. 
 They must know, without doubt, that they will have a fair chance by racing 
clean. And for them to do that, the rules must be enforced, and the painful 
effort to make that happen must be unending and ruthless. Antidoping 
enforcement is 1,000 percent better than in my era of competition, and that 
brings me great satisfaction. But we must support these efforts even more. 
 Almost every athlete I’ve met who has doped will say they did it only 
because they wanted a level playing field. That says something: everyone wants 
10
11
12
13
14
15

440 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
a fair chance, not more. So, let’s give our young athletes a level playing field, 
without doping. Let’s put our effort and resources into making sport fair, so that 
no athlete faces this decision ever again. We put so much emotion into market-
ing and idolizing athletes, let’s put that same zeal into giving them what they 
really want: the ability to live their dreams without compromising their morals. 
Source: New York Times, August 12, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
How important is it to improve just 2 percent in a highly competitive sport? 
 2. 
When the author was told he would not be successful unless he doped, what 
did he do? 
 3. 
Eventually, what did Vaughters end up doing? 
 4. 
What, according to Vaughters, do athletes say they want? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Vaughters’s claim? What is the basic logic of his argument? (Add a 
“because clause” to his claim.)  
 6. 
The author asserts that we achieve our dreams only through hard work and 
discipline, not luck or ability. Is this true? Can you defend this assertion? If yes, 
how? If no, then why do we want to embrace the idea?  
 7. 
What does the author mean by a “level playing field”? How does he think this 
can be achieved? Do you agree?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Vaughters implies that more rigorous testing will get doping out of sports. Can 
testing control all doping? If yes, how would you make this happen? If no, are 
there other strategies that could also help keep athletes from choosing enhance-
ment drugs?  
 9. 
Personal essays can make effective arguments, but what potential problems 
must the authors overcome to be successful?  
 AFTER ARMSTRONG’S FALL, THE CASE 
FOR PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT   
BRADEN  ALLENBY 
President’s Professor and Lincoln Professor of Engineering and Ethics in the School of 
Sustainable Engineering at Arizona State University, Braden Allenby holds a PhD in 
Environmental Sciences from Rutgers University in addition to a law degree. He 
entered academia after 20 years as counsel to AT&T. He is the coauthor, with Daniel 
Serewitz, of  The Techno-Human Condition  (2011) and author of  Reconstructing Earth: 
Technology and Environment in the Age of Humans (2005).

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
441
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Is there a case for performance enhancement? How do 
you expect Allenby to develop his argument?  
 I n the past month, cyclist Lance 
Armstrong has been stripped of his 
seven Tour de France titles. His com-
mercial sponsors, including Nike, have 
fled. He has resigned as chairman of 
Livestrong, the anti-cancer charity he 
founded. Why? Because the U.S. Anti-
Doping Agency and the International 
Cycling 
Union 
say 
he 
artificially 
enhanced his performance in ways not 
approved by his sport and helped 
 others on his team do the same. 
 This may seem like justice, but that’s 
an illusion. Whether Armstrong cheated 
is not the core consideration. Rather, his 
case shows that enhancement is here to 
stay. If everyone’s enhancing, it’s a real-
ity that we should embrace. 
 Look at any sport. People are run-
ning, swimming and biking faster and 
farther; linemen are bulkier than ever; 
sluggers have bigger muscles and hit more home runs. This might be due to 
better nutrition. Perhaps it is a result of legally prescribed drugs. Heck, it 
might simply be because of better training. But illegal enhancement has never 
been more evident or more popular. 
 Moreover, enhancement science—pharmacology, nanotechnology, bio-
technology and genetics—is more sophisticated than ever. A recent  Nature 
article, for example, discusses oxygen-carrying particles that could be inserted 
in athletes’ blood and DNA therapies that could enhance muscle performance. 
 In an earlier time, rules limiting the use of such technology may have been 
a brave attempt to prevent cheating. Now, they are increasingly ineffectual. 
Humans are becoming a design space. That athletes are on the cutting edge of 
this engineering domain is neither a prediction nor a threat. It is the status quo. 
 Get over it. 
 Professional athletes didn’t always make big bucks, so when enhancement 
techniques were primitive, the payoff wasn’t necessarily worth the health risks. 
And with less demand, there were fewer nerds in fewer laboratories creating 
enhancement technologies. Anabolic steroids, for example, weren’t devel-
oped until the 1930s. Can you imagine Babe Ruth using a low-oxygen cham-
ber that simulated a high-altitude environment to increase his red-blood-cell 
count and improve his respiratory system’s efficiency? That’s just one new way 
a player can get an edge. 
 Today, the gap between superstar athletes and almost-stars is rapidly grow-
ing. The benefits of being at the top of your game—money, sponsors, cars, 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

442 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
houses, movie careers, book deals and groupies—have never been clearer. 
After all, how many lucrative marketing contracts go to bronze medalists? 
 To perform consistently, 21st-century athletes enhance legally with better 
gear, specialized diets, physical trainers, vitamin B, and energy drinks and gels. 
Why not add drugs and other technologies to the list of legal enhancements, 
especially when most of us are enhancing our workplace concentration with a 
morning coffee or energy shot? 
 In my engineering and sustainability classes, I ask my students how many 
have played sports in high school or college. Usually, at least half raise their 
hands. Then I ask how many know people who enhanced illegally. The hands 
stay up, even if I limit the question to high school athletes. Enhancement—
legal or illegal, according to confused, arbitrary and contradictory criteria—is 
pervasive. Indeed, surveys show that significant numbers of non-athletes, 
especially in high school and college, use steroids to try to improve their 
appearance rather than to augment their play on the field. This should not be 
surprising, given the popularity of other cosmetic-enhancement techniques 
such as discretionary plastic surgery, even among young people. 
 Armstrong’s alleged doping in the Tour de France is just more evidence 
that human excellence is increasingly a product of enhancement. 
 Mischaracterizing a fundamental change in sports as merely individual vio-
lations of the rules has serious consequences. For example, this thinking has 
led to inadequate research on the risks of enhancement technologies, espe-
cially new ones. Why research something that can’t be used? My anecdotal 
class surveys show that students have significant skepticism about the reported 
side effects of such treatments and drugs, as well as perceptions of bias among 
regulators against enhancement. As a result of such attitudes, there’s a ten-
dency to play down the risks of some technologies. Call it the “Reefer 
Madness” response—ignoring real risks because you think the danger is exag-
gerated. This is ignorance born of prohibition. 
 What should be done? Past a certain age, athletes should be allowed to 
use whatever enhancements they think appropriate based on objective data. 
Providing reliable information about the full range of technologies should 
become the new mission of a (renamed) Anti-Doping Agency, one not driven 
by an anti-enhancement agenda. It wouldn’t have to be a free-for-all: Age lim-
its and other appropriate regulations could limit dangerous enhancements for 
non-professionals; those that are too risky could be restricted or, yes, banned. 
 How? Perhaps the Food and Drug Administration could take over these 
duties from the Anti-Doping Agency, using its own calculus. Is the proposed 
enhancement technology effective? Does it hurt more than it helps? It’s doubt-
ful that a genetic enhancement, for example, would be allowed. The field is 
too new. However, some supplements such as creatine, alphalipoic acid and at 
least some currently banned steroids would probably be acceptable. 
 In professional sports, normal people do not compete normally. We watch 
athletes who are enhanced—through top-notch training, equipment and 
sometimes illegal substances—compete for our amusement. And, despite our 
sanctimonious claims that this is wrong, we like it that way. So we do athletes 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

 
CHAPTER 18  Sports Talk—Sports Battles  
443
a deep disservice by clinging to our whimsical illusion of reality at the cost of 
their livelihood. If we allow football players to take violent hits and suffer con-
cussions so that we might be entertained, why not allow them to use sub-
stances that might cause them health problems? It’s their decision. 
 If you yearn to watch “purer” athletes, check out a Division III football 
game. Visit the minor league ballpark near you. Set up an amateur league. 
Better yet, train for a marathon sans enhancement. 
 But don’t force the Tour de France to cling to outdated ideas of how ath-
letes pedaling for their professional lives should behave. Cyclists have 
enhanced, are enhancing now and will continue to enhance. In his stubborn 
refusal to admit guilt in the face of the evidence, maybe this is what Armstrong 
is trying to tell us. 
Source: Washington Post, October 28, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What are some of the ways that athletes are enhancing their performance? 
 2. How has enhancement science changed? 
 3. Why has enhancement become so appealing to athletes? 
 4. What is a consequence of continuing to try to stop illegal doping? 
 5. How are our expectations of professional athletes different from that of amateurs? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What is Allenby’s claim? How does he defend and support it? 
 7. In two paragraphs, the author discusses some specifics of managing sports 
with enhancement rules lifted. First, how does this discussion aid his argu-
ment? Second, do his suggestions seem sensible and feasible? Why or why not? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. Allenby suggests that since everybody is doing it, we should “get over it” and 
accept the reality of enhancement. This is a pragmatic approach to the problem; 
are you content with a pragmatic approach to doping in sports? Why or why not?  
 9. To what extent are we, the spectators, to blame for illegal doping? 
 10. Why do we play (and watch) competitive sports? Be prepared to discuss or 
write about questions 9 and 10.
16
17

 CHAPTER 19 
America’s Colleges: 
Issues and Concerns

445
T
o say that the issues in education are both numerous and serious is certainly 
an understatement. Clinton wanted to be the “education president.” Bush 
had his No Child Left Behind initiative. Obama has his Race to the Top plan 
and continues to emphasize the need to give everyone an opportunity to attend 
college. And yet criticism continues amid only a few voices defending U.S. 
schools. America’s best schools and colleges attract students from around the 
world. However, the variations in funding, facilities, teachers, and test scores 
from one school to another should be unacceptable to politicians and parents—
and the students—who lose out to inferior schools.
 The vast differences become noticeable at the college level. On the one 
hand, Harvard students such as Mark Zuckerberg drop out to form companies 
and become rich and famous, leaving some to argue that the most talented 
young people are wasting time in college classes and should, instead, be imme-
diately funded to pursue their creative plans. On the other hand, up to one-
third of the freshman class at many quality colleges is taking at least one 
remedial course, with the percentage higher at community colleges. The aver-
age completion time for a four-year degree is now six years, and the completion 
rate of those who start college is less than 50 percent. Do these numbers spell 
failure for a goal of universal education—or is college work inappropriate for a 
majority of people? If an undergraduate degree is an unrealistic standard for 
most people, then how do we compete in a global economy with a workforce 
requiring brainpower, not brawn? 
 These are questions in need of contemplation by all involved, including 
current undergraduates. The chapter begins its exploration by looking at the 
still-uneven access to college and then moves to a debate on the worth of col-
lege, given its costs. When we question the worth of a degree, we also are rais-
ing questions about what college is for, why it should—or should not—be 
valued. The chapter ends with authors examining two campus concerns, cheat-
ing on exams and speech-code restrictions that might be considered censorship. 
These concerns closely tie to the broader debate of what it means to have a col-
lege education. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS 
 1. 
How do you account for the weak showing of U.S. students on international 
tests in math and science? Should we, as a nation, be concerned?  
 2. 
What are the biggest obstacles to getting into college? 
 3. 
What should students want to get from a college education? Do students, par-
ents, and the business community have differing perceptions on the purpose of 
college? Should they?  
 4. 
Should the United States develop better vocational training and apprenticeship 
programs? If so, how? 
 5. 
Why do good students cheat in college? 
 6. 
Are speech codes and guidelines to control harassment forms of censorship? If 
so, is this okay, or is it a problem?  

 These students enjoy one another and their 
beautiful campus. 
446 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 5 MYTHS ABOUT WHO GETS 
INTO COLLEGE   
          RICHARD D.   KAHLENBERG  
 A senior fellow at the Century Foundation, Richard Kahlenberg is an expert on K–12 
schooling. He is the author of four books on education and the editor of seven more, 
most recently  Rewarding Strivers: Helping Low-Income Students Succeed in College 
(2010). His articles are widely published, and he is a frequent guest on TV talk shows. 
The following article appeared in the  Washington Post  on May 23, 2010.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  In preparation for reading, glance at the five myths the 
author will examine. Which, if any, myths do you think are accurate? Even if there 
is just one that you thought was an accurate statement, is that sufficient reason to 
study Kahlenberg’s analysis? 
 T his spring, more than 3 million students will graduate from America’s high 
schools, and more than 2 million of them will head off to college in the fall. At 
the top colleges, competition has been increasingly fierce, leaving many high 
school seniors licking their wounds and wondering what they did “wrong.” But 
do selective colleges and universities do a good job of identifying the best and 
brightest? And is the concern about who gets into the best colleges justified? 
 1. Admissions officers have 
figured out how to reward merit 
above wealth and  connections. 
A 2004 Century Foundation study 
found that at the most selective 
universities and colleges, 74 per-
cent of students come from the 
richest quarter of the population, 
while just 3 percent come from 
the bottom quarter. Rich kids can’t 
possibly be 25 times as likely to be 
smart as poor kids, so wealth and 
connections must still matter. 
 Leading schools have two 
main admissions policies that favor 
wealthy students. The more glaring 
of these is legacy  preferences—an 
admissions boost for the children 
of alumni. Legacy preferences 
increase a student’s chances of 
admission by, on average, 20 per-
centage points over non-legacies. 
Schools use such preferences on 
the theory that they increase dona-
tions from alumni, but new research 
by Chad Coffman questions that 
premise. Those universities that 
1
2
3

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
447
have abandoned legacy preferences—or never used them—have plenty of alumni 
donors. Examples include Caltech, Texas A&M and the University of Georgia. 
 Less obvious is the role of the SAT, which was, when it was introduced in 
1926, supposed to help identify talented students from across all schools and 
backgrounds. Instead, it seems to amplify the advantages enjoyed by the most 
privileged students. New research by Georgetown University’s Anthony 
Carnevale and Jeff Strohl finds that the most disadvantaged applicants (those 
who, among other characteristics, are black, attend public schools with high 
poverty rates, come from low-income families and have parents who are high 
school dropouts) score, on average, 784 points lower on the SAT than the most 
advantaged students (those who, among other things, are white, attend private 
schools and have wealthy, highly educated parents). This gap is  equivalent to 
about two-thirds of the test’s total score range. If the SAT were a 100-yard dash, 
advantaged kids would start off 65 yards ahead before the race even began. 
 2. Disadvantages based on race are still the biggest obstacle to 
 getting into college.  More than race, it’s class: The effects of racial discrimi-
nation are increasingly dwarfed by the impact of socioeconomic status. Take 
that 784-point difference in SAT scores between the most advantaged and the 
most disadvantaged students. All other things being equal, the researchers 
found that there was a 56-point difference between black and white students. 
Most of the rest of the gap was the result of socioeconomic factors. To truly 
even the playing field, the system would therefore need to provide a lot of 
affirmative action to economically disadvantaged students who beat the odds 
and a little bit of affirmative action based on race. 
 Yet colleges and universities today do the opposite: They provide substan-
tial preferences based on race and virtually none based on class. According to 
researchers William Bowen, Martin Kurzweil and Eugene Tobin, at highly selec-
tive institutions, for students within a given SAT range, being a member of an 
underrepresented minority increases one’s chance of admission by 28 per-
centage points. That is, a white student might have a 30 percent chance of 
admission, but a black or Latino student with a similar record would have a 
58 percent chance of admission. By contrast, Bowen and his colleagues found, 
students from poor families don’t receive any leg up in the process—they fare 
neither better nor worse than wealthier applicants. 
 3. Generous financial aid policies are the key to boosting  socioeconomic 
diversity.  In response to the growing scarcity of poor and working-class students 
on campus, roughly 100 universities and colleges have boosted financial aid in 
the past several years. But these programs have not been enough to change the 
socioeconomic profile of these schools’ student bodies. At the University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, for example, a generous financial aid program, the 
Carolina Covenant, was instituted in 2004. Under its terms, low-income students 
are not required to take out loans as part of their  financial aid packages. 
 According to research by Edward B. Fiske, the program has been success-
ful in accomplishing one important goal: boosting the graduation rate among 
low-income students. Traditionally, low-income and working-class students 
4
5
6
7
8

448 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
drop out at much higher rates than do higher-income students, as financial 
worries and jobs with long hours distract from their studies. Fiske found that 
the Carolina Covenant raised the four-year graduation rates of low-income stu-
dents by almost 10 percent. 
 Yet the proportion of low-income students at UNC-Chapel Hill remained 
flat between 2003 and 2008, because the university has not given such stu-
dents (those eligible for federal Pell grants, 90 percent of which go to students 
from families making less than $40,000 a year) any break in the admissions 
process. A few other institutions, including Amherst and Harvard, have begun 
to consider a student’s socioeconomic status in their admissions decisions; 
these schools provide a promising example. At Harvard, the percentage of 
students receiving Pell grants has shot up from 9.4 percent in the 2003–2004 
school year to 15 percent in the 2008–2009 school year. 
 4. Selective colleges are too expensive and aren’t worth the  investment. 
A selective institution with a large endowment may indeed be worth the money. 
The least selective colleges spend about $12,000 per student, compared with 
$92,000 per student at the most selective schools. Put another way, at the 
wealthiest 10 percent of institutions, students pay, on average, just 20 cents in 
fees for every dollar the school spends on them, while at the poorest 10 per-
cent of institutions, students pay 78 cents for every dollar spent on them. 
 Furthermore, selective colleges are quite a bit better at retention: If a 
more selective school and a less selective school enroll two equally qualified 
students, the more selective school is much more likely to graduate its stu-
dent. Future earnings are, on average, 45 percent higher for students who 
graduated from more selective institutions than for those from less selective 
ones, and the difference in earnings is widest among low-income students. 
And according to research by Thomas Dye, 54 percent of America’s top 4,325 
corporate leaders are graduates of just 12 institutions. 
 5. With more students going to college, we’re closer to the goal of 
equal opportunity.  The good news is that students are going to college at a 
higher rate than ever before; the bad news is that stratification is increasing at 
colleges and universities. Much as urban elementary and secondary schools saw 
white, affluent parents flee to suburban schools in the 1970s and 1980s, less 
selective colleges are now experiencing white flight. According to Carnevale 
and Strohl, white student representation declined from 79 percent to 58 percent 
at less selective and noncompetitive institutions between 1994 and 2006, while 
black student representation soared from 11 percent to 28 percent. American 
higher education is in danger of quickly becoming both separate and unequal. 
 Source:  Washington Post,  May 23, 2010. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What numbers demonstrate that selective colleges are not rewarding merit 
above wealth and connections? What two admissions policies favor the rich?  
9
10
11
12

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
449
 2. What is the biggest obstacle to getting into college? Why are racial minorities 
not the most disadvantaged in the college selection process?  
 3. Why has increased financial aid not changed the socioeconomic mix at most 
colleges? Which colleges have begun to consider socioeconomic status in the 
admissions process? 
 4. For what three reasons is the cost of highly selective colleges possibly worth the 
price?  
 5. In spite of the increase in the numbers of students attending college, why is this 
not a sign of equal opportunity in higher education?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  6. What kind of evidence does Kahlenberg provide in support of each of his 
 arguments counter to current views regarding college admissions? 
  7. What is the author’s purpose in writing? To expose myths about changes in 
 college admissions is, ultimately, to write what kind of argument? Write a claim 
statement that reveals Kahlenberg’s purpose in writing.  
  8. Is the information convincing? Why or why not? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  9. Are you surprised by any of the statistics? If so, which ones? If not, why not? 
 10. To embrace the five myths about college admissions is to see American society 
going in what direction? Presumably we would agree that this direction is good 
for our society. So, if these myths don’t hold up to the facts, then what should 
we be doing to correct this problem? What are your suggestions—or the sug-
gestions implied in much of the essay—for making a college education more 
available to all who wish to attend?  
WHAT’S A COLLEGE EDUCATION 
REALLY WORTH? NOT ENOUGH   
 NAOMI  SCHAEFER RILEY  
 When an editor and writer for the  Wall Street Journal, Naomi Riley covered educa-
tion, religion, and culture. She is now a freelance writer who appears in a number of 
newspapers and on her blog. She is the author of  The Faculty Lounges: And Other 
Reasons You Won’t Get the College Education You Pay For (2011) and  ‘Til Faith Do Us 
Part: How Interfaith Marriage Is Transforming America (2013). The following article 
appeared June 5, 2011.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Do you think a college education is worth the cost? If 
not, why are you in college?  
 D id Peter Thiel pop the bubble? That was the question on the minds of parents, 
taxpayers and higher education leaders late last month when the  co-founder of 
PayPal announced that he was offering $100,000 to young people who would 
1

450 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
stay out of college for two years and work instead on scientific and technologi-
cal innovations. Thiel, who has called college “the default activity,” told  USA 
Today that “the pernicious side effect of the education bubble is assuming edu-
cation [guarantees] absolute good, even with steep student fees.” 
 He has lured 24 of the smartest kids in America and Canada to his Silicon 
Valley lair with promises of money and mentorship for their projects. Some of 
these young people have been working in university labs since before adoles-
cence. Others have consulted for Microsoft, Coca-Cola and other top compa-
nies. A couple didn’t even have to face the choice of putting off college—one 
enrolled in college at age 12 and, at 19, had left his PhD studies at Stanford to 
start his own company. 
 Of course, Thiel’s offer isn’t going to change the way most universities do 
business anytime soon. These 24 kids represent the narrowest swath of the 
country’s college-bound youth. (Though it’s important to note: When we talk 
about America having the greatest system of higher education in the world, 
these are the kind of people we’re bragging about.) 
 There’s not much reason to worry that this program is going to produce a 
nation of dropouts, contrary to the fears of some wags such as James Temple, 
a columnist for the  San Francisco Chronicle. Temple called the premise of the 
fellowships “scary” and worried about the broader message they send. 
However, as a country, we are still creeping along toward President Obama’s 
dream of universal higher education. Obama sees this not only as a way for all 
individuals to have the opportunity to reach their full potential but also as a 
key to the nation’s ability to compete in the global marketplace. 
 But Thiel put a dollar figure on something that certain young people may 
already have suspected was true. A friend of mine whose son, a budding Internet 
entrepreneur, just graduated from Yale told me about a conversation that her 
son reported having with another somewhat successful start-up founder. The 
latter had dropped out of Harvard Law School to launch his business, and he 
advised my friend’s son to drop out of Yale—venture capitalists would know that 
he was serious if he was willing to give up that Ivy League diploma. My friend 
was a little horrified, having already dropped somewhere around $200,000 on 
her son’s education, but it does raise the question: For a smart kid from an 
upper-middle-class family who went to one of the top high schools in the coun-
try, and who already has a business going, what does a college diploma mean? 
 Colleges have long been engaged in an odd deal with students and their 
parents. Paying for a college education—or taking on a huge amount of debt to 
finance an education—is a transaction in which most of the buyers and most of 
the sellers have fundamentally different understandings of the product. 
 Think about it this way: Suppose I start a print newspaper tomorrow. I 
might think I’m selling excellent journalism, while my “readers” are actually 
using my product to line their birdcages. It might work out fine for a while. But 
the imbalance in this transaction would make it difficult to talk in general terms 
about improving the product or whether the product is worth what I’m charg-
ing. I might think I should improve my grammar and hire more reporters. My 
customers might want me to make the paper thicker. 
2
3
4
5
6
7

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
451
 In the college transaction, most parents think they’re buying their kids a 
credential, a better job and a ticket, economically speaking at least, to the 
American dream. Most college professors and administrators (the good ones, 
anyway) see their role as producing liberally educated, well-rounded individu-
als with an appreciation for certain kinds of knowledge. If they get a job after 
graduation, well, that’s nice, too. 
 The students, for the most part, are not quite sure where they fit into this 
bargain. Some will get caught up in what they learn and decide to go on to 
further education. But most will see college as an opportunity to have fun and 
then come out the other end of the pipeline with the stamp of approval they 
need to make a decent salary after graduation. 
 So does Thiel’s offer suggest that a university diploma might be most use-
ful lining a birdcage? Yes and no. He has certainly undermined the worth of a 
credential. But it is universities themselves that have undermined the worth of 
the education. It is to their detriment that they have done so, certainly, but it 
is to the detriment of students as well. 
 In the recent movie  The Social Network, Mark Zuckerberg is shown devoting 
endless hours in his room to computer programming. He goes to a few parties, 
but mostly he is engaged in his new business venture, “the Facebook.” How is this 
possible, one might wonder? Was he flunking out of his classes? No. Thanks to the 
wonders of grade inflation and the lack of a serious core curriculum, it is possible 
to get through Harvard and a number of other high-price universities acing your 
computer science classes and devoting very little effort to anything else. 
 Colleges and universities have allowed their value to slip by letting students 
call this an undergraduate education. There is no compelling understanding 
among students of why they are there. Studying is not how they spend even the 
bulk of their waking hours, and their classes seem random at best. They may 
spend Monday in “19th Century Women’s Literature,” Tuesday in “Animal 
Behavior” and Wednesday in “Eastern Philosophy,” but these courses may bear 
little relation to any they took the previous semester or any they will take the next. 
 A 2010 report called “What Will They Learn?,” published by the American 
Council of Trustees and Alumni, an organization that emphasizes traditional 
education, surveyed the curricula of more than 700 colleges. About 4 percent 
require students to take a basic economics class. A little more than a quarter 
of the public institutions and only 5 percent of the private colleges and univer-
sities require a single broad survey course in American history or government. 
And only 61 percent of colleges and universities require students to take a 
college-level mathematics class. 
 General education requirements are no longer general at all. They are 
absurdly specific. At Cornell, you can fill your literature and arts requirement 
with “Global Martial Arts Film and Literature.” And at Northwestern, the math 
requirement can be fulfilled with “Slavonic Linguistics.” It’s little wonder that 
smart students think their time is better spent coding. 
 So yes, Zuckerberg was wasting his parents’ money and his own time. Why 
pay to be at Harvard if that’s what you’re going to do? Why not take a class on 
Dostoyevsky or the history of Christianity or astronomy or ancient history? You 
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

452 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
are surrounded by some of the most learned people in the world, and you are 
holed up in your dorm room typing code. (One could place some blame on 
the students, but it’s hard to fault people for not knowing what they don’t 
know.) Surely Thiel has the right idea when it comes to the Zuckerbergs of the 
world. And colleges have only themselves to blame if they lose some of these 
very smart young people to his fellowships. 
 Beyond the top tier, there are also gaping holes in higher education. 
Executives at U.S. companies routinely complain about the lack of reading, 
writing and math skills in the recent graduates they hire. Maybe they too will 
get tired of using higher education as a credentialing system. Maybe it will be 
easier to recruit if they don’t have to be concerned about the overwhelming 
student debt of their new employees. 
 Employers may decide that there are better ways to get high school stu-
dents ready for careers. What if they returned to the idea of apprenticeship, 
not just for shoemakers and plumbers but for white-collar jobs? College as a 
sorting process for talent or a way to babysit 18-year-olds is not very efficient 
for anyone involved. Would students rather show their SAT scores to compa-
nies and then apply for training positions where they can learn the skills they 
need to be successful? Maybe the companies could throw in some liberal arts 
courses along the way. At least they would pick the most important ones and 
require that students put in some serious effort. Even a 40-hour workweek 
would be a step up from what many students are asked to do now. 
 If tuition continues to rise faster than inflation, and colleges cannot pro-
vide a compelling mission for undergraduate education, we may move further 
away from Obama’s vision of education and closer to Peter Thiel’s. 
Source: Washington Post, June 5, 2011. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
Who is Peter Thiel and what did he do? 
 2. 
How typical are the students working for Thiel? 
 3. 
What do parents think they are buying when they pay for college? What do pro-
fessors believe their role to be? What do students think they should be doing?  
 4. 
What characteristics of college courses and general requirements does the 
author present? 
 5. 
What might employers prefer new hires to do instead of getting a college degree? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
    6. 
What is the problem Riley addresses? (Think about this.) What, then, is her claim? 
 7. 
What are her reasons? (Add a “because” clause to the claim.) 
 8. 
Riley develops an extended metaphor, beginning in paragraph 4. What is the 
metaphor and what is its point?  
 9. 
What kinds of grounds does the author present? How effective are the grounds 
in support of the claim?  
16
17
18

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
453
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. What seem to be the implications of Riley’s view? Who should drop out of the 
top schools? Who should attend college? Who should consider some other 
approach to a job? 
 11. Riley doesn’t really blame the good professors for defining the purpose of col-
lege differently from parents; what does she blame colleges for? Do you agree 
with her complaint? Why or why not?  
 12. What, in your view, is the purpose of college? Why?
 WHAT’S MORE EXPENSIVE THAN 
COLLEGE? NOT GOING TO COLLEGE  
 DEREK   THOMPSON  
 A senior editor at  The Atlantic, Derek Thompson oversees business articles for   TheAtlantic
.com . He has published in  Slate, Business Week, and  The Daily Beast and appears on radio 
and TV talk shows. His essay was published at   TheAtlantic.com on March 27, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Given Thompson’s focus on business issues, how do you 
expect him to develop this argument? Is there more than one way to define the 
“worth” of a college education? 
 If you want to feel optimistic about the state of things for unemployed, disen-
gaged, and dissatisfied youths in America, here’s a way. Spin a globe. Stop it 
with your finger. If you touch land, the overwhelming odds are that the young 
people in that country are doing much worse.  
 There are 1.2 billion people between 15 and 24 in the world, according to 
the International Youth Foundation’s new  Opportunity for Action paper. 
Although many of their prospects are rising, they are emerging from condi-
tions of widespread poverty and lack of access to the most important means 
of economic mobility: education. In the Middle East and North Africa, youth 
unemployment has been stuck above 20 percent for the last two decades. 
And in the parts of the world where youth unemployment has been low, such 
as south and east Asia, young people are overwhelmingly employed in the 
agriculture sector, which leaves them vulnerable to poverty. 
 The report is a crackerjack box of interesting facts—e.g.: the probability that 
a 15-year-old Russian male will die before he is 60 is higher than 40 percent, the 
highest in Europe; among women 15 to 24 years old, only 15 percent are working 
in the Middle East—but some of the most surprising stats are the closest to home.  
 The IYF authors focus on the so-called “NEETs” in the United States and 
Europe. NEET stands for those Not Engaged in Employment/education, or 
Training. A 2012 U.S. study put the social cost per NEET youth at $37,450, 
when you factored in lost earnings, public health spending, and other factors. 
That brings the total cost of 6.7 million NEET American youths to $4.75  trillion, 
equal to nearly a third of GDP, or half of U.S. public debt. 
 Statistics like this are a good reminder that, even though college tuition is 
famously outpacing median incomes, there is still something more expensive 
than going to school. Very often, that is not going to school. 
1
2
3
4
5

454 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 The NEET study’s final number might be too high. It also might be too low. I 
can’t say. But it’s far from the only report identifying an astronomical cost to not 
going to college. 
 • 
 The typical income gap between a college graduate and a high school drop-
out has never been higher. Today, college grads earn 80 percent more than 
people who don’t go to high school. 
 • 
 A 2009 McKinsey report estimated that if we raised our education perfor-
mance to the level of Korea, we could improve the US economy by more 
than $2 trillion. (We could, in other words, add the GDP of Italy to our 
economy with education reform.) 
 • 
 Yet another study from NBER estimated that the benefit of a good teacher 
over an average teacher could improve a student’s future lifetime earnings 
by $400,000. 
 • 
 Finally, a study from the Hamilton Project found that $100,000 spent on 
college at age 18 would yield a higher lifetime return than an equal invest-
ment in corporate bonds, U.S. government debt, or hot company stocks. 
 College has its skeptics, and the skeptics make good points. Does a four-
year university make sense for every student? Probably not. Is the modern 
on-site college education necessarily the ideal means to deliver training after 
high school? Maybe not. Vocational training and community colleges deserve 
a place in this discussion. And we happen to be living through a quiet revolu-
tion in higher education. 
 Here are three quick examples. First, beginning this year, students at MITx can 
take free online courses offered by MIT and receive a credential for a price far less 
than tuition if they demonstrate mastery in the subject. Second, the University 
of Southern California 
is experimenting with 
online classrooms that 
connect students across 
the country in front of a 
single professor. Third, 
there’s Western Gover-
nors University, a non-
profit, private online 
university that’s spear-
heading the movement 
toward “competency-
based degrees” that 
reward what students can 
prove they know rather 
than how many hours 
or credits they amass. 
 Some 
of 
these 
experiments will fail, and 
some will scale. What’s 
important is that they 
offer higher ed and 
6
7
8
9
0
Norway
Germany
France
Canada
Portugal
US
UK
Spain
Italy
Greece
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Youth not in education, employment, or training,
selected countries, 2010 (% of age group)
18
%

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
455
retraining that is cheap, creative, and convenient. If we can win the marketing war 
in neighborhoods blighted by NEETs and deliver a post-high school education 
to some of those 7 million young people who have disengaged with education 
and work, we will be spending money to save money. 
 Take out that globe one more time and give it a spin. I challenge you to 
land on a region where education gains aren’t translating to productivity and 
income gains. The highest-income countries have the highest rates of enroll-
ment in secondary school and the smallest share of informal employment that 
is vulnerable to an economic downturn.  There is a cost to not educating young 
people. The evidence is literally all around us. 
Source:  © 2012, The Atlantic Media Co. as first published in The Atlantic online, March 27, 2012. All 
rights reserved. Distributed by Tribune Media Services.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
How bad off are young people in the United States compared to other young 
people in the world?  
 2. 
What is the social cost to the United States of all the young people not engaged 
in either education or training?  
 3. 
How much can a good teacher improve lifetime earnings? 
 4. 
What are Thompson’s three examples of big changes in education? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Thompson’s claim? How does he develop and support his claim? 
 6. 
Is his support convincing? Why or why not? 
 7. 
How does he qualify his claim? How does this qualification aid his argument? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
What statistics surprise or impress you the most? Why? 
 9. 
Who has the more convincing argument—Riley or Thompson? Why? Defend 
your choice.
10
Doctoral degree
Professional degree
Master’s degree
Bachelor’s degree
Associate degree
Some college,no degree
High school graduate
Less than a high
school diploma
14.6
7.9
9.7
8.6
5.2
2.5
Average, all workers
Unemployment rate in 2009
Education pays
2.3
3.9
6.8
1,257
$1,532
1,529
1,025
761
774
Average, all workers
454
Median weekly earnings in 2009
626
699

456 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 HELPING STUDENTS FIND 
THEIR PLACE IN THE WORLD  
 DANIELLE   ALLEN  
 Holding a PhD in government from Harvard and one in classics from Cambridge 
University, Danielle Allen is a professor of social science at Princeton’s Institute for 
Advanced Study. She serves on the boards of Princeton, the Mellon Foundation, and 
Amherst College. Among her books are  Why Plato Wrote (2010) and  Talking to 
Strangers: Anxieties of Citizenship Since Brown v. Board of Education (2004). The fol-
lowing article appeared on September 24, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What might Allen’s helpful suggestions be? How do you 
expect college to help you?  
 Debates about the nature of higher education are often framed by the ques-
tion of whether vocational elements or liberal arts elements should dominate 
in the curriculum. This is a mistake. 
 Human beings generally need to foster their development along four 
dimensions: They need to prepare themselves for bread-winning work; for 
civic and political engagement; for creative self-expression and world-making; 
and for rewarding relationships in spaces of intimacy and leisure. We can’t do 
without the skills, knowledge and understanding that enable us to make a liv-
ing. But neither can we do without a related set of competencies that help us 
understand who we are as human beings so that we can make reasonable 
choices about what, individually and collectively, we should do. How should 
we direct our creative capacities? What should be our shared political ideals 
and goals? What are the sources of satisfaction in private relationships? 
 When we consider education from the perspective of the collective, 
instead of the individual, and ask whether a citizenry generally is being edu-
cated as needed, there often seems to be a mismatch between what people 
choose to learn and the available jobs. The philosopher Plato seems to have 
been motivated by a similar frustration. He imagined a utopia ruled by a 
 philosopher-king in which, from birth, everyone would be slotted into a par-
ticular occupational group and educated to excel to the highest degree within 
that occupation. Some would be farmers, some craftsmen and traders, some 
soldiers, and some political leaders. From a bird’s-eye view, the state would 
know from an individual’s birth who should be what. 
 Here and there we can see policy efforts that, in the name of efficiency, 
seek to apply to education the kinds of information that can be acquired from 
a bird’s-eye view. For instance, Florida is reshaping its community college cur-
riculum by setting up in particular areas degree programs in vocational spe-
cialties that labor demographers identify as undersupplied in that location. 
There is, of course, nothing wrong with putting real opportunities in front of 
people. But we don’t want to craft an environment where people fail to come 
to their own understanding of what they should try to do because as a nation 
we are justifiably trying to increase the efficiency with which we match human 
capital to the labor market. For this reason, it is necessary to have a liberal arts 
element infused throughout the curriculum at all levels: in K-12 and commu-
nity colleges as well as four-year colleges and universities. 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
457
 Just as we should want to cultivate capacities for self-knowledge (to sup-
port vocational choices, among other reasons) we must also recognize that an 
element of self-knowledge includes being able to see how one’s competen-
cies connect to the diversity of methods available for self-support. One needs 
to understand oneself; one also needs to be able to see the vocational oppor-
tunities that are out there. 
 In our restructured world of work—which has a range of service jobs and 
knowledge jobs that are not captured by the traditional professions and trades; 
where people will change areas of specialization multiple times over their work-
ing lives—simply seeing the opportunities is hard. To this end, the Mellon 
Foundation, on whose board I serve, has been supporting the placement of 
students who have earned PhDs in the humanities—people who have, in other 
words, committed themselves most fully to an education in the liberal arts—
into non-academic jobs. The goal is to help those whose education has tipped 
more toward the liberal arts acquire the observational attunement necessary to 
see the range of occupational possibilities. 
 Human beings are not born complete; we make ourselves over the course 
of our lives. Science confirms this. For all the power of genetics, from the 
moment of our birth culture has a huge impact on us, including even on which 
features of our genetic endowment come to the fore. We most fully realize our 
potential when we make ourselves—even if most commonly we can do this 
only with the help of others. Each of us is best positioned to be the expert on 
ourselves; this is why self-knowledge is so important. This is the reason we each 
have to find our own way in the world, rather than letting someone—for 
instance, a philosopher-king—place us once and for all in a particular position. 
 Our contemporary situation demands that we help our young people find 
their way by marrying the cultivation of self-knowledge to a worldly capacity 
to see practical opportunities. This requires a curriculum that unifies liberal 
arts and vocational elements at all levels.  
Source: Washington Post, September 24, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. In what four ways do we need to develop? 
 2. How did Plato imagine organizing society? 
 3. What can be lost in the name of efficiency? 
 4. What are some realities of today’s world of work? 
 5. Who knows you best? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What, for Allen, is the wrong way to discuss higher education? What is the bet-
ter way; that is, what is Allen’s claim?  
 7. How does the author develop her argument? What are her grounds? 
 8. For Allen, what kind of education gives us the best chance of knowing our-
selves? Do you agree? If yes, why? If no, how would you refute Allen? 
5
6
7
8

458 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. Allen points out that today’s new kinds of jobs don’t fit neatly into traditional 
professional or trade categories. Is this a new idea for you? Does it make sense? 
 10. When you think of courses to take, do you think about what knowledge or 
skills you could acquire from those courses? If not, why not?  
 11. Do you think about what courses would enhance your knowledge of self? If 
not, why not?
WHY KIDS CHEAT AT HARVARD  
 HOWARD  GARDNER  
 Howard Gardner is professor of cognition and education at the Harvard Graduate School 
of Education and senior director of the Harvard Zero Project, a project focused on creat-
ing performance-based assessments in education. The author of 28 books, he is best 
known for his theory of multiple intelligences. Among his many books are  Intelligence 
Reframed: Multiple Intelligences for the 21st Century (1999) and  Truth, Beauty, and 
Goodness Reframed: Educating for the Virtues in the Era of Truthiness and Twitter  
(2011). Dr. Gardner has been cited as one of the 100 most influential intellectuals in the 
world today. His article on Harvard student cheating appeared on September 7, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Why do you think that students at Harvard—or 
anywhere—cheat on exams and papers? Can we understand the motivation?  
 On August 27 [2012], approximately 1,600 freshmen arrived at Harvard College. Two 
days later, I had the pleasure of spending 90 minutes with 20 of these students. They 
impressed me with their intellect but also with their empathy and willingness to listen to 
and learn from one another. They were excited by the opportunity to be at Harvard; 
they used such superlatives that I joked to colleagues that in a few years, they would be 
so critical, if not cynical, they would have a hard time believing their earlier enthusiasm. 
 On August 30 [2012], I and many others learned of the university’s largest 
cheating scandal in living memory. According to news reports, close to half of 
the 250 undergraduates in “Introduction to Congress” are being investigated 
for allegedly cheating on a final examination. 
 The fate of individual students is not yet known, but this event will clearly 
be a stain on Harvard’s reputation as large and consequential as that suffered 
by the service academies in earlier decades. 
 Many wonder how this could have happened at “MGU” (man’s greatest 
university). They will ask whether a large number of the same enthusiastic and 
loving students I met with last week might well, in a year or two, be part of a 
cheating scandal themselves. The answer, I fear, is yes. 
 I’ve been at Harvard for more than half a century—as an undergraduate, a 
graduate student, a researcher and, for almost three decades, a professor. I 
know the university well, and in many ways I love it. Yet almost 20 years ago I 
became concerned about the effect that market ways of thinking have on our 
society, particularly our young. Colleagues and I undertook a study of “good 
work.” As part of that study, we interviewed 100 of the “best and brightest” 
students and spoke with them in depth about life and work. 
 The results of that study, reported in  Making Good, surprised us. Over and 
over again, students told us that they admired good work and wanted to be good 
1
2
3
4
5
6

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
459
workers. But they also told us they wanted—ardently—to be successful. They 
feared that their peers were cutting corners and that if they themselves behaved 
ethically, they would be bested. And so, they told us in effect, “Let us cut corners 
now and one day, when we have achieved fame and fortune, we’ll be good work-
ers and set a good example.” A classic case of the ends justify the means. 
 We were so concerned by the results that, for the past six years, we have 
conducted reflection sessions at elite colleges, including Harvard. Again, we 
have found the students to be articulate, thoughtful, even lovable. Yet over 
and over again, we have also found hollowness at the core. 
 Two examples: In discussing the firing of a dean who lied about her academic 
qualifications, no student supported the firing. The most common responses were 
“She’s doing a good job, what’s the problem?” and “Everyone lies on their resumé.” 
In a discussion of the documentary  Enron: the Smartest Guys in the Room, students 
were asked what they thought of the company traders who manipulated the price of 
energy. No student condemned the traders; responses varied from caveat emptor 
to saying it’s the job of the governor or the state assembly to monitor the situation. 
 One clue to the troubling state of affairs came from a Harvard classmate 
who asked me: “Howard, don’t you realize that Harvard has always been primar-
ily about one thing—success?” The students admitted to Harvard these days 
have watched their every step, lest they fail in their goal of admission to an elite 
school. But once admitted, they begin to look for new goals, and being a suc-
cessful scholar is usually not high on the list. What is admired is success on Wall 
Street, Silicon Valley, Hollywood—a lavish lifestyle that, among other things, 
allows you to support your alma mater and get the recognitions that follows. 
 As for those students who do have the scholarly bent, all too often they see 
professors cut corners—in their class attendance, their attention to student work, 
and, most flagrantly, their use of others to do research. Most embarrassingly, 
when professors are caught—whether in financial misdealings or even plagiarizing 
others’ work—there are frequently no clear punishments. If punishments ensue, 
they are kept quiet, and no one learns the lessons that need to be learned. 
 Whatever happens to those guilty of cheating, many admirable people are 
likely to be tarred by their association with Harvard. That’s the cost of being a 
7
8
9
10
12
The beautiful Harvard campus.

460 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
flagship institution. Yet this scandal can have a positive outcome if leaders 
begin a searching examination of the messages being conveyed to our pre-
cious young people and then do whatever it takes to make those messages 
ones that lead to lives genuinely worthy of admiration. 
Source: Washington Post, September 7, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What is the occasion for Gardner’s article? 
 2. What did the students Gardner interviewed 20 years ago say they admired? 
But, what did they want to be?  
 3. What did the students interviewed over the years think they might have to do 
to be successful?  
 4. What did Gardner conclude about his students as he continued to interview them? 
 5. What has Harvard “always been primarily about”? 
 6. What do the scholarly students often discover about professors? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 7. Gardner is not reporting on the cheating incident; he is responding to it. What 
point does he want to make; that is, what is his claim?  
 8. How does the author develop and support his claim? 
 9. What does Gardner gain by telling readers of his long association with Harvard? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. Were you surprised by the students’ responses to the fired dean and the Enron 
traders? Why or why not?  
 11. What values shape Gardner’s definition of good students—or good professors? 
Do you agree with him? If yes, why? If no, how would you refute him?  
 12. Can cheating ever be justified—even if others do it? Explain your views on this issue. 
 THE CLOSED AMERICAN MIND  
 GEORGE  WILL 
 A syndicated columnist since 1974, George Will is also the author of a number of books, 
including one about his great love—baseball. He is a regular participant in television talk 
shows of political analysis. The following column appeared December 2, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    In what ways might the American mind be closed in the 
view of conservative Will? How will his discussion connect to the college campus?  
 I n 2007, Keith John Sampson, a middle-aged student working his way through 
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis as a janitor, was declared guilty 
of racial harassment. Without granting Sampson a hearing, the university 
 administration—acting as prosecutor, judge and jury—convicted him of “openly 
reading [a] book related to a historically and racially abhorrent subject.” 
 “Openly.” “Related to.” Good grief. 
1
2

 
CHAPTER 19 America’s Colleges: Issues and Concerns 
461
 The book,  Notre Dame vs. the Klan, celebrated the 1924 defeat of the Ku Klux 
Klan in a fight with Notre Dame students. But some of Sampson’s co-workers dis-
liked the book’s cover, which featured a black-and-white photograph of a Klan rally. 
Someone was offended, therefore someone else  must be guilty of harassment. 
 This non sequitur reflects the right never to be annoyed, a new campus 
entitlement. Legions of administrators, who now outnumber full-time faculty, 
are kept busy making students mind their manners, with good manners under-
stood as conformity to liberal politics. 
 Liberals are most concentrated and untrammeled on campuses, so look 
there for evidence of what, given the opportunity, they would do to America. 
Ample evidence is in  Unlearning Liberty: Campus Censorship and the End of 
American Debate by Greg Lukianoff, 38, a graduate of Stanford Law School who 
describes himself as a liberal, pro-choice, pro-gay rights, lifelong Democrat who 
belongs to “the notoriously politically correct Park Slope Food Co-Op in 
Brooklyn” and has never voted for a Republican “nor do I plan to.” But as presi-
dent of the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (FIRE), he knows that 
the most common justifications for liberal censorship are “sensitivity” about 
“diversity” and “multi-culturalism,” as academic liberals understand those things. 
 In recent years, a University of Oklahoma vice president has declared that no 
university resources, including e-mail, could be used for “the forwarding of political 
humor/commentary.” The College at Brockport in New York banned using the 
Internet to “annoy or otherwise inconvenience” anyone. Rhode Island College pro-
hibited, among many other things, certain “attitudes.” Texas Southern University’s 
comprehensive proscriptions included “verbal harm” from damaging “assump-
tions” or “implications.” Texas A&M promised “freedom from indignity of any 
type.” Davidson banned “patronizing remarks.” Drexel University forbade “inap-
propriately directed laughter.” Western Michigan University banned “sexism,” 
including “the perception” of a person “not as an individual, but as a member of a 
category based on sex.” Banning “perceptions” must provide full employment for 
the burgeoning ranks of academic administrators. 
 Many campuses congratulate themselves on their broad-mindedness 
when they establish small “free-speech zones” where political advocacy can 
be scheduled. At one point Texas Tech’s 28,000 students had a “free-speech 
gazebo” that was 20 feet wide. And you thought the First Amendment made 
America a free-speech zone. 
 At Tufts, a conservative newspaper committed “harassment” by printing 
accurate quotations from the Koran and a verified fact about the status of 
women in Saudi Arabia. Lukianoff says that Tufts may have been the first 
American institution “to find someone guilty of harassment for stating verifi-
able facts directed at no one in particular.” 
 He documents how “orientation” programs for freshmen become propa-
ganda to (in the words of one orthodoxy enforcer) “leave a mental footprint on 
their consciousness.” Faculty, too, can face mandatory consciousness-raising. 
 In 2007, Donald Hindley, a politics professor at Brandeis, was found guilty of 
harassment because when teaching Latin American politics he explained the ori-
gin of the word “wetbacks,” which refers to immigrants crossing the Rio Grande. 
Without a hearing, the university provost sent Hindley a letter stating that the 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

462 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
university “will not tolerate inappropriate, racial and discriminatory conduct.” 
The assistant provost was assigned to monitor Hindley’s classes “to ensure that 
you do not engage in further violations of the nondiscrimination and harassment 
policy.” Hindley was required to attend “anti-discrimination training.” 
 Such coercion is a natural augmentation of censorship. Next comes mob 
rule. Last year, at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the vice provost for 
diversity and climate—really; you can’t make this stuff up—encouraged stu-
dents to disrupt a news conference by a speaker opposed to racial preferences. 
They did, which the vice provost called “awesome.” This is the climate on an 
especially liberal campus that celebrates “diversity” in everything but thought. 
 “What happens on campus,” Lukianoff says, “doesn’t stay on campus” 
because censorship has “downstream effects.” He quotes a sociologist whose 
data he says demonstrate that “those with the highest levels of education 
have the  lowest exposure to people with conflicting points of view.” This 
encourages “the human tendency to live within our own echo chambers.” 
Parents’ tuition dollars and student indebtedness pay for this. Good grief.  
Source: Washington Post, December 2, 2012. © 2012 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used 
by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. www.
washingtonpost.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What did student Keith Sampson experience at Indiana? 
 2. What are liberal concerns on campuses that can lead to what Will calls censorship? 
 3. What are “free-speech zones”? 
 4. What does Lukianoff mean by “downstream effects”? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What is Will’s subject? What is his claim? 
 6. How does the author develop and support his claim? 
 7. Examine the evidence presented in paragraph 12; would you like to know more 
about the data? (When, where, and how the data were collected?)  
 8. Has Will presented a convincing argument? If yes, why? If no, why not? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. In paragraph 5, Will asserts that we can look to colleges to see what liberals 
would do to the country if they could. Does the comment belong in this essay, 
in your view, or does it seem a distraction? Explain your response. 
 10. Is it appropriate for colleges to establish rules about harassment? What about 
speech code guidelines? Explain your views.  
 11. What suggestions do you have for balancing a free exchange of ideas with a 
need to recognize the diversity of a campus community?   
11
12

 READ:  What situation is depicted? Who speaks to whom? 
 REASON:  Who “hasn’t noticed yet” and what has he failed to observe?  
What makes the cartoon clever? 
 REFLECT/ WRITE:  Explain the point of the cartoon. 
 TOLES © 2012 The Washington Post. Reprinted with 
permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved. 
 The Environment: How Do We 
Sustain It? 
 CHAPTER 20 

464
 I
 n 2005 psychology professor Glenn Shean published a book titled  Psychol-
ogy and the Environment.  Dr. Shean argues that we are behaving as if we have 
no environmental problems to face, and that therefore the biggest first step 
to solving problems related to environmental degradation is to make people 
aware of and concerned about the interconnected issues of climate change, the 
heavy use of fossil fuels, and species extinction. Because we are programmed 
to make quick decisions based on immediate dangers, we find it difficult to 
become engaged with dangers that stretch out into an indeterminate future. 
There is always tomorrow to worry about the polar bears or the increasing 
levels of CO 2 in the atmosphere, or the rapidly melting ice caps. And besides, 
who wants to give up a comfortable lifestyle because it might affect future life 
on this planet? 
 By 2008 even the Bush administration began to give voice to the concerns of 
environmentalists such as Dr. Shean. After much resistance, there seems to be a 
more widespread acceptance of climate change and the problems that it can 
cause, but even among those grudgingly on board there is still a debate as to the 
degree to which human actions are a major cause of the problems—as opposed 
to a recognition of periods of temperature increases and decreases that have been 
a part of the history of the planet. Why do we resist accepting responsibility for 
adding to the problem? Because to admit to being a cause means that we have to 
accept being part of the solution—we have to agree to change some of the things 
we are doing that are heating up the atmosphere. And here is where sacrifice and 
cost enter the picture. Do we expect factories to shut down? No, but regulations 
governing pollutants from their smokestacks will help the atmosphere—at a cost 
to doing business. Do we expect people to stop enjoying the beach? No, but we 
could have restrictions on building that destroys the barrier islands and marsh-
lands protecting shorelines from erosion and destruction from storms. Do we 
expect people to stop driving cars? No, but the government could require manu-
facturers to build more fuel-efficient cars—at a cost to doing business. 
 And so, even though the conversation has changed somewhat since 2005, 
the debate continues over the extent to which human actions make a difference 
and then what should be done, at what cost, and at whose expense. In five arti-
cles and several visuals—including the one that opens this chapter—a variety of 
voices are heard on this debate. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS 
 1. 
To whom do you listen primarily when you explore scientific questions? 
Scientists? Politicians? Religious leaders? What is the reasoning behind your 
choice?  
 2. 
How green is your lifestyle? Do you think it matters? Why or why not? 
 3. 
Does Dr. Shean describe you when he writes of those who are complacent about 
environment problems because there does not seem to be an immediate  danger? 
If so, do you think you should reconsider your position? Why or why not?  
 4. 
If you accept that we have a problem, what solutions would you support? 
Reject? Why?  

 T. Rex  in charge. 
 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
465
 THE SIXTH EXTINCTION: IT HAPPENED 
TO HIM. IT’S HAPPENING TO YOU.   
    MICHAEL   NOVACEK 
 Paleontologist Michael Novacek is senior vice president and provost of the American 
Museum of Natural History in New York City. Author of more than 200 articles and 
books, Novacek’s most recent book is  Terra: Our 100-Million-Year-Old Ecosystem—
and the Threats That Now Put It at Risk (2008). “The Sixth Extinction” was published 
on January 13, 2008, in the  Washington Post. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Who is the “Him” in Novacek’s title? Is it ridiculous to 
suggest that  we could be like  him? 
  The news of environmental 
traumas assails us from every 
side—unseasonal storms, floods, 
fires, drought, melting ice caps, 
lost species of river dolphins and 
giant turtles, rising sea levels 
potentially displacing inhabitants 
of Arctic and Pacific islands and 
hundreds of thousands of people 
dying every year from air pollu-
tion. Last week brought more—
new reports that Greenland’s 
glaciers may be melting away at 
an alarming rate. 
 What’s going on? Are we 
experiencing one of those major 
shocks to life on Earth that rocked 
the planet in the past? 
 That’s just doomsaying, say 
those who insist that economic 
growth and human technological 
ingenuity will eventually solve 
our problems. But in fact, the sci-
entific take on our current environmental mess is hardly so upbeat. 
 More than a decade ago, many scientists claimed that humans were dem-
onstrating a capacity to force a major global catastrophe that would lead to a 
traumatic shift in climate, an intolerable level of destruction of natural habi-
tats, and an extinction event that could eliminate 30 to 50 percent of all living 
species by the middle of the 21st century. Now those predictions are coming 
true. The evidence shows that species loss today is accelerating. We find our-
selves uncomfortably privileged to be witnessing a mass extinction event as 
it’s taking place, in real time. 
 The fossil record reveals some extraordinarily destructive events in the 
past, when species losses were huge, synchronous and global in scale. 
Paleontologists recognize at least five of these mass extinction events, the last 
1
2
3
4
5

466 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
of which occurred about 65 million years ago and wiped out all those big, 
 charismatic dinosaurs (except their bird descendants) and at least 70 percent 
of all other species. The primary suspect for this catastrophe is a six-mile-wide 
asteroid (a mile higher than Mount Everest) whose rear end was still sticking 
out of the atmosphere as its nose augered into the crust a number of miles off 
the shore of the present-day Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. Earth’s atmosphere 
became a hell furnace, with super-broiler temperatures sufficient not only to kill 
exposed organisms, but also to incinerate virtually every forest on the planet. 
 For several million years, a period 100 times greater than the entire known 
history of Homo sapiens, the planet’s destroyed ecosystems underwent a slow, 
laborious recovery. The earliest colonizers after the catastrophe were populous 
species that quickly adapted to degraded environments, the ancient analogues 
of rats, cockroaches and weeds. But many of the original species that occupied 
these ecosystems were gone and did not come back. They’ll never come back. 
The extinction of a species, whether in an incinerated 65-million-year-old reef 
or in a bleached modern-day reef of the Caribbean, is forever. 
 Now we face the possibility of mass extinction event No. 6. No big killer 
asteroid is in sight. Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes are not of the scale to 
cause mass extinction. Yet recent studies show that troubling earlier projec-
tions about rampant extinction aren’t exaggerated. 
 In 2007, of 41,415 species assessed for the International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species, 16,306 
(39 percent) were categorized as threatened with extinction: one in three amphib-
ians, one quarter of the world’s pines and other coniferous trees, one in eight 
birds and one in four mammals. Another study identified 595 “centers of 
imminent extinction” in tropical forests, on islands and in mountainous areas. 
Disturbingly, only one-third of the sites surveyed were legally protected, and 
most were surrounded by areas densely populated by humans. We may not be 
able to determine the cause of past extinction events, but this time we have, 
indisputably: We are our own asteroids. 
 Still, the primary concern here is the future welfare of us and our children. 
Assuming that we survive the current mass extinction event, won’t we do 
okay? The disappearance of more than a few species is regrettable, but we 
can’t compromise an ever-expanding population and a global economy whose 
collapse would leave billions to starve. This dismissal, however, ignores an 
essential fact about all those species: They live together in tightly networked 
ecosystems responsible for providing the habitats in which even we humans 
thrive. Pollination of flowers by diverse species of wild bees, wasps, butterflies 
and other insects, not just managed honeybees, accounts for more than 
30 percent of all food production that humans depend upon. 
 What will the quality of life be like in this transformed new world? Science 
doesn’t paint a pretty picture. The tropics and coral reefs, major sources of the 
planet’s biological diversity, will be hugely debilitated. The 21st century may 
mark the end of the line for the evolution of large mammals and other animals 
that are now either on the verge of extinction, such as the Yangtze River dol-
phin, or, like the African black rhinoceros, confined to small, inadequately sup-
portive habitats. And devastated ecosystems will provide warm welcome to all 
6
7
8
9
10

 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
467
those opportunistic invader species that have already demonstrated their 
capacity to wipe out native plants and animals. We, and certainly our children, 
will find ourselves largely embraced by a pest and weed ecology ideal for the 
flourishing of invasive species and new, potentially dangerous microbes to 
which we haven’t built up a biological resistance. 
 Of course people care about this. Recent surveys show a sharp increase in 
concern over the environmental changes taking place. But much of this spike 
in interest is due to the marked shift in attention to climate change and global 
warming away from other environmental problems such as deforestation, 
water pollution, overpopulation and biodiversity loss. Global warming is of 
course a hugely important issue. But it is the double whammy of climate 
change combined with fragmented, degraded natural habitats—not climate 
change alone—that is the real threat to many populations, species and ecosys-
tems, including human populations marginalized and displaced by those 
 combined forces. 
 Still, human ingenuity, commitment and shared responsibility have great 
potential to do good. The IUCN Red List now includes a handful of species 
that have been revived through conservation efforts, including the European 
white-tailed eagle and the Mekong catfish. Narrow corridors of protected 
habitat now connect nature preserves in South Africa, and similar corridors link 
up the coral reefs of the Bahamas, allowing species in the protected areas to 
move back and forth, exchange genes and sustain their populations. Coffee 
farms planted near protected forests and benefiting from wild pollinators have 
increased coffee yields. New York’s $1 billion purchase of watersheds in the 
Catskill Mountains that purify water naturally secured precious natural habitat 
while eliminating the need for a filtration plant that would have cost $6 to 
$8 billion, plus annual operating costs of $300 million. Emissions of polluting 
gases such as dangerous nitrogen oxides have leveled off in North America 
and even declined in Europe (unfortunately emissions of the same are steeply 
rising in China). Plans for reflective roofing, green space and increased shade 
to cool urban “heat islands” are at least under consideration in many cities. 
 These actions may seem puny in light of the enormous problem we face, 
but their cumulative effect can bring surprising improvements. Yet our recent 
efforts, however praiseworthy, must become more intensive and global. Any 
measure of success depends not only on international cooperation but also on 
the leadership of the most powerful nations and economies. 
 The first step in dealing with the problem is recognizing it for what it is. 
Ecologists point out that the image of Earth still harboring unspoiled, pristine 
wild places is a myth. We live in a human-dominated world, they say, and virtu-
ally no habitat is untouched by our presence. Yet we are hardly the infallible 
masters of that universe. Instead, we are rather uneasy regents, a fragile and 
dysfunctional royal family holding back a revolution. 
 The sixth extinction event is under way. Can humanity muster the leadership 
and international collaboration necessary to stop eating itself from the inside? 
 Source:  Washington Post, January 13, 2008. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
11
12
13
14
15

468 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
  1. What events suggest to scientists that we may be heading for another mass 
extinction?  
  2. What is the response of many to this “doomsaying” discussion? 
  3. How many mass extinctions has the Earth experienced? When was the last one 
and what happened then?  
  4. How do scientists describe the consequences of extinction No. 6? 
  5. What are the specific problems that combine to threaten a disastrous change in 
our environment?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  6. What is the primary cause of a potential extinction No. 6? What, then, needs to 
be the primary source of the solutions? What, in the author’s view, is the 
 necessary first step? 
  7. In paragraph 12, Novacek describes some actions we have taken to address 
problems. What does he seek to accomplish by including this paragraph? 
  8. What is Novacek’s claim? State it to reveal a causal argument. 
  9. Of the various consequences of extinction No. 6, listed in paragraph 10, what 
seems most frightening or devastating to you? Why?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. Novacek lists numbers and types of endangered species. Do these figures 
 surprise you? Concern you? Why or why not? 
 11. In your experience, how widespread is the concern for environmental degrada-
tion? Do your friends and family discuss this issue? Do most dismiss the 
 seriousness of the issue, as Novacek suggests? 
 12. Have you made changes to be kinder to the environment? If so, what have you 
done and what would you recommend that others do?  
 13. Do you agree with Novacek—or does he overstate the problem? If you agree, 
how would you contribute to his argument? If you disagree, how would you 
refute him? 
 TRUST ME, I’M A SCIENTIST  
 DANIEL T.  WILLINGHAM  
Why So Many People Choose Not to Believe What Scientists Say
 A professor of psychology at the University of Virginia with a PhD in cognitive psy-
chology from Harvard University, Daniel Willingham maintains a long list of interesting 
blogs at his university home page. He is the author of many articles and books, includ-
ing  Why Don’t Students Like School? (2010) and  When Can You Trust the Experts: 
How to Tell Good Science from Bad in Education (2012). The following article was 
published in May 2011.  

 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
469
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Do you trust scientists? If not, why not?  
 A friend of mine has long held that a vaccination his son received as an infant 
triggered his child’s autism. He clings to this belief despite a string of scientific 
studies that show no link between autism and vaccines. When the original 
paper on such a link was recently discredited as a fraud, my friend’s reaction 
was that it will now be more difficult to persuade people of the dangers of 
vaccination. He is not alone: nearly half of all Americans believe in the vaccine-
autism link or are unsure about it. 
 The paradox goes deeper. My friend insists that he trusts scientists—and 
again, in this respect, he is like most Americans. In a 2008 survey by the 
National Science Foundation, more respondents expressed “a great deal” of 
confidence in science leaders than in leaders of any other institution except 
the military. On public policy issues, Americans believe that science leaders 
are more knowledgeable and impartial than leaders in other sectors of society, 
such as business or government. Why do people say that they trust scientists 
in general but part company with them on specific issues? 
 Many individuals blame the poor quality of science education in the U.S. If 
kids got more science in school, the thinking goes, they would learn to appre-
ciate scientific opinion on vaccines, climate, evolution and other policy issues. 
But this is a misconception. Those who know more science have only a slightly 
greater propensity to trust scientists. The science behind many policy issues is 
highly specialized, and evaluating it requires deep knowledge—deeper than 
students are going to get in elementary and high school science classes. A 
more direct approach would be to educate people about why they are prone 
to accept inaccurate beliefs in the first place. 
 Humans do seem to prize accuracy above all. We want our beliefs to be 
accurate—to align with what is really true about the world—and we know that 
science is a reliable guide to accuracy. But this desire to be accurate conflicts 
with other motives, some of them unconscious. People hold beliefs to protect 
important values, for example. Individuals who think of nature as sacred may 
perceive genetic modification as morally wrong, regardless of its safety or 
utility. People also hold beliefs that are rooted in their emotions. A flu 
pandemic that can cause widespread death among the innocent may cause 
feelings of fear and helplessness. One way to cope with those emotions is to 
belittle warnings of a pandemic as improbable. 
 In reconciling our rational and irrational motives for belief, we have 
become good at kidding ourselves. Because we want to see ourselves as 
rational beings, we find reasons to maintain that our beliefs  are accurate. One 
or two contrarians are sufficient to convince us that the science is “controver-
sial” or “unsettled.” If people knew that other motives might compromise the 
accuracy of their beliefs, most would probably try to be on their guard. 
 Asking science teachers to impart enough content to understand all the 
issues may be unrealistic, but they might be able to improve people’s apprecia-
tion for the accuracy of scientific knowledge. Through the study of the history 
of science, students might gain an understanding both of their own motivations 
1
2
3
4
5
6

470 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
for belief and of science as a method of knowing. If a student understands how 
a medieval worldview could have made a geocentric theory of the solar system 
seem correct, it is a short step to seeing similar influences in oneself. 
 Science history can also help students understand why scientific knowl-
edge grows ever more accurate. It is easy for a non-scientist to dismiss an 
unpleasant conclusion as controversial on the grounds that scientists con-
stantly change their minds: “First they say chocolate is bad for us, then it’s 
good . . . they can’t decide anything.” By studying how new observations led 
to the revision of important theories, however, students see that scientists’ 
readiness to change their beliefs to align with data is a source of great strength, 
not weakness, and why near consensus on issues such as global warming or 
vaccine safety is so impressive. Science may not be the only way of organizing 
and understanding our experience, but for accuracy it fares better than reli-
gion, politics and art. That’s the lesson.  
Source: Scientific American, May 2011. Reproduced with permission. Copyright © 2011 Scientific 
American, a division of Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. How many Americans believe that vaccines cause autism? 
 2. What did the National Science Foundation study show about Americans’ trust 
in scientists?  
 3. Does having more science knowledge increase trust in scientists? 
 4. Why do people seek reasons to reject scientific knowledge? 
 5. How can knowledge of science history increase trust in science? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What type (genre) of argument is this? Is it possible to categorize this argument 
in more than one genre?  
 7. What is Willingham’s claim? State it to reveal the argument’s genre. 
 8. How does the author develop and support his claim? 
 9. What is not the primary cause of distrust of science? What is the primary cause? 
 10. How would you describe the author’s style and tone? How do they aid his 
argument? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 11. Does Willingham’s analysis of human psychology make sense to you? If not, 
how would you explain the paradox of Americans’ attitudes toward scientists? 
 12. How much knowledge of science history do you have? Is increasing this kind 
of knowledge at least part of the answer to trusting scientists? If yes, why? If 
no, why not?  
7

 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
471
   GLOBAL WARMING IS JUST 
THE TIP OF THE ICEBERG   
  JAMES R.   LEE  
 Assistant professor at the American University School of International Service, Dr. Lee 
is also director of the Mandala Projects. These include the Trade and Environmental 
Database, the Inventory of Conflict and Environment, and the Global Classroom. He is 
currently working on a book related to the topic of the following essay, which 
appeared in the  Washington Post  on January 4, 2009.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  If global warming is just the tip, what lies below the tip 
of the iceberg? What do you expect Lee to write about? 
 T he Cold War shaped world politics for half a century. But global warming 
may shape the patterns of global conflict for much longer than that—and help 
spark clashes that will be, in every sense of the word, hot wars. 
 We’re used to thinking of climate change as an environmental problem, 
not a military one, but it’s long past time to alter that mindset. Climate change 
may mean changes in Western lifestyles, but in some parts of the world, it will 
mean far more. Living in Washington, I may respond to global warming by 
buying a Prius, planting a tree or lowering my thermostat. But elsewhere, 
people will respond to climate change by building bomb shelters and 
buying guns. 
 “There is every reason to believe that as the 21st century unfolds, the 
security story will be bound together with climate change,” warns John 
Ashton, a veteran diplomat who is now the United Kingdom’s first special 
envoy on climate change. “The last time the world faced a challenge this com-
plex was during the Cold War. Yet the stakes this time are even higher because 
the enemy now is ourselves, the choices we make.” 
 Defense experts have also started to see the link between climate change 
and conflict. A 2007 CNA Corp. report, supervised by a dozen retired admirals 
and generals, warned that climate change could lead to political unrest in 
numerous badly hit countries, then perhaps to outright bloodshed and battle. 
One key factor that could stoke these tensions is massive migration as people 
flee increasingly uninhabitable areas, which would lead to border tensions, 
greater demands for rescue and evacuation services and disputes over essen-
tial resources. With these threats looming, the U.N. Security Council held a 
precedent-setting debate on climate change in April 2007—explicitly casting 
global warming as a national security issue. 
 Global warming could lead to warfare in three different ways. 
 The first is conflict arising from scarcity. As the world gets hotter and drier, 
glaciers will melt, and the amount of arable land will shrink. In turn, fresh water, 
plants, crops and cattle and other domestic animals will be harder to come 
by, thereby spurring competition and conflict over what’s left. In extreme 
examples, a truly desiccated ecosystem could mean a complete evacuation of 
a hard-hit region. And the more people move, the more they will jostle with 
their new neighbors. 
1
2
3
4
5
6

472 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 Such displacement can arise either suddenly or slowly. The growth of the 
Sahara, for instance, took many millenniums; many thousands of years ago, 
people were slowly nudged out of the inland region of northern Africa and 
into such great river valleys as the Nile and the Niger. Over time, incremental 
but prolonged rises in sea levels will also gradually uproot hundreds of millions 
of people. 
 But sometimes the displacement happens with shocking speed: Just think 
of the deadly hurricanes Katrina and Rita, which together drove millions of 
people to suddenly leave Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas. As global warming 
and population growth increase, we could see far deadlier storms than Katrina. 
In 1991, a cyclone in Bangladesh displaced 2 million people and killed 138,000. 
 All this can lead to warfare when it’s time for the displaced to find a new 
home. For most of human history, they could at least theoretically do so in 
unclaimed lands—a sort of territorial pressure valve whose existence tamped 
down conflict. But today, this reservoir of vacant turf no longer exists, except 
in the least hospitable parts of the planet. So when the displaced start eyeing 
currentily inhabited areas, expect trouble—and the bigger the displacement, 
the bigger the fight. 
 The second cause of the coming climate wars is the flip side of scarcity: 
the problems of an increase in abundance. Suppose that global warming 
makes a precious resource easier to get at—say, rising temperatures in north-
ern Canada, Alaska and Siberia make it easier to get at oil and gas resources 
in regions that had previously been too bone-chilling to tap. (A few degrees of 
change in temperature can transform a previously inhospitable climate.) But 
what happens if some tempting new field pops up in international waters 
7
8
9
10

 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
473
contested by two great powers? Or if smaller countries with murky borders 
start arguing over newly arable land? 
 Finally, we should also worry about new conflicts over issues of sovereignty 
that we didn’t need to deal with in our older, colder world. Consider the 
Northwest Passage, which is turning into an ice-free corridor from Europe to 
Asia during the summer months. Canada claims some portions of the route as 
its own sovereign waters, while the United States argues that these sections lie 
within international waters. Admittedly, it’d take a lot of tension for this to turn 
into a military conflict, but anyone convinced that the United States and 
Canada could never come to blows has forgotten the War of 1812. And not all 
this sort of resource conflict will occur between friendly countries. 
 Other kinds of territorial quarrels will arise, too. Some remote islands—
particularly such Pacific islands as Tuvalu, Kiribati, Tonga, the Maldives and 
many others—may be partially or entirely submerged beneath rising ocean 
waters. Do they lose their sovereignty if their territory disappears? After all, 
governments in exile have maintained sovereign rights in the past over land 
they didn’t control (think of France and Poland in World War II). Nor are these 
new questions far away in the future. The first democratically elected presi-
dent of the Maldives, Mohamed Nasheed, is already planning to use tourism 
revenue to buy land abroad—perhaps in India, Sri Lanka or Australia—to 
house his citizens. “We do not want to leave the Maldives, but we also do not 
want to be climate refugees living in tents for decades,” he told Britain’s 
 Guardian newspaper. 
 The net result of these changes will be the creation of two geopolitical 
belts of tension due to global warming, which will dramatically shape the 
 patterns of conflict in the 21st century. 
 First, politics will heat up along what we might call the equatorial tension 
belt, a broad swath of instability around the planet’s center. This belt will creep 
southward, deeper into Africa, and extend far into central Asia. 
 Second, a new tension belt will develop around the polar circles. In the 
short term, the main problems will arise in the Northern Hemisphere, but later 
in the 21st century, the area around the South Pole may also see increasing 
security strains as countries rush to claim and develop heretofore frozen areas. 
If the equatorial tension belt includes mostly poor, developing countries fight-
ing over survival, the new polar tension belt will draw in wealthy, developed 
countries fighting over opportunity. 
 This is, admittedly, a glum view of the future. But we can still avoid the 
new hot wars—or at least cool them down a bit. For starters, we should redou-
ble our efforts to slow down global warming and undo the damage humanity 
has already done to the environment. Every little bit helps, so by all means, 
hassle your senator and recycle those bottles. 
 Beyond that, we need to get our heads around the idea that global warm-
ing is one of the most serious long-term threats to our national and personal 
security. For the next two decades or so, the climate will continue to change: 
Historic levels of built-up greenhouse gases will continue to warm the world—
and spin it toward new patterns of conflict. So we need to do more than simply 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

474 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
reverse climate change. We need to understand and react to it—ordinary 
 people and governments alike—in ways that avoid conflict. Over the next few 
years, we may find that climate-change accords and peace treaties start to 
overlap more and more. And we may find that global warming is heating new 
conflicts up to the boiling point. 
Source:   Washington Post,  January 4, 2009. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What are the three ways that global warming can lead to war? 
 2. 
 How can human displacement caused by global warming happen slowly? 
How can it come about quickly?  
 3. 
How can sovereignty issues be a result of global warming? 
 4. 
Where are the two geopolitical “belts of tension”? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Lee’s claim? What evidence does he provide to support the seriousness 
of the problem? 
 6. 
Examine Lee’s discussion of each cause; does he provide a convincing scenario 
for each possible source of conflict? Why or why not?  
 7. 
What type (genre) of argument is this? Where does Lee place most of his 
emphasis? Why? What does he provide in the final two paragraphs?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Lee concedes that most of us see global warming as an environmental problem 
only—serious as that is. Is his warning of climate-change war a new idea for 
you? Does it make sense? (If you were a Maldives native, would Lee’s  argument 
seem more convincing?)  
   9. 
Most of the author’s argument is given to explaining the problem— understandably. 
Can you add to his discussion of solutions? If recycling bottles won’t stop immi-
grants from arid lands seeking new homes, what else do we need to do—as indi-
viduals and as a nation—to address the problems raised by Lee?  
 ON CLIMATE CHANGE, GOVERNMENT 
IS NOT THE ANSWER  
           ART CARDEN 
 Holding a PhD in economics from Washington University in St. Louis, Art Carden is 
assistant professor of economics at Samford University. He is also a senior research 
fellow with the Institute of Faith, Work, and Economics and a senior fellow with the 
Beacon Center of Tennessee. He has published in economics journals and magazines 
and is a regular contributor to   Forbes.com . The following article on climate change 
appeared in the  Washington Examiner on November 7, 2012.  

 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
475
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What answers to the problems of climate change do you 
expect the author to suggest? Do you have answers to the problems of climate 
change?  
 Climate change is a textbook example of the economic case for government 
intervention. In the language of an economics textbook, it involves a pretty 
clear market failure created by the fact that my actions (emitting carbon diox-
ide) spill over onto non-consenting third parties. 
 Consider: I burn fossil fuels, to my own benefit. The climate changes. You 
might also benefit if you own land in northern Canada, but you might be worse 
off if you live in Miami or Bangladesh. How can you be compensated for the 
harm I cause to benefit myself? On the face of it, there’s a plausible case for 
government involvement. 
 But in light of political responses to natural disasters and political out-
comes more generally, I’m included to think that political “solutions” are not 
solutions at all. Consider how governments respond to natural disasters like 
Hurricane Sandy. They openly defy the laws of the marketplace and impose 
laws against price gouging. These laws in turn create shortages, which in turn 
create unnecessary suffering. 
 Consider also the China-bashing that was on display in the recent presi-
dential election and the more general foreigner-bashing that is part and parcel 
of the political scene. Such rhetoric and the policies based on it are at odds 
with what economists left, right and center have known about trade for centu-
ries. Trade creates wealth, and free trade among nations is a rising tide that 
lifts all boats. In spite of this, few things are as unpopular as free trade (on the 
Left) and open immigration (on the Right). 
 The rhetorical, cultural and political environment in which climate change 
policy is made will never be one characterized by wise and benevolent leaders 
seeking only the good of a populace consisting of recently enlightened New 
Environmentalist Men and Women. People have all sorts of biases that warp 
their political judgment, as Bryan Caplan has discussed in his book  The Myth 
of the Rational Voter. 
 With systematically biased voters, tangled webs of interest groups and 
politicians who are all eager to cater to these biases and these interest groups, 
the policies we get in the real world are likely to differ from the optimal poli-
cies that get discussed in the “externalities and public goods” lectures in 
introductory economics classes by a pretty wide margin. 
 The lesson for climate change policy is dismal. Even if we agree that cli-
mate change is a problem, and even if we agree that climate change could 
have very, very bad effects, ongoing research in “robust political economy” is 
showing us that passing seemingly plausible ideas through the filters of politi-
cal bias will give us something very different from the “solutions” we would 
like to see. 
 How, then, should we address climate change? Adaptation is probably a 
better strategy than prevention. Large-scale, top-down solutions are unlikely 
to work, so the best way to proceed might be to recognize some of the key 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

476 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
insights of 2009 Nobel laureate Elinor Ostrom. Her work focused on how 
“bottom-up” solutions to resource management problems evolve. To trans-
late it into the language of a bumper sticker you might have seen, “Think 
globally, act locally.” Let’s look for ways to devolve authority and to develop 
markets for goods and for risks that are not currently priced. Let’s trust the 
initiative of innovative economic, social and cultural entrepreneurs rather than 
politicians.  
Source: Washington Examiner, November 7, 2012. Reprinted with permission from the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
Why does it seem that government should seek solutions to climate 
change?  
 2. 
Why are political solutions not likely to be good ones? What are Carden’s views 
of politicians and voters?  
 3. 
Does the author seem convinced that climate change is a serious problem? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 4. 
What, exactly, is Carden refuting? What is his claim? 
 5. 
What alternative approach does he present? 
 6. 
What are the grounds for his rejection of government seeking solutions to cli-
mate change? Is his argument against government approach convincing? (Does 
he ever explain which governments—or should we assume that he means both 
federal and state governments?)  
 7. 
Does Carden demonstrate that the only two choices are government preven-
tion or local adaptation? (Scientists have described the Arctic ice melt as faster 
than they had predicted years ago. Is “prevention” really an option?)  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Do you think that state and federal governments cope reasonably well with 
natural disasters such as Hurricane Sandy—keeping in mind what the word 
 disaster means? Can communities and individuals cope better? (If you lost your 
home in a flood, would you be able to pay for a hotel room and, in a short time, 
find another home in which to live? Do most people have the resources to cope 
with disasters without government assistance?)  
 9. 
What suggestions do you have for managing our lives, individually and col-
lectively, in a time of climate change that includes rising temperatures, rising 
sea levels, and more violent and unusual weather?  

 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
477
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What does the visual on this page represent? 
 2. 
What do the words in the visual communicate? 

478 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 3. 
What is the ad’s claim? 
 4. 
Does this ad’s visual effectively support the claim? Why or why not? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 5. 
Who has to work together to solve the climate crisis? (Think about this and also 
draw from your reading in this chapter.) Are all of the significant players likely 
to work together? Why or why not?  
 6. 
Does this ad catch your attention sufficiently for you to check out its website? 
For you to think about ways that you can help solve the climate problem? Why 
or why not?
 THE COST OF CLIMATE 
INACTION  
         KRISTEN   SHEERAN  AND   MINDY   LUBBER  
 Formerly an associate professor at St. Mary’s College of Maryland, Kristen Sheeran is 
now executive director of the Economics for Equity and the Environment Network (E3 
Network), a group of economists concerned with environmental policy. Dr. Sheeran 
has published papers on economics in scholarly journals and addressed environmental 
issues in popular newspapers and magazines. Mindy Lubber, MBA, has been the 
regional administrator for the EPA and the founder/CEO of Green Century Capital 
Management. She is now president of Ceres, a national coalition of investors, 
 environmental organizations, and other public interest groups working to incorporate 
sustainability into capital markets. Their article was published in the  Washington Post  
on May 6, 2009.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  The authors’ title might seem a bit cryptic; what “inaction” 
do you expect them to examine? And what are they likely to mean by “cost”? 
 Robert J. Samuelson’s April 27 [2009] op-ed, “Selling the Green Economy,” 
was way off the mark on the economics of tackling climate change. It was a call 
to bury our collective heads in the sand simply because the future involves 
uncertainty—exactly the opposite of what we need to do. 
 Samuelson argued that the cost of moving to a clean-energy economy is 
higher than advocates expect and that transition can’t happen nearly fast 
enough to meet the ambitious goals proposed in the climate and energy bill 
sponsored by Reps. Henry Waxman (D-Calif.) and Edward Markey (D-Mass.). 
 But this assumes that all costs involved in mitigating climate change—and 
there will be costs—represent new costs, without acknowledging the massive 
error in our market system that equates the price of carbon emissions to zero. This 
fundamental error skews everything that follows, because if emitting carbon costs 
nothing on a balance sheet, all steps to reduce pollution count as “new costs.” 
 The real cost of carbon emissions is far from zero. Each new scientific 
report brings proof of a changing climate that promises to disrupt agricultural 
patterns, set off a scramble for dwindling resources, raise sea levels, propel 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 20  The Environment: How Do We Sustain It? 
479
population shifts and require massive emergency spending as we try to react 
to the growing crises. These are the costs of inaction. 
 A smart climate policy can create a mechanism to put the right price on 
carbon, and rapid economic change will follow that firm price signal, along 
with reduced climate risks. Our work with more than 100 economists  nationwide 
and at  RealClimateEconomics.org demonstrates the weight of economic 
 analysis supporting this point. 
 The failure to put a real price on carbon emissions also undermines 
Samuelson’s second point, that we cannot switch to clean energy technologies 
quickly. Many claim that these technologies will not work, at least in a 
 cost-effective way, because we would already be using them if they did. 
 But we are not using them enough now because we have set the price of 
carbon pollution at zero and have devoted most of our financial incentives to 
fossil fuel production to gas up our vehicles, heat our homes and power our 
factories. Acknowledging the climate crisis and pricing its risks correctly, 
instead of passing them on to our children, would produce an amazingly quick 
shift to new technologies and behaviors. We change habits when it makes 
economic sense to  do so. Price matters. 
 Ultimately, households and businesses care more about their total energy 
bill than costs per gallon or per kilowatt hour. Gas at $4 per gallon is cheaper 
in a car that gets 40 miles per gallon than $3-a-gallon gas in a clunker that gets 
20 mpg. American entrepreneurial and research genius can move us to far 
greater energy efficiency quickly, using mostly existing technologies, when a 
carbon price rewards the effort. 
 The economic impacts on households, then, may not be as dramatic as 
some warn. We can mobilize the political will for clean technologies and emis-
sions reduction when, as economic research demonstrates, there is a visible pay-
off in jobs and strides in international competitiveness from these technologies. 
 And none of this is in conflict with the business community. Quite the 
 contrary. Consider Business for Innovative Climate and Energy Policy (BICEP), 
a coalition of nationally and globally known companies including Nike, 
Starbucks, Sun Microsystems, Timberland and Levi Strauss that the investor 
coalition Ceres coordinates. The heads of these companies believe that passing 
strong climate and energy legislation this year is in the interests of both the 
planet and their businesses. 
 Some BICEP businesses already see climate change affecting their supply 
chains, manufacturing and international markets. Those are costs. These com-
panies see strong climate and energy policy as pro-business because increased 
energy efficiency saves them money and clear price signals on carbon help 
them plan competitive strategies on a more level playing field. 
 The cost of inaction is high and could be catastrophic. But, contrary to claims, 
the cost of switching to cleaner energy and dramatically lower emissions will spur 
competitive gains, cost far less and come much more quickly once we have set 
our goals, adjusted our incentives and corrected the market’s false signals. 
 History shows that big changes often come in a rush, unforeseen by the 
critics of the day. We believe that honest accounting for the reality of climate 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

480 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
change will bring a convergence of effort and interests, triggering change on 
a scale that will, once again, alter the course of history. 
 Source:  Washington Post,  May 6, 2009. Reprinted by permission of Kristen Sheeran. 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
  1. Why do Sheeran and Lubber disagree with Robert Samuelson? What two 
points does Samuelson make? What, in the authors’ view, does he ignore when 
making both points?  
  2. What are the climate disruptions listed by Sheeran and Lubber? 
  3. What can motivate households and businesses to embrace clean technologies 
and reduced emissions?  
  4. What is Ceres? What companies are part of BICEP? 
  5. What legislation do these companies support? Why do they support it? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  6. Sheeran and Lubber use Samuelson’s column as an occasion for writing, but 
their primary purpose is not simply to refute him. What is their claim? Where 
do they state it?  
  7. Explain, in your own words, the idea of carbon costs—and their effect on 
 business decisions. 
  8. The authors conclude with a stirring belief in the possibility of significant 
change. Is their appeal an effective ending? Why or why not?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
  9. Is the concept of carbon costs to business new to you? Does it make sense to 
factor in gas bills or spending for natural disasters as part of the costs of doing 
business? Why or why not?  
 10. Is the authors’ focus on the costs of not responding to climate change an 
approach that works for you? If you are unmoved by Sheeran and Lubber’s 
argument, how would you refute them?  

 READ: What is the situation? Where are we? 
 REASON: Who speaks the lines? What is the speaker doing?  
 REFLECT/ WRITE: What is amusing about the cartoon? What more serious 
point does Morin make? 
 © 2012 Jim Morin/Morintoons Syndicate. Reprinted with permission.  
 Laws and Rights: Gun Control 
and Immigration Debates 
 CHAPTER 21 

482
 T
he visuals and articles in this chapter explore and debate two current issues: 
gun control and immigration. In the spring of 2008, the Supreme Court, in a 
close decision, struck down the District of Columbia’s ban on handguns. Some 
saw the decision as affirming the Second Amendment’s guarantee of gun own-
ership to individuals. The Court, however, did not rule out all restrictions, and 
the several mass shootings since the ruling have led to a renewed interest in 
establishing further restrictions.
In his second inaugural address, President Obama asked Congress to pass 
not only reasonable gun restrictions but also immigration reform laws. His call 
comes after an Arizona law requiring police officers to check a person’s status just 
because the person has done something to get police attention—including being 
part of a car collision that was not the “immigrant-looking” person’s fault. Is this 
careful attention to illegal immigration, or is it harassment? Do states have the 
powers to enact such laws, or are immigration issues under federal control? This 
chapter raises these and other tough questions. Reflect on the following questions 
as a guide to your study of the current debates on gun control and immigration.
PREREADING QUESTIONS
 1. 
What kinds of restrictions—if any—on guns will be consistent with the Supreme 
Court’s 2008 ruling and the Second Amendment?
 2. 
Is there any reason for citizens to own rapid-fire assault weapons?
 3. 
Should the Arizona law be seen as a way to harass legal immigrants, thereby 
discouraging immigrants from settling in that state?
 4. 
Is there any reason why young adults brought here illegally as children should 
be deprived of a college education or U.S. citizenship?
 5. 
If you wanted to change any of the current laws on these issues to have them 
reflect your views, how would you go about trying to get your legislation passed?
 GUN CONTROL? DREAM ON 
 
 KATHA  POLLITT 
 Associate editor and columnist of  The Nation, Katha Pollitt also contributes to other 
periodicals. Some of her essays are collected in  Reasonable Creatures: Essays on 
Women and Feminism (1994), two volumes of poetry include  Antarctic Traveller 
(1982), and  The Mind-Body Problem: Poems (2009). Her successful collection, 
 Learning to Drive: And Other Life Stories, was published in 2008. The following 
 Nation column appeared August 8, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What does Pollitt’s title tell you about her likely position on 
gun control? Which of the following opening statistics is the most arresting for you?
ONE NATION, UNDER GUNS
There are 90 for every 100 Americans.
Every year in the U.S. there are nearly:
Support for a ban on handguns has 
decreased in recent years . . .
 30,000  gun deaths  
60% in 1959 
70,000 gun injuries
43% in 2011
20 instances of mass murder using guns

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
483
 Why am I even bothering to write about gun control? That was going to 
be my opening sentence when this column was to be focused on the Aurora, 
Colorado, movie-theater massacre: twelve people murdered and fifty-eight 
wounded, some very severely, by James Holmes, demented neuroscience 
graduate student. Then came the massacre at the Sikh temple in Oak Creek, 
Wisconsin: six killed and three wounded, by Wade Michael Page, 40-year-old 
white supremacist and leader of a racist hardcore band called End Apathy. 
And even after this horrific crime, which the FBI is calling “domestic terror-
ism,” my opening is the same:  Why am I even bothering to write about gun 
control? End apathy? Fat chance. If even the shooting of Gabrielle Giffords, 
one of Congress’s own, by Jared Loughner, another hyperarmed madman, 
didn’t move her pro-gun colleagues or their constituents, nothing will. 
 Remember the Million Mom March? In May 2000, 750,000 women gath-
ered on the National Mall to call for what are often referred to as “reasonable” 
controls on guns, like background checks at gun shows and handgun registra-
tion (as opposed to “unreasonable” curbs like making it illegal to buy weap-
ons intended to kill people—for example, handguns or AK-47s, let alone 6,000 
rounds of ammunition on the Internet). Today you might as well stand on the 
Mall and sing “Where Have All the Flowers Gone?” 
 The Million Mom March was loosely tied to the Gore campaign, and 
Gore-Bush was the last election when Dems saw gun control as a potential vote 
winner. Once Gore lost, Democrats fled the issue. For Democratic Party leaders 
like Howard Dean (surprisingly, no friend to gun control) and Chuck Schumer, 
restrictions on gun ownership interfered with the party’s strategy of winning races 
in red states by running macho pro-gun candidates like Jon Tester and Jim Webb 
for the Senate, Brian Schweitzer for governor of Montana, or the host of conser-
vative Blue Dog types who briefly swelled the ranks of Congressional Democrats. 
 So here we are today. Hours after the Sikh temple shooting, Nancy Pelosi 
said she was “devastated” but foresaw no action on Capitol Hill. “The votes 
aren’t there,” she lamented. Even in a Democratic Congress, she acknowl-
edged, they might not be there, “because it takes a lot of votes to go down 
1
2
3
4
Children led from Sandy Hook school after mass shooting.

484 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
that path.” After the Aurora shooting, Obama spokesman Jay Carney empha-
sized controlling guns within the context of “existing law”—no easy task, 
given recent Supreme Court decisions upholding gun rights. Senator Frank 
Lautenberg, who has put forward a bill outlawing online ammunition sales—
and recently refused to pull his amendment to the cybersecurity bill banning 
high-capacity ammunition clips—is the rare Dem on the national scene who 
hasn’t given up. And Lautenberg is 88 years old. 
 In the absence of leadership at the national level, big-city police chiefs and 
mayors like Michael Bloomberg have tried to step into the breach. But with little 
support from the top and lacking an impassioned mass movement, to say nothing 
of money to combat the NRA’s huge war chest, it’s no wonder that gun control 
has shriveled into a Worthy Cause. According to Gallup, in 2011 only 26 percent 
of Americans favored a ban on handguns, down from a high of 60 percent way 
back in the dark ages of 1959. (Other polls show the country evenly divided but 
still unchanged by the recent mass murders.) Membership in the NRA has been 
increasing for decades and now stands at 4.3 million. As for the 30,000 annual 
gun deaths, 70,000 injuries and almost twenty mass murders a year? The ninety 
guns for every 100 Americans? It’s something to wring your hands about, like 
sexting or obesity or plastic bags. Just another weird American thing. 
 Why is this? One reason is surely that guns have effectively become the 
emblem of the ongoing great white male right-wing freak-out. (Ladies might 
pack a pink pistol, but not an AK-47.) When Obama was elected, gun sales 
rose—quick, the Kenyan Muslim Communist is coming for our weapons! On 
NPR’s  Diane Rehm Show, John Velleco of Gun Owners of America seemed 
comfortable with the idea that someone might want an arsenal of assault weap-
ons to protect his family from a home invasion. What home invasion would that 
be? And among the many foolish justifications for amassing high-powered 
weaponry is the delusion that you and your friends could outgun the govern-
ment if you personally decided it had become a tyranny. That’s almost as ridicu-
lous as the notion that if everyone carried a gun, people would be safer. All 
those moviegoers in Aurora needed to make their misery complete was to 
have a bunch of freelancers shooting off their weapons in a dark theater. 
 The trouble is, as with so many aspects of conservatism—the anti-choice 
movement, the Tea Party, Ron Paul—“gun rights” supporters win on intensity and 
single-mindedness. We have common sense, but they have a master narrative: 
rugged individualism, patriotism and self-defense (which includes paranoid fanta-
sies about threats from ordinary people in turbans whom they are too ignorant to 
realize are Sikhs, not Muslims . . . and obviously I’m not saying it would have been 
less horrific and more “understandable” if Page had attacked a mosque). 
 Of course, your average gun enthusiast is hardly tomorrow’s Holmes or 
Loughner or Page—you have to be mentally ill to commit mass murder—but 
without a gun, it’s difficult to kill and injure a whole crowd of people, no matter 
how much you’d like to. Gun advocates have devoted a great deal of ingenuity 
to trying to discredit this elementary point. And to the extent that gun-control 
supporters have become depressed and discouraged, they have succeeded.  
Source: The Nation, August 8, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
5
6
7
8

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
485
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What events have led to Pollitt’s column? 
 2. Who used to work for more gun control? Why? And why did that support 
collapse?  
 3. How many gun deaths occur in the United States each year? 
 4. How does the author account for the country’s focus on guns? What makes gun 
advocates successful?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What is Pollitt’s claim? (Think about this; is there a precise claim statement 
anywhere?)  
 6. How does the author develop and support her argument? (What does she do 
first? Second? Third? See if you can find specific steps in the essay.) 
 7. How would you describe her tone? What elements of style help create that tone? 
 8. Who is Pollitt’s audience? To what extent does her audience influence her 
approach and style? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 9. Do you agree with the author’s analysis of the current situation in the gun 
debate? If yes, why? If no, why not?  
 10. What mass killing has taken place since this essay was published? How has it 
affected the gun debate? Would Pollitt be a little less depressed? Explain. 
 WE CAN’T AFFORD THE 
TRUE COST OF GUN CRIME 
 
 PETULA   DVORAK  
 Petula Dvorak is a columnist for the  Washington Post. Her column appeared on 
April 13, 2012. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   When you read the essay’s title, what “cost” do you 
expect the author to address? Does your expectation turn out to be accurate? 
 So let’s say the human tragedy part of a shooting death isn’t enough to 
change your mind about gun control. 
 Maybe it’s not the angle you want to take when talking about Trayvon 
Martin, who may have been racially profiled but would still be alive today if 
George Zimmerman weren’t a wannabe cop packing heat. 
 Or perhaps it’s just bad luck that Amari Market-Purrel Perkins, a Prince 
George’s County first-grader, is dead because a fool living in his home stashed 
a gun in a Spider-Man backpack. 
 Sure, let’s forget all that sad stuff. How about, instead, we talk about the 
Benjamins, baby: What do guns in the wrong hands cost us? 
 Take a look at the massacre at Virginia Tech that occurred five years ago. 
Put aside the loss of 32 lives, the devastation of 32 families, the permanent, 
1
2
3
4
5

486 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
emotional scarring of those who survived but were mentally or physically 
marred by the day one man unleashed all the demons in his head upon a uni-
versity using a Walther P22 and a Glock 19. 
 What does allowing a mentally ill young man to legally buy two guns and 
an arsenal of magazines cost the rest of us in dollar terms? 
 About $48.2 million. That’s according to the Center for American Progress, a 
liberal D.C. think tank that analyzed Seung Hui Cho’s April 16, 2007, attack by sift-
ing through the legal bills, university staffing costs, police costs, hospital bills and 
even autopsy receipts that kept piling up long after the candlelight vigils ended. 
 That $48.2 million tab for the two-hour shooting was picked up by local, 
state and federal taxpayers, the public university system, parents and stu-
dents. That’s a huge chunk of a state budget, and any other event that cost 
this much would get unblinking scrutiny. 
 “We have such a high demand in society for efficiency and careful use of 
tax dollars” that it made sense to look at such a tragedy through a fiscal lens, 
said Donna Cooper, a senior fellow with the economic policy team at the 
Center for American Progress and co-author of the cost study. 
 And yet, even after seeing the human tragedy and economic travesty that 
an assailant with guns can cause, crazy stuff is happening all around us to grant 
access to even more guns. 
 As if to spite the Virginia Tech community, the victims and their families on 
the eve of the anniversary of the massacre, Virginia opened the door and basi-
cally hung a “Welcome Back!” sign for gunrunners. 
 The state repealed its almost 20-year-old, commonsense law that limited 
people to purchasing just one handgun every 30 days. 
 That law clearly didn’t stop Cho, who researched gun laws well and waited 32 
days between his two gun purchases, but it does open the door for Virginia to 
become Guns R Us once again. Before the 30-day law was passed in 1993, Virginia 
was notorious for being the Northeast’s major gun supplier. In New York in 1991, 
40 percent of the weapons found at crime scenes were traced to the Old Dominion. 
 Come on—show me a society where guns mean less violence. Even Wyatt 
Earp figured that one out when he banned guns from his territory. 
 So why the sudden decision by the legislature to repeal this law and by 
Gov. Robert F. McDonnell (R) to sign the repeal? Did we hear a massive public 
outcry? Acknowledge the widespread pain and suffering of those who were 
unable to pursue life, liberty or happiness because they couldn’t buy more 
than 12 guns a year? 
 My guess is that gun lobbyists fearing tighter regulations after a spike in 
murderous rampages began flying their flags, displaying their eagles and scar-
ing the crud out of people. 
 Since the first modern-day mass killing—at a McDonald’s in San Ysidro in 
1984, where 40 people were shot and more than half of them died—there 
have been 15 similar killings over 23 years, according to the Center for 
American Progress report. 
 Now get this: In the five years since Virginia Tech, there have been 12. 
 I’m not seeing how making it easier to get a gun helps things, especially in 
Virginia. 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
487
 The Founding Fathers were thinking of defending our land against the 
Redcoats when they wrote the Second Amendment. Suburban kids hopped 
up on years of  Grand Theft Auto; 33-bullet magazines and semi-automatic kill-
ing machines; and a vigilante hell-bent on protecting a cul-de-sac from Skittles 
simply weren’t in the mix. 
 So we need to work within that amendment to fit the world we live in today. 
 Most folks advocate commonsense proposals that can help keep guns out 
of the hands of dangerous people. 
 The Center for American Progress advocates full background checks on all 
gun transactions, including online and at gun shows. The group calls for clear 
standards and stronger compliance for reporting mental health issues to the 
National Instant Criminal Background Check System—which would have 
shown the gun dealer that Cho had recently been hospitalized for mental 
issues and should not have been eligible to buy his arsenal. 
 And they suggest outlawing high-capacity bullet magazines, which serve 
absolutely no purpose for any law-abiding gun owner. 
 If the struggle of former Arizona representative Gabrielle Giffords to recover 
from an attack by a crazed gunman, or the tears of Virginia Tech families and the 
daily loss of life to gun violence in America don’t move you, just think cash. 
 A decade ago, doctors wrote in the  Journal of the American Medical 
Association that gun violence was a public health crisis costing Americans 
more than $100 billion a year. 
 That’s something we simply cannot afford.  
Source: Washington Post, April 13, 2012. © 2012 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. www
.washingtonpost.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What does Dvorak mean when she writes: “Let’s talk about the Benjamins”? 
 2. How much did the Virginia Tech massacre cost? Who paid the bills? 
   3. What law did Virginia recently change? How is this significant outside of Virginia? 
 4. How many mass murders have happened in the past five years? 
 5. What changes to improve safety are recommended by the Center for American 
Progress? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What is Dvorak’s claim? Where does she state it? 
 7. How does the author develop and support her claim? Is she motivated to write 
only by the cost issue? Explain.  
 8. How does Dvorak anticipate gun supporters’ use of the Second Amendment 
and seek to refute their counterargument? 
 9. Analyze Dvorak’s style and tone; what strategies shape her style and create her 
tone? 
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

488 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. The author wonders why gun owners need to buy more than twelve guns a 
year. Do you agree with her view? If so, why? If not, why not?  
 11. How do the proposals of the Center for American Progress compare to the 
changes in laws that President Obama has proposed? How has the Congress 
responded to these proposals? Do you agree with Congress’s action? Why or 
why not?  
 12. Have you thought about the financial costs of gun deaths? Is this a useful 
approach to the issue? Why or why not?  
 “SENSELESS” IS NOT 
STUDYING GUN VIOLENCE 
 
 JAY  DICKEY  AND   MARK   ROSENBERG  
 Jay Dickey, an attorney and life member of the NRA, served in the House of 
Representatives (R, Arkansas) from 1993 to 2000. After leaving Congress, he led a 
consulting firm. Dr. Mark Rosenberg, a physician and public policy expert, was direc-
tor of the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control at the U.S. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention from 1994 to 1999. Currently president and CEO of 
the Task Force for Global Health, Dr. Rosenberg is author or editor of several books, 
including  Violence in America: A Public Health Approach (1991). Their article was 
published on July 29, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    After reading about the two authors, are you surprised 
that they are coauthoring an article on gun control issues? Are you even more 
interested to see what they have to say together on this issue? 
 A few years ago, one of us came across a young woman who had just been 
hit by a car. She was the mother of two young children and one of Atlanta’s 
star runners. I found her unconscious and bleeding profusely from a severe 
head injury. She died in my arms while I tried to resuscitate her. 
 Her death was tragic, but it wasn’t “senseless.” In scientific terms, it was 
explicable. The runner, who had competed in 15 marathons and broken many 
records, wore no lights or reflective vest in the early-morning darkness; she 
crossed the street within crosswalk lines that had faded to near-invisibility; 
there were no speed bumps on this wide, flat street to slow cars down. 
 Scientists don’t view traffic injuries as “senseless” or “accidental” but as 
events susceptible to understanding and prevention. Urban planners, elected 
officials and highway engineers approach such injuries by asking four ques-
tions: What is the problem? What are the causes? Have effective interventions 
been discovered? Can we install these interventions in our community? 
 The federal government has invested billions to understand the causes of 
motor vehicle fatalities and, with that knowledge, has markedly reduced traffic 
deaths in the United States. Since the mid-1970s, research has inspired such 
interventions as child restraints, seat belts, frontal air bags, a minimum drinking 
age and motorcycle helmets. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
estimates that 366,000 lives were saved through such efforts from 1975 to 2009. 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
489
 Through the same scientific, evidence-based approach, our country has 
made progress understanding and preventing violence. Once upon a time, 
law-abiding citizens believed that violence generated by evil always had 
existed and always would exist. By the mid-20th century, that sense of fatalism 
was yielding to discoveries by social scientists, physicians and epidemiolo-
gists. Now a body of knowledge makes it clear that an event such as the mass 
shooting in Aurora, Colo., was not a “senseless” occurrence as random as a 
hurricane or earthquake but, rather, has underlying causes that can be under-
stood and used to prevent similar mass shootings. 
 We also recognize different types of violence, including child abuse and 
neglect, sexual assault, elder abuse, suicide and economically and politically 
motivated violence. Like motor vehicle injuries, violence exists in a cause-and-
effect world; things happen for predictable reasons. By studying the causes of 
a tragic—but not senseless—event, we can help prevent another. 
 Recently, some have observed that no policies can reduce firearm fatali-
ties, but that’s not quite true. Research-based observations are available. 
Child-proof locks, safe-storage devices and waiting periods save lives. 
 But it’s vital to understand why we know more and spend so much more 
on preventing traffic fatalities than on preventing gun violence, even though 
firearm deaths (31,347 in 2009, the most recent year for which statistics are 
available) approximate the number of motor vehicle deaths (32,885 in 2010). 
 From 1986 to 1996, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) sponsored high-quality peer-reviewed research into the underlying 
causes of gun violence. People who kept guns in their homes did not—despite 
their hopes—gain protection, according to research published in the  New 
England Journal of Medicine. Instead, residents in homes with a gun faced a 
2.7-fold greater risk of homicide and a 4.8-fold greater risk of suicide. The 
National Rifle Association moved to suppress the dissemination of these 
results and to block funding of future government research into the causes of 
firearm injuries. 
 One of us served as the NRA’s point person in Congress and submitted an 
amendment to an appropriations bill that removed $2.6 million from the CDC’s 
budget, the amount the agency’s injury center had spent on firearms-related 
research the previous year. This amendment, together with a stipulation that 
“None of the funds made available for injury prevention and control at the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention may be used to advocate or pro-
mote gun control,” sent a chilling message. 
 Since the legislation passed in 1996, the United States has spent about 
$240 million a year on traffic safety research, but there has been almost no 
publicly funded research on firearm injuries. 
 As a consequence, U.S. scientists cannot answer the most basic question: 
What works to prevent firearm injuries? 
 We don’t know whether having more citizens carry guns would decrease 
or increase firearm deaths; or whether firearm registration and licensing would 
make inner-city residents safer or expose them to greater harm. We don’t 
know whether a ban on assault weapons or large-capacity magazines, or 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

490 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
limiting access to ammunition, would have saved lives in Aurora or would 
make it riskier for people to go to a movie. And we don’t know how to effec-
tively restrict access to firearms by those with serious mental illness. 
 What we do know is that firearm injuries will continue to claim far too 
many lives at home, at school, at work and at the movies until we start asking 
and answering the hard questions. “Such violence, such evil is senseless,” 
President Obama said last week. What is truly senseless is to decry these 
deaths as senseless when the tools exist to understand causes and to prevent 
these deadly effects. 
 We were on opposite sides of the heated battle 16 years ago, but we are 
in strong agreement now that scientific research should be conducted into 
preventing firearm injuries and that ways to prevent firearm deaths can be 
found without encroaching on the rights of legitimate gun owners. The same 
evidence-based approach that is saving millions of lives from motor-vehicle 
crashes, as well as from smoking, cancer and HIV/AIDS, can help reduce the 
toll of deaths and injuries from gun violence. 
 Most politicians fear talking about guns almost as much as they would being 
confronted by one, but these fears are senseless. We must learn what we can do 
to save lives. It is like the answer to the question: “When is the best time to plant 
a tree?” The best time to start was 20 years ago; the second-best time is now.  
Source: Washington Post, July 29, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the authors.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What event seems to have led to this essay? 
 2. What do the authors mean by “senseless”? What is it in contrast to? 
 3. What has research revealed about the relative safety of those with guns in their 
homes? What was the NRA’s response to this research?  
 4. What legislation did Dickey sponsor and get passed in Congress? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. What is the authors’ claim? Where do they state it? 
 6. This essay has a relatively long introduction; what do the authors gain from 
their approach? 
 7. Analyze the essay’s style and tone. Note especially the concluding paragraph; 
what makes it effective?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. This argument for research also represents a change of thinking for one of the 
authors. How does your knowledge of his change of heart—and his willing-
ness to assert that he was wrong—affect your response to the essay? Explain.  
 9. Have the authors convinced you that firearm injuries are not senseless? If yes, 
why? If no, why not?  
14
15
16

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
491
 10. If you are convinced that we can understand the causes of firearm injuries, then 
are you prepared to embrace the conclusion that follows: We must do the 
research and find prevention strategies? If you reject the conclusion but accept 
the first step of the argument, how can you explain your unwillingness to fol-
low the authors’ logic? Be prepared to discuss these issues in class or think 
about preparing a counterargument. 
 IMMIGRATE, ASSIMILATE  
 
 AMY   CHUA  
 A professor at Yale Law School since 2001, Amy Chua specializes in international 
 business transactions, ethnic conflict, and globalization and the law. She is the author 
of  World on Fire (2004) and Day of  Empire: How Hyperpowers Rise to Global 
Dominance—And Why They Fall (2007). Her essay on immigration, published 
February 3, 2008, was a special to the  Washington Post. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS Given the title, where do you expect to find Chua on the 
immigration debate? Given her education and expertise, how do you expect her 
to support her argument?  
 If you don’t speak Spanish, Miami really can feel like a foreign country. In 
any restaurant, the conversation at the next table is more likely to be in Spanish 
than English. And Miami’s population is only 65 percent Hispanic. El Paso is 
76 percent Latino. Flushing, N.Y., is 60 percent immigrant, mainly Chinese. 
 Chinatowns and Little Italys have long been part of America’s urban land-
scape, but would it be all right to have entire U.S. cities where most people 
spoke and did business in Chinese, Spanish or even Arabic? Are too many Third 
World, non-English-speaking immigrants destroying our national identity? 
 For some Americans, even asking such questions is racist. At the other 
end of the spectrum, conservative talk-show host Bill O’Reilly fulminates 
against floods of immigrants who threaten to change America’s “complexion” 
and replace what he calls the “white Christian male power structure.” 
 But for the large majority in between, Democrats and Republicans alike, 
these questions are painful, and there are no easy answers. At some level, 
most of us cherish our legacy as a nation of immigrants. But are all immigrants 
really equally likely to make good Americans? Are we, as Samuel Huntington 
warns, in danger of losing our core values and devolving “into a loose confed-
eration of ethnic, racial, cultural and political groups, with little or nothing in 
common apart from their location in the territory of what had been the United 
States of America”? 
 My parents arrived in the United States in 1961, so poor that they couldn’t 
afford heat their first winter. I grew up speaking only Chinese at home (for 
every English word accidentally uttered, my sister and I got one whack of the 
chopsticks). Today, my father is a professor at Berkeley, and I’m a professor at 
Yale Law School. As the daughter of immigrants, a grateful beneficiary of 
America’s tolerance and opportunity, I could not be more pro-immigrant. 
 Nevertheless, I think Huntington has a point. 
1
2
3
4
5
6

492 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 Around the world today, nations face violence and instability as a result of 
their increasing pluralism and diversity. Across Europe, immigration has resulted 
in unassimilated, largely Muslim enclaves that are hotbeds of unrest and even 
terrorism. The riots in France late last year were just the latest manifestation. 
With Muslims poised to become a majority in Amsterdam and elsewhere within 
a decade, major West European cities could undergo a profound transforma-
tion. Not surprisingly, virulent anti-immigration parties are on the rise. 
 Not long ago, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union disinte-
grated when their national identities proved too weak to bind together diverse 
peoples. Iraq is the latest example of how crucial national identity is. So far, it 
has found no overarching identity strong enough to unite its Kurds, Shiites and 
Sunnis. 
 The United States is in no danger of imminent disintegration. But this is 
because it has been so successful, at least since the Civil War, in forging a 
national identity strong enough to hold together its widely divergent commu-
nities. We should not take this unifying identity for granted. 
 The greatest empire in history, ancient Rome, collapsed when its cultural 
and political glue dissolved, and peoples who had long thought of themselves 
as Romans turned against the empire. In part, this fragmentation occurred 
because of a massive influx of immigrants from a very different culture. The 
“barbarians” who sacked Rome were Germanic immigrants who never fully 
assimilated. 
 Does this mean that it’s time for the United States to shut its borders 
and reassert its “white, Christian” identity and what Huntington calls its 
Anglo-Saxon, Protestant “core values”? 
 ANTI-IMMIGRANT MISTAKES 
 No. The anti-immigration camp makes at least two critical mistakes. 
 First, it neglects the indispensable role that immigrants have played in 
building American wealth and power. In the 19th century, the United States 
would never have become an industrial and agricultural powerhouse without 
the millions of poor Irish, Polish, Italian and other newcomers who mined coal, 
laid rail and milled steel. European immigrants led to the United States’ win-
ning the race for the atomic bomb. 
 Today, American leadership in the Digital Revolution—so central to our 
military and economic preeminence—owes an enormous debt to immigrant 
contributions. Andrew Grove (co-founder of Intel), Vinod Khosla (Sun 
Microsystems) and Sergey Brin (Google) are immigrants. Between 1995 and 
2005, 52.4  percent of Silicon Valley startups had one key immigrant founder. 
And Vikram S. Pundit’s recent appointment to the helm of Citigroup means that 
14 CEOs of Fortune 100 companies are foreign-born. 
 The United States is in a fierce global competition to attract the world’s 
best high-tech scientists and engineers—most of whom are not white Christians. 
Just this past summer, Microsoft opened a large new software-development 
center in Canada, in part because of the difficulty of obtaining U.S. visas for 
foreign engineers. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
493
 Second, anti-immigration talking heads forget that their own scapegoat-
ing vitriol will, if anything, drive immigrants further from the U.S. mainstream. 
One reason we don’t have Europe’s enclaves is our unique success in forging 
an ethnically and religiously neutral national identity, uniting individuals of all 
backgrounds. This is America’s glue, and people like Huntington and O’Reilly 
unwittingly imperil it. 
 Nevertheless, immigration naysayers also have a point. 
 America’s glue can be subverted by too much tolerance. Immigration 
advocates are too often guilty of an uncritical political correctness that avoids 
hard questions about national identity and imposes no obligations on immi-
grants. For these well-meaning idealists, there is no such thing as too much 
diversity.  
 MAINTAINING OUR HERITAGE 
 The right thing for the United States to do—and the best way to keep 
Americans in favor of immigration—is to take national identity seriously while 
maintaining our heritage as a land of opportunity. U.S. immigration policy 
should be tolerant but also tough. Here are five suggestions:
 •  Overhaul Admission Priorities. 
 Since 1965, the chief admission criterion has been family reunification. 
This was a welcome replacement for the ethnically discriminatory quota sys-
tem that preceded it. But once the brothers and sisters of a current U.S. resi-
dent get in, they can sponsor their own extended families. In 2006, more than 
800,000 immigrants were admitted on this basis. By contrast, only about 
70,000 immigrants were admitted on the basis of employment skills, with an 
additional 65,000 temporary visas granted to highly skilled workers. 
 This is backward. Apart from nuclear families (spouse, minor children, pos-
sibly parents), the special preference for family members should be drastically 
reduced. As soon as my father got citizenship, his relatives in the Philippines 
asked him to sponsor them. Soon, his mother, brother, sister and sister-in-law 
were also U.S. citizens or permanent residents. This was nice for my family, but 
frankly there is nothing especially fair about it. 
 Instead, the immigration system should reward ability and be keyed to the 
country’s labor needs, skilled or unskilled, technological or agricultural. In par-
ticular, we should significantly increase the number of visas for highly skilled 
workers, putting them on a fast track for citizenship. 
 •  Make English the Official National Language. 
 A common language is critical to cohesion and national identity in an ethni-
cally diverse society. Americans of all backgrounds should be encouraged to 
speak more languages—I’ve forced my own daughters to learn Mandarin (minus 
the threat of chopsticks)—but offering Spanish-language public education to 
Spanish-speaking children is the wrong kind of indulgence. Native-language 
education should be overhauled, and more stringent English proficiency 
requirements for citizenship should be set up. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

494 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 •  Immigrants Must Embrace the Nation’s Civic Virtues. 
 It took my parents years to see the importance of participating in the 
larger community. When I was in third grade, my mother signed me up for 
Girl Scouts. I think she liked the uniforms and merit badges, but when I told 
her that I was picking up trash and visiting soup kitchens, she was 
horrified. 
 For many immigrants, only family matters. Even when immigrants get 
involved in politics, they often focus on protecting their own and protesting 
discrimination. That they can do so is one of the great virtues of U.S. democ-
racy. But a mind-set based solely on taking care of your own factionalizes our 
society. 
 Like all Americans, immigrants have a responsibility to contribute to the 
social fabric. It’s up to each immigrant community to fight off an “enclave” 
mentality and give back to their new country. It’s not healthy for Chinese to 
hire only Chinese, or Koreans only Koreans. By contrast, the free health clinic 
set up by Muslim Americans in Los Angeles—serving the entire poor 
 community—is a model to emulate. Immigrants are integrated at the moment 
they realize that their success is intertwined with everyone else’s. 
 •  Enforce the Law.  
 Illegal immigration, along with terrorism, is the chief cause of today’s anti-
immigration backlash. It is also inconsistent with the rule of law, which, as any 
immigrant from a developing country will tell you, is a critical aspect of U.S. 
identity. But if we’re serious about this problem, we need to enforce the law 
against not only illegal aliens, but also against those who hire them. 
24
25
26
27
A Hispanic American shows his dual loyalties in march on Washington.

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
495
 It’s the worst of all worlds to allow U.S. employers who hire illegal aliens—
thus keeping the flow of illegal workers coming—to break the law while 
demonizing the aliens as lawbreakers. An Arizona law that took effect Jan. 1 
tightens the screws on employers who hire undocumented workers, but this 
issue can’t be left up to a single state. 
 •  Make the United States an Equal-Opportunity Immigration Magnet.  
 That the 11 million to 20 million illegal Immigrants are 80 percent Mexican 
and Central American is itself a problem. This is emphatically not for the rea-
son Huntington gives—that Hispanics supposedly don’t share America’s core 
values. But if the U.S. immigration system is to reflect and further our ethni-
cally neutral identity, it must itself be ethnically neutral, offering equal oppor-
tunity to Sudanese, Estonians, Burmese and so on. The starkly disproportionate 
ratio of Latinos—reflecting geographical fortuity and a large measure of 
 lawbreaking—is inconsistent with this principle. 
 Immigrants who turn their backs on American values don’t deserve to be 
here. But those of us who turn our backs on immigrants misunderstand the 
secret of America’s success and what it means to be American.  
 Source: Washington Post, February 3, 2008. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
  1. What is Huntington’s concern for America? 
  2. What has happened in some European cities? To several European countries? 
What causes internal conflict in Iraq?  
     3. What are the two mistakes of those who oppose immigration, in the author’s view? 
  4. What are the author’s suggestions for a tough immigration policy? State her 
five proposals in your own words.  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
  5. Why does Chua provide her immigrant experience and family success story? 
As a part of her argument, what purpose does it serve?  
  6. What is clever about her concluding paragraph? How does it mirror the 
approach of her argument? 
  7. What is Chua’s claim? Express her position as a problem/solution argument. 
  8. Look at Chua’s five proposals. What kinds of grounds does she provide in support?  
  9. Is the author convincing? If so, what makes her argument effective? If not, why not? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. Chua asserts that the chief cause of anti-immigration attitudes is a combination 
of terrorism and illegal aliens. Do you agree with this assessment? If not, 
why not?  
28
29
30

496 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 11. Where do you stand on immigration? In opposition? Embracing diversity? Or 
somewhere in the middle? Has Chua established a good argument for the mid-
dle ground? Why or why not?  
 12. Is there any specific proposal with which you disagree? If so, why? How would 
you refute Chua’s defense of that proposal?  
 LEGAL, ILLEGAL 
 
 ROBERTO   SURO  
 A professor of public policy and director of the Tomas Rivera Policy Institute at the 
University of Southern California, Roberto Suro is author or editor of several books on 
immigration, including  Writing Immigration: Scholars and Journalists in Dialogue 
(2011). Suro is also active in the community, serving on the board of directors of an 
association of charities and as a trustee of a foundation supporting social science 
research. The following essay was published July 5, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Can you find any clues to Suro’s essay from his title? 
What do you expect to discover? 
 A century ago, the immigrants from across the Atlantic included settlers 
and sojourners. Along with the many folks looking to make a permanent 
home in the United States came those who had no intention to stay, and who 
would make some money and then go home. Between 1908 and 1915, about 
7 million people arrived while about 2 million departed. About a quarter of 
all Italian immigrants, for example, eventually returned to Italy for good. 
They even had an affectionate nickname, “uccelli di passaggio,” birds of 
passage. 
 Today, we are much more rigid about immigrants. We divide newcomers 
into two categories: legal or illegal, good or bad. We hail them as Americans 
in the making, or brand them as aliens fit for deportation. That framework has 
contributed mightily to our broken immigration system and the long political 
paralysis over how to fix it. We don’t need more categories, but we need to 
change the way we think about categories. We need to look beyond strict 
definitions of legal and illegal. To start, we can recognize the new birds of pas-
sage, those living and thriving in the gray areas. We might then begin to solve 
our immigration challenges. 
 Crop pickers, violinists, construction workers, entrepreneurs, engineers, 
home health-care aides and particle physicists are among today’s birds of pas-
sage. They are energetic participants in a global economy driven by the flow 
of work, money and ideas. They prefer to come and go as opportunity calls 
them. They can manage to have a job in one place and a family in another. 
 With or without permission, they straddle laws, jurisdictions and identities 
with ease. We need them to imagine the United States as a place where they 
can be productive for a while without committing themselves to staying for-
ever. We need them to feel that home can be both here and there and that 
they can belong to two nations honorably. 
1
2
3
4

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
497
 Imagine life with a radically different immigration policy: The Jamaican 
woman who came as a visitor and was looking after your aunt until she died 
could try living in Canada for a while. You could eventually ask her to come 
back to care for your mother. The Indian software developer could take some 
of his Silicon Valley earnings home to join friends in a little start-up, knowing 
that he could always work in California again. Or the Mexican laborer who 
busts his back on a Wisconsin dairy farm for wages that keep milk cheap would 
come and go as needed because he could decide which dairy to work for and 
a bi-national bank program was helping him save money to build a better life 
for his kids in Mexico. 
 Accommodating this new world of people in motion will require new 
attitudes on both sides of the immigration battle. Looking beyond the culture war 
logic of right or wrong means opening up the middle ground and understanding 
that managing immigration today requires multiple paths and multiple outcomes, 
including some that are not easy to accomplish legally in the existing system. 
 A new system that encourages both sojourners and settlers would not 
only help ensure that our society receives the human resources it will need in 
the future, it also could have an added benefit: Changing the rigid framework 
might help us resolve the status of the estimated 11 million unauthorized 
migrants who are our shared legacy of policy failures. 
 Currently, we do not do gray zones well. Hundreds of thousands of people 
slosh around in indeterminate status because they’re caught in bureaucratic 
limbo or because they have been granted temporary stays that are repeatedly 
extended. President Obama created a paler shade of gray this summer by 
5
6
7
8
Civilian watches the border with Mexico, determined to spot illegals crossing the 
desert.

498 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
exercising prosecutorial discretion not to deport some young people who 
were brought to this country illegally as children. But these are exceptions, 
not rules. 
 The basic mechanism for legal immigration today, apart from the special 
category of refugee, is the legal permanent resident visa, or green card. Most 
recipients are people sponsored by close relatives who live in the United 
States. As the name implies, this mechanism is designed for immigrants who 
are settling down. The visa can be revoked if the holder does not show “intent 
to remain” by not maintaining a U.S. address, going abroad to work full time 
or just traveling indefinitely. Legal residents are assumed to be on their way to 
becoming Americans, physically, culturally and legally. After five years of living 
here, they become eligible for citizenship and a chance to gain voting rights 
and full access to the social safety net. 
 This is a fine way to deal with people who arrive with deep connections to 
the country and who resolve to stay. That can and should be most immigrants. 
But this mechanism has two problems: The nation is not prepared to offer citi-
zenship to every migrant who is offered a job. And not everyone who comes 
here wants to stay forever. 
 It may have once made sense to think of immigrants as sodbusters who 
were coming to settle empty spaces. But that antique reasoning does not 
apply when the country is looking at a long, steep race to remain competitive 
in the world economy, particularly not when innovation and entrepreneurship 
are supposed to be our comparative advantage. To succeed, we need modern 
birds of passage. 
 The challenges differ depending on whether you are looking at the 
high end of the skills spectrum, the information workers or at low-skilled 
laborers. 
 A frequent proposal for highly skilled workers comes with the slogan, 
“Staple a green card to the diploma.” That is supposed to ensure that a 
greater share of brainy international students remain in the United States after 
earning degrees in science and technology. But what if they are not ready for 
a long-term commitment? No one would suggest that investment capital or 
design processes need to reside permanently in one nation. Talent today 
yearns to be equally mobile. Rather than try to oblige smart young people 
from abroad to stay here, we should allow them to think of the United States 
as a place where they can always return, a place where they will spend part, 
not all, of their lives, one of several places where they can live and work and 
invest. 
 Temporary-worker programs are a conventional approach to meeting low-
skilled labor needs without illegal immigration. That’s what President George 
W. Bush proposed in 2004, saying the government should “match willing for-
eign workers with willing American employers.” An immigrant comes to do a 
particular job for a limited period of time and then goes home. But such pro-
grams risk replacing one kind of rigidity with another. The relatively small pro-
grams currently in place don’t manage the matchmaking very well. Competing 
domestic workers need to be protected, as do the migrant workers, and the 
9
10
11
12
13
14

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
499
process must be nimble enough to meet labor market demand. Nobody really 
has pulled that off, and there is no reason to believe it can be done on a grand 
scale. Rather than trying to link specific migrants to specific jobs, different types 
of temporary work visas could be pegged to industries, to places or to time 
periods. You could get an engineering visa, not only a visa to work at Intel. 
 Both short-term visas and permanent residence need to be part of the 
mix, but they are not the whole answer. Another valuable tool is the provi-
sional visa, which Australia uses as a kind of intermediary stage in which tem-
porary immigrants spend several years before becoming eligible for permanent 
residency. The U.S. system practically obliges visitors to spend time here with-
out authorization when they’ve married a citizen, gotten a job or done some-
thing else that qualifies them to stay legally. 
 We also could borrow from Europe and create long-term permission to 
reside for certain migrants that is contingent on simply being employed, not 
on having a specific job. And, legislation could loosen the definitions of per-
manent residency so that migrants could gain a lifetime right to live and work 
in the United States without having to be here (and pay taxes here) more or 
less continuously. 
 The idea that newcomers are either saints or sinners is not written 
indelibly either in our hearts or in our laws. As the size of the unauthorized 
population has grown over the past 20 years or so, the political response has 
dictated seeing immigration policy through the stark lens of law enforcement: 
Whom do we lock up, kick out, fence off? Prominent politicians of both parties, 
including both presidential candidates, have engaged in macho one-upmanship 
when it comes to immigration. So, President Obama broke records for depor-
tations. Mitt Romney, meanwhile, vows to break records for border security. 
 Breaking out of the either/or mentality opens up many avenues for man-
aging future immigration. It could also help break the stalemate over the cur-
rent population of unauthorized migrants. No election result will produce a 
Congress that offers a path to citizenship for everybody, but there is no sup-
port for total deportation, either. 
 If we accept that there are spaces between legal and illegal, then options 
multiply. 
 Citizenship could be an eventual outcome for most, not all, people here 
illegally, but everyone would get some kind of papers, and we can engineer a 
way for people to work their way from one status to another. The newly arrived 
and least attached could be granted status for a limited time and receive help 
with returning to their home countries. Others might be offered life-long privi-
leges to live and work here, but not citizenship. We’d give the fullest welcome 
to those with homes, children or long time jobs. 
 By insisting that immigrants are either Americans or aliens, we make it 
harder for some good folks to come and we oblige others to stay for the 
wrong reasons. Worse, we ensure that there will always be people living 
among us who are outside the law and that is not good for them or us.  
Source: Washington Post, July 5, 2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

500 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What, for Suro, was—and still is—a bird of passage? 
 2. How do we view these sojourners today? 
 3. How do immigrants typically come to the United States today? What are they 
expected to do?  
 4. What are the problems with this mechanism? 
 5. What are the two primary groups of sojourners? How does each group need to 
be accommodated?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. What kind (genre) of argument is this? State Suro’s claim to reveal the essay’s 
argument type. 
 7. What approach to immigration issues is  not the solution, in Suro’s view? Why 
not? What are the problems with the current approach?  
 8. List the specific strategies Suro presents for handling various kinds of immi-
grants. Which ones will require new legislation?  
 9. What other problem will be easier to address once we agree to Suro’s 
recommendations? 
 10. Analyze Suro’s style and tone; how do they help his argument? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 11. Do you, in general, agree with Suro that seeing only two categories of 
immigrants is not the way to approach this issue? If yes, why? If no, why not?  
 12. Which of the author’s specific proposals makes sense to you? Why? 
 13. Suro concludes that illegal immigrants are not good for either them or us. Why 
are illegals not good for us—we who are legal? Reflect on this question. 
 WHEN SOCIETIES COLLIDE: 
PART THREE: FINDING THE 
BEST FIT IMMIGRATION MODEL 
 
 PATRICIA B.   STRAIT  
 Patricia Strait began her career as an air traffic controller in the U.S. Navy. She is cur-
rently on the faculty of the University of Richmond and serves as program chair of 
Human Resources and Leadership Studies. She has written articles in both English and 
Spanish on labor economics, immigration, and employee ethics. The following article, 
to be published in the  International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences , will be 
the third and final of three connected articles that study immigration issues and 
problems.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   What do you think you might learn from this in-depth 
sociological study of immigration? What differences from Chua’s and Suro’s essays 
can you anticipate? 

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
501
 INTRODUCTION AND REVIEW OF PARTS ONE AND TWO OF THE TRILOGY 
 In the first part of the trilogy (Strait, 2010), the sources which inform and 
shape immigration views were explored. The four major sources of information 
included the news media, government agencies, nongovernment organiza-
tions (NGOs), and scholarly journals. The news media was found to be the 
most prevalent and abundant source of information which influences percep-
tions regarding immigration, especially among the general public. The news 
media, which includes print, Internet, television and film, is primarily a profit-
driven source which provides narratives which are structured in such a way as 
to be consumed quickly by the viewing public. The majority of the stories which 
appear in the news media emphasize two contrasting elements: One, the 
apprehension or transport of illegal immigrants, and two, upbeat stories of 
successful immigrant citizens. The stakeholders whose views are mostly com-
monly represented in the news media include primarily two groups: host popu-
lations who seek to protect their nations’ borders and resources, and immigrant 
citizens who have earned residency via the “legitimate” immigration system. 
 The second source of information regarding immigration is government 
agencies which typically gather statistical information. Included in this group are 
agencies such as the US Census Bureau and the European Commission. 
Government agencies typically make this quantitative information available to the 
general public through their respective online databases. The information typi-
cally includes data on variables such as the number of immigrants, countries of 
origin, level of education, and place of residence. By comparing these variables 
across a period of time, patterns may be observed and geographic areas which 
have been particularly impacted by immigration may be identified. The informa-
tion contained within these databases is used by primarily three groups: the pub-
lic sector for the allocation of funds regarding government services, the private 
sector for marketing purposes, and politicians for identifying changing constitu-
encies. The two stakeholder groups whose interests are represented most com-
monly by government agencies are the same two groups who are most likely to 
access the government databases, the host population and private enterprise. 
 The third source of information, nongovernment organizations, provides 
immigration information which is both extensive and contradictory. The stake-
holder represented varies according to the mission of the NGO, its political 
orientation, and its source of funding. Although many NGOs claim to be non-
partisan, a sympathetic view toward one particular stakeholder or another can 
usually be detected. Examples of NGOs in the immigration arena include: the 
Pew Research Center, the Human Rights Watch, the Migration Policy Institute, 
the Center for Immigration Studies, and the CATO Institute. Each of these 
organizations represents a different place on the immigration debate contin-
uum. Some NGOs are sympathetic to immigrants while others seek to protect 
the interests of host populations. It is also important to note that the research 
findings from NGOs are often contradictory. 
 Lastly, the information provided by scholarly journals typically comes in 
two categories: First, scholarly literature that explores the historic origins of 
1
2
3
4

502 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
diasporas, and second, population journals which investigate global shifts in 
demographics. Gabaccia (2000) represents the first category of researchers via 
her work concerning Italian transnational family economies. Other researchers 
such as Ong (1999; 2009) have introduced concepts such as “flexible citizen-
ship” and the decreasing relevance of national borders. Fishkin (2005) has 
supported the idea that national borders have diminishing importance as 
more people become part of the global flow of talent. These researchers 
encourage stakeholders to question long-held assumptions regarding citizen-
ship and national borders. In contrast, journals such as the  European Journal 
of Population, Population and Development Review, and the  Journal of 
Population Research tend to explore the shifting demographics between and 
within nations (Lee & Mason, 2009; Stalker, 2003). It is more difficult to detect 
the stakeholder whose interests are represented in scholarly journals as most 
researchers cultivate a detached scholarly perspective. Although it would 
appear that the information provided by these journals would be of interest to 
all stakeholders, it is probably other researchers who are most likely to access 
them due to the esoteric nature of the journals. The most important finding in 
Part One of the Trilogy was how strongly the information source influenced 
not only opinions, but the findings of the immigration research as well. 
 Part Two of the Trilogy (Strait, 2011) revealed ethical dilemmas which 
resulted when certain stakeholder groups were omitted from the immigration 
dialog. These ethical dilemmas included taxation of undocumented immi-
grants, expedited citizenship through military service, immigrant profiling, and 
the repatriation of undocumented immigrants to high risk environments. 
 Taxation of Undocumented Immigrants: As birth rates among host 
populations in industrialized nations continue to decline, social welfare pro-
grams have become more difficult to sustain as tax contributions to these 
programs have also declined. To make up this lost income, the tax revenue 
derived from immigrant populations has become an increasingly important 
revenue source for host countries. While some have expressed concern that 
more liberal immigration policies would result in a swelling underclass, cur-
rent research has indicated that the size and composition of the underclass 
has remained the same through the years despite the recent increases in 
immigration (Griswold, 2009). The practice of collecting income taxes from 
illegal immigrants while denying them access to the services they are fund-
ing such as higher education, disability, and unemployment is viewed by 
many as controversial. In the meantime, however, destination nations con-
tinue to enjoy the economic benefits of cheap labor, reduced consumer 
costs, and additional tax revenues. 
 Military Service as a Pathway to Citizenship: Populating a nation’s mili-
tary with immigrants is far from a new government practice. Immigrants have 
been recruited to serve in the militaries of destination nations for centuries. In 
the case of the United States, the practice of using immigrants can be docu-
mented as far back as the Revolutionary War depending on how one wants to 
define the term  immigrant. Other periods in which immigrants have been 
widely used in the world’s militaries have included World I, World War II, the 
5
6
7

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
503
Korean War, and Vietnam as well as the Persian Gulf Conflict, Somalia, Kosovo, 
Haiti and Panama. According to the US Senate, there are 114,601 foreign-
born individuals serving in the US military as of June 2009 (Stock, 2009). The 
use of noncitizens continues to be common practice in other destination 
nations as well, especially in countries with low unemployment. 
 Repatriation of Immigrants to High Risk Environments: The flow of ille-
gal immigrants into the US, Spain and Italy continues despite these countries’ 
attempts to re-enforce their coasts with both air and sea patrols. In addition, 
undocumented immigrants from Mexico and Central America are still arriving 
in the US via massive expanses of desert along the southwest border. In the 
year 2010, the state of Arizona experienced a record high number of deaths as 
252 bodies were recovered along its borders (Medrano, 2010). Many other 
immigrants have died after being packed into trailers while being smuggled 
across the US border in conditions which lack both sanitary conditions and suf-
ficient air to breathe (Hernandez, 2003). The United States, Spain and Italy are 
not the only countries of choice among undocumented immigrants and asy-
lum seekers. Since the mid 1990s, Ireland has accepted 30,000 immigrants 
seeking asylum, the majority of them from Nigeria (Strieff, 2008). The nations 
of Sweden, England, and France are also popular among asylum seekers. For 
many destination nations whether to grant asylum or to repatriate asylum 
seekers to their countries of origin is often a difficult choice. Even within a 
single country, asylum decisions are often not consistent, but vary according 
to the area in which the immigrant entered the country as well as the immi-
grant’s country of origin (Human Rights Watch 2002; 2003). 
 Immigrant Profiling for Purposes of Risk Management: The risk that 
immigrants pose to destination nations is perceived to be two-fold. First is the 
terrorism risk as evidenced by the attacks of September 2001 in the US, 
Madrid in March 2004, London in July 2005, and Glasgow in June 2007. The 
second risk that immigrants are believed to pose is to the financial solvency of 
a host country’s social programs such as healthcare, public education, trans-
portation, and unemployment insurance. In any case, the attacks call into 
question the effectiveness of current profiling practices as a means of manag-
ing the terrorist risk. Many critics of the current profiling system are pushing 
governments to develop a strategy that would focus more on behaviors rather 
than demographic variables which often penalize innocent immigrants (Human 
Rights Watch 2005; 2007). Despite the headline grabbing events in England, 
Scotland, Spain, and the United States, the actual percentage of immigrants 
associated with terrorist activities is extremely small. Given the very few num-
ber of immigrants involved in terrorist activities, it appears the far greater risk 
that immigrants might pose to host nations is on their social welfare systems. 
Goodhart (2004), editor of the British publication  Prospect, has made a com-
pelling argument that immigrants pose a serious threat to a host country’s 
economy by destroying the equilibrium of its social welfare system. Goodhart 
contends that social welfare systems that offer such services as health insur-
ance, transportation, education, child care, and unemployment insurance are 
based on the common and equal needs of a homogenous society; a system in 
8
9

504 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
which all members contribute and carry a similar risk. Governments which 
have traditionally offered extensive social services such as Denmark, the 
Netherlands, and Sweden have had until recently homogenous populations 
which share a common history, language, religion and culture. The concern 
that many citizens have is that immigrants will draw upon the host population’s 
social services disproportionately while at the same time contributing little to 
the tax base that funds these services.  
 PART THREE OF THE TRILOGY: TOWARD THE “BEST FIT” IMMIGRATION MODEL 
 The objective of this third and final part of the trilogy is to present three immi-
gration models and demonstrate how a host country can determine the best 
fit immigration model for its circumstances. These models include: the Theory 
of Catalysts and Magnets, the Theory of Capitalism and Inequalities, and the 
Theory of Multiculturalism. The “best fit” model for a host country would be 
determined by an analysis of that country’s history, culture, demographic and 
economic variables. The framework provided indicates that many of the immi-
gration problems experienced by host countries today have been caused by 
failing to recognize the relevance of an immigration model’s prerequisites 
thereby leading to the selection of an inappropriate immigration model. Below 
is an overview of the three immigration models followed by a description of 
the host country prerequisites. Host countries need to carefully review the 
prerequisites of each model in order to achieve the best fit and develop effec-
tive immigration policies. 
 The Catalysts and Magnets Model: This theory contends that host popu-
lations and immigrants are players in a global system of catalysts and magnets 
(Strait 2011; Shafir, 1995). Variables such as underperforming economies, wars, 
and natural disasters serve as catalysts which propel immigrants from their 
countries of origin. Host countries with robust economies and generous social 
welfare systems act as magnets. Immigrants are drawn to countries with strong 
magnets and over a period of two to three generations are absorbed into the 
host population. 
 Best Fit for the Catalysts and Magnets Model: In order for the Catalysts 
and Magnets Model to function properly, a host country must meet the follow-
ing prerequisites:
 • 
 Historical Prerequisites: A historical pattern of sustained and intimate 
interactions with other cultures is an important prerequisite for the 
Catalysts and Magnets Model to succeed in a host nation. The host coun-
try’s history should include a full integration of myriad ethnic groups and 
religions. Previous colonial powers such as the Netherlands, France, the 
UK, Portugal and Spain are not necessarily good candidates for 
the Catalysts and Magnets Model. This is especially true in cases where 
the colonial power never truly mixed with the native population of the 
colonized country. This segmentation of social groups is particularly rele-
vant for former colonial powers that are currently experiencing “boomer-
ang immigration” as former subjects migrate to the nation that colonized 
them. 
10
11
12

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
505
 • 
 Cultural Prerequisites: The host population must be willing to socialize 
with, live along side, and ultimately intermarry with the immigrant popula-
tion. In other words, the host country must have a social class structure 
which is permeable. Strong divisions between social classes and social 
norms which discourage intermarriage will make the adaptation of this 
model highly problematic. Intermarriage is an important vehicle for immi-
grants to be able to achieve full integration with the host population. The 
presence of well integrated immigrant citizens in the host nation is also 
important as they act as powerful facilitators to aid new immigrants who 
are facing challenges pertaining to the job market, culture, language, and 
religious practices of the host nation.  
 • 
 Demographic Prerequisites: Immigrants should be able to fill existing 
gaps in the demographic profile for the host country. For instance, if the 
host country has a dearth of young workers between the ages of 18–35, 
then an immigrant population which predominately falls within that age 
category will be most beneficial to the host population. Birth rates are also 
an important factor. This is especially true when the host population has a 
low birth rate and an escalating number of people retiring. Immigrants 
who are able to fill vacancies in undermanned professions such as nursing, 
engineering, and the sciences are also beneficial to the host population 
and further support the Catalysts and Magnets Model.  
 • 
 Economic Prerequisites: The economic environment which creates the 
most receptive environment for the Catalysts and Magnets Model is an 
environment in which the host nation has low unemployment modest infla-
tion and steady GDP growth. Ideally, the host country would have an eco-
nomic system in which all three sectors are active, the private sector to 
generate employment, the public sector to provide basic services, and the 
nonprofit sector to supply volunteers to assist immigrants. Most notably, 
the private sector must have the authority and flexibility to hire and dis-
miss workers as conditions dictate.  
 The Capitalism and Inequalities Model: The Theory of Capitalism and 
Inequalities contends that capitalism by its very nature creates a shortage of 
host population workers at the lowest levels of employment, especially in 
labor intensive industries such as agriculture, construction, and food process-
ing. This dearth of labor is caused by the host population becoming better 
qualified and moving up in the job market (Shafir, 1995; Strait, 2011). A capi-
talist system attracts immigrants both overtly and covertly in order to acquire 
the necessary labor to fill the void in labor intensive industries. In the Capitalism 
and Inequalities Model, the host and the immigrant populations never truly 
mix and intermarriage is unlikely. As immigrants retire or return to their coun-
tries of origin, more immigrants are needed to replace them. In the Capitalism 
and Inequalities Model, immigrants are not viewed as vested citizens and 
therefore are prohibited from accessing the host country’s welfare system. 
 Best fit for the Capitalism and Inequalities Model: For the Capitalism 
and Inequalities Model to function properly, a host country must meet the 
following prerequisites.
13
14

506 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 • 
 Historical Prerequisites: A host country with a history of a homogenous 
population is well suited for the Capitalism and Inequalities Model. In 
order to bring immigrants in at strictly the lowest levels of employment, 
thus saving the better paying and more prestigious jobs for the host 
population, the host population must be insular in its practices. That is to 
say, that the host population would likely have a language which is not 
widely spoken by other populations, and its higher educational system 
would be primarily reserved for the host population. Countries which are 
more geographically isolated would also be a good fit for the Capitalism 
and Inequalities Model. For instance, countries which are far north, have 
a harsher climate or are surrounded by water make these countries less 
vulnerable to migration flows. Such isolation would also make it easier 
for the host country to monitor and control the arrival of new 
immigrants.  
 • 
 Cultural Prerequisites: From a cultural perspective the host country would 
have values and practices which would be somewhat unique or specific to 
that country. This may include such things as a religious preference, views 
regarding the role of women, or the scope of government authority. The 
host country would also be of one mind regarding taxation, voting rights, 
and the environment. The best fit host country would have a rather closed 
social structure; thereby making it unlikely that the host and immigrant 
populations would intermarry.  
 • 
 Demographic Prerequisites: From a demographic perspective, the best 
fit host nation would have an extremely low birth rate. The government 
and the private sector would partner to offer aggressive training 
and education programs which would allow the host population to move 
up the job ladder. The host nation would also need to have a high 
literacy rate.  
 • 
 Economic Prerequisites: First and foremost from an economic perspec-
tive the ideal host country for this model would have a shortage of low 
skilled labor. National unemployment would be low. It would also be nec-
essary to have a system of taxation which is perceived by the host popula-
tion as fair and balanced. Access to financial aid from government 
programs would be restricted to the host population and no one group 
would be able to draw disproportionately on the welfare system. The gov-
ernment would have the support of the host population to enforce strict 
immigration control and would prohibit “chain migration,” which occurs 
when immigrants bring over extended family members. All immigrant 
visas would have strict time limitations which could only be renewed if it 
served the best interest of the host population.  
 The Multiculturalism Model: The Multicultural Model of immigration con-
tends that global migration is part of the natural order of the universe as the 
world becomes more mobile and interconnected. Multiculturalism is regarded 
as a phenomenon which in itself should be protected and valued. 
Multiculturalists believe that immigrants should not be forced to fully 
15

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
507
assimilate or integrate with the host population but rather host countries 
should encourage and foster a pluralistic society. The mixing of various cul-
tures, languages and religions is thought to create a more advanced and 
sophisticated society that is better prepared to compete in the global 
marketplace. 
 Best Fit for the Multicultural Model: For the Multicultural Model to suc-
ceed, the host country must meet the following prerequisites:
 • 
 Historical Prerequisites: For multiculturalism to be successful the host 
country must be able to articulate a clear vision regarding its founding 
principles, and have at least one powerful common denominator which 
unites the host population and all immigrant groups within its borders. 
Examples of compelling common denominators might include democracy 
or equal rights. The host nation would need to have a society with a long 
history of accepting people of many faiths and ethnic backgrounds, as 
well as a high tolerance for religious differences. A secular government 
with no undertones of favoritism toward a particular religion would also be 
an important prerequisite.  
 • 
 Cultural Prerequisites: From a cultural perspective, the host nation would 
include a fluid social class structure in which an immigrant might easily 
move upward as more education and income are obtained. A secular edu-
cation system would be of critical importance along with a curriculum 
which supports and encourages a transnational approach to education. 
Media and entertainment outlets would support a broad assortment of 
interests.  
 • 
 Demographic Prerequisites: The demographic prerequisites would include 
a high tolerance for linguistic diversity while at the same time mandating 
one official language in public affairs. All groups would have equal access 
to educational institutions and equal protection under the law. A wide 
range of age groups would be needed in order to sustain pension pro-
grams. No one group would be allowed to draw upon government sup-
port programs disproportionately. The birth rate of the various ethnic 
groups would be equivalent across all ethnic groups allowing each group 
to grow proportionately with respect to the host population.  
 • 
 Economic Prerequisites: Above all, the host country would have to have 
an economic and legal system which allows for the rapid creation of job 
opportunities. It would also allow businesses to “right size,” which is to 
say increase or reduce their workforces as conditions dictate. Ideally, the 
host nation would have a pattern of low unemployment and modest infla-
tion. The economic activity of the host nation would be diversified and 
would not rely on the government to create jobs. Taxes would also be low 
to increase disposable income and encourage consumption. NGOs would 
be active in supporting immigrant groups and helping them to assimilate. 
The influence of labor unions would be minimal in order to allow the pri-
vate sector to set wages at a level that would permit businesses to develop 
products at competitive prices.  
16

508 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
 ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
 Now that the immigration models and host country requirements have been 
described, it becomes clear why many host countries struggle to develop 
effective immigration policies. Symptoms of a mismatch between a host coun-
try and its current immigration model include such indicators as:
 • 
An increasing number of violent attacks against immigrants and/or host 
populations  
 • 
Large numbers of unemployed immigrants  
 • 
The presence and growing influence of extremist groups  
 • 
Isolated and disenfranchised immigrant groups  
 • 
A growing sense of dislocation felt by the host population  
 • 
Disproportionate consumption of government aid by immigrant groups  
 • 
Highly segregated host and immigrant neighborhoods  
 Notorious Mismatches: Many EU nations such as the UK, France, Germany, 
the Netherlands, Sweden, and Norway have chosen Multiculturalism as their 
immigration model. Yet in each case, the leaders of these countries as well as 
other highly visible national figures have declared Multiculturalism a failure. 
Among these unlikely individuals are well-known human rights activist Hege 
Storhaug of Norway, Prime Minister David Cameron of the UK, German 
Chancellor Angela Merkel, former President Nicolas Sarkozy of France (the son 
of a Hungarian immigrant himself) and Swiss parliament member, Oskar 
Freysinger. Simply stated, Multiculturalism has failed in these countries because 
these countries do not possess the prerequisites required by the Multiculturalism 
Model. To begin with, there is no compelling common denominator which 
unites the disparate groups contained within their borders. Instead there is 
fragmentation regarding key values. Even the previously compelling ideals of 
democracy and religious freedom have not been values which have resonated 
with many of the immigrant groups which currently populate these host coun-
tries. In addition, the aforementioned countries do not have a long or consis-
tent history of embracing people of different faiths and ethnic backgrounds. In 
contrast, they have actually had, until recently, fairly homogenous populations 
that have shared a common religion and language. Likewise, these countries 
do not have a permeable social structure in which an immigrant might easily 
mix with the host population. Lastly, several important economic prerequisites 
are also absent. With the exception of Germany, unemployment is nearing 
record levels within the EU. This fact combined with high taxes and stiff govern-
ment regulations have discouraged the generation of new jobs in the private 
sector. Hiring, therefore, is slow and their economies are unable to absorb the 
steady influx of immigrants. The labor unions further hinder the private sector’s 
ability to right size, and union salaries place an upward pressure on the price of 
goods and services, making them less competitive in the global marketplace 
especially against emerging economic contenders such as Brazil, China, and 
India. The final blow to Multiculturalism in many EU countries is the easy access 
to government support programs which has allowed certain immigrant groups 
17
18

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
509
to draw disproportionately upon government subsidies. It is no wonder, then, 
that Multiculturalism has been declared a failure in much of Europe. 
Which model then would be more appropriate for many of these EU 
nations? Surprisingly, the answer appears to be the model of Capitalism and 
Inequalities. The irony is that capitalism is regarded by many EU citizens as part 
of the problem when in fact an analysis of their historical, cultural, demographic 
and economic variables calls for the Capitalism and Inequalities Model. That is 
to say that many EU countries have a history of slow job growth, powerful labor 
unions which tie the hands of the private sector to “right size,” high unemploy-
ment, and easily accessible welfare programs. 
 In contrast, Australia, Canada and the US who have depended upon immi-
grants for the purposes of nation building have long utilized the Multicultural 
Immigration Model, although many now question whether the Multicultural Model 
is still appropriate for these countries as well. The reason that the Multicultural 
Model has succeeded for so long in these countries is that they are vast in size and 
provide numerous opportunities for immigrants. Other factors which helped to 
foster the success of the Multicultural Model in these countries have included low 
unemployment, minimal bureaucracy, rapid job creation, abundant resources, low 
taxes, fluid class structure, few unions, secular policies, a host population willing to 
intermarry with immigrants, and defining principles which have united the host 
population and immigrants. There is no question that the Multicultural Model is 
now under pressure in each of these three countries. The recent global recession 
and large scale illegal immigration have made their host populations wary of mul-
ticulturalism. The immigration model prerequisites described in this article appear 
to indicate that the Catalysts and Magnets Model may now be their more appro-
priate choice. For the Catalysts and Magnets Model to succeed in these countries, 
however, the host nations of Australia, Canada, and the US must be able to exert 
influence on both the catalysts and the magnets that create their immigration 
flows. In order to control the economic catalysts which drive immigrants from their 
native countries, these host nations must be willing to engage in direct foreign 
investment in order to provide immigrants with incentives to remain in their coun-
tries of origin. In order to control the magnets, three actions would be needed: 
punishment for employers who hire illegal immigrants, fine-tuning the visa process 
to allow for the acquisition of foreign temporary workers where and when needed, 
and restricting social welfare programs to permanent citizens. It is important to 
note that immigrants themselves can contribute to a mismatch or bad fit by choos-
ing a host country that embraces a set of values that are incompatible with the 
immigrant’s own beliefs or aspirations. For the immigrant to give himself the best 
chance of a good fit with a host nation, it is necessary for the immigrant to be fully 
informed of a host country’s historical, demographic, cultural, and economic vari-
ables as well as the host country’s immigration policies. 
 Immigration remains a contentious issue in all host nations, and significant 
policy changes are slow to occur, especially during election years. It is important 
to clarify that one immigration model is not inherently better than another immi-
gration model. The salient issue is that the host country’s profile must be in sync 
with the model it has chosen. A host country which embraces an inappropriate 
immigration model is pursuing a dangerous path that can lead not only to social 
19
20
21

510 
SECTION 5  A COLLECTION OF READINGS 
strife, but financial peril as well. A thorough understanding of the immigration 
models described herein and a careful analysis of a host country’s variables 
should lead to more effective immigration policies for the 21st century.  
 REFERENCES 
 Fishkin, S. (2005). Crossroads of cultures: The transnational turn in American 
studies.  American Quarterly, 57 (1), 17–57. 
 Gabaccia, D. R. (2000).  Italy’s Many Diasporas. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. 
 Goodhart, D. (2004, February). Too diverse?  Prospect. Retrieved May 26, 
2012, from  http://www.carnegiecouncil.org/media/goodhart.pdf  
 Griswold, D. (2009). As immigrants move in, Americans move up. Cato 
Institute Report. Retrieved June 16, 2010, from   http://www.cato/org/
pub_display.php?pub_id 5 10650  
 Herandez, J. C. (2003). 18 illegal immigrants die in trailer in Texas.  Guadalajara 
Reporter. Retrieved June 6, 2011, from   http://guadalajarareporter.com/
news-mainmenu-86/1996/18-illegal-immigrants-die-in-trailer-in-texas.html  
 Human Rights Watch. (2002). Discrecionalidad sin limites: La applicacion arbi-
taria de la ley Espanola de immigracion. Retrieved March 8, 2009, from 
 http://books.google.com/Books?id 5 6iEpOQ9hwIMC&printsec 5
 frontcover&source 5 gbs_ge_summary_R&cad 5 0#v 5 onepage&q&f 5 false  
 Human Rights Watch. (2003). Asylum seekers and refugees. Retrieved June 
15, 2010, from   http://hrw.org/legacy/un/chr59/refugees.htm  
 Human Rights Watch. (2005). Nota del ministerio de justicia de Espana al 
informe ?Sentando ejemplo? Medidas antiterroristas en Espana presen-
tado por Human Rights Watch. Retrieved June 20, 2010, from   http://
www.hrw/org/spanish/docs/2005/02/15/  Spain10360.htm 
 Human Rights Watch. (2007). Espana: Las medidas antiterroristas vulneran los 
derechos basicos. Retrieved March 9, 2009, from   http://hrw.org/spanish/
docs/2005/01/27/  spain10075.htm 
 Human Rights Watch. (2009). World report. Retrieved June 19, 2010, from 
 http://www.hrw/org/world-report-2009  
 Medrano, L. (2010). Border deaths for illegal immigrants hit record high in 
Arizona sector.  Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved June 7, 2011, from 
 http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/2010/1216/Border-deaths-for-illegal-
immigrants-hit-record-high-in-Arizona-sector  
 Ong, A. (1999).  Flexible citizenship. The cultural logics of transnationality. 
Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
 Shafir, G. (1995).  Immigrants and nationalists: Ethnic conflict and accommoda-
tion in Catalonia,  The Basque country, Latvia, and Estonia. Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press. 
 Strait, P. B. (2010). When societies collide: An immigration trilogy. Part one: 
Stakeholder Identification through the synthesis of information. 
 International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences, 5 (5), 319–26. 
 Strait, P. B. (2011). When societies collide: A trilogy about immigration. Part 
two: Emerging ethical dilemmas in immigration.  International Journal of 
Interdisciplinary Social Sciences, 6 (2), 217–26. 

 
CHAPTER 21 Laws and Rights: Gun Control and Immigration Debates 
511
 Strait, P. B. (2011, August 28). Rising nationalism raises global tension.  Richmond 
Times 
Dispatch. 
Retrieved 
from 
  http://www.2.timesdispatch.com/
news/commentary/2011/Aug/28/tdcomm03-rising-nationalism-raises-global-
tension-ar-1267039/  
 Strieff, D. (2008, March 17). New Ireland changes go more than skin deep. 
 MSNBC Online News. Retrieved May 9, 2009, from   www.msnbc.com/
id/23636868/from/TE  
 Stock, M. (2009). Essential to the fight: Immigrants in the military eight years 
after 9/11.  Immigration Policy Center. Retrieved on June 7, 2011, from 
 http://www.ilw.com/Articles/2009,1124-stock.pdf  
Source: From International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences. In press. Reprinted by permission 
of the author.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. What are the four sources of information that shape views on immigration? 
What kinds of information does each source provide?  
 2. What ethical dilemmas were examined in part 2? What is the ethical dilemma 
found in each issue?  
 3. What are Strait’s three immigration models? What is the idea behind develop-
ing the three models?  
 4. What characteristics of the host country are needed for a fit with the Catalysts 
and Magnets Model?  
 5. What characteristics of the host country are needed for a fit with the Capitalism 
and Inequalities Model?  
 6. What characteristics of the host country are needed for a fit with the 
Multiculturalism Model?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 7. What is Strait’s primary claim? 
 8. How is her argument more specifically applied to the United States? 
 9. Are Strait’s three models supported by logic and reality, in your experience? If 
not, how would you refute her?  
 10. Do her analyses of and recommendations for the United States make sense to 
you? If not, in what specific ways would you disagree with her?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 11. What specifics in Strait’s analysis surprise you the most? Why? 
 12. In paragraph 19, the author makes three specific recommendations for the 
United States to make the Catalysts and Magnets Model work. Do these recom-
mendations seem logical to you? Do you think the United States is likely to 
accept them? Explain.  

America: Past, Present, Future
 CHAPTER 22 
READ: Where are we? Who, in the photo, do you recognize?
REASON: What can you conclude about this gathering? (Think about critical 
events in the 21st century.)
REFLECT/WRITE: What feelings are captured in the photo? What makes 
the image arresting?

513
 T
hirteen years into the 21st century, we might be forgiven for harboring some 
uncertainty about the country’s future. Although some have written of Amer-
ica’s decline, we seem to have survived the recession better than many other 
countries and, as Thomas Friedman notes in this chapter, we are still the land of 
entrepreneurs, the country driving technological innovation. We also held elec-
tions in 2012 without violent demonstrations or fraud, actions all too often associ-
ated with elections in other parts of the world, as Zainab Chaudary points out. 
Fareed Zakaria, writing about the 2012 elections, sees decisions by a number of 
states as marks of the country’s open-mindedness and acceptance of its diversity. 
 To borrow from Friedman, that’s the good news. But, we still have some 
presence in Iraq, after years of an extremely costly war. We are still fighting in 
Afghanistan, and we surely must wonder if the effort will lead to a sustainable 
peace and a better society. Republicans and Democrats have wasted time, refus-
ing to work together to solve budget and funding issues. Budget cuts are hurt-
ing public education at all levels, and far too many schools are failing to educate 
the next generation of workers. At times we find hatred and bigotry here, not 
just in trouble spots around the world, leaving writers such as Colbert King 
wondering when we will finally live up to the ideals expressed by Martin 
Luther King, Jr. How will the future judge us? Can we find ways to embrace 
what is good for the individual with what is good for all? 
 Some good news: Younger Americans are more concerned about the envi-
ronment and far more accepting of diversity than older Americans. If young 
Americans will commit to becoming and staying informed and to participating 
in elections (older Americans vote in greater numbers than younger Americans 
in most elections) based on careful consideration of the candidates, there is 
hope that we can make ourselves anew and journey forward together, as so 
eloquently put by both Abraham Lincoln and Barack Obama. 
 You can begin by seeking out the authors in this text who have impressed 
you with the knowledge, wisdom, and perhaps calm approach to examining 
problems and offering solutions. Learn, and reflect on what you learn. Think 
about the kind of world you want to have for the rest of your life. You might 
also ask yourself: What can I do to make a difference? 
 SECOND INAUGURAL ADDRESS 
 
 ABRAHAM  LINCOLN 
 A mostly self-educated country lawyer on the Western frontier, Abraham Lincoln 
(1809–1865) rose to become the sixteenth president of the United States. He first 
served in the Illinois State Legislature and one term in the U.S. House of Representatives 
before securing the Republican Party’s nomination for president. He won the 1860 elec-
tion by sweeping the North, his opposition to the spread of slavery resulting in few 
votes in the southern states. His moving appeals to the electorate won him reelection in 
spite of less moderate Republicans unhappy with him and those committed to secession 
wishing him dead. Six days after Robert E. Lee surrendered to General Grant, ending 
the Civil War, Lincoln was assassinated at Ford’s Theater in Washington by Confederate 
supporter John Wilkes Booth. Scholars rank Lincoln as one of the top three greatest 
presidents, along with Washington and FDR. Lincoln delivered his brief but powerful 
address below at the swearing-in for his second term as president.  

514 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    With the country still torn by war, Lincoln chose to speak 
only briefly; does this seem a wise and sensitive decision, or would you have 
wished for a longer discussion of the issues surrounding the war?  
 At this second appearing to take the oath of the presidential office, there 
is less occasion for an extended address than there was at the first. Then a 
statement, somewhat in detail, of a course to be pursued, seemed fitting and 
proper. Now, at the expiration of four years, during which public declarations 
have been constantly called forth on every point and phase of the great con-
test which still absorbs the attention, and engrosses the enerergies [sic] of the 
nation, little that is new could be presented. The progress of our arms, upon 
which all else chiefly depends, is as well known to the public as to myself; and 
it is, I trust, reasonably satisfactory and encouraging to all. With high hope for 
the future, no prediction in regard to it is ventured. 
 On the occasion corresponding to this four years ago, all thoughts were 
anxiously directed to an impending civil-war. All dreaded it—all sought to 
avert it. While the inaugural address was being delivered from this place, 
devoted altogether to  saving the Union without war insurgent agents were in 
the city seeking to  destroy it without war—seeking to dissol[v]e the Union, and 
divide effects, by negotiation. Both parties deprecated war; but one of them 
would  make war rather than let the nation survive; and the other would  accept 
war rather than let it perish. And the war came. 
 One eighth of the whole pop-
ulation were colored slaves, not 
distributed generally over the 
Union, 
but 
localized 
in 
the 
Southern part of it. These slaves 
constituted a peculiar and power-
ful interest. All knew that this 
interest was, somehow, the cause 
of the war. To strengthen, perpet-
uate, and extend this interest was 
the object for which the insur-
gents would rend the Union, even 
by war; while the government 
claimed no right to do more than 
to restrict the territorial enlarge-
ment of it. Neither party expected 
for the war, the magnitude of the 
duration, which it has already 
attained. Neither anticipated that 
the  cause of the conflict might 
cease with, or even before, the 
conflict itself should cease. Each 
looked for an easier triumph, and 
a result less fundamental and 
astounding. Both read the same 
1
2
3

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
515
Bible, and pray to the same God; and each invokes His aid against the other. It 
may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just God’s assistance in 
wringing their bread from the sweat of other men’s faces; but let us judge not 
that we be not judged. The prayers of both could not be answered; that of 
neither has been answered fully. The Almighty has His own purposes. “Woe 
unto the world because of offences! For it must needs be that offences comes; 
but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!” If we shall suppose that 
American Slavery is one of those offences which, in the providence of God, 
must needs come, but which, having continued through His appointed time, 
He now wills to remove, and that He gives to both North and South, this terri-
ble war, as the woe due to those by whom the offence came, shall we discern 
therein any departure from those divine attributes which the believers in a 
Living God always ascribe to Him? Fondly do we hope—fervently do we pray—
that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it 
continue, until all the wealth piled by the bond-man’s two hundred and fifty 
years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with 
the lash, shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thou-
sand years ago, so still it must be said, “the judgments of the Lord, are true 
and righteous altogether.” 
 With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as 
God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to 
bind up the nation’s wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, 
and for his widow, and his orphan—to do all which may achieve and cherish a 
just, and a lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What is the great contest to which Lincoln refers? 
 2. 
Who chose to “make war”? 
 3. 
What cause does Lincoln give for the war? 
 4. 
How has the cause ceased while the war continues? 
 5. 
What guidelines for responding to the war’s end does Lincoln establish? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 6. 
In the long third paragraph, how does Lincoln explain why both sides in the 
war are suffering?  
   7. 
Analyze Lincoln’s final paragraph—one long sentence: What elements of style 
do you find? What makes his oratory so powerful?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRTING 
    8. 
Although admired perhaps second only to “The Gettysburg Address,” too few have 
read this address. What surprised you the most in his “Second Inaugural”? Why?  
 9. 
What can today’s leaders learn from Lincoln’s speech? Explain. 
4

516 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
 YOUR MOST POWERFUL 
CURRENCY: YOUR VOTE 
 
 ZAINAB  CHAUDARY  
 Holding a degree in political science from the University of Heidelberg, Zainab 
Chaudary is on the staff of Congressman Rush Holt (D-NJ). She is fluent in Urdu, 
German, and French. The focus of her work is with immigrant groups and immigration 
issues. At night she writes, using her blog,  The Momorist, to reflect on life, on science 
and religion, past and present, human relationships, and probably politics as well. The 
following article appeared on  altmuslimah.com  November 1, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Do you value the privilege of voting? Do you actually 
vote in every election?  
 As I write this, a brave young woman [Malala Yousafzai] sits in a hospital 
bed halfway across the world, recovering from a gunshot wound to the head 
that she received simply for speaking out, for using her young voice to bring 
about change on an issue that she felt demanded attention. The issue? The 
state of education for young girls and women in Swat, a conflict-ridden area in 
northern Pakistan beset with violence in the struggle between the right-wing 
Taliban and the more moderate-minded. 
 I’ve listened to her story in anger and frustration, not only because of its 
tremendous injustice, but also because the story carries a slight twist of fate: 
the girl could have been me. I could have been a young woman gunned down 
for insisting to her right to an education in male-dominated Pakistan. 
 Of the many things I’m grateful to my parents for, perhaps the biggest 
one is this. Thirty years ago, they left behind family, friends, and a familiar way 
of life for the unknown, for the sole purpose of giving their baby daughter the 
very best opportunities and the chance to obtain an education and begin a 
career that was equal to that of any man. It’s a story repeated across America 
time and time again, this tale of intrepid immigrants leaving their homes for 
the United States, a country of opportunity, diversity, and above all, choice. 
 The American political system makes the “American Dream” possible. 
Immigrants often leave behind countries where corruption is rampant and brib-
ery is the norm, where citizens have no voice and no means of improving the 
state of their country, and where elections are rigged or despots rule on the 
basis of falsified vote counts (as in this instance in Iraq in 2002, when Saddam 
Hussein claimed to have won the elections by “100% of the vote”). To an ordi-
nary citizen, bringing about change seems impossible in such a political system. 
 Yet so many of our first and second generation immigrants in the American-
Muslim community take their vote for granted. Working in politics and promot-
ing civic engagement, I have run into a mindset that is at best ambivalent to the 
electoral process and at worst vehemently opposed to political participation. In 
a year when American-Muslims are struggling with Islamophobia, egregious civil 
rights violations by the NYPD, and a dangerous misrepresentation of Muslims by 
the FBI, this voice is no longer a right we can take for granted—it is a necessity. 
 Women in our community in particular do see the importance of their vote. 
But this year’s [2012] election hinges upon the female electorate. Despite the 
articles about the rise of women, both in the workforce and in the political 
sphere, women hold only 78 out of the 435 seats in the House of 
1
2
3
4
5
6

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
517
Represen tatives and only 
17 out of the 100 seats in 
the Senate, and women’s 
issues are still being 
decided by the men in 
the room. Although wom-
en’s issues loom large 
over the 2012  election—
with debate on contra-
ception, abortion rights, 
and 
decisions 
about 
women’s health care deci-
sions 
becoming 
more 
rancorous by the day—the gender gap in voting focuses more on issues such as 
education, the economy, and the size of government. 
 Perfection is elusive. Any country is a work in progress, and the key word 
here is “work.” To foster change, one must  be the vehicle for change. Malala 
Yousafzai lives in Pakistan, and fights for the right to an education, the right to 
make informed decisions in her life, and in her country. I live in the United 
States, where I’m still fighting for equal pay for women, the right to make 
decisions about my own body, and a domestic and foreign policy that is 
humane and just. There were women before us who fought for suffrage, and 
there are women in this day and age around the globe who are still battling for 
their basic rights as rational, intelligent human beings. We owe it to them. The 
female electorate must join the conversation and win a seat at the table with 
that best and most powerful currency of any democracy: their vote.  
Source: altmuslimah.com, November 1, 2012. Reprinted by permission.
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
For the author, what is important about Malala’s story? 
 2. 
How does this country make the American Dream possible? 
 3. 
Which American citizens, especially, must embrace their right to vote? 
 4. 
How many women are now in the House of Representative and how many are 
in the Senate—after the 2012 election? (If you don’t know, think about how to 
find this information online.)  
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Chaudary’s claim? How does she develop and support her claim? 
 6. 
Do you find her essay compelling? If so, what makes it work? If not, why not? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
Women in the United States are better off than those in Pakistan; do they still 
have good reasons, in your view, to vote and get involved in politics? If yes, 
why? If no, why not?  
 8. 
What suggestions do you have for getting more young Americans engaged in 
politics?  
7

518 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
 DO YOU WANT THE GOOD NEWS FIRST? 
 
 THOMAS L.  FRIEDMAN  
 The  New York Times foreign affairs columnist, Thomas Friedman has won the Pulitzer 
Prize for Commentary three times. Friedman holds an MA in Modern Middle East 
Studies from Oxford University and is the author of several books, including  From Beirut 
to Jerusalem (1989)—winner of the National Book Award for nonfiction—and  The World 
Is Flat: A Brief History of the 21st Century —winner of the Goldman Sachs/Financial 
Times Business Book of the Year award. The following column appeared May 19, 2012.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Given what you know about the author’s field of study 
and writing, what do you think the good news might be? What else can you 
expect to read about?  
 I’ve spent the last week traveling to two of America’s greatest innovation 
hubs—Silicon Valley and Seattle—and the trip left me feeling a combination of 
exhilaration and dread. The excitement comes from not only seeing the stun-
ning amount of innovation emerging from the ground up, but from seeing the 
new tools coming on stream that are, as  Amazon.com ’s founder, Jeff Bezos, 
put it to me, “eliminating all the gatekeepers”—making it easier and cheaper 
than ever to publish your own book, start your own company and chase your 
own dream. Never have individuals been more empowered, and we’re still just 
at the start of this trend. 
 “I see the elimination of gatekeepers everywhere,” said Bezos. Thanks to 
cloud computing for the masses, anyone anywhere can for a tiny hourly fee now 
rent the most powerful computing and storage facilities on Amazon’s “cloud” to 
test any algorithm or start any company or publish any book. Start-ups can even 
send all their inventory to Amazon, and it will do all the fulfillment and  delivery—
and even gift wrap your invention before shipping it to your customers. 
 This is leading to an explosion of new firms and voices. “Sixteen of the top 
100 best sellers on Kindle today were self-published,” said Bezos. That means 
no agent, no publisher, no paper—just an author, who gets most of the royal-
ties, and Amazon and the reader. It is why, Bezos adds, the job of the company 
leader now is changing fast: “You have to think of yourself not as a designer 
but as a gardener”—seeding, nurturing, inspiring, cultivating the ideas com-
ing from below, and then making sure people execute them. 
 The leading companies driving this trend—Amazon, Facebook, Microsoft, 
Google, Apple, LinkedIn, Zynga and Twitter—are all headquartered and listed 
in America. Facebook, which didn’t exist nine years ago, just went public at a 
valuation of nearly $105 billion—two weeks after buying a company for $1 bil-
lion, Instagram, which didn’t exist 18 months ago. So why any dread? 
 It’s because we’re leaving an era of some 50 years’ duration in which to be 
a president, a governor, a mayor or a college president was, on balance, to 
give things away to people; and we’re entering an era—no one knows for how 
long—in which to be a president, a governor, a mayor or a college president 
will be, on balance, to take things away from people. And if we don’t make 
this transition in a really smart way—by saying, “Here are the things that made 
us great, that spawned all these dynamic companies”—and make sure that 
we’re preserving as much of that as we can, this trend will not spread as it 
1
2
3
4
5

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
519
should. Maybe we could grow as a country without a plan. But we dare not cut 
without a plan. We can really do damage. I can lose weight quickly if I cut off 
both arms, but it will surely reduce my job prospects. 
 What we must preserve is that magic combination of cutting-edge higher 
education, government-funded research and immigration of high-I.Q. risk-takers. 
They are, in combination, America’s golden goose, laying all these eggs in 
Seattle and Silicon Valley. China has it easy right now. It just needs to do the 
jobs that we have already invented, just more cheaply. America has to invent 
the new jobs—and that requires preserving the goose. 
 Microsoft still does more than 80 percent of its research work in America. 
But that is becoming harder and harder to sustain when deadlock on Capitol 
Hill prevents it from acquiring sufficient visas for the knowledge workers it 
needs that America’s universities are not producing enough of. The number of 
filled jobs at Microsoft went up this year from 40,000 to 40,500 at its campus 
outside Seattle, yet its list of unfilled jobs went from 4,000 to almost 5,000. 
Eventually, it will have no choice but to shift more research to other countries. 
 It is terrifying to see how budget-cutting in California is slowly reducing 
what was once one of the crown jewels of American education—the University 
of California system—to a shadow of its old self. And I fear the cutting is just 
beginning. As one community leader in Seattle remarked to me, governments 
basically do three things: “Medicate, educate and incarcerate.” And various 
federal and state mandates outlaw cuts in medicating and incarcerating, so 
much of the money is coming out of educating. Unfortunately, even to self-
publish, you still need to know how to write. The same is happening to research. 
A new report just found that federal investment in biomedical research through 
the National Institutes of Health has decreased almost every year since 2003. 
 When we shrink investments in higher education and research, “we shoot 
ourselves in both feet,” remarked K.R. Sridhar, founder of Bloom Energy, the 
Silicon Valley fuel-cell company. “Our people become less skilled, so you are 
shooting yourself in one foot. And the smartest people from around the world 
have less reason to come here for the quality education, so you are shooting 
yourself in the other foot.” 
 The Labor Department reported two weeks ago that even with our high 
national unemployment rate, employers advertised 3.74 million job openings in 
March. That is, in part, about a skills mismatch. In an effort to overcome that, 
and help fill in the financing gap for higher education in Washington State, 
Boeing and Microsoft recently supported a plan whereby the state, which was 
cutting funding to state universities but also not letting them raise tuition, would 
allow the colleges to gradually raise rates and the two big companies would 
each kick in $25 million for scholarships for students wanting to study science 
and technology or health care to ensure that they have the workers they need. 
 This is not a call to ignore the hard budget choices we have to make. It’s a 
call to make sure that we give education, immigration and research their 
proper place in the discussion. 
 “Empowering the individual and underinvesting in the collective is our 
great macro danger as a society,” said the pollster Craig Charney. Indeed, it is. 
Investment in our collective institutions and opportunities is the only way to 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

520 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
mitigate the staggering income inequalities that can arise from a world where 
Facebook employees can become billionaires overnight, while the universities 
that produce them are asked to slash billions overnight. As I’ve said, nations 
that don’t invest in the future tend not to do well there.  
Source: New York Times, May 19, 2012. © 2012 The New York Times. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, 
or retransmission of this Content without express written permission is prohibited. www.nytimes.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. Why is it now easier to publish your own book or start your own business? 
 2. How has a company leader’s job changed? 
 3. Which companies are creating these new trends in business? 
 4. What causes the “bad news”? 
 5. What do we need to preserve, in Friedman’s view? 
 6. Why are there unfilled jobs even with high unemployment? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 7. What is Friedman’s claim? (It might help to see this as a problem/solution argument.) 
 8. How does the author develop and support his claim? 
 9. Friedman assumes that we are in a period of budget cuts. Is this an acceptable 
assumption? That is, can the author expect his readers to understand the cur-
rent economic and political climate—and not have to provide support? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 10. Are you surprised by Friedman’s list of what we need to preserve? Did you 
think that any of the three needed preserving? Explain your response. 
 11. Do you agree with Friedman that we must invest “in the collective,” even in 
difficult economic times? Can society move forward only on the strength of a 
few very successful individuals? Ponder these issues—it is  your future America. 
 THE EMERGING AMERICA 
 
 FAREED   ZAKARIA  
 Holding degrees from Yale College and Harvard University, Indian American Fareed 
Zakaria is the host of CNN’s international affairs program GPS, which is aired world-
wide. On this program, Dr. Zakaria has interviewed heads of state as well as numerous 
intellectuals and business leaders. He is also an editor at  Time, a columnist at the 
 Washington Post, and the author of several books, including  The Future of Freedom 
(2003) and  The Post-American World (2008). The following column was published on 
November 9, 2012, just after the 2012 elections.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS    Would you describe America as “emerging”? What do 
you think Zakaria might emphasize in an essay with this title?  
 Growing up in India in the middle 1960s and 1970s, I always thought of 
America as the future. It was the place where the newest technology, the best 
1

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
521
gadgets and the latest fads seemed to originate. Seemingly exotic political 
causes—women’s liberation, gay rights, the fight against ageism—always 
seemed to get their start on the streets or in the legislatures and courts of the 
United States. Indians couldn’t imagine embracing all American trends—in 
fact, some were rejected outright—because they were too edgy for a country 
like India. But we had a sneaking suspicion that today’s weird California fad 
would become tomorrow’s conventional practice. 
 For me, Tuesday’s [2012] elections brought back that sense of America as the 
land of the future. The presidential race is being discussed as one that was “about 
nothing,” with no message or mandate. But that’s simply not true. Put aside 
the reelection of Barack Obama and consider what else happened this week: 
 Three states voted to legalize same-sex marriage, which is the civil rights 
cause of our times. One day we will look back and wonder how people could 
have been so willing to deny equal treatment under the law to a small 
 minority—and Tuesday will stand as one of the most important moments 
marking the end of that cruelty. 
 Two other states voted to legalize some recreational use of marijuana, 
which will surely mark the beginning of the end of the war on drugs. This 
may be the most costly, distorting and futile war the United States has ever 
waged. Over the past four decades, we have spent $1 trillion to fight this 
“war” without reducing the price and availability of drugs in cities while also 
destroying our penal system. The United States has more than three times as 
many prisoners per capita as we had in 1980—and about 10 times as many 
prisoners as other rich countries, according to data from the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development. In 2010, about 1.6 million Americans 
were arrested on drug charges, most for using marijuana, a drug that is no 
more dangerous than alcohol. 
 This week’s votes indicate that Americans have begun rethinking those 
policies, perhaps moving toward ones that would deprive drug cartels of their 
huge profits and allow our police to focus on serious crimes. Ethan Nadelmann, an 
expert and advocate of such policies, notes that “even as the federal government 
persists with its failed drug war strategy, the United States has now emerged as 
the global leader in promoting more sensible policies with respect to marijuana.” 
 Perhaps the most stunning shift this week came not in the passage of a 
ballot measure or law but in an exit-poll finding—one that might move us 
toward major legislation. When asked what should be done with the millions 
of illegal immigrants working in the United States, almost two-thirds of respon-
dents wanted to grant them legal status. Four years ago, anti-immigrant voices 
were so loud that John McCain, the sponsor of a comprehensive and intelli-
gent immigration reform bill, had to run away from his own handiwork when 
he campaigned for the White House. 
 There was no mandate for big government. On the contrary, voters—by a 
slim majority—told pollsters that government was doing too much. And they 
reelected a slew of Republican governors, many of whom have been compe-
tent and reform-minded in tackling the problems of their states. But in two 
rock-ribbed Republican states, Indiana and Missouri, voters rejected Senate 
candidates whose attitudes toward women were demeaning. 
2
3
4
5
6
7

522 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
 I hesitate to build a grand narrative out of all this, but the trend seems to 
be toward individual freedom, self-expression and dignity for all. This embrace 
of diversity—in every sense—is America’s great gift to the world, one at which, 
since the days of J. Hector St. John de Crevecoeur and Alexis de Tocqueville, 
foreigners have marveled. 
 In 1990, the neoconservative writer Ben Wattenberg wrote a book titled 
 The First Universal Nation, arguing that the United States was creating some-
thing unique in history, a nation composed of all colors, races, religions and 
creeds, all thriving in their individualism. That diversity, he wrote, was going to 
be America’s greatest strength in the years ahead. 
 While Wattenberg’s party, the GOP, has taken to looking at this new America 
with anxiety and fear, he was right. What the world saw this week was a picture 
of America at its best: edgy, experimental, open-minded—and brilliantly diverse.  
Source: Washington Post, November 9, 2012. © 2012 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used 
by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. www.
washingtonpost.com
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What decisions did states make as part of the 2012 elections? 
 2. 
How much has the United States spent on its drug war? What have been the 
results of this “war”? 
 3. 
What attitudes were revealed in exit poles? 
 4. 
What kind of nation are we creating, according to the author Wattenberg? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is Zakaria’s claim? What grounds does he provide? 
 6. 
Do you agree that the various state decisions and exit-poll views are signifi-
cant? Why or why not?  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 7. 
Of the four election-day changes Zakaria presents, which one surprised you the 
most? Why? 
 8. 
Some have written of America’s decline in the world; Zakaria sees a country 
developing its uniqueness. Do you agree that the United States is becoming 
more open-minded and “brilliantly diverse”? If yes, why? If no, why not?  
 9. 
Do you share Zakaria’s enthusiasm for the changes revealed in the 2012 elec-
tion? If yes, why? If no, why not?  
 WE STILL AREN’T GOOD ENOUGH 
 
 COLBERT I.  KING  
 A Washington native, Colbert King has held a number of positions in the government, 
including special agent for the State Department, and in banking, including at the 
World Bank. King joined the  Washington Post editorial board in 1990, began writing a 
8
9
10

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
523
weekly column in 1995, and became deputy editor of the editorial page in 2000. In 
2003 he won a Pulitzer Prize for Commentary. He is a regular on the political talk show 
 Inside Washington. The following column was published on January 19, 2013.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   In what ways do you expect King to find the United 
States “not good enough”? Do you have issues in which you find the United 
States “not good enough”?  
 H ow fitting it is that this weekend’s shabbat observance, which I plan to 
share with the B’nai Tzedek Congregation in Potomac, coincides with two 
other weekend celebrations: Martin Luther King  J r. Day and the swearing-in of 
President Obama. 
 There is much to commemorate: the exodus to freedom from slavery in 
Egypt; the life and legacy of America’s foremost civil rights leader; and a 
changing United States that reelected its first black president. 
 But delve deep below this weekend’s celebratory moments and consider 
our world with introspection, and you might well be led to an observation that 
King made in 1954, one that still holds true. 
 In a sermon in Detroit, he said that you didn’t have to look far to see that 
something was basically wrong with our world. 
 Society, he said, has more knowledge today than people have had in any 
period of human history, whether the topic is mathematics, science, social sci-
ence or philosophy. 
 “The trouble isn’t so much that we don’t know enough,” King preached, “but 
it’s as if we aren’t good enough.” 
 The trouble isn’t so much that our scientific genius lags behind, he said, 
but that our moral genius has not caught up. 
 Through our scientific advances, such as the building of jet aircraft that 
can transect the globe, we have made the world a neighborhood, King said. 
 But morally, he said, we’ve failed to make it a brotherhood. 
 Examples abound. 
 Consider these words: “It is high time to assess how many [members of 
parliament] and government members are of Jewish origin and who present a 
national security threat.” 
 Do you think those evil thoughts were expressed during Adolf Hitler’s 
Third Reich? Marton Gyongyosi of the neo-Nazi Jobbik Party of Hungary 
spoke those words last fall. 
 The fire of anti-Semitism that reduced a once-thriving Hungarian Jewish 
population to a third of its size still smolders. The smoke also rises in other 
parts of the world. 
 Some government leaders condemned Gyongyosi’s remarks, belatedly. 
But there are plenty of others, such as Iranian President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad, who belong in Gyongyosi’s camp. 
 They remind us, just as King preached at the tender age of 29, that we still 
aren’t good enough. King declared that some things are right and some things 
are wrong, eternally and absolutely. 
 And there still exists one undeniable wrong that must be faced. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

524 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
 Despite scientific and tech-
nological advances that have 
taken us to places unthought 
of only a few years ago, in 
2013 bigotry has global dim-
ensions. It represents a moral 
challenge to the world. 
 King spoke of creating a 
worldwide fellowship that lifts 
concern “beyond one’s tribe, 
race, class and nation.” Embrace 
all mankind, he said. 
 Now that is a tough call 
for an American president, to 
move from national to ecu-
menical concerns. 
 Fixing the economy, rebuilding infrastructure, strengthening the middle 
class, managing the debt, protecting our homeland, defending the vulnerable 
and changing gun laws are presidential priorities that can’t wait. They all cry 
out for action. 
 But bigotry is a global curse, a growing cancer on the world. Can America 
turn a blind eye to hatred? 
 Would that the questions stopped there. 
 Is hatred a popular subject for a reelected Barack Obama to address? The 
polls would probably say no. 
 We have enough on our hands here at home, is the common answer.  What 
do ethnic and religious rivalries have to do with us, anyway? 
 Besides, is it good politics? The politicians probably would universally say 
no. There are no votes in taking on world hate. 
 But is it the right thing to do? 
 King would say yes. 
 Not because he believed that a word from the president of the United 
States would change the world. 
 But King might contend that the president of a racially, ethnically and reli-
giously diverse nation founded on the principles of liberty and equal rights—
however haltingly observed in the past—has an obligation to take sides 
against bigotry wherever it is found. 
 King wrote from his Birmingham jail cell that “injustice anywhere is a threat 
to justice everywhere.” 
 “We are” he said, “caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a 
single garment of destiny. What ever affects one directly, affects all indirectly.” 
 Bear this in mind as we gather this weekend to remember, rejoice and observe.  
Source: Washington Post, January 19, 2013. © 2013 The Washington Post. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, 
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. www.
washingtonpost.com
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
525
 QUESTIONS FOR READING 
 1. 
What converging events seem fitting to King? 
 2. 
What is wrong with our world, in the view of Martin Luther King, Jr.? What do 
we have? What have we failed to do?  
 3. 
What is the author’s primary example of bigotry and hatred? 
 4. 
What did Martin Luther King, Jr., think we need to act against injustice? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS 
 5. 
What is King’s claim? How does he develop and support his claim? 
 6. 
King presents essentially one example of hatred and bigotry; should he cata-
logue more examples—or does he need just this one example to make his point? 
Explain.  
 7. 
How does the author connect the weekend’s three events with the development 
of his argument? How does he refer again to the three events in his conclusion? 
(Did you notice and appreciate the unifying cleverness of King’s strategy?)  
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING 
 8. 
Do you agree with Martin Luther King, Jr.’s assertion that “injustice anywhere 
is a threat to justice everywhere”? If yes, why? If not, why not?  
 9. 
Do we have an obligation to “take sides against bigotry”—and hate—anywhere 
we find it in the world? Both Kings are asserting that we diminish ourselves 
morally when we see wrong and fail to act to eliminate it. What is your response 
to these ideas?  
 HOW THE FUTURE WILL JUDGE US  
 
 KWAME ANTHONY   APPIAH  
 The son of a Ghanian lawyer and politician and British novelist, Appiah was educated 
in both Ghana and England. He holds a PhD in philosophy from Cambridge University, 
and, since 2002, he has held appointments in both the philosophy department at 
Princeton University and the university’s Center for Human Values. Appiah is the 
author of many books, including  The Ethics of Identity (2003) and  The Honor Code: 
How Moral Revolutions Happen (2010). He is recognized as one of the world’s most 
significant contemporary thinkers. His essay here was first published on September 
26, 2010, in the  Washington Post. 
 PREREADING QUESTIONS  Given Appiah’s areas of study and interest, what kinds of 
current problems do you think he will select for future judgment? What have we 
repudiated from our country’s past? 
 Once, pretty much everywhere, beating your wife and children was 
regarded as a father’s duty, homosexuality was a hanging offense, and water-
boarding was approved—in fact, invented—by the Catholic Church. Through 
the middle of the 19th century, the United States and other nations in the 
Americas condoned plantation slavery. Many of our grandparents were born 
in states where women were forbidden to vote. And well into the 20th century, 
1

526 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
lynch mobs in this country stripped, tortured, hanged and burned human 
beings at picnics. 
 Looking back at such horrors, it is easy to ask: What were people 
thinking? 
 Yet, the chances are that our own descendants will ask the same question, 
with the same incomprehension, about some of our practices today. 
 Is there a way to guess which ones? After all, not every disputed institution 
or practice is destined to be discredited. And it can be hard to distinguish in 
real time between movements, such as abolition, that will come to represent 
moral common sense and those, such as prohibition, that will come to seem 
quaint or misguided. Recall the book-burners of Boston’s old Watch and Ward 
Society or the organizations for the suppression of vice, with their crusades 
against claret, contraceptives and sexually candid novels. 
 Still, a look at the past suggests three signs that a particular practice is 
destined for future condemnation. 
 First, people have already heard the arguments against the practice. The 
case against slavery didn’t emerge in a blinding moment of moral clarity, for 
instance; it had been around for centuries. 
 Second, defenders of the custom tend not to offer moral counter-
arguments but instead invoke tradition, human nature or necessity. (As in, 
“We’ve always had slaves, and how could we grow cotton without them?”) 
 And third, supporters engage in what one might call strategic ignorance, 
avoiding truths that might force them to face the evils in which they’re com-
plicit. Those who ate the sugar or wore the cotton that the slaves grew simply 
didn’t think about what made those goods possible. That’s why abolitionists 
sought to direct attention toward the conditions of the Middle Passage, 
through detailed illustrations of slave ships and horrifying stories of the suffer-
ing below decks. 
 With these signs in mind, here are four contenders for future moral 
condemnation. 
 OUR PRISON SYSTEM  
 We already know that the massive waste of life in our prisons is morally 
troubling; those who defend the conditions of incarceration usually do so in 
non-moral terms (citing costs or the administrative difficulty of reforms); and 
we’re inclined to avert our eyes from the details. Check, check and check. 
 Roughly 1 percent of adults in this country are incarcerated. We have 
4 percent of the world’s population but 25 percent of its prisoners. No other 
nation has as large a proportion of its population in prison; even China’s rate is 
less than half of ours. What’s more, the majority of our prisoners are non- 
violent offenders, many of them detained on drug charges. (Whether a coun-
try that was truly free would criminalize recreational drug use is a related 
question worth pondering.) 
 And the full extent of the punishment prisoners face isn’t detailed in any 
judge’s sentence. More than 100,000 inmates suffer sexual abuse, including 
rape, each year; some contract HIV as a result. Our country holds at least 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
527
25,000 prisoners in isolation in so-called supermax facilities, under conditions 
that many psychologists say amount to torture.  
 INDUSTRIAL MEAT PRODUCTION  
 The arguments against the cruelty of factory farming have certainly been 
around a long time; it was Jeremy Bentham, in the 18th century, who observed 
that, when it comes to the treatment of animals, the key question is not 
whether animals can reason but whether they can suffer. People who eat 
f actory-farmed bacon or chicken rarely offer a moral justification for what 
they’re doing. Instead, they try not to think about it too much, shying away 
from stomach-turning stories about what goes on in our industrial abattoirs. 
 Of the more than 90 million cattle in our country, at least 10 million at any 
time are packed into feedlots, saved from the inevitable diseases of over-
crowding only by regular doses of antibiotics, surrounded by piles of their own 
feces, their nostrils filled with the smell of their own urine. Picture it—and then 
imagine your grandchildren seeing that picture. In the European Union, many 
of the most inhumane conditions we allow are already illegal or—like the sow 
stalls into which pregnant pigs are often crammed in the United States—will 
be illegal soon.  
 THE INSTITUTIONALIZED AND ISOLATED ELDERLY  
 Nearly 2 million of America’s elderly are warehoused in nursing homes, 
out of sight and, to some extent, out of mind. Some 10,000 for-profit facilities 
have arisen across the country in recent decades to hold them. Other elderly 
Americans may live independently, but often they are isolated and cut off from 
their families. (The United States is not alone among advanced democracies in 
this. Consider the heat wave that hit France in 2003: While many families were 
enjoying their summer vacations, some 14,000 elderly parents and grandpar-
ents were left to perish in the stifling temperatures.) Is this what Western 
modernity amounts to—societies that feel no filial obligations to their incon-
venient elders? 
 Sometimes we can learn from societies much poorer than ours. My English 
mother spent the last 50 years of her life in Ghana, where I grew up. In her final 
years, it was her good fortune not only to have the resources to stay at home, 
but also to live in a country where doing so was customary. She had family 
next door who visited her every day, and she was cared for by doctors and 
nurses who were willing to come to her when she was too ill to come to them. 
In short, she had the advantages of a society in which older people are treated 
with respect and concern. 
 Keeping aging parents and their children closer is a challenge, particularly 
in a society where almost everybody has a job outside the home (if not across 
the country). Yet the three signs apply here as well: When we see old people 
who, despite many living relatives, suffer growing isolation, we know some-
thing is wrong. We scarcely try to defend the situation; when we can, we put it 
out of our minds. Self-interest, if nothing else, should make us hope that our 
descendants will have worked out a better way.  
13
14
15
16
17

528 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
 THE ENVIRONMENT  
 Of course, most transgenerational obligations run the other way—from 
parents to children—and of these the most obvious candidate for opprobrium 
is our wasteful attitude toward the planet’s natural resources and ecology. 
Look at a satellite picture of Russia, and you’ll see a vast expanse of parched 
wasteland where decades earlier was a lush and verdant landscape. That’s the 
Republic of Kalmykia, home to what was recognized in the 1990s as Europe’s 
first man-made desert. Desertification, which is primarily the result of destruc-
tive land-management practices, threatens a third of the Earth’s surface; tens 
of thousands of Chinese villages have been overrun by sand drifts in the past 
few decades. 
 It’s not as though we’re unaware of what we’re doing to the planet: We 
know the harm done by deforestation, wetland destruction, pollution, overfish-
ing, greenhouse gas emissions—the whole litany. Our descendants, who will 
inherit this devastated Earth, are unlikely to have the luxury of such reckless-
ness. Chances are, they won’t be able to avert their eyes, even if they want to. 
 Let’s not stop there, though. We will all have our own suspicions about 
which practices will someday prompt people to ask, in dismay: What were 
they thinking? 
 Even when we don’t have a good answer, we’ll be better off for anticipat-
ing the question.  
 Source:  Washington Post, September 26, 2010. Reprinted by permission of the author.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING  
 1. On what basis are current practices likely to be repudiated by future Americans? 
What three signs mark a practice for future condemnation?  
 2. How do the three signs suggest that our prison system is likely to be condemned?  
 3. What are the problems with our industrial meat production? 
 4. What in our work situations contributes to the isolation of the elderly? What 
happened to many older people in France in 2003?  
 5. How will the next generation have to react to the environment? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REASONING AND ANALYSIS  
 6. What is Appiah’s claim? (You will need a complex statement that combines 
both a general idea and specific practices.)  
 7. How do Appiah’s four practices illustrate his idea of the three warning signs? 
 8. What else does the author provide to defend his choice of the specific four 
practices?  
 9. Appiah is making some devastating judgments of people past and present. 
How would you describe his tone? How does his tone help him keep readers 
from feeling attacked or judged? 
18
19
20
21

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
529
 QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION AND WRITING  
 10. Has Appiah convinced you that the future will judge the four practices he dis-
cusses? Why or why not?  
 11. Did any of the four practices chosen by the author surprise you? If so, which 
one(s)? Why?  
 12. If you had been asked to select four current practices for condemnation, would 
you have included any of Appiah’s? Why or why not? What other(s) would 
have been on your list? Why?  
 WE MADE OURSELVES ANEW, AND 
VOWED TO MOVE FORWARD TOGETHER 
 
 BARACK H.   OBAMA 
 The forty-fourth president of the United States was born in Hawaii on August 4, 1961, 
to a white American mother and a black Kenyan father, while both were in college. 
After Obama attended Columbia College and Harvard Law School—where he 
became the first African American editor of the  Harvard Law Review —Obama 
returned to Chicago to teach at the University of Chicago Law School and to practice 
civil rights law. Elected first to the Illinois State Senate, he was then, in 2004, elected 
to the U.S. Senate. In 2008 Obama became the first African American president of the 
United States. The following address was delivered at his second swearing in, January 
21, 2013, following his reelection in 2012 to a second term as president.  
 PREREADING QUESTIONS   Perhaps you heard the address, perhaps not; in either 
case, think about what issues you expect Obama to cover. Also pay attention to 
his style, his oratory.  
 V ice  P resident  B iden,  Mr. Chief Justice, members of the United States 
Congress, distinguished guests, and fellow citizens: 
 E ach time we gather to inaugurate a president, we bear witness to the 
enduring strength of our Constitution. We affirm the promise of our democ-
racy. We recall that what binds this nation together is not the colors of our skin 
or the tenets of our faith or the origins of our names. 
 What makes us exceptional, what makes us America, is our allegiance to 
an idea articulated in a declaration made more than two centuries ago. We 
hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal. That they 
are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, and among these 
are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. 
 Today we continue a never-ending journey to bridge the meaning of those 
words with the realities of our time. For history tells us that while these truths 
may be self-evident, they’ve never been self-executing. That while freedom is 
a gift from God, it must be secured by his people here on Earth. 
 The patriots of 1776 did not fight to replace the tyranny of a king with the 
privileges of a few, or the rule of a mob. They gave to us a republic, a govern-
ment of and by and for the people. Entrusting each generation to keep safe 
our founding creed. And for more than 200 years, we have. Through blood 
1
2
3
4

530 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
drawn by lash, and blood drawn by sword, we noted that no union founded on 
the principles of liberty and equality could survive half-slave and half-free. 
 We made ourselves anew, and vowed to move forward together. 
 Together we determined that a modern economy requires railroads and 
highways to speed travel and commerce, schools and colleges to train our 
workers. Together we discovered that a free market only thrives when there 
are rules to ensure competition and fair play. Together we resolve that a great 
nation must care for the vulnerable and protect its people from life’s worst 
hazards and misfortune. 
 Through it all, we have never relinquished our skepticism of central author-
ity, nor have we succumbed to the fiction that all societies’ ills can be cured 
through government alone. Our celebration of initiative and enterprise, our 
insistence on hard work and personal responsibility—these are constants in 
our character. 
 For we have always understood that when times change, so must we. 
That fidelity to our founding principles requires new responses to new chal-
lenges, that preserving our individual freedoms ultimately requires collective 
action. 
 For the American people can no more meet the demands of today’s world 
by acting alone than American soldiers could have met the forces of fascism or 
communism with muskets and militias. No single person can train all the math 
and science teachers we’ll need to equip our children for the future. Or build 
the roads and networks and research labs that will bring new jobs and busi-
nesses to our shores. 
 Now, more than ever, we must do these things together, as one nation 
and one people. 
 This generation of Americans has been tested by crises that steeled our 
resolve and proved our resilience. A decade of war is now ending. 
 And economic recovery has begun. 
 America’s possibilities are limitless, for we possess all the qualities that this 
world without boundaries demands: youth and drive, diversity and openness, 
an endless capacity for risk and a gift for reinvention. 
 My fellow Americans, we are made for this moment and we will seize it, so 
long as we seize it together. 
 For we the people understand that our country cannot succeed when a 
shrinking few do very well and a growing many barely make it. 
 We believe that America’s prosperity must rest upon the broad shoulders 
of a rising middle class. We know that America thrives when every person can 
find independence and pride in their work, when the wages of honest labor 
will liberate families from the brink of hardship. 
 We are true to our creed when a little girl born into the bleakest poverty 
knows that she has the same chance to succeed as anybody else because she 
is an American, she is free and she is equal not just in the eyes of God but also 
in our own. 
 We understand that outworn programs are inadequate to the needs of our 
time. So we must harness new ideas and technology to remake our 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
531
government, revamp our tax code, reform our schools, and empower our citi-
zens with the skills they need to work hard or learn more, reach higher. 
 But while the means will change, our purpose endures. A nation that 
rewards the effort and determination of every single American, that is what 
this moment requires. That is what will give real meaning to our creed. 
 We the people still believe that every citizen deserves a basic measure of 
security and dignity. We must make the hard choices to reduce the cost of 
health care and the size of our deficit. 
 But we reject the belief that America must choose between caring for the 
generation that built this country and investing in the generation that will build 
its future. 
 For we remember the lessons of our past, when twilight years were spent 
in poverty and parents of a child with a disability had nowhere to turn. We do 
not believe that in this country freedom is reserved for the lucky or happiness 
for the few. We recognize that no matter how responsibly we live our lives, any 
one of us at any time may face a job loss or a sudden illness or a home swept 
away in a terrible storm. The commitments we make to each other through 
Medicare and Medicaid and Social Security, these things do not sap our 
 initiative. They strengthen us. 
 They do not make us a nation of takers. They free us to take the risks that 
make this country great. 
 We the people still believe that our obligations as Americans are not just 
to ourselves, but to all posterity. We will respond to the threat of climate 
change, knowing that the failure to do so would betray our children and future 
generations. 
 Some may still deny the overwhelming judgment of science, but none can 
avoid the devastating impact of raging fires, and crippling drought, and more 
powerful storms. The path toward sustainable energy sources will be long and 
sometimes difficult. But Americans cannot resist this transition. We must lead it. 
 We cannot cede to other nations the technology that will power new jobs 
and new industries. We must claim its promise. That’s how we will maintain our 
economic vitality and our national treasure, our forests and waterways, our 
crop lands and snow-capped peaks. That is how we will preserve our planet, 
commanded to our care by God. That’s what will lend meaning to the creed 
our fathers once declared. 
 We the people still believe that enduring security and lasting peace do not 
require perpetual war. 
 Our brave men and women in uniform tempered by the flames of battle 
are unmatched in skill and courage. 
 Our citizens seared by the memory of those we have lost, know too well 
the price that is paid for liberty. The knowledge of their sacrifice will keep us 
forever vigilant against those who would do us harm. But we are also heirs to 
those who won the peace, and not just the war. Who turn sworn enemies into 
the surest of friends. And we must carry those lessons into this time as well. 
We will defend our people, and uphold our values through strength of arms 
and the rule of law. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

532 
SECTION 5 A COLLECTION OF READINGS
 We will show the courage to try and resolve our differences with other 
nations peacefully. Not because we are naive about the dangers we face, but 
because engagement can more durably lift suspicion and fear. 
 America will remain the anchor of strong alliances in every corner of the 
globe. And we will renew those institutions that extend our capacity to man-
age crises abroad. For no one has a greater stake in a peaceful world than its 
most powerful nation. We will support democracy from Asia to Africa, from the 
Americas to the Middle East, because our interests and our conscience compel 
us to act on behalf of those who long for freedom. And we must be a source of 
hope to the poor, the sick, the marginalized, the victims of prejudice. 
 Not out of mere charity, but because peace in our time requires the con-
stant advance of those principles that our common creed describes: tolerance 
and opportunity, human dignity and justice. We the people declare today that 
the most evident of truths—that all of us are created equal—is the star that 
guides us still, just as it guided our forebears through Seneca Falls and Selma 
and Stonewall; just as it guided all those men and women, sung and unsung, 
who left footprints along this great Mall, to hear a preacher say that we cannot 
walk alone, to hear a king proclaim that our individual freedom is inextricably 
bound to the freedom of every soul on Earth. 
 It is now our generation’s task to carry on what those pioneers began, for 
our journey is not complete until our wives, our mothers and daughters can 
earn a living equal to their efforts. 
 Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated 
like anyone else under the law, for if we are truly created equal, then surely the 
love we commit to one another must be equal as well. 
30
31
32
33
34
Obama greets troops in Afghanistan.

 
CHAPTER 22 America: Past, Present, Future 
533
 Our journey is not complete until no citizen is forced to wait for hours to 
exercise the right to vote. 
 Our journey is not complete until we find a better way to welcome the 
striving, hopeful immigrants who still see America as a land of opportunity, 
until bright young students and engineers are enlisted in our workforce rather 
than expelled from our country. 
 Our journey is not complete until all our children, from the streets of 
Detroit to the hills of Appalachia to the quiet lanes of Newtown, know that 
they are cared for and cherished and always safe from harm. 
 That is our generation’s task, to make these works, these rights, these val-
ues of life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness real for every American. 
 Being true to our founding documents does not require us to agree on 
every contour of life. It does not mean we all define liberty in exactly the same 
way or follow the same precise path to happiness. 
 Progress does not compel us to settle centuries-long debates about the 
role of government for all time, but it does require us to act in our time. 
 For now, decisions are upon us and we cannot afford delay. We cannot 
mistake absolutism for principle or substitute spectacle for politics, or treat 
name-calling as reasoned debate. 
 We must act. We must act knowing that our work will be imperfect. We 
must act knowing that today’s victories will be only partial, and that it will be up 
to those who stand here in four years—and 40 years, and 400 years hence—to 
advance the timeless spirit once conferred to us in a spare Philadelphia hall. 
 My fellow Americans, the oath I have sworn before you today, like the one 
recited by others who serve in this Capitol, was an oath to God and country, 
not party or faction. 
 And we must faithfully execute that pledge during the duration of our 
service. But the words I spoke today are not so different from the oath that is 
taken each time a soldier signs up for duty, or an immigrant realizes her dream. 
 My oath is not so different from the pledge we all make to the flag that 
waves above and that fills our hearts with pride. They are the words of citizens, 
and they represent our greatest hope. You and I, as citizens, have the power to 
set this country’s course. You and I, as citizens, have the obligation to shape 
the debates of our time, not only with the votes we cast, but the voices we lift 
in defense of our most ancient values and enduring ideas. 
 Let each of us now embrace with solemn duty, and awesome joy, what is 
our lasting birthright. With common effort and common purpose, with passion 
and dedication, let us answer the call of history and carry into an uncertain 
future that precious light of freedom. 
 Thank you. God bless you. And may He forever bless these United States 
of America.  
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47

534
 APPENDIX 
 Understanding Literature 
 T
 he same process of reading nonfiction can be used to understand  literature—
fiction, poetry, and drama. You still need to read what is on the page, l ooking 
up unfamiliar words and tracking down references you don’t understand. You 
still need to examine the context, to think about who is writing to whom, under 
what circumstances, and in what literary format. And, to respond fully to the 
words, you need to analyze the writer’s techniques for developing ideas and 
expressing attitudes. 
 Although it seems logical that the reading process should be much the 
same regardless of the work, not all readers of literature are willing to accept 
that logic. Some readers want a work of literature to mean whatever they think 
it means. But what happened to the writer’s desire to communicate? If you 
decide that a Robert Frost poem, for example, should mean whatever you are 
feeling when you read it, you might as well skip the reading of Frost and just 
commune with your feelings. Presumably you read Frost to gain some new 
insight from him, to get beyond just your vision and see something of human 
experience and emotion from a new vantage point. 
 Other readers of literature hesitate over the concept of  literary analysis, or at 
least over the word  analysis. These readers complain that analysis will “tear the 
work apart” and “ruin it.” If you are inclined to share this attitude, stop for a 
minute and think about the last sports event you watched. Perhaps a friend 
explained: “North Carolina is so good at stalling to use up the clock; Duke will 
have to foul to get the ball and have a chance to tie the game.” The game is 
being analyzed! And that analysis makes the event more fully experienced by 
those who understand at least some of the elements of basketball. 
 The analogy is clear. You, too, can be a fan of literature. You can enjoy read-
ing and discussing your reading once you learn to use your active reading and 
analytic skills to open up a poem or story, and once you sharpen your knowl-
edge of literary terms and concepts so that you can “speak the language” of 
literary criticism with the same confidence with which you discuss the merits 
of a full court press. 

 
 Understanding Literature  
535
 GETTING THE FACTS: ACTIVE READING, 
SUMMARY, AND PARAPHRASE 
 Let’s begin with the following poem by Paul Dunbar. As you read, make mar-
ginal notes, circling a phrase you fancy, putting a question mark next to a diffi-
cult line, underscoring words you need to look up. Note, too, your emotional 
reactions as you read. 
 PROMISE  
 
 PAUL LAWRENCE   DUNBAR  
 Born of former slave parents, Dunbar (1872–1906) was educated in Dayton, Ohio. 
After a first booklet of poems,  Oak and Ivy,  was printed in 1893, several friends 
helped Dunbar get a second collection,  Majors and Minors, published in 1895. A copy 
was given to author and editor William Dean Howells, who reviewed the book favor-
ably, increasing sales and Dunbar’s reputation. This led to a national publisher issuing 
 Lyrics of Lowly Life in 1896, the collection that secured Dunbar’s fame.  
 I grew a rose within a garden fair, 
 And, tending it with more than loving care, 
 I thought how, with the glory of its bloom, 
 I should the darkness of my life illume; 
 And, watching, ever smiled to see the lusty bud 
 Drink freely in the summer sun to tinct its blood. 
 My rose began to open, and its hue 
 Was sweet to me as to it sun and dew; 
 I watched it taking on its ruddy flame 
 Until the day of perfect blooming came, 
 Then hasted I with smiles to find it blushing red— 
 Too late! Some thoughtless child had plucked my rose and fled! 
 “Promise” should not have been especially difficult to read, although you 
may have paused a moment over “illume” before connecting it to “illuminate,” 
and you may have to check the dictionary for a definition of “tinct.” Test your 
knowledge of content by listing all the facts of the poem. Pay attention to the 
poem’s basic situation. Who is speaking? What is happening, or what thoughts 
is the speaker sharing? In this poem, the “I” is not further identified, so you will 
have to refer to him or her as the “speaker.” You should not call the speaker 
“Dunbar,” however, because you do not know if Dunbar ever grew a rose. 
 In “Promise” the speaker is describing an event that has taken place. The 
speaker grew a rose, tended to it with care, and watched it begin to bloom. 
Then, when the rose was in full bloom, some child picked the rose and took it 
away. The situation is fairly simple, isn’t it? Too simple, unfortunately, for some 
readers who decide that the speaker never grew a rose at all. But when anyone 
5
10

536 
APPENDIX
writes, “I grew a rose within a garden fair,” it is wise to assume that the writer 
means just that. People do grow roses, most often in gardens, and then the gar-
dens are made “fair” or beautiful by the flowers growing there. Read first for 
the facts; try not to jump too quickly to broad generalizations. 
 As with nonfiction, one of the best ways to make certain you have under-
stood a literary work is to write a summary or paraphrase. Since a summary 
condenses, you are most likely to write a summary of a story, novel, or play, 
whereas a paraphrase is usually reserved for poems or complex short passages. 
When you paraphrase a difficult poem, you are likely to end up with more 
words than in the original because your purpose is to turn cryptic lines into 
more ordinary sentences. For example, Dunbar’s “Then hasted I with smiles” 
can be paraphrased to read: “Then, full of smiles, I hurried.” 
 When summarizing a literary work, remember to use your own words, draw 
no conclusions, giving only the facts, but focus your summary on the key events 
in the story. (Of course the selecting you do to write a summary represents pre-
liminary analysis; you are making some choices about what is important in the 
work.) Read the following short story by Kate Chopin and then write your own 
summary. Finally, compare yours to the summary that follows the story. 
 THE STORY OF AN HOUR  
 
 KATE   CHOPIN  
 Now recognized as an important voice from nineteenth-century America, Kate Chopin 
(1851–1904) enjoyed popularity for her short stories from 1890 to 1900 and then 
 condemnation and neglect for sixty years. She saw two collections of stories 
 published— Bayou Folk  in 1894 and  A Night in Acadie in 1897—before losing popularity 
and critical acclaim with the publication of her short novel  The Awakening in 1899, the 
story of a woman struggling to free herself from years of repression and subservience.  
 Knowing that Mrs. Mallard was afflicted with a heart trouble, great care was 
taken to break to her as gently as possible the news of her husband’s death. 
 It was her sister Josephine who told her, in broken sentences; veiled hints 
that revealed in half concealing. Her husband’s friend Richards was there, too, 
near her. It was he who had been in the newspaper office when intelligence of 
the railroad disaster was received, with Brently Mallard’s name leading the list 
of “killed.” He had only taken the time to assure himself of its truth by a sec-
ond telegram, and had hastened to forestall any less careful, less tender friend 
in bearing the sad message. 
 She did not hear the story as many women have heard the same, with a 
paralyzed inability to accept its significance. She wept at once, with sudden, 
wild abandonment, in her sister’s arms. When the storm of grief had spent 
itself she went away to her room alone. She would have no one follow her. 
 There stood, facing the open window, a comfortable, roomy armchair. Into 
this she sank, pressed down by a physical exhaustion that haunted her body 
and seemed to reach into her soul. 
 She could see in the open square before her house the tops of trees that 
were all aquiver with the new spring life. The delicious breath of rain was in the 
1
2
3
4
5

 
 Understanding Literature  
537
air. In the street below a peddler was crying his wares. The notes of a distant 
song which some one was singing reached her faintly, and countless sparrows 
were twittering in the eaves. 
 There were patches of blue sky showing here and there through the clouds 
that had met and piled one above the other in the west facing her window. 
 She sat with her head thrown back upon the cushion of the chair, quite 
motionless, except when a sob came up into her throat and shook her, as a 
child who has cried itself to sleep continues to sob in its dreams. 
 She was young, with a fair, calm face, whose lines bespoke repression and 
even a certain strength. But now there was a dull stare in her eyes, whose 
gaze was fixed away off yonder on one of those patches of blue sky. It was 
not a glance of reflection, but rather indicated a suspension of intelligent 
thought. 
 There was something coming to her and she was waiting for it, fearfully. 
What was it? She did not know; it was too subtle and elusive to name. But she 
felt it, creeping out of the sky, reaching toward her through the sounds, the 
scents, the color that filled the air. 
 Now her bosom rose and fell tumultuously. She was beginning to recog-
nize this thing that was approaching to possess her, and she was striving to 
beat it back with her will—as powerless as her two white slender hands would 
have been. 
 When she abandoned herself a little whispered word escaped her slightly 
parted lips. She said it over and over under her breath: “free, free, free!” The 
vacant stare and the look of terror that had followed it went from her eyes. 
They stayed keen and bright. Her pulses beat fast, and the coursing blood 
warmed and relaxed every inch of her body. 
 She did not stop to ask if it were or were not a monstrous joy that held her. 
A clear and exalted perception enabled her to dismiss the suggestion as trivial. 
 She knew that she would weep again when she saw the kind, tender hands 
folded in death; the face that had never looked save with love upon her, fixed 
and gray and dead. But she saw beyond that bitter moment a long procession 
of years to come that would belong to her absolutely. And she opened and 
spread her arms out to them in welcome. 
 There would be no one to live for her during those coming years; she 
would live for herself. There would be no powerful will bending hers in that 
blind persistence with which men and women believe they have a right to 
impose a private will upon a fellow-creature. A kind intention or a cruel inten-
tion made the act seem no less a crime as she looked upon it in that brief 
moment of illumination. 
 And yet she had loved him—sometimes. Often she had not. What did it 
matter! What could love, the unsolved mystery, count for in face of this pos-
session of self-assertion which she suddenly recognized as the strongest 
impulse of her being! 
 “Free! Body and soul free!” she kept whispering. 
 Josephine was kneeling before the closed door with her lips to the key-
hole, imploring for admission. “Louise, open the door! I beg; open the 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

538 
APPENDIX
door—you will make yourself ill. What are you doing, Louise? For heaven’s 
sake open the door.” 
 “Go away. I am not making myself ill.” No; she was drinking in a very elixir 
of life through that open window. 
 Her fancy was running riot along those days ahead of her. Spring days, and 
summer days, and all sorts of days that would be her own. She breathed a 
quick prayer that life might be long. It was only yesterday she had thought 
with a shudder that life might be long. 
 She arose at length and opened the door to her sister’s importunities. 
There was a feverish triumph in her eyes, and she carried herself unwittingly 
like a goddess of Victory. She clasped her sister’s waist, and together they 
descended the stairs. Richards stood waiting for them at the bottom. 
 Someone was opening the front door with a latchkey. It was Brently 
Mallard who entered, a little travel-stained, composedly carrying his grip-sack 
and umbrella. He had been far from the scene of accident, and did not even 
know there had been one. He stood amazed at Josephine’s piercing cry; at 
Richards’ quick motion to screen him from the view of his wife. 
 But Richards was too late. 
 When the doctors came they said she had died of heart disease—of joy 
that kills. 
 Summary of “The Story of an Hour” 
 Mrs. Mallard’s sister Josephine and her husband’s friend Richards come to tell 
her that her husband has been listed as killed in a train accident. They try to 
be gentle because Mrs. Mallard has a heart condition. She cries and then goes 
to her bedroom alone. She sits in an armchair and gazes out the open window. 
Her dull stare gives way to some new thought that she cannot push away. She 
whispers the word “free” and thinks about a future directed by herself. 
Responding to Josephine’s pleas, she leaves the bedroom and sees Richards 
below—and then Mr. Mallard letting himself in the front door. Mrs. Mallard 
dies, and the doctors who attend her say she died of heart disease—of “joy 
that kills.”  
 Note that the summary is written in the present tense. Brevity is achieved by 
leaving out dialogue and the details of what Mrs. Mallard sees outside her win-
dow and the future life she imagines. Observe that the summary is not the same 
as the original story. The drama and emotion are missing, details that help us to 
understand the story’s ending. 
 Now for a paraphrase. Read the following sonnet by Shakespeare, looking 
up unfamiliar words and making notes. Remember to read to the end of a unit 
of thought, not just to the end of a line. Some sentences continue through sev-
eral lines; if you pause before you reach punctuation, you will be confused. 
Write your own paraphrase, not looking ahead in the text, and then compare 
yours with the one that follows the poem. 
18
19
20
21
22
23

 
 Understanding Literature  
539
 SONNET 116  
 
 WILLIAM   SHAKESPEARE  
 Surely the best-known name in literature, William Shakespeare (1564–1616) is famous 
as both a dramatist and a poet. Rural Warwickshire and the market town of 
 Stratford-on-Avon, where he grew up, showed him many of the character types who 
were to enliven his plays, as did the bustling life of a young actor in London. 
Apparently his sonnets were intended to be circulated only among his friends, but 
they were published nonetheless in 1609. His thirty-seven plays were first published 
together in 1623. Shakespeare’s 154 sonnets vary, some focusing on separation and 
world-weariness, others on the endurance of love.  
 Let me not to the marriage of true minds 
 Admit impediments. Love is not love 
 Which alters when it alteration finds, 
 Or bends with the remover to remove. 
 O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark  
 That looks on tempests and is never shaken; 
 It is the star to every wand’ring bark, 
 Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken. 
 Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks 
 Within his bending sickle’s compass come; 
 Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, 
 But bears it out even to the edge of doom. 
 If this be error and upon me proved, 
 I never writ, nor no man ever loved. 
 Paraphrase of “Sonnet 116” 
 I cannot accept barriers to the union of steadfast spirits. We cannot call love 
love if it changes because it discovers change or if it disappears during 
absence. On the contrary, love is a steady guide that, in spite of difficulties, 
remains unwavering. Love can define the inherent value in all who lack 
 self-knowledge, though superficially they know who they are. Love does not 
lessen with time, though signs of physical beauty may fade. Love endures, 
changeless, eternally. If anyone can show me to be wrong in this position, I am 
no writer and no man can be said to have loved.  
 We have examined the facts of a literary work, what we can call the internal 
situation. But, as we noted in Chapter 2, there is also the external situation or 
context of any piece of writing. For many literary works, the context is not as 
essential to understanding as it is with nonfiction. You can read “The Story of 
an Hour,” for instance, without knowing much about Kate Chopin, or the cir-
cumstances in which she wrote the story, although such information would 
enrich your reading experience. There is a body of information, however, that is 
important: the external literary situation. Readers should take note of these 
details before they begin to read:
5
10

540 
APPENDIX
 • First, don’t make the mistake of calling every work a “story.” Make clear 
distinctions among stories, novels, plays, and poems. 
 • Poems can be further divided into narrative, dramatic, and lyric poems. 
 • A  narrative poem, such as Homer’s  The Iliad, tells a story in verse. A  dramatic 
poem records the speech of at least one character. 
 • A poem in which only one figure speaks—but clearly addresses words 
to someone who is present in a particular situation—is called a  dramatic 
monologue. 
 •  Lyric poems, Dunbar’s “Promise” for example, may place the speaker in a 
situation or may express a thought or feeling with few, if any, situational 
details, but lyric poems have in common the convention that we as read-
ers are listening in on someone’s thoughts, not listening to words directed 
to a second, created figure. These distinctions make us aware of how the 
words of the poem are coming to us. Are we hearing a storyteller or some-
one speaking? Or, are we overhearing someone’s thoughts?  
 Lyric poems can be further divided into many subcategories or types. Most 
instructors will expect you to be able to recognize some of these types. You 
should be able to distinguish between a poem in  free verse (no prevailing metri-
cal pattern) and one in  blank verse (continuous unrhymed lines of iambic pen-
tameter). ( Note: A metrical line will contain a particular number—pentameter is 
five—of one kind of metrical “foot.” The iambic foot consists of one unstressed 
syllable followed by one stressed syllable.) You should also be able to tell if a 
poem is written in some type of  stanza form (repeated units with the same num-
ber of lines, same metrical pattern, and same rhyme scheme), or if it is a  sonnet 
(always fourteen lines of iambic pentameter with one of two complex rhyme 
schemes labeled either “English” or “Italian”). You want to make it a habit to 
observe these external elements before you read. To sharpen your observation, 
complete the following exercise. 
 EXERCISE: Observing Literary Types and Using Literary Terms 
 1. 
After surveying this appendix, make a list of all the works of literature by 
 primary type: short story, poem, play. 
REMEMBER: Active reading includes looking over a work first and pre-
dicting what will come next. Do not just start reading words without first 
understanding what kind of work you are about to read.
■ ■

 
 Understanding Literature  
541
 2. For each work on your list, add two more pieces of information: whether the 
author is American or British, and in what century the work was written. Why 
should you be aware of the writer’s dates and nationality as you read? 
 3. Further divide the poems into narrative, dramatic, or lyric. 
 4. List as many of the details of type or form as you can for each poem. For exam-
ple, if the poem is written in stanzas, describe the stanza form used: the number 
of lines, the meter, the rhyme scheme. If the poem is a sonnet, determine the 
rhyme scheme. ( Note: Rhyme scheme is indicated by using letters, assigning  a to 
the first sound and using a new letter for each new sound. Thus, if two consecu-
tive lines rhyme, the scheme is  aa, bb, cc, dd, and so on.) 
■ ■
 SEEING CONNECTIONS: ANALYSIS 
  Although we read first for the facts and an initial emotional response, we do 
not stop there, because as humans we seek meaning. Surely there is more to 
“The Story of an Hour” than the summary suggests; emotionally we know this 
to be true. As with nonfiction, one of the best places to start analysis is with a 
work’s organization or structure. Lyric poems will be shaped by many of the 
same structures found in essays: chronological, spatial, general to particular, 
particular to general, a list of particulars with an unstated general point, and 
so forth. In “Promise,” Dunbar gives one illustration, recounted chronologi-
cally, to make a point that is left unstated. “Sonnet 116” contains a list of char-
acteristics of love underscored in the conclusion by the speaker’s conviction 
that he is right. 
 Analysis of Narrative Structure 
 In stories (and plays and narrative poems) we are given a series of events, in 
time sequence, involving one or more characters. In some stories, episodes are 
only loosely connected but are unified around a central character (Mark Twain’s 
 Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, for example). Most stories present events that 
are at least to some extent related causally; that is, action A by the main charac-
ter leads to event B, which requires action C by the main character. This kind of 
plot structure can be diagrammed, as in  Figure 1 . 
  Figure  1 introduces some terms and concepts useful in analyzing and 
discussing narratives. The story’s  exposition refers to the background details 
Climax
Resolution
Complication(s)/Conflict
Exposition
 FIGURE 1  Plot Structure 

542 
APPENDIX
needed to get the story started, including the time and place of the story and 
relationships of the characters. In “The Story of an Hour,” a key detail of 
exposition is the fact that Mrs. Mallard has a heart condition. The  complication 
refers to an event: Something happens to produce tension or  conflict. In 
Chopin’s story, the announcement of Mr. Mallard’s death seems to be an 
immediate complication. But, after her initial tears, we do not see Mrs. 
Mallard dealing with this complication in the “typical” way. Instead, when 
she sits in her bedroom, she experiences a  conflict. She struggles within 
 herself. Why does she struggle? Why not just embrace the new idea that 
comes to her? 
 Although some stories present one major complication leading to a  climax 
of decision or insight for the main character, many actually repeat the pattern, 
presenting several complications—each with an attempted resolution that 
causes yet another complication—until we reach the high point of tension, the 
 climax. The action—or inaction—of the climactic moment leads to the story’s 
 resolution and ending. 
 These terms are helpful in analysis, even though some stories end abruptly, 
with little apparent resolution. A stark “resolution” is part of the modern writ-
er’s view of reality, that life goes on, with problems often remaining unresolved. 
A character in an unpleasant marriage continues in that marriage, perhaps 
r uefully, perhaps a bit wiser but no happier and unable to act to change the sit-
uation. What is the climactic moment in “The Story of an Hour”? How is the 
story resolved? What is significant about the doctors’ explanation at the end? 
Are they correct? 
 Analysis of Character 
 An analysis of plot structure suggests to us that Mrs. Mallard is not in conflict 
over her husband’s death. She is in conflict, initially, over her reaction to that 
death, but she resolves her conflict, only to have Mr. Mallard open the front 
door. Note the close connection between complication (event) and conflict 
(what the characters are feeling). Fiction requires both plot and character, events 
and players in those events. In serious literature the greater emphasis is usually 
on character, on what we learn about human life through the interplay of 
 character and incident. 
 As we shift from plot to character, we can enhance our analysis by consid-
ering how writers present character. Writers will usually employ several tech-
niques from the following list:
 • Descriptive details. (Mrs. Mallard’s heart condition. Josephine and  Richards 
worry about her health.) 
 • Dramatic scenes. (Instead of telling, they show us. Much of “The Story 
of an Hour” is dialogue. When Mrs. Mallard is in her bedroom alone, we 
overhear her internal dialogue.)  
 • Contrast among characters. (Josephine assumes that Mrs. Mallard contin-
ues to be the distraught, bereft widow, whereas she is actually embracing 

 
 Understanding Literature  
543
a future on her own. Note the contrast between the gentle, kind control of 
Mr. Mallard in their marriage and the way the control actually feels in his 
wife’s experience of it.) 
 • Other elements in the work. (Names can be significant, or characters can 
become associated with significant objects, or details of setting can become 
symbolic. Note all of the specific details of events outside Mrs. Mallard’s 
window. What, altogether, do they represent?)  
 Understanding character can be a challenge because we must infer from a 
few words, gestures, and actions. Looking at all of a writer’s options for pre-
senting character will keep us from overlooking important details. 
 Analysis of Elements of Style and Tone 
 All the elements, discussed in Chapter 2, that shape a writer’s style and create 
tone can be found in literary works as well and need to be considered as part of 
your analysis. We can begin with Chopin’s title. How much can happen in one 
hour? Well, the person we thought was dead is alive, and the “widow” ends up 
dead, quite a reversal of fortunes in such a short time. This situation is filled 
with irony. The doctors’ misunderstanding of the cause of Mrs. Mallard’s shock 
at the sight of her husband also adds irony to the story. The doctors express 
society’s conventional thinking: Dear Mrs. Mallard is so happy that her hus-
band is really alive that her heart cannot stand it. But is that really what shocks 
her into an early death? 
 Shakespeare’s “Sonnet 116” develops the speaker’s ideas about love 
through a series of metaphors. The rose in Dunbar’s “Promise” is not a meta-
phor, though, because it is not part of a comparison. Yet, as we read the poem 
we sense that it is about something more serious than the nurturing and then 
stealing of one flower, no matter how beautiful. The poem’s title gives us a clue 
that the rose stands for something more than itself; it is a symbol. Traditionally 
the red rose is a symbol of love. To tie the poem together, we will have to see 
how the title, the usual symbolic value of the rose, and specifics of the poem 
connect. 
 DRAWING CONCLUSIONS: INTERPRETATION 
 We have studied the facts of several works and analyzed their structures 
and other key elements. To reach some conclusions and shape our thinking 
into a coherent whole is to offer an interpretation of the work. At this point, 
readers can be expected to disagree somewhat, but if we have all read care-
fully and applied our knowledge of literature, differences should, most of 
the time, be ones of focus and emphasis. Presumably no one is prepared to 
argue that “Promise” is about pink elephants or “The Story of an Hour” 
about the Queen of England. Neither work contains any facts to support 
those conclusions. 

544 
APPENDIX
 What conclusions can we reach about “Promise”? A beautiful flower has 
been nurtured into bloom by a speaker who expects it to brighten his or her life. 
The title lets us know that the rose represents great promise. Has a rival stolen 
the speaker’s loved one, represented symbolically by the rose? A thoughtless 
child would not be an appropriate rival for an adult speaker. In the context of 
this poem, the rose represents, more generally, something that the speaker cher-
ishes in anticipation of the pleasure it will bring, only to lose that something. 
 What conclusions have you reached about “The Story of an Hour”? What is 
the real irony of the story? When Mr. Mallard, very much alive, opens the door 
to his home, what door does he shut for Mrs. Mallard?  
 WRITING ABOUT LITERATURE 
 When you are assigned a literary essay, you will usually be asked to write 
either an explication or an analysis. An  explication presents a reading of a com-
plex poem. It will combine paraphrase and explanation to clarify the poem’s 
meaning. A  literary analysis can take many forms. You may be asked to analyze 
one element in a work: character conflict, the use of setting, the tone of a 
poem. Or you could be asked to contrast two works. Usually an analytic 
assignment requires you to connect analysis to interpretation, for we analyze 
the parts to better understand the whole. If you are asked to examine the met-
aphors in a Shakespeare sonnet, for example, you will want to show how 
understanding the metaphors contributes to an understanding of the entire 
poem. In short, literary analysis is much the same as a style analysis of an 
essay. Thus the guidelines for writing about style discussed in Chapter 2 
apply here as well. *  Successful analyses are based on accurate reading, reflec-
tion on the work’s emotional impact, and the use of details from the work to 
support conclusions.
 Literary analyses can also incorporate material beyond the particular work. 
We can analyze a work in the light of biographical information or from a par-
ticular political ideology. Or we can study the social-cultural context of the 
work, or relate it to a literary tradition. These are only a few of the many 
approaches to the study of literature, and they depend on the application of 
knowledge outside the work itself. For undergraduates, topics based on these 
approaches usually require research. The student research essay at the end of 
the Appendix is a literary analysis. Alan examines Faulkner’s  Intruder in the 
Dust as an initiation novel. He connects his analysis to works by Hawthorne 
and Arthur Miller. What is taken from his research is documented and helps 
develop and support his own conclusions about the story. 
 To practice close reading, analysis, and interpretation of literature, read the 
following works. Use the questions after each work to aid your response. 
* Remember: The guidelines for referring to authors, titles, and direct quotations—presented in 
Chapter 1—also apply.

 
 Understanding Literature  
545
 TO HIS COY MISTRESS  
 
 ANDREW   MARVELL  
 One of the last poets of the English Renaissance, Andrew Marvell (1621–1678) 
g raduated from Cambridge University, spent much of his young life as a tutor, and 
was elected to Parliament in 1659. He continued in public service until his death. Most 
of his best-loved lyric poems come from his years as a tutor. “To His Coy Mistress” 
was published in 1681.  
 Had we but world enough, and time, 
 This coyness, lady, were no crime. 
 We would sit down, and think which way 
 To walk, and pass our long love’s day. 
 Thou by the Indian Ganges’ side 
 Shouldst rubies find; I by the tide 
 Of Humber would complain. I would 
 Love you ten years before the Flood, 
 And you should, if you please, refuse 
 Till the conversion of the Jews. 
 My vegetable o love should grow 
 slowly vegetative  
 Vaster than empires, and more slow; 
 An hundred years should go to praise 
 Thine eyes, and on thy forehead gaze; 
 Two hundred to adore each breast, 
 But thirty thousand to the rest; 
 An age at least to every part, 
 And the last age should show your heart. 
 For, lady, you deserve this state, 
 Nor would I love at lower rate. 
 But at my back I always hear 
 Time’s wingèd chariot hurrying near; 
 And yonder all before us lie 
 Deserts of vast eternity. 
 Thy beauty shall no more be found, 
 Nor in thy marble vault shall sound 
 My echoing song; then worms shall try 
 That long preserved virginity, 
 And your quaint honor turn to dust, 
 And into ashes all my lust. 
 The grave’s a fine and private place, 
 But none, I think, do there embrace. 
 Now therefore, while the youthful hue 
 Sits on thy skin like morning dew, 
 And while thy willing soul transpires 
 At every pore with instant fires, 
 Now let us sport us while we may, 
 And now, like amorous birds of prey, 
 Rather at once our time devour 
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

546 
APPENDIX
 Than languish in his slow-chapped power. 
 Let us roll all our strength and all 
 Our sweetness up into one ball, 
 And tear our pleasures with rough strife 
 Thorough o the iron gates of life. 
 through  
 Thus, though we cannot make our sun 
 Stand still, yet we will make him run. 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING, REASONING, AND REFLECTION 
 1. Describe the poem’s external form.
      2. How are the words coming to us? That is, is this a narrative, dramatic, or lyric 
poem? 
 3. Summarize the speaker’s argument, using the structures  if, but, and  therefore. 
 4. What figure of speech do we find throughout the first verse paragraph? What is 
its effect on the speaker’s tone? 
 5. Find examples of irony and understatement in the second verse paragraph. 
 6. How does the tone shift in the second section? 
 7. Explain the personification in line 22. 
 8. Explain the metaphors in lines 30 and 45. 
 9. What is the paradox of the last two lines? How can it be explained? 
 10. What is the idea of this poem? What does the writer want us to reflect on? 
 THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD 
TO HIS LOVE   
           CHRISTOPHER    MARLOWE  
 Cambridge graduate, Renaissance dramatist second only to Shakespeare, Christopher 
Marlowe (1564–1593) may be best known for this lyric poem. Not only is it widely 
anthologized, it has also spawned a number of responses by such significant writers as 
the seventeenth-century poet John Donne and the twentieth-century humorous poet 
Ogden Nash. For the Renaissance period the shepherd was a standard figure of the 
lover.  
 Come live with me and be my love, 
 And we will all the pleasures prove 
 That valleys, groves, hills, and fields, 
 Woods, or steepy mountain yields. 
 And we will sit upon the rocks, 
 Seeing the shepherds feed their flocks, 
 By shallow rivers to whose falls 
 Melodious birds sing madrigals. 
40
45
5

 
 Understanding Literature  
547
 And I will make thee beds of roses 
 And a thousand fragrant posies, 
 A cap of flowers, and a kirtle 
 Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle; 
 A gown made of the finest wool 
 Which from our pretty lambs we pull; 
 Fair lined slippers for the cold, 
 With buckles of the purest gold; 
 A belt of straw and ivy buds, 
 With coral clasps and amber studs: 
 And if these pleasures may thee move, 
 Come live with me, and be my love. 
 The shepherds’ swains shall dance and sing 
 For thy delight each May morning: 
 If these delights thy mind may move, 
 Then live with me and be my love. 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING, REASONING, AND REFLECTION 
 1. 
Describe the poem’s external structure. 
 2. 
What is the speaker’s subject? What does he want to accomplish? 
 3. 
Summarize his “argument.” How does he seek to convince his love? 
 4. 
What do the details of his argument have in common—that is, what kind of 
world or life does the speaker describe? Is there anything missing from the 
shepherd’s world? 
 5. 
Would you like to be courted in this way? Would you say yes to the shepherd? 
If not, why?  
 THE NYMPH’S REPLY TO THE SHEPHERD  
 
 SIR WALTER   RALEIGH 
 The renowned Elizabethan courtier, Sir Walter Raleigh (1552–1618) led a varied life as 
both a favorite of Queen Elizabeth and out of favor at court, as a colonizer and writer, 
and as one of many to be imprisoned in the Tower of London. In the following poem, 
Raleigh offers a response to Marlowe, using the nymph as the voice of the female lover.  
 If all the world and love were young, 
 And truth in every shepherd’s tongue, 
 These pretty pleasures might me move 
 To live with thee and be thy love. 
 Time drives the flocks from field to fold 
 When rivers rage and rocks grow cold, 
10
15
20
5

548 
APPENDIX
 And Philomel becometh dumb; 
 The rest complains of cares to come. 
 The flowers do fade, and wanton fields 
 To wayward winter reckoning yields; 
 A honey tongue, a heart of gall, 
 Is fancy’s spring, but sorrow’s fall. 
 Thy gowns, thy shoes, thy beds of roses, 
 Thy cap, thy kirtle, and thy posies 
 Soon break, soon wither, soon forgotten,— 
 In folly ripe, in reason rotten. 
 Thy belt of straw and ivy buds, 
 Thy coral clasps and amber studs, 
 All these in me no means can move 
 To come to thee and be thy love. 
 But could youth last and love still breed, 
 Had joys no date nor age no need, 
 Then these delights my mind might move 
 To live with thee and be thy love. 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING, REASONING, AND REFLECTION 
 1. 
Describe the poem’s external structure. 
 2. 
What is the context of the poem, the reason the speaker offers her words? 
 3. 
Analyze the speaker’s argument, using  if and  but as your basic structure—and 
then the concluding, qualifying  but. 
 4. 
What evidence does the speaker provide to support her argument? 
 5. 
Who has the more convincing argument: Marlowe’s shepherd or Raleigh’s 
nymph? Why?  
 IS MY TEAM PLOUGHING  
 
 A. E.   HOUSMAN  
 British poet A. E. Housman (1859–1936) was a classicist, first a professor of Latin at 
University College, London, and then at the University of Cambridge. He spent the 
rest of his life at Trinity College, Cambridge. He is best known for his first volume of 
poetry,  A Shropshire Lad  (1896), a collection of crystal clear and deceptively simple 
verses that give expression to a world that has been lost—perhaps the innocence of 
youth.  
 “Is my team ploughing, 
 That I was used to drive 
10
15
20

 
 Understanding Literature  
549
 And hear the harness jingle 
 When I was man alive?” 
 Ay, the horses trample, 
 The harness jingles now: 
 No change though you lie under 
 The land you used to plough. 
 “Is football playing 
 Along the river shore, 
 With lads to chase the leather, 
 Now I stand up no more?” 
 Ay, the ball is flying, 
 The lads play heart and soul; 
 The goal stands up, the keeper  
 Stands up to keep the goal. 
 “Is my girl happy, 
 That I thought hard to leave, 
 And has she tired of weeping 
 As she lies down at eve?” 
 Ay, she lies down lightly, 
 She lies not down to weep: 
 Your girl is well contented. 
 Be still, my lad, and sleep. 
 “Is my friend hearty,  
 Now I am thin and pine, 
 And has he found to sleep in 
 A better bed than mine?” 
 Yes, lad, I lie easy,   
 I lie as lads would choose; 
 I cheer a dead man’s sweetheart, 
 Never ask me whose. 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING, REASONING, AND REFLECTION 
 1. 
Classify the poem according to its external structure. 
 2. 
Is this a narrative, dramatic, or lyric poem? How are we to read the words com-
ing to us?  
   3. 
What is the relationship between the two speakers? What has happened to the 
first speaker? What has changed in the life of the second speaker?  
 4. 
What ideas are suggested by the poem? What does Housman want us to take 
from his poem? 
5
10
15
20
25
30

550 
APPENDIX
 TAXI 
 
 AMY  LOWELL  
 Educated at private schools and widely traveled, American Amy Lowell (1874–1925) 
was both a poet and a critic. Lowell frequently read her poetry and lectured on poetic 
techniques, defending her verse and that of other modern poets.  
 When I go away from you 
 The world beats dead 
 Like a slackened drum. 
 I call out for you against the jutted stars 
 And shout into the ridges of the wind. 
 Streets coming fast, 
 One after the other, 
 Wedge you away from me, 
 And the lamps of the city prick my eyes 
 So that I can no longer see your face. 
 Why should I leave you, 
 To wound myself upon the sharp edges of the night? 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING, REASONING, AND REFLECTION 
 1. 
Classify the poem according to its external structure. 
 2. 
Is this a narrative, dramatic, or lyric poem? 
 3. 
Explain the simile in the opening three lines and the metaphor in the last line of 
the poem.  
 4. 
What is the poem’s subject? What seems to be the situation in which we find 
the speaker? 
 5. 
How would you describe the tone of the poem? How do the details and the 
emotional impact of the metaphors help to create tone? 
 6. 
What is the poem’s meaning or theme? In other words, what does the poet 
want us to understand from reading her poem?  
 THE ONES WHO WALK 
AWAY FROM OMELAS   
 
 URSULA K.   LE GUIN 
 A graduate of Radcliffe College and Columbia University, Ursula K. Le Guin is the 
author of more than twenty novels and juvenile books, several volumes of poetry, 
and numerous stories and essays published in science fiction, scholarly, and popular 
journals. Her fiction stretches the categories of science fiction or fantasy and chal-
lenges a reader’s moral understanding. First published in 1973, the following story, 
according to Le Guin, was inspired by a passage in William James’s “The Moral 
Philosopher and the Moral Life” in which he asserts that we could not tolerate a situ-
ation in which the happiness of many people was purchased by the “lonely torment” 
of one “lost soul.” 
5
10

 
 Understanding Literature  
551
 With a clamor of bells that set the swallows soaring, the Festival of 
Summer came to the city Omelas, bright-towered by the sea. The rigging of 
the boats in harbor sparkled with flags. In the streets between houses with red 
roofs and painted walls, between the old moss-grown gardens and under ave-
nues of trees, past great parks and public buildings, processions moved. Some 
were decorous: old people in long stiff robes of mauve and gray, grave master 
workmen, quiet, merry women carrying their babies and chatting as they 
walked. In other streets the music beat faster, a shimmering of gong and tam-
bourine, and the people went dancing, the procession was a dance. Children 
dodged in and out, their high calls rising like the swallows’ crossing flights 
over the music and the singing. All the processions wound towards the north 
side of the city, where on the great water-meadow called the Green Fields 
boys and girls, naked in the bright air, with mudstained feet and ankles and 
long, lithe arms, exercised their restive horses before the race. The horses 
wore no gear at all but a halter without bit. Their manes were braided with 
streamers of silver, gold, and green. They flared their nostrils and pranced and 
boasted to one another; they were vastly excited, the horse being the only 
animal who has adopted our ceremonies as his own. Far off to the north and 
west the mountains stood up half circling Omelas on her bay. The air of morn-
ing was so clear that the snow still crowning the Eighteen Peaks burned with 
white-gold fire across the miles of sunlit air, under the dark blue of the sky. 
There was just enough wind to make the banners that marked the racecourse 
snap and flutter now and then. In the silence of the broad green meadows 
one could hear the music winding through the city streets, farther and nearer 
and ever approaching, a cheerful faint sweetness of the air that from time to 
time trembled and gathered together and broke out into the great joyous 
clanging of the bells. 
 Joyous! How is one to tell about joy? How describe the citizens of Omelas? 
 They were not simple folk, you see, though they were happy. But we do 
not say the words of cheer much any more. All smiles have become archaic. 
Given a description such as this one tends to make certain assumptions. Given 
a description such as this one tends to look next for the King, mounted on a 
splendid stallion and surrounded by his noble knights, or perhaps in a golden 
litter borne by great-muscled slaves. But there was no king. They did not use 
swords, or keep slaves. They were not barbarians. I do not know the rules and 
laws of their society, but I suspect that they were singularly few. As they did 
without monarchy and slavery, so they also got on without the stock exchange, 
the advertisement, the secret police, and the bomb. Yet I repeat that these 
were not simple folk, not dulcet shepherds, noble savages, bland utopians. 
They were not less complex than us. The trouble is that we have a bad habit, 
encouraged by pedants and sophisticates, of considering happiness as 
s omething rather stupid. Only pain is intellectual, only evil interesting. This is 
the treason of the artist: a refusal to admit the banality of evil and the terrible 
boredom of pain. If you can’t lick ‘em, join ‘em. If it hurts, repeat it. But to 
praise despair is to condemn delight, to embrace violence is to lose hold of 
everything else. We have almost lost hold, we can no longer describe a happy 
1
2
3

552 
APPENDIX
man, nor make any celebration of joy. How can I tell you about the people of 
Omelas? They were not naïve and happy children—though their children were, 
in fact, happy. They were mature, intelligent, passionate adults whose lives 
were not wretched. O miracle! But I wish I could describe it better. I wish I 
could convince you. Omelas sounds in my words like a city in a fairy tale, long 
ago and far away, once upon a time. Perhaps it would be best if you imagined 
it as your own fancy bids, assuming it will rise to the occasion, for certainly I 
cannot suit you all. For instance, how about technology? I think that there 
would be no cars or helicopters in and above the streets; this follows from the 
fact that the people of Omelas are happy people. Happiness is based on a just 
discrimination of what is necessary, what is neither necessary nor destructive, 
and what is destructive. In the middle category, however—that of the unnec-
essary but undestructive, that of comfort, luxury, exuberance, etc.—they could 
perfectly well have central heating, subway trains, washing machines, and all 
kinds of marvelous devises not yet invented here, floating light-sources, fuel-
less power, a cure for the common cold. Or they could have none of that: it 
doesn’t matter. As you like it. I incline to think that people from towns up and 
down the coast have been coming in to Omelas during the last days before 
the Festival on very fast trains and double-decked trams, and that the train 
station of Omelas is actually the handsomest building in town, though plainer 
than the magnificent Farmers’ Market. But even granted trains, I fear that 
Omelas so far strikes some of you as goody-goody. Smiles, bells, parades, 
horses, bleh. If so, please add an orgy. If an orgy would help, don’t hesitate. 
Let us not, however, have temples from which issue beautiful nude priests and 
priestesses already half in ecstasy and ready to copulate with any man or 
woman, lover or stranger, who desires union with the deep godhead of the 
blood, although that was my first idea. But really it would be better not to 
have any temples in Omelas—at least, not manned temples. Religion yes, 
clergy no. Surely the beautiful nudes can just wander about, offering them-
selves like divine soufflés to the hunger of the needy and the rapture of the 
flesh. Let them join the processions. Let tambourines be struck above the cop-
ulations, and the glory of desire be proclaimed upon the gongs, and (a not 
unimportant point) let the offspring of these delightful rituals be beloved and 
looked after by all. One thing I know there is none of in Omelas is guilt. But 
what else should there be? I thought that first there were no drugs, but that is 
puritanical. For those who like it, the faint insistent sweetness of  drooz may 
perfume the ways of the city,  drooz  which first brings a great lightness and 
brilliance to the mind and limbs, and then after some hours a dreamy languor, 
and wonderful visions at last of the very arcana and inmost secrets of the 
Universe, as well as exciting the pleasure of sex beyond all belief; and it is not 
habit-forming. For more modest tastes I think there ought to be beer. What 
else, what else belongs in the joyous city? The sense of victory, surely, the cel-
ebration of courage. But as we did without clergy, let us do without soldiers. 
The joy built upon successful slaughter is not the right kind of joy; it will not 
do; it is fearful and it is trivial. A boundless and generous contentment, a mag-
nanimous triumph felt not against some outer enemy but in communion with 

 
 Understanding Literature  
553
the finest and fairest in the souls of all men everywhere and the splendor of 
the world’s summer; this is what swells the hearts of the people of Omelas, 
and the victory they celebrate is that of life. I really don’t think many of them 
need to take  drooz. 
 Most of the processions have reached the Green Fields by now. A marvel-
ous smell of cooking goes forth from the red and blue tents of the provision-
ers. The faces of small children are amiably sticky; in the benign grey beard of 
a man a couple of crumbs of rich pastry are entangled. The youths and girls 
have mounted their horses and are beginning to group around the starting 
line of the course. An old woman, small, fat, and laughing, is passing out flow-
ers from a basket, and tall young men wear her flowers in their shining hair. A 
child of nine or ten sits at the edge of the crowd, alone, playing on a wooden 
flute. People pause to listen, and they smile, but they do not speak to him, for 
he never ceases playing and never sees them, his dark eyes wholly rapt in the 
sweet, thin magic of the tune. 
 He finishes, and slowly lowers his hands holding the wooden flute. 
 As if that little private silence were the signal, all at once a trumpet sounds 
from the pavilion near the starting line: imperious, melancholy, piercing. The 
horses rear on their slender legs, and some of them neigh in answer. Soberfaced, 
the young riders stroke the horses’ necks and soothe them, whispering, “Quiet, 
quiet, there my beauty, my hope.” They begin to form in rank along the st arting 
line. The crowds along the racecourse are like a field of grass and flowers in the 
wind. The Festival of Summer has begun. 
 Do you believe? Do you accept the festival, the city, the joy? No? Then let 
me describe this one more thing. 
 In a basement under one of the beautiful public buildings of Omelas, or 
perhaps in the cellar of one of its spacious private homes, there is a room. It 
has one locked door, and no window. A little light seeps in dustily between 
cracks in the boards, secondhand from the cobwebbed window somewhere 
across the cellar. In one corner of the little room a couple of mops, with stiff, 
clotted, foul-smelling heads, stand near a rusty bucket. The floor is dirt, a lit-
tle damp to the touch, as cellar dirt usually is. The room is about three paces 
long and two wide: a mere broom closet or disused tool room. In the room a 
child is sitting. It could be a boy or a girl. It looks about six, but actually is 
nearly ten. It is feeble-minded. Perhaps it was born defective, or perhaps it 
has become imbecile through fear, malnutrition, and neglect. It picks its nose 
and occasionally fumbles vaguely with its toes or genitals, as it sits hunched in 
the corner farthest from the bucket and the two mops. It is afraid of the 
mops. It finds them horrible. It shuts its eyes, but it knows the mops are still 
standing there; and the door is locked; and nobody will come. The door is 
always locked; and nobody ever comes, except that sometimes—the child 
has no understanding of time or interval—sometimes the door rattles terribly 
and opens, and a person, or several people, are there. One of them may 
come in and kick the child to make it stand up. The others never come close, 
but peer in at it with frightened, disgusted eyes. The food bowl and the water 
jug are hastily filled, the door is locked, the eyes disappear. The people at the 
4
5
6
7
8

554 
APPENDIX
door never say anything, but the child, who has not always lived in the tool 
room, and can remember sunlight and its mother’s voice, sometimes speaks. 
“I will be good,” it says. “Please let me out. I will be good!” They never 
answer. The child used to scream for help at night, and cry a good deal, but 
now it only makes a kind of whining, “eh-haa-eh-haa,” and it speaks less and 
less often. It is so thin there are no calves to its legs; its belly protrudes; it lives 
on a half-bowl of corn meal and grease a day. It is naked. Its buttocks 
and thighs are a mass of festered sores, as it sits in its own excrement 
continually. 
 They all know it is there, all the people of Omelas. Some of them have 
come to see it, others are content merely to know it is there. They all know that 
it has to be there. Some of them understand why, and some do not, but they 
all understand that their happiness, the beauty of their city, the tenderness of 
their friendships, the health of their children, the wisdom of their scholars, the 
skill of their makers, even the abundance of their harvest and the kindly weath-
ers of their skies, depend wholly upon this child’s abominable misery. 
 This is usually explained to children when they are between eight and 
twelve, whenever they seem capable of understanding; and most of those 
who come to see the child are young people, though often enough an adult 
comes, or comes back, to see the child. No matter how well the matter has 
been explained to them, these young spectators are always shocked and sick-
ened at the sight. They feel disgust, which they had thought themselves supe-
rior to. They feel anger, outrage, impotence, despite all the explanations. They 
would like to do something for the child. But there is nothing they can do. If 
the child were brought up into the sunlight out of that vile place, if it were 
cleaned and fed and comforted, that would be a good thing, indeed; but if it 
were done, in that day and hour all the prosperity and beauty and delight of 
Omelas would wither and be destroyed. Those are the terms. To exchange all 
the goodness and grace of every life in Omelas for that single, small improve-
ment: to throw away the happiness of thousands for the chance of the happi-
ness of one: that would be to let guilt within the walls indeed. 
 The terms are strict and absolute; there may not even be a kind word 
 spoken to the child. 
 Often the young people go home in tears, or in a tearless rage, when they 
have seen the child and faced this terrible paradox. They may brood over it for 
weeks or years. But as time goes on they begin to realize that even if the child 
could be released, it would not get much good of its freedom: a little vague 
pleasure of warmth and food, no doubt, but little more. It is too degraded and 
imbecile to know any real joy. It has been afraid too long ever to be free of 
fear. Its habits are too uncouth for it to respond to humane treatment. Indeed, 
after so long it would probably be wretched without walls about it to protect 
it, and darkness for its eyes, and its own excrement to sit in. Their tears at the 
bitter injustice dry when they begin to perceive the terrible justice of reality, 
and to accept it. Yet it is their tears and anger, the trying of their generosity 
and the acceptance of their helplessness, which are perhaps the true source of 
9
10
11
12

 
 Understanding Literature  
555
the splendor of their lives. Theirs is no vapid, irresponsible happiness. They 
know that they, like the child, are not free. They know compassion. It is the 
existence of the child, and their knowledge of its existence, that makes possi-
ble the mobility of their architecture, the poignancy of their music, the profun-
dity of their science. It is because of the child that they are so gentle with 
children. They know that if the wretched one were not there snivelling in the 
dark, the other one, the flute-player, could make no joyful music as the young 
riders line up in their beauty for the race in the sunlight of the first morning of 
summer. 
 Now do you believe in them? Are they not more credible? But there is one 
more thing to tell, and this is quite incredible. 
 At times one of the adolescent girls or boys who go to see the child, does 
not go home to weep or rage, does not, in fact, go home at all. Sometimes also 
a man or woman much older falls silent for a day or two, and then leaves 
home. These people go out into the street, and walk down the street alone. 
They keep walking, and walk straight out of the city of Omelas, through the 
beautiful gates. They keep walking across the farmlands of Omelas. Each one 
goes alone, youth or girl, man or woman. Night falls; the traveler must pass 
down village streets, between the houses with yellow-lit windows, and on out 
into the darkness of the fields. Each alone, they go west or north, towards the 
mountains. They go on. They leave Omelas, they walk ahead into the dark-
ness, and they do not come back. The place they go towards is a place even 
less imaginable to most of us than the city of happiness. I cannot describe it at 
all. It is possible that it does not exist. But they seem to know where they are 
going, the ones who walk away from Omelas. 
 Source: Copyright © 1973 by Ursula K. Le Guin; first appeared in  New Dimensions 3, reprinted by 
permission of the author and the author’s agent, Virginia Kidd. 
 QUESTIONS FOR READING, REASONING, AND REFLECTION 
 1. 
What is the general impression you get of the city of Omelas from the opening 
paragraph? To what senses does the author appeal?  
 2. 
Describe the people of Omelas. Are they happy? Do they have technology? 
Guilt? Religion? Soldiers? Drugs? 
 3. 
What shocking detail emerges about Omelas? On what does this ideal commu-
nity thrive?  
 4. 
How do the children and teens respond to the locked-up child at first? How do 
they reconcile themselves to the situation? What do some residents do? 
 5. 
Can you understand the reason most residents accept the situation? Can you 
understand those who walk away? With which group do you most identify? 
Why? 
 6. 
On what does Le Guin want us to reflect? How would you state the story’s 
theme? 
13
14

556 
APPENDIX
 TRIFLES  
 
 SUSAN   GLASPELL  
 Born in Iowa, Susan Glaspell (1876–1948) attended Drake University and then began 
her writing career as a reporter with the  Des Moines Daily News.  She also started 
writing and selling short stories; her first collection,  Lifted Masks,  was published in 
1912. She completed several novels before moving to Provincetown with her 
 husband, who started the Provincetown Players in 1915. Glaspell wrote seven short 
plays and four long plays for this group, including  Trifles (1916). The well-known 
“Jury of Her Peers” (1917) is a short-story version of the play  Trifles.  Glaspell must 
have recognized that the plot of  Trifles  was a gem worth working with in more than 
one literary form.  
 Characters 
 George Henderson, County Attorney 
 Henry Peters, Sheriff 
 Lewis Hale, A Neighboring Farmer 
 Mrs. Peters 
 Mrs. Hale 
 S CENE:  The kitchen in the now abandoned farmhouse of  J OHN W RIGHT,  a 
gloomy kitchen, and left without having been put in order—unwashed pans 
under the sink, a loaf of bread outside the bread-box, a dish-towel on the 
table—other signs of incompleted work. At the rear, the outer door opens and 
the S HERIFF  comes in followed by the C OUNTY A TTORNEY  and H ALE.  The S HERIFF 
 and H ALE  are men in middle life; the C OUNTY A TTORNEY  is a young man; all are 
much bundled up and go at once to the stove. They are followed by the two 
women—the S HERIFF ’ s wife first; she is a slight wiry woman, a thin nervous face.  
M RS. H ALE  is larger and would ordinarily be called more comfortable looking, 
but she is disturbed now and looks fearfully about as she enters. The women 
have come in slowly, and stand close together near the door.  
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ Rubbing his hands. ] This feels good. Come up to the fire, ladies. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 [ After taking a step forward. ] I’m not—cold. 
 S HERIFF 
 [ Unbuttoning his overcoat and stepping away from the stove as if to mark 
the beginning of official business. ] Now, Mr. Hale, before we move things 
about, you explain to Mr. Henderson just what you saw when you came here 
yesterday morning. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 By the way, has anything been moved? Are things just as you left them 
yesterday? 

 
 Understanding Literature  
557
 S HERIFF 
 [ Looking about. ] It’s just the same. When it dropped below zero last night 
I thought I’d better send Frank out this morning to make a fire for us—no use 
getting pneumonia with a big case on, but I told him not to touch anything 
except the stove—and you know Frank. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Somebody should have been left here yesterday. 
 S HERIFF 
 Oh—yesterday. When I had to send Frank to Morris Center for that man 
who went crazy—I want you to know I had my hands full yesterday. I knew you 
could get back from Omaha by today and as long as I went over everything 
here myself— 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Well, Mr. Hale, tell just what happened when you came here yesterday 
morning. 
 H ALE 
 Harry and I had started to town with a load of potatoes. We came along 
the road from my place and as I got here I said, “I’m going to see if I can’t get 
John Wright to go in with me on a party telephone.” I spoke to Wright about 
it once before and he put me off, saying folks talked too much anyway, and all 
he asked was peace and quiet—I guess you know about how much he talked 
himself; but I thought maybe if I went to the house and talked about it before 
his wife, though I said to Harry that I didn’t know as what his wife wanted 
made much difference to John— 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Let’s talk about that later, Mr. Hale. I do want to talk about that, but tell 
now just what happened when you got to the house. 
 H ALE 
 I didn’t hear or see anything; I knocked at the door, and still it was all quiet 
inside. I knew they must be up, it was past eight o’clock. So I knocked again, 
and I thought I heard somebody say, “Come in.” I wasn’t sure, I’m not sure yet, 
but I opened the door—this door [ indicating the door by which the two women 
are still standing ] and there in that rocker—[ pointing to it ] sat Mrs. Wright. 
 [ They all look at the rocker. ] 
 COUNTY ATTORNEY 
 What—was she doing? 
 H ALE 
 She was rockin’ back and forth. She had her apron in her hand and was 
kind of—pleating it. 

558 
APPENDIX
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 And how did she—look? 
 H ALE 
 Well, she looked queer. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 How do you mean—queer? 
 H ALE 
 Well, as if she didn’t know what she was going to do next. And kind of 
done up. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 How did she seem to feel about your coming? 
 H ALE 
 Why, I don’t think she minded—one way or other. She didn’t pay much atten-
tion. I said, “How do, Mrs. Wright, it’s cold, ain’t it?” And she said, “Is it?”—and 
went on kind of pleating at her apron. Well, I was surprised; she didn’t ask me to 
come up to the stove, or to set down, but just sat there, not even looking at me, 
so I said, “I want to see John.” And then she—laughed. I guess you would call it a 
laugh. I thought of Harry and the team outside, so I said a little sharp: “Can’t I see 
John?” “No,” she says, kind o’ dull like. “Ain’t he home?” says I. “Yes,” says she, 
“he’s home.” “Then why can’t I see him?” I asked her, out of patience. “ ‘Cause 
he’s dead,” says she. “ Dead? ” says I. She just nodded her head, not getting a bit 
excited, but rockin’ back and forth. “Why—where is he?” says I, not knowing what 
to say. She just pointed upstairs—like that [ himself pointing to the room above ]. I 
got up, with the idea of going up there. I walked from there to here—then I says, 
“Why, what did he die of?” “He died of a rope around his neck,” says she, and just 
went on pleatin’ at her apron. Well, I went out and called Harry. I thought I might—
need help. We went upstairs and there he was lyin’— 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 I think I’d rather have you go into that upstairs, where you can point it all 
out. Just go on now with the rest of the story. 
 H ALE 
 Well, my first thought was to get that rope off. It looked . . . [ Stops, his 
face twitches ] . . . but Harry, he went up to him, and he said, “No, he’s dead all 
right, and we’d better not touch anything.” So we went back downstairs. She 
was still sitting that same way. “Has anybody been notified?” said Harry. He 
said it business-like—and she stopped pleatin’ of her apron. “I don’t know,” 
she says. “You don’t  know? ” says Harry. “No,” says she. “Weren’t you sleepin’ 
in the bed with him?” says Harry. “Yes,” says she, “but I was on the inside.” 

 
 Understanding Literature  
559
“Somebody slipped a rope round his neck and strangled him and you didn’t 
wake up?” says Harry. “I didn’t wake up,” she said after him. We must’a looked 
as if we didn’t see how that could be, for after a minute she said, “I sleep 
sound.” Harry was going to ask her more questions but I said maybe we ought 
to let her tell her story first to the coroner, or the sheriff, so Harry went fast as 
he could to Rivers’ place, where there’s a telephone. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 And what did Mrs. Wright do when she knew that you had gone for the 
coroner? 
 H ALE 
 She moved from that chair to this one over here [ Pointing to a small chair 
in the corner ] and just sat there with her hands held together and looking 
down. I got a feeling that I ought to make some conversation, so I said I had 
come in to see if John wanted to put in a telephone, and at that she started to 
laugh, and then she stopped and looked at me—scared. [ The County Attorney, 
who has had his notebook out, makes a note. ] I dunno, maybe it wasn’t scared. 
I wouldn’t like to say it was. Soon Harry got back, and then Dr. Lloyd came, 
and you, Mr. Peters, and so I guess that’s all I know that you don’t. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ Looking around. ] I guess we’ll go upstairs first—and then out to the barn 
and around there. [ To the Sheriff. ] You’re convinced that there was nothing 
important here—nothing that would point to any motive. 
 S HERIFF 
 Nothing here but kitchen things. 
 [ The County Attorney, after again looking around the kitchen, opens the 
door of a cupboard closet. He gets up on a chair and looks on a shelf. Pulls his 
hand away, sticky. ] 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Here’s a nice mess. 
 [ The women draw nearer. ] 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ To the other woman. ] Oh, her fruit; it did freeze. [ To the Lawyer. ] She wor-
ried about that when it turned so cold. She said the fire’d go out and her jars 
would break. 
 S HERIFF 
 Well, can you beat the woman! Held for murder and worryin’ about her 
preserves. 

560 
APPENDIX
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 I guess before we’re through she may have something more serious than 
preserves to worry about. 
 H ALE 
 Well, women are used to worrying over trifles. 
 [ The two women move a little closer together. ] 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ With the gallantry of a young politician. ] And yet, for all their worries, 
what would we do without the ladies? [ The women do not unbend. He goes to 
the sink, takes a dipperful of water from the pail and pouring it into a basin, 
washes his hands. Starts to wipe them on the roller-towel, turns it for a cleaner 
place. ] Dirty towels! [ Kicks his foot against the pans under the sink. ] Not much 
of a housekeeper, would you say, ladies? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Stiffly. ] There’s a great deal of work to be done on a farm. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 To be sure. And yet [ with a little bow to her ] I know there are some Dickson 
County farmhouses which do not have such roller towels. 
 [ He gives it a pull to expose its full length again. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Those towels get dirty awful quick. Men’s hands aren’t always as clean as 
they might be. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Ah, loyal to your sex, I see. But you and Mrs. Wright were neighbors. I sup-
pose you were friends, too. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Shaking her head. ] I’ve not seen much of her of late years. I’ve not been 
in this house—it’s more than a year. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 And why was that? You didn’t like her? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I liked her all well enough. Farmers’ wives have their hands full, Mr. 
Henderson. And then— 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Yes—? 

 
 Understanding Literature  
561
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Looking about. ] It never seemed a very cheerful place. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 No—it’s not cheerful. I shouldn’t say she had the homemaking instinct. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Well, I don’t know as Wright had, either. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 You mean that they didn’t get on very well? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 No, I don’t mean anything. But I don’t think a place’d be any cheerfuller 
for John Wright’s being in it. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 I’d like to talk more of that a little later. I want to get the lay of things 
upstairs now. 
 [ He goes to the left, where three steps lead to a stair door. ] 
 S HERIFF 
 I suppose anything Mrs. Peters does’ll be all right. She was to take in some 
clothes for her, you know, and a few little things. We left in such a hurry 
yesterday. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Yes, but I would like to see what you take, Mrs. Peters, and keep an eye 
out for anything that might be of use to us. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Yes, Mr. Henderson. 
 [ The women listen to the men’s steps on the stairs, then look about the 
kitchen. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I’d hate to have men coming into my kitchen, snooping around and 
criticizing. 
 [ She arranges the pans under the sink which the Lawyer had shoved out of 
place. ] 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Of course it’s no more than their duty. 

562 
APPENDIX
 M RS. H ALE 
 Duty’s all right, but I guess that deputy sheriff that came out to make the 
fire might have got a little of this on. [ Gives the roller towel a pull. ] Wish I’d 
thought of that sooner. Seems mean to talk about her for not having things 
slicked up when she had to come away in such a hurry. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 [ Who has gone to a small table in the left corner of the room, and lifted 
one end of a towel that covers a pan. ] She had bread set. 
 [ Stands still. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Eyes fixed on a loaf of bread beside the breadbox, which is on a low shelf 
at the other side of the room. Moves slowly toward it. ] She was going to put this 
in there. [ Picks up loaf, then abruptly drops it. In a manner of returning to famil-
iar things. ] It’s a shame about her fruit. I wonder if it’s all gone. [ Gets up on the 
chair and looks. ] I think there’s some here that’s all right, Mrs. Peters. Yes—here; 
[ holding it toward the window ] this is cherries, too. [ Looking again. ] I declare I 
believe that’s the only one. [ Gets down, bottle in her hand. Goes to the sink and 
wipes it off on the outside. ] She’ll feel awful bad after all her hard work in the 
hot weather. I remember the afternoon I put up my cherries last summer. 
 [ She puts the bottle on the big kitchen table, center of the room. With a 
sigh, is about to sit down in the rocking-chair. Before she is seated realizes 
what chair it is; with a slow look at it, steps back. The chair which she has 
touched rocks back and forth. ] 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 Well, I must get those things from the front room closet. [ She goes to the 
door at the right, but after looking into the other room, steps back. ] You com-
ing with me, Mrs. Hale? You could help me carry them. 
 [ They go in the other room; reappear, Mrs. Peters carrying a dress and 
skirt, Mrs. Hale following with a pair of shoes. ] 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 My, it’s cold in there. 
 [ She puts the clothes on the big table, and hurries to the stove. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Examining the skirt. ] Wright was close. I think maybe that’s why she kept 
so much to herself. She didn’t even belong to the Ladies Aid. I suppose she 
felt she couldn’t do her part, and then you don’t enjoy things when you feel 
shabby. She used to wear pretty clothes and be lively, when she was Minnie 
Foster, one of the town girls singing in the choir. But that—oh, that was thirty 
years ago. This all you was to take in? 

 
 Understanding Literature  
563
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 She said she wanted an apron. Funny thing to want, for there isn’t much to 
get you dirty in jail, goodness knows. But I suppose just to make her feel more 
natural. She said they was in the top drawer in this cupboard. Yes, here. And 
then her little shawl that always hung behind the door. [ Opens stair door and 
looks. ] Yes, here it is. 
 [ Quickly shuts door leading upstairs. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Abruptly moving toward her. ] Mrs. Peters? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Yes, Mrs. Hale? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Do you think she did it? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ In a frightened voice. ] Oh, I don’t know. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Well, I don’t think she did. Asking for an apron and her little shawl. 
Worrying about her fruit. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ Starts to speak, glances up, where footsteps are heard in the room above. 
In a low voice. ] Mr. Peters says it looks bad for her. Mr. Henderson is awful 
sarcastic in a speech and he’ll make fun of her sayin’ she didn’t wake up. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Well, I guess John Wright didn’t wake when they was slipping that rope 
under his neck. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 No, it’s strange. It must have been done awful crafty and still. They say it 
was such a—funny way to kill a man, rigging it all up like that. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 That’s just what Mr. Hale said. There was a gun in the house. He says that’s 
what he can’t understand. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Mr. Henderson said coming out that what was needed for the case was a 
motive; something to show anger, or—sudden feeling. 

564 
APPENDIX
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Who is standing by the table. ] Well, I don’t see any signs of anger around 
here. [ She puts her hand on the dish towel which lies on the table, stands look-
ing down at table, one half of which is clean, the other half messy. ] It’s wiped 
to here. [ Makes a move as if to finish work, then turns and looks at loaf of 
bread outside the breadbox. Drops towel. In that voice of coming-back to 
familiar things. ] Wonder how they are finding things upstairs. I hope she had it 
a little more red-up up there. You know, it seems kind of sneaking. Locking her 
up in town and then coming out here and trying to get her own house to turn 
against her! 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 But Mrs. Hale, the law is the law. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I s’pose ‘tis. [ Unbuttoning her coat. ] Better loosen up your things, Mrs. 
Peters. You won’t feel them when you go out. 
 [ Mrs. Peters takes off her fur tippet, goes to hang it on hook at back of 
room, stands looking at the under part of the small corner table. ] 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 She was piecing a quilt. 
 [ She brings the large sewing basket and they look at the bright pieces. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 It’s log cabin pattern. Pretty, isn’t it? I wonder if she was goin’ to quilt it or 
just knot it? [ Footsteps have been heard coming down the stairs. The Sheriff 
enters followed by Hale and the County Attorney. ] 
 S HERIFF 
 They wonder if she was going to quilt it or just knot it! 
 [ The men laugh, the women look abashed. ] 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ Rubbing his hands over the stove. ] Frank’s fire didn’t do much up there, 
did it? Well, let’s go out to the barn and get that cleared up. 
 [ The men go outside. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Resentfully. ] I don’t know as there’s anything so strange, our takin’ up our 
time with little things while we’re waiting for them to get the evidence. [ She 
sits down at the big table smoothing out a block with decision. ] I don’t see as 
it’s anything to laugh about. 

 
 Understanding Literature  
565
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ Apologetically. ] Of course they’ve got awful important things on their 
minds. [ Pulls up a chair and joins Mrs. Hale at the table. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Examining another block. ] Mrs. Peters, look at this one. Here, this is the 
one she was working on, and look at the sewing! All the rest of it has been so 
nice and even. And look at this! It’s all over the place! Why, it looks as if she 
didn’t know what she was about! 
 [ After she has said this they look at each other, then start to glance back at the 
door. After an instant Mrs. Hale has pulled at a knot and ripped the sewing. ] 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Oh, what are you doing, Mrs. Hale? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Mildly. ] Just pulling out a stitch or two that’s not sewed very good. 
[ Threading a needle. ] Bad sewing always made me fidgety. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ Nervously. ] I don’t think we ought to touch things. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I’ll just finish up this end. [ Suddenly stopping and leaning forward. ] Mrs. Peters? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Yes, Mrs. Hale? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 What do you suppose she was so nervous about? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Oh—I don’t know. I don’t know as she was nervous. I sometimes sew awful 
queer when I’m just tired. [ Mrs. Hale starts to say something, looks at Mrs. 
Peters, then goes on sewing. ] Well I must get these things wrapped up. They 
may be through sooner than we think. [ Putting apron and other things 
together. ] I wonder where I can find a piece of paper, and string. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 In that cupboard, maybe. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ Looking in cupboard. ] Why, here’s a bird-cage. [ Holds it up. ] Did she have 
a bird, Mrs. Hale? 

566 
APPENDIX
 M RS. H ALE 
 Why, I don’t know whether she did or not—I’ve not been here for so long. 
There was a man around last year selling canaries cheap, but I don’t know as 
she took one; maybe she did. She used to sing real pretty herself. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 [ Glancing around. ] Seems funny to think of a bird here. But she must have 
had one, or why would she have a cage? I wonder what happened to it. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I s’pose maybe the cat got it. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 No, she didn’t have a cat. She’s got that feeling some people have about 
cats—being afraid of them. My cat got in her room and she was real upset and 
asked me to take it out. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 My sister Bessie was like that. Queer, ain’t it? 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 [ Examining the cage. ] Why, look at this door. It’s broke. One hinge is pulled 
apart. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Looking too. ] Looks as if someone must have been rough with it. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 Why, yes. 
 [ She brings the cage forward and puts it on the table. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I wish if they’re going to find any evidence they’d be about it. I don’t like 
this place. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 But I’m awful glad you came with me, Mrs. Hale. It would be lonesome for 
me sitting here alone. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 It would, wouldn’t it? [ Dropping her sewing. ] But I tell you what I do wish, 
Mrs. Peters. I wish I had come over sometimes when  she was here. I—[ looking 
around the room ]—wish I had. 

 
 Understanding Literature  
567
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 But of course you were awful busy, Mrs. Hale—your house and your children. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I could’ve come. I stayed away because it weren’t cheerful—and that’s 
why I ought to have come. I—I’ve never liked this place. Maybe because it’s 
down in a hollow and you don’t see the road. I dunno what it is, but it’s a lone-
some place and always was. I wish I had come over to see Minnie Foster some-
times. I can see now— 
 [ Shakes her head. ] 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Well, you mustn’t reproach yourself, Mrs. Hale. Somehow we just don’t 
see how it is with other folks until—something comes up. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Not having children makes less work—but it makes a quiet house, and 
Wright out to work all day, and no company when he did come in. Did you 
know John Wright, Mrs. Peters? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Not to know him; I’ve seen him in town. They say he was a good man. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Yes—good; he didn’t drink, and kept his word as well as most, I guess, and 
paid his debts. But he was a hard man, Mrs. Peters. Just to pass the time of 
day with him—[ Shivers. ] Like a raw wind that gets to the bone. [ Pauses, her 
eye falling on the cage. ] I should think she would’a wanted a bird. But what do 
you suppose went with it? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 I don’t know, unless it got sick and died. 
 [ She reaches over and swings the broken door, swings it again, both 
women watch it. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 You weren’t raised round here, were you? [ Mrs. Peters shakes her head. ] 
You didn’t know—her? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Not till they brought her yesterday. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 She—come to think of it, she was kind of like a bird herself—real sweet 
and pretty, but kind of timid and—fluttery. How—she—did—change. [ Silence; 

568 
APPENDIX
then as if struck by a happy thought and relieved to get back to everyday 
things. ] Tell you what, Mrs. Peters, why don’t you take the quilt in with you? It 
might take up her mind. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 Why, I think that’s a real nice idea, Mrs. Hale. There couldn’t possibly be 
any objection to it, could there? Now, just what would I take? I wonder if her 
patches are in here—and her things. 
 [ They look in the sewing basket. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 Here’s some red. I expect this has got sewing things in it. [ Brings out a 
fancy box. ] What a pretty box. Looks like something somebody would give 
you. Maybe her scissors are in here. [ Opens box. Suddenly puts her hand to 
her nose. ] Why—[ Mrs. Peters bends nearer, then turns her face away. ] There’s 
something wrapped up in this piece of silk. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 Why, this isn’t her scissors. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Lifting the silk. ] Oh, Mrs. Peters—it’s— 
 [ Mrs. Peters bends closer. ] 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 It’s the bird. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Jumping up. ] But, Mrs. Peters—look at it! Its neck! Look at its neck! It’s 
all—other side  to. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 Somebody—wrung—its—neck. 
 [ Their eyes meet. A look of growing comprehension, or horror. Steps are 
heard outside. Mrs. Hale slips box under quilt pieces, and sinks into her chair. 
Enter Sheriff and County Attorney. Mrs. Peters rises. ] 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ As one turning from serious things to little pleasantries. ] Well ladies, have 
you decided whether she was going to quilt it or knot it? 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 We think she was going to—knot it. 

 
 Understanding Literature  
569
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Well, that’s interesting, I’m sure. [ Seeing the bird-cage. ] Has the bird 
flown? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Putting more quilt pieces over the box. ] We think the—cat got it. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ Preoccupied. ] Is there a cat? 
 [ Mrs. Hale glances in a quick covert way at Mrs. Peters. ] 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Well, not now. They’re superstitious, you know. They leave. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ To Sheriff Peters, continuing an interrupted conversation. ] No sign at all 
of anyone having come from the outside. Their own rope. Now let’s go up 
again and go over it piece by piece. [ They start upstairs. ] It would have to have 
been someone who knew just the— 
 [ Mrs. Peters sits down. The two women sit there not looking at one 
another, but as if peering into something and at the same time holding 
back. When they talk now it is in the manner of feeling their way over strange 
ground, as if afraid of what they are saying, but as if they can not help say-
ing it. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 She liked the bird. She was going to bury it in that pretty box. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ In a whisper. ] When I was a girl—my kitten—there was a boy took a 
hatchet, and before my eyes—and before I could get there—[ Covers her face 
an instant. ] If they hadn’t held me back I would have—[ Catches herself, looks 
upstairs where steps are heard, falters weakly ]—hurt him. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ With a slow look around her. ] I wonder how it would seem never to have 
had any children around. [ Pause. ] No, Wright wouldn’t like the bird—a thing 
that sang. She used to sing. He killed that, too. 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ Moving uneasily. ] We don’t know who killed the bird. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I knew John Wright. 

570 
APPENDIX
 M RS. P ETERS 
 It was an awful thing was done in this house that night, Mrs. Hale. Killing a 
man while he slept, slipping a rope around his neck that choked the life out of 
him. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 His neck. Choked the life out of him. 
 [ Her hand goes out and rests on the bird-cage. ] 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 We don’t know who killed him. We don’t  know. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Her own feeling not interrupted. ] If there’d been years and years of noth-
ing, then a bird to sing to you, it would be awful—still, after the bird was still. 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 [ Something within her speaking. ] I know what stillness is. When we home-
steaded in Dakota, and my first baby died—after he was two years old, and 
me with no other then— 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Moving. ] How soon do you suppose they’ll be through, looking for the 
evidence? 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 I know what stillness is. [ Pulling herself back. ] The law has got to punish 
crime, Mrs. Hale. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Not as if answering that. ] I wish you’d seen Minnie Foster when she wore 
a white dress with blue ribbons and stood up there in the choir and sang. [ A 
look around the room. ] Oh, I  wish I’d come over here once in a while! That was 
a crime! That was a crime! Who’s going to punish that? 
 M RS. P ETERS 
 [ Looking upstairs. ] We mustn’t—take on. 
 M RS. H ALE 
 I might have known she needed help! I know how things can be—for women. 
I tell you, it’s queer, Mrs. Peters. We live close together and we live far apart. We 
all go through the same things—it’s all just a different kind of the same thing. 
[ Brushes her eyes, noticing the bottle of fruit, reaches out for it. ] If I was you I 
wouldn’t tell her her fruit was gone. Tell her it  ain’t. Tell her it’s all right. Take this 
in to prove it to her. She—she may never know whether it was broke or not. 

 
 Understanding Literature  
571
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 [ Takes the bottle, looks about for something to wrap it in; takes petticoat 
from the clothes brought from the other room, very nervously begins winding 
this around the bottle. In a false voice. ] My, it’s a good thing the men couldn’t 
hear us. Wouldn’t they just laugh! Getting all stirred up over a little thing like 
a—dead canary. As if that could have anything to do with—with—wouldn’t 
they  laugh! 
 [ The men are heard coming downstairs. ] 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Under her breath. ] Maybe they would—maybe they wouldn’t. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 No, Peters, it’s all perfectly clear except a reason for doing it. But you 
know juries when it comes to women. If there was some definite thing. 
Something to show—something to make a story about—a thing that would 
connect up with this strange way of doing it— 
 [ The women’s eyes meet for an instant. Enter Hale from outer door. ] 
 H ALE 
 Well, I’ve got the team around. Pretty cold out there. 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 I’m going to stay here awhile by myself. [ To the Sheriff. ] You can send 
Frank out for me, can’t you? I want to go over everything. I’m not satisfied that 
we can’t do better. 
 S HERIFF 
 Do you want to see what Mrs. Peters is going to take in? 
 [ The Lawyer goes to the table, picks up the apron, laughs. ] 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 Oh, I guess they’re not very dangerous things the ladies have picked out. 
[ Moves a few things about, disturbing the quilt pieces which cover the 
box. Steps back. ] No, Mrs. Peters doesn’t need supervising. For that matter, a 
sheriff’s wife is married to the law. Ever think of it that way, Mrs. Peters? 
 M RS.  P ETERS 
 Not—just that way. 
 S HERIFF 
 [ Chuckling. ] Married to the law. [ Moves toward the other room. ] I just want you 
to come in here a minute, George. We ought to take a look at these windows. 

572 
APPENDIX
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ Scoffingly. ] Oh, windows! 
 S HERIFF 
 We’ll be right out, Mr. Hale. 
 [ Hale goes outside. The Sheriff follows the County Attorney into the other 
room. Then Mrs. Hale rises, hands tight together, looking intensely at Mrs. 
Peters, whose eyes make a slow turn, finally meeting Mrs. Hale’s. A moment 
Mrs. Hale holds her, then her own eyes point the way to where the box is con-
cealed. Suddenly Mrs. Peters throws back quilt pieces and tries to put the box 
in the bag she is wearing. It is too big. She opens box, starts to take bird out, 
cannot touch it, goes to pieces, stands there helpless. Sound of a knob turning 
in the other room. Mrs. Hale snatches the box and puts it in the pocket of her 
big coat. Enter County Attorney and Sheriff. ] 
 C OUNTY A TTORNEY 
 [ Facetiously. ] Well, Henry, at least we found out that she was not going to 
quilt it. She was going to—what is it you call it, ladies? 
 M RS. H ALE 
 [ Her hand against her pocket. ] We call it—knot it, Mr. Henderson.  
 QUESTIONS FOR READING, REASONING, AND REFLECTION 
 1. 
Explain the situation as the play begins. 
 2. 
Examine the dialogue of the men. What attitudes about themselves—their 
work, their abilities, their importance—are revealed? What is their collective 
opinion of women?  
 3. 
When Mrs. Hale and Mrs. Peters discover the dead bird, what do they begin to 
understand?  
 4. 
What other “trifles” in the kitchen provide additional evidence as to what has 
happened? 
 5. 
What trifles can be seen as symbols? What do they reveal about Mrs. Wright’s 
life and character?  
 6. 
What is the play about primarily? Is it a murder mystery? Does it speak for 
feminist values? Is it about not seeing—not really knowing—others? In a few 
sentences, state what you consider to be the play’s dominant theme. Then list 
the evidence you would use to support your conclusion.  
 7. 
Is there any sense in which one could argue that Mrs. Wright had a right to kill 
her husband? If you were a lawyer, how would you plan her defense? If you 
were on the jury, what sentence would you recommend?  

 
 Understanding Literature  
573
 SAMPLE STUDENT LITERARY ANALYSIS 
Peterson 1
Alan Peterson
American Literature 242
May 5, 2010
Faulkner’s Realistic Initiation Theme
William Faulkner braids a universal theme, the theme of initiation, into 
the fiber of his novel Intruder in the Dust. From ancient times to the present, 
a prominent focus of literature, of life, has been rites of passage,  particularly 
those of childhood to adulthood.  Joseph Campbell defines rites of passage as 
“distinguished by formal, and usually very severe, exercises of severance.” A 
“candidate” for initiation into adult society, Campbell explains, experiences a 
shearing away of the “attitudes, attachments and life patterns” of childhood (9). 
This severe, painful stripping away of the child and installation of the adult is 
presented somewhat differently in several works by American writers.
One technique of handling this theme of initiation is used by Nathaniel 
Hawthorne in his story “My Kinsman, Major Molineaux.” The story’s main 
character, Robin, is suddenly awakened to the real world, the adult world, 
when he sees Major Molineaux “in tar-and-feathery dignity” (Hawthorne 528). 
A terrified and amazed Robin gapes at his kinsman as the large and colorful 
crowd laughs at and ridicules the Major; then an acquiescent Robin joins with 
the crowd in the mirthful shouting (Hawthorne 529). This moment is Robin’s 
epiphany, his sudden realization of reality. Robin goes from unsophisticated 
rube to resigned cynical adult in one quick scene. Hawthorne does hold out 
hope that Robin will not let this event ruin his life, indeed that he will perhaps 
prosper from it.
A similar, but decidedly less optimistic, example of an epiphanic 
initiation occurs in Arthur Miller’s play Death of a Salesman. Miller develops 
an initiation theme within a flashback. A teenaged Biff, shockingly confronted 
with Willy’s infidelity and weakness, has his boyhood dreams, ambitions—his 
Appropriate heading 
when separate title 
page is not used.
Center the title.
Double-space 
throughout.
Opening ¶ 
 introduces subject, 
presents thesis, 
and defines key 
term—initiation.
Student combines 
paraphrase and 
brief quotations in 
definition.
Summary and 
 analysis combined 
to explain initiation 
in Hawthorne’s story.
Transition to second 
example estab-
lishes contrast with 
Hawthorne.

574 
APPENDIX
Peterson 2
vision—shattered, leaving his life in ruins, a truth borne out in scenes in which 
Biff is an adult during the play (1083–84, 1101). Biff’s discovery of the vices 
and shortcomings of his father overwhelms him. His realization of adult life is 
a revelation made more piercing when put into the context of his naive and 
overly hopeful upbringing. A ravaged and defeated Biff has adulthood wantonly 
thrust upon him. Unlike Hawthorne’s Robin, Biff never recovers.
William Faulkner does not follow these examples when dealing with the 
initiation of his character Chick in Intruder in the Dust. In Robin’s and Biff’s 
cases, each character’s passage into adulthood was brought about by 
realization of and disillusionment with the failings and weaknesses of a male 
adult playing an important role in his life. By contrast, Chick’s male role 
models are vital, moral men with integrity. Chick’s awakening develops as he 
begins to comprehend the mechanisms of the adult society in which he would 
be a member.
Faulkner uses several techniques for illustrating Chick’s growth into a 
man. Early in the novel, at the end of the scene in which Chick tries to pay for 
his dinner, Lucas warns Chick to “stay out of that creek” (Faulkner 16).1 The 
creek is an effective symbol: it is both a physical creek and a metaphor for the 
boy’s tendency to slide into gaffes that perhaps a man could avoid. The creek’s 
symbolic meaning is more evident when, after receiving the molasses, Chick 
encounters Lucas in town. Lucas again reminds Chick not to “fall in no more 
creeks this winter” (24). At the end of the novel, Lucas meets Chick in Gavin’s 
office and states: “you ain’t fell in no more creeks lately, have you?” (241). 
Although Lucas phrases this as a question, the answer is obvious to Lucas, as 
well as to the reader, that indeed Chick has not blundered into his naive 
boyhood quagmire lately. When Lucas asks his question, Chick’s actual falling 
into a creek does not occur to the reader.
     1. Subsequent references to Faulkner’s novel cite page numbers only.
¶ concludes with 
emphasis on 
contrast.
Transition to 
Faulkner’s story 
by contrast with 
Hawthorne and 
Miller.
Footnote first paren-
thetical reference to 
inform readers that 
subsequent citations 
will exclude the 
author’s name and 
give only the page 
number.

 
 Understanding Literature  
575
Peterson 3
Another image Faulkner employs to show Chick growing into a man is 
the single-file line. After Chick gets out of the creek, he follows Lucas into the 
house, the group walking in single file. In the face of Lucas’s much stronger 
adult will, Chick is powerless to get out of the line, to go to Edmonds’s house 
(7). Later in the novel, when Miss Habersham, Aleck Sander, and Chick are 
walking back from digging up the grave, Chick again finds himself in a single-file 
line with a strong-willed adult in front. Again he protests, then relents, but 
clearly he feels slighted and wonders to himself “what good that [walking 
single file] would do” (130). The contrast between these two scenes 
illustrates Chick’s growth, although he is not yet a man.
Faulkner gives the reader other hints of Chick’s passage into manhood. 
As the novel progresses, Chick is referred to (and refers to himself ) as a 
“boy” (24), a “child” (25), a “young man” (46), “almost a man” (190), a “man” 
(194), and one of two “gentlemen” (241). Other clues crop up from time to 
time. Chick wrestles with himself about getting on his horse and riding away, 
far away, until Lucas’s lynching is “all over finished done” (41). But his growing 
sense of responsibility and outrage quell his boyish desire to escape, to bury 
his head in the sand. Chick looks in the mirror at himself with amazement at 
his deeds (125). Chick’s mother serves him coffee for the first time, despite 
the agreement she has with his father to withhold coffee until his eighteenth 
birthday (127). Chick’s father looks at him with pride and envy (128–29).
Perhaps the most important differences between the epiphanic 
initiations of Robin and Biff and that experienced by Chick are the facts that 
Chick’s epiphany does not come all at once and it does not devastate him. 
Chick learns about adulthood—and enters adulthood—piecemeal and with 
support. His first eye-opening experience occurs as he tries to pay Lucas for 
dinner and is rebuffed (15–16). Chick learns, after trying again to buy a clear 
conscience, the impropriety and affront of his actions (24). Lucas teaches
Note transition.
Note interpolation in 
square brackets.
Good use of brief 
quotations combined 
with analysis.
Characteristics of 
Chick’s gradual 
and positive ini-
tiation explained. 
Observe coherence 
techniques.

576 
APPENDIX
Peterson 4
Chick how he should resolve his dilemma by setting him “free” (26–27). Later, 
Chick feels outrage at the adults crowding into the town, presumably to see a 
lynching, then disgrace and shame as they eventually flee (196–97, 210). As in 
most lives, Chick’s passage into adulthood is a gradual process; he learns a 
little bit at a time and has support in his growing. Gavin is there for him, to 
act as a sounding board, to lay a strong intellectual foundation, to confirm his 
beliefs. Chick’s initiation is consistent with Joseph Campbell’s explanation: “all 
rites of passage are intended to touch not only the candidate, but also every 
member of his circle” (9). Perhaps Gavin is affected the most, but Chick’s 
mother and father, and Lucas as well, are influenced by the change in Chick.
In Intruder in the Dust, William Faulkner has much to say about the role 
of and the actions of adults in society. He depicts racism, ignorance, 
resignation, violence, fratricide, citizenship, hope, righteousness, lemming-like 
aggregation, fear, and a host of other emotions and actions. Chick learns not 
only right and wrong, but that in order to be a part of society, of his 
community, he cannot completely forsake those with whom he disagrees or 
whose ideas he challenges. There is much compromise in growing up; Chick 
learns to compromise on some issues, but not all. Gavin’s appeal to Chick to 
“just don’t stop” (210) directs him to conform enough to be a part of the 
adult world, but not to lose sight of, indeed instead to embrace, his own 
values and ideals.
Student concludes 
by explaining the 
values Chick devel-
ops in growing up.

 
 Understanding Literature  
577
Peterson 5
Works Cited
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Princeton: Princeton UP, 
1949. Print.
Faulkner, William. Intruder in the Dust. New York: Random, 1948. Print.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel. “My Kinsman, Major Molineaux.” 1832.
The Complete Short Stories of Nathaniel Hawthorne. New York: Hanover/
Doubleday, 1959. 517–30. Print.
Miller, Arthur. Death of a Salesman. 1949. An Introduction to Literature. 9th ed. 
Eds. Sylvan Barnet, Morton Berman, and William Burto. Boston: Little, 
1985. 1025–111. Print.
Paging is 
continuous.
Place Works Cited 
on separate page.
Double-space 
throughout.
Use hanging 
indentation.

578
 SUGGESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION AND WRITING 
 1. 
Prepare an explication of either Amy Lowell’s “Taxi” or Sir Walter Raleigh’s “The 
Nymph’s Reply to the Shepherd.” You will need to explain both what the poem 
says and what it means—or what it accomplishes.  
 2. 
Analyze A. E. Housman’s attitudes toward life and human relationships in “Is My 
Team Ploughing.” 
 3. 
Analyze Mrs. Mallard’s conflict, and decision about that conflict, as the basis for 
your understanding of the dominant theme in “The Story of an Hour.” 
 4. 
You are Mrs. Wright’s attorney (see  Trifles, pp. 556–72). Write your closing argument 
in her defense, explaining why only a light sentence is warranted for Mrs. Wright. 
Select details from the play to support your assertions about Mrs. Wright’s  character 
and motivation.  
 5. 
Explain what you think are the most important ideas about community in Ursula K. 
Le Guin’s “The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas.” 
 6. 
John Donne in “The Bait” and Ogden Nash in “Love Under the Republicans (or 
Democrats)” also have responses to Marlowe’s “The Passionate Shepherd to His 
Love.” Select one of these poems, find a copy, read and analyze it, and then evaluate 
its argument as a response to Marlowe’s shepherd.  

579
Photo Credits
 Section 1  Opener (left): ©Hans Neleman/Taxi/Getty Images RF; (middle): ©GeoStock/Getty Images 
RF; (right): ©Purestock/SuperStock RF; Chapter 1 Opener: ©Rubberball/Erik Isakson/Getty Images 
RF; page 8: ©image100/PunchStock RF; p. 15: ©Purestock/SuperStock RF; p. 29: ©NBC/Photofest; 
p. 52: ©Hans Neleman/Taxi/Getty Images RF; p. 60: ©Balkis Press/ABACA/Newscom.  
 Section 2  Opener (left): ©Hans Neleman/Taxi/Getty Images RF; (middle): ©GeoStock/Getty Images 
RF; (right): ©Purestock/SuperStock RF; p. 74: ©Stockbyte/Punchstock RF; p. 94: ©AFP/Getty 
Images; CO4: ©SuperStock/Getty Images; p. 116: ©Hulteng/MCT/Newscom; CO5: ©Getty Images; 
p. 123: ©George Tames/The New York Times; p. 124: Courtesy Exxon Mobil Corporation; p. 125: 
Courtesy of Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company; p. 126: Artist: Richard Borge,  www.richardborge.com ; Cre-
ative Director: Dan Greenwald; Design Studio: White Rhino; Client: AVID. ©2008 Avid Technol-
ogy Inc.; p. 142: Courtesy of OMEGA; p. 170: Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division 
[LC-USZ62-48965]; p. 173: ©Gamble/TopFoto/The Image Works.  
 Section 3  Opener (left): ©Hans Neleman/Taxi/Getty Images RF; (middle): ©GeoStock/Getty Images 
RF; (right): ©Purestock/SuperStock RF; p. 190 (left): ©Joel Ryan/AP Images; p. 190 (right): ©Lisa 
Rose/AP Images; CO8: ©Tim Pannell/Corbis RF; p. 203: ©Rick Gayle Studio/Corbis RF; p. 206: 
©Chuck Kennedy KRT/Newscom; p. 207: ©Pixtal/age fotostock RF; p. 217: ©Chad Baker/Ryan 
McVay/Getty Images RF; p. 220: ©Design Pics/Rowan Gillson RF; CO10: Courtesy of Lowe World-
wide, Inc.; p. 237: ©Nick Rowe/Getty Images RF; p. 244: ©Purestock/SuperStock RF; p. 249: Library 
of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division [LC-USF33- 031322-M5]; p. 252: ©English School/
Getty Images.  
 Section 4  Opener (left): ©Hans Neleman/Taxi/Getty Images RF; (middle): ©GeoStock/Getty Images 
RF; (right): ©Purestock/SuperStock RF; CO12: ©BananaStock/JupiterImages RF; p. 270: ©Comstock 
Images RF; p. 272: Infotrac screen reprinted courtesy of Gale Group; CO13: ©Tetra Images/Getty 
Images RF; CO14: ©Goodshot/Punchstock RF; p. 330: ©BananaStock/JupiterImages RF.  
 Section 5  Opener (left): ©Hans Neleman/Taxi/Getty Images RF; (middle): ©GeoStock/Getty Images 
RF; (right): ©Purestock/SuperStock RF; p. 354: Jonathan Olley/©Columbia Pictures/courtesy Ever-
ett Collection; p. 358: ©Ryan McVay/Getty Images RF; p. 373: Courtesy of The Advertising Archives; 
p. 380: ©Eric Audras/Photoalto/PictureQuest RF; p. 391: ©Buyenlarge/SuperStock; p. 395: ©AFP/
Getty Images; p. 403: ©Greg Hinsdale/Corbis; p. 414: ©Purestock/PunchStock RF; p. 418: ©Getty 
Images; p. 426: ©Stockbyte/Getty Images RF; p. 434: ©Matt Dunham/AP Images; p. 441: ©Getty 
Images; CO19: ©Art Vandalay/Getty Images RF; p. 446: ©Photodisc Red/Getty Images RF; p. 459: 
©Kevin Galvin/Alamy; p. 465: ©Interfoto/Alamy; p. 472: ©GeoStock/Getty Images RF; p. 477: 
We Can Solve It advertisement courtesy of The Climate Reality Project; p. 483: ©Newtown Bee, 
Shannon Hicks/AP Images; p. 494: ©Kevin Lamarque/Reuters/Corbis; p. 497: ©Saul Loeb/epa/
Corbis; CO22: Official White House Photo by Pete Souza; p. 514: ©Image Source RF; p. 517: ©AFP/
Getty Images; p. 524: Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division [LC-USZ62-111158]; 
p. 532: ©AFP/Getty Images.  

580
Index 
 Aamodt, Sandra,  79–80 
 “Abolish Marriage” (Kinsley), 
 399–402 
 Achenbach, Joel,  22–25 
 active reading,  13–18 
 ad hominem argument,  167 
 ad populum argument,  167 
 advertisements, 121, 124–126, 224. 
 See also visual arguments 
 guidelines for reading,  122 
 wecansolveit.org,  477–478 
 in Works Cited,  329 
 “After Armstrong’s Fall, the Case 
for Performance Enhance-
ment” (Allenby),  440–443 
 afterwords, citation of,  322 
 agents, in causal arguments,  226 
 “Algerian Hostage Crisis Heightens 
As Scores Are Reported 
Dead” (Bright),  58 
 Allen, Danielle,  456–458 
 Allenby, Braden,  440–443 
 America, readings on past, present, 
future,  512–533 
 American Psychological Association 
(APA),  267, 313 
 in-text citations,  330–333 
 list of references,  333–337 
 Publication Manual of the,  330 
 student essay example,  337–346 
 analogies,  160–161, 160 f 
 false,  165 
 analysis 
 of arguments,  5–6, 87–97, 168–169, 
229–230  
 of causal arguments,  229–230 
 of claims of value,  211 
 of evaluation arguments,  197 
 of evidence for investigative 
 arguments,  136–137 
 literary,  534–578 
 of problem/solution arguments, 
 242–245 
 of style,  38–56 
 Andrews, Lori B.,  394–397 
 angle brackets,  336 
 annotations 
 in active reading,  14 
 in bibliographies,  278–279 
 in note taking,  281 
 answers, need for, illogic based on,  162 
 anthologies, citation of,  322 
 antithesis,  44 
 Appiah, Kwame Anthony,  525–529 
 arguments,  3, 69–97 
 by analogy,  160–161 
 analysis of,  87–97 
 Aristotle on,  72–75, 75 f 
 authorities in,  132–133 
 backing for,  85–86, 87 
 causal,  224–239 
 characteristics of,  71–72 
 claims in,  81–84, 87, 106 
 claims of policy,  102 
 claims of values,  102 
 contexts of,  3–4 
 deductive,  152–160 
 definition,  102, 179–193 
 definition of,  3 
 drafting,  107–108 
 drafting claims,  104–105 
 ethos,  72 – 73 
 evaluation,  194–208 
 facts in,  76 
 goal in,  102 
 grounds in,  81–82, 84–85, 87, 
105–106  
 inductive,  151–152 
 inferences in,  76–77 
 investigative,  102, 135–148 
 judgments in,  77–78 
 kairos,   74 – 75 
 language of,  75–81, 100–101 
 logos,  73 
 moving from topic to claim to 
 support of,  103–107 
 pathos,  73 – 74 
 planning,  106–107 
 position papers,  209–223 
 problem/solution,  236–238 
 purpose in,  101–103 
 qualifiers of,  86, 87 
 rebuttals to,  87, 102, 202 
 revising,  108–111 
 Rogerian/conciliatory 
approach to,   103 
 statistics in,  132, 133–135 
 tone in,  110–111 
 topic selection for,  104 
 Toulmin on,  72 f, 81 – 87 , 107 
 visual,  120–126 
 warrants in,  81–83, 85, 87 
 word choice in,  110–111 
 writing effective,  98–119 
 Aristotle,  72–75 
 articles 
 basic MLA form for 
 documenting,  268, 268 f 
 on CD-ROM, etc.,  327–328 
 in reference lists (APA),  334–335, 
336  
 assumptions,  160–161, 230 
 attacks on the opposition,  110–111 
 audience 
 appeals to,  73–74 
 for arguments,  99–101, 198 
 becoming part of the writer’s,  13 
 knowing your,  99–101 
 of research papers,  298 
 rhetorical context and,  36–37 
 understanding the author’s 
intended,   6–7, 49 
 authorities, evaluating,  132–133 
 authors 
 anonymous,  314 
 corporate,  317, 332 
 of edited books,  335 
 evaluating credentials of,  277 
 in-text citations of (APA),  
330–333  
 multiple,  316, 319–320, 331–332 
 multiple works by,  317 
 in parenthetical citations,  314–318 
 of personal communications,  333 
 pseudonyms,  320 
 quoting,  26 
 referring to informally,  20 
 rhetorical context of,  36 
 understanding purpose of,  278 
 unknown,  316 
 author/year style.  See American 
Psychological Association 
(APA)  
 Avid ad,  126 
Note: Page numbers followed by an italicized f refer to illustrations and figures.

 
INDEX 
581
 “The Cost of Climate Inaction” 
(Sheeran and Lubber), 
 478–480 
 counterarguments,  105, 106, 
197, 212  
 Crawford, Susan B.,  383–387 
 credibility,  107, 276–278 
 critical reading and analysis,  1–33 
 connotations,  39–41, 181 
 hyperbole, understatement, 
and irony,  45 
 level of diction,  42 
 metaphors,  44 
 repetition,  45 
 responding to sources,  4–10 
 rhetorical context,  35–38 
 traits of critical readers,  35 
 cross-references,  318, 323 
 “‘Daring to Discuss Women in 
 Science’: A Response to 
John Tierney” (Simard), 
 236–238 
 data (evidence),  72, 136–138, 
151–152, 291  
 databases, electronic,  271–273 
 “The Death of the Cyberflâneur” 
(Morozov),  390–394 
 “The Declaration of Independence,” 
 156–159 
 “Declaration of Sentiments” 
 (Stanton),  169–172 
 deduction,  152–160 
 definition arguments,  102, 
179–193  
 defining words in,  181–182 
 developing extended definitions, 
 182–184 
 drafting,  186 
 evaluating,  185 
 planning,  185–186 
 revising,  186 
 student essay example,  187–189 
 definitions 
 extended,  182–184 
 in opening paragraphs,  291, 292 
 in problem/solution 
arguments,   242 
 of words in arguments,  181–182 
 denotation,  39–40 
 details 
 in definition arguments,  183 
 synthesizing,  295–296 
 Dettmer, Jamie,  59–60 
 diagrams,  127 
 Dickey, Jay,  488–491 
 diction level,  42 
 difference, in causal arguments,  228 
 digital object identifiers (DOIs),  336 
 Dingus, Lowell,  151–152 
 in conclusions,  296 
 drafting,  104–105 
 of fact,  83 
 focused,  288 
 in induction,  151–152 
 inventive,  288 
 in opening paragraphs,  290–291 
 of policy, 84, 102.  See also  problem/
solution arguments  
 qualified,  106 
 in rebuttals,  202 
 for research papers,  264–265, 
287–288  
 Toulmin on,  81–84, 87 
 of values,  83–84, 102, 209–223 
 clichés,  110 
 climate change, readings on,  463–480 
 climax, in literature,  542 
 “The Closed American Mind” (Will), 
 460–462 
 coherence, in paragraphs,  292–293, 299 
 collections, citation of,  322–323 
 colleges, readings on America’s,  
 444–462  
 colons, with quotation marks,  27 
 commas, with quotation marks,  26 
 commonality, in causal 
arguments,   228 
 common knowledge,  283 
 common practice argument,  167 
 communication skills,  3 
 comparison, in definition arguments, 
183–184.  See also analogies 
 complications, in literature,  542 
 concentration,  14 
 concerts, citation of,  328 
 conciliatory approach,  103, 212 
 conclusions 
 about graphics,  128 
 in literary analysis,  543–544 
 writing,  296–298 
 conditions, in causal arguments, 
 226, 227 
 conflict, in literature,  542 
 connecting words,  109–110 
 connotations,  39–41, 181 
 content 
 responding to,  5 
 revising for,  299 
 context 
 of literature,  539–540 
 rhetorical,  35–38 
 of writing,  3–4 
 contrast (antithesis),  44 
 contrast essays,  56–61 
 Controlling Urban Runoff 
(Scheuler),   282 
 Coontz, Stephanie,  406–410 
 correlation, cause vs.,  226–227 
 correspondence, citation of,  274, 333 
 in Works Cited,  328 
 backing for arguments,  85–86, 87 
 bandwagon argument,  167 
 bar charts,  127, 127 f 
 Barry, Dave,  46, 47–49 
 begging the question,  166 
 Berger, Garrett,  139–144 
 bibliographies.  See also Works 
Cited lists  
 annotated,  278–279 
 APA style for,  333–337 
 working,  266–269 
 “Big Pun’s Prophesy” (Walker), 
 362–366 
 blank verse,  540 
 Bloche, M. Gregg,  115–118 
 blogs, citation of,  327 
 books 
 basic MLA form for documenting,  
 267–268, 268 f  
 edited,  335 
 in-text citation of (APA),  330–332 
 in reference lists (APA),  333–334 
 in Works Cited,  319–323 
 Brahmstedt, Christian,  168–169 
 Bright, Arthur,  58 
 Brown, Chris,  213–216 
 “Buying Time” (Berger),  139–144 
 Cain, Susan,  14–18 
 capitalization,  21, 46 
 in quotations,  27 
 in titles,  334, 335 
 Carden, Art,  474–476 
 cartoons,  122, 123 f 
 in Works Cited,  329 
 casebooks, citation of,  322–323 
 causal arguments,  224–239 
 analyzing,  229–230 
 cause vs. correlation in,  226–227 
 characteristics of,  225–227 
 complexity in,  226, 227–228 
 drafting,  231 
 Mill’s method for 
investigating,   228 
 planning,  230 
 revising,  231–232 
 CD-ROM articles, citation of, 
 327–328 
 character, analysis of,  542–543 
 charts,  127, 127 f, 130 f, 138 , 328 
 Chaudary, Zainab,  513, 516–517 
 “Cheering Free Speech” (Mateer 
and Leu),   90–92   
 Chopin, Kate,  536–538, 542, 544 
 “Christmas-Tree Totalitarians” 
( Sowell),  205–207 
 Chua, Amy,  491–496 
 claims  
 in analogy,  160–161 
 arguments as,  3 

582 
INDEX
 “Five Myths about Torture and 
Truth” (Rejali),  112–115 
 “5 Myths About Who Gets into 
College” (Kahlenberg), 
 446–449 
 flowcharts,  127 
 footnotes,  318 
 forced hypothesis,  163 
 forewords, citation of,  322 
 format,  300 
 APA style,  337 
 MLA,  318–319 
 for quotations,  331, 337 
 free verse,  540 
 Friedman, Thomas L.,  513, 518–522 
 “The Future Is Now: It’s  Heading 
Right at Us, but We 
Never See It Coming” 
 (Achenbach),  22–25 
 “‘F Word,’ The” (Dumas),  61–64 
 Gaffney, Eugene,  151–152 
 Gardner, Howard,  458–460 
 gender issues and marriage, readings 
on,  398–421 
 generalization, errors in,  162–163 
 genres,  36 
 “Gettysburg Address” (Lincoln),  4–7, 
19, 44 
 Givhan, Robin,  189–192 
 “Glamour, That Certain Something” 
(Givhan),   189–192 
 Glaspell, Susan,  556–572 
 “Global Warming Is Just the Tip of 
the Iceberg” (Lee),   471–474 
 Goode, James,  54–56 
 “The Good Heart” (Underwood), 
 12–13 
 Goodman, Ellen,  43, 46, 51–56 
 got milk? ad,  224 
 government documents 
 locating,  273–274 
 in reference lists (APA),  336 
 in Works Cited (MLA),  327, 329 
 graphics,  127–131 
 for investigative arguments, 
 138–139 
 reading,  128 
 understanding how they differ, 
 127–128 
 graphs,  127 
 Greenwell, Megan,  434–437 
 grounds, in arguments,  81–82, 84–85, 
160–161  
 listing for another perspective, 
 105–106 
 listing possible,  105 
 gun control, readings on,  481–491 
 “Gun Control? Dream On” (Pollitt), 
 482–485 
 encyclopedia, citation of,  322 
 endnotes,  318 
 environment, readings on the, 
 463–480 
 ethos,  72 – 73 
 “Euthanasia—A Critique” (Singer 
and Siegler),  103 
 evaluation arguments,  194–208 
 analyzing,  197 
 characteristics of,  195–196 
 drafting,  198–199 
 planning,  198 
 revising,  199 
 student example,  200–201 
 types of,  196–197 
 “Every Body’s Talking” (Navarro), 
 144–148 
 evidence 
 analyzing,  138 
 in arguments,  72 
 authorities and,  132 
 gathering,  136–137 
 in induction,  151–152 
 for investigative arguments, 
 136–137 
 opening with,  291 
 relevant,  152 
 “Examining the Issue of Gun 
 Control” (Brown),  
213–216   
 examples,  45, 183 
 explication,  544 
 exposition,  541–542 
 external literary situation,  539–540 
 ExxonMobil ad,  124 
 “Facebook Is Using You” (Andrews), 
 394–397 
 facts 
 in arguments,  76 
 claims of,  83 
 in literature analysis,  535–536 
 opening with,  291 
 Fairlee, Henry,  13 
 fallacies.  See logical fallacies 
 false analogies,  165 
 false dilemma,  164 
 “Faulkner’s Realistic Initiation 
Theme” (Peterson),  573–577 
 faulty generalizations,  162, 163 
 Feinstein, John,  423–426 
 fiction.  See literature 
 field research,  273–276 
 figurative comparison,  44, 184 
 films,  275 
 “Firearms, Violence and Public 
 Policy” (Zimring),  
285–286   
 “Five Leadership Lessons from James 
T. Kirk” (Knapp),   28–32  
 Discovering Dinosaurs (Norell, 
Faggney, and Dingus), 
 151–152 
 discriminatory language,  111 
 discussions, documenting,  283 
 dissertations, citation of,  329 
 documentation, 266–269.  See also 
American Psycholo-
gical Association (APA); 
 Modern Language 
 Association (MLA) 
 avoiding plagiarism with, 
 281–283 
 credibility and,  277–278 
 in drafts,  288–289 
 in-text,  288–289, 330–333 
 of opinions and discussions,  283 
 Works Cited,  278, 288–289, 300, 
310–311, 314–329  
 DOIs (digital object identifiers),  336 
 Donaldson, David,  279 
 “Do Not Fear the Cybermind” 
( Wegner),  387–390 
 Douglas, Stephen,  227 
 “The Downside of Living Together” 
(Jay),  411–414 
 “Do You Want the Good News 
First?” (Friedman), 
 518–522 
 drafting arguments,  107–108 
 causal arguments,  231 
 definition arguments,  186 
 evaluation arguments,  198–199 
 investigative,  137 
 position papers,  211–213 
 problem/solution arguments, 
 246–247 
 rebuttals,  202 
 research papers,  288–298 
 revising and rewriting,  
108–111, 139 
 style analysis,  50–51 
 dramatic monologues,  540 
 dramatic poems,  540 
 Dumas, Firoozeh,  61–64 
 Dunbar, Paul Lawrence,  535, 540, 
543, 544  
 DVD-ROM articles, citation of, 
 327–328 
 DVDs,  275 
 Dvorak, Petula,  485–488 
 Edelman, Peter,  248–251 
 edited books, citation of,  335 
 editing,  109–110 
 ego, illogic based on,  162 
 electronic databases,  271–272 
 ellipses, in quotations,  26, 27–28 
 Ellison, Katherine,  358–362 
 e-mail, citation of,  333, 337 

 
INDEX 
583
 ad populum,  167 
 analogies and,  160–161 
 from avoiding the real issue, 
 166–168 
 begging the question,  166 
 causes of illogic,  162 
 common practice/
bandwagon,   167  
 in deductive argument,  153–156 
 false analogy,  165 
 false dilemma,  164 
 forced hypothesis,  163 
 hasty/faulty generalizations, 
 162, 163 
 non sequitur,  163 – 164 
 from oversimplification,  
162–166  
 overstatement,  162–163 
 post hoc,  165 
 red herring,  166 
 slippery slope argument,  164 
 straw man,  166–167 
 logos,  73 
 “Love to Read, Kids? Your Time Is 
Almost Up” (Petri),  64–66 
 Lowell, Amy,  550 
 Lubber, Mindy,  478–480 
 Lukianoff, Greg,  88–90 
 Luntz, Frank,  366–378 
 lyric poems,  540 
 magazines, citation of,  268, 268 f, 326 , 
327–328, 334–336  
 mailing lists, Internet,  337 
 major premises,  153, 156 
 maps,  127, 131 f, 328 
 Marlowe, Christopher,  546–547 
 marriage and gender issues, readings 
on,  398–421 
 Marvell, Andrew,  545–546 
 Matchar, Emily,  232–235 
 Mateer, Jeffrey,  90–92 
 media, readings on the,  349–378 
 metaphors,  44, 543 
 in definition arguments,  184 
 Mill, John Stuart,  228 
 “Mind Over Mass Media” (Pinker), 
 203–205 
 minor premises,  153, 156 
 Modern Language Association 
(MLA),   266–267, 312–329 
 articles,  268, 268 f, 327 – 328 
 avoiding plagiarism in,  283 
 basic book form,  267–268, 268 f 
 bibliographies,  278–279 
 books,  267–268, 268 f, 319 – 323 
 on ellipses in quotations,  26, 
27–28 
 parenthetical citations,  288–289, 
313–318  
 “Is My Team Ploughing” ( Housman), 
 548–549 
 italics,  21–22, 46, 321, 323 
 “I Tweet, Therefore I Am” 
( Orenstein),  380–383 
 jargon,  110 
 Jay, Meg,  411–414 
 Jenkins, Sally,  431–433 
 judgments,  77–78 
 Kahlenberg, Richard D.,  446–449 
 kairos,  74 – 75 
 Kennedy, Gregory M.,  219–222 
 Kilpatrick, James J.,  72 
 King, Colbert I.,  513, 522–525 
 King, Martin Luther, Jr.,  513 
 Kinsley, Michael,  399–402 
 Knapp, Alex,  28–32 
 Korda, Michael,  43, 44 
 Krauthammer, Charles,  195–196 
 laws and rights, readings on,  481–511 
 lectures,  275, 328 
 Lee, James R.,  471–474 
 “Legal, Illegal” (Suro),  496–500 
 legal documents 
 in Works Cited,  329 
 Le Guin, Ursula K.,  550–555 
 “The Lesson of Penn State” 
(Feinstein),  423–426 
 letters.  See correspondence, citation 
of 
 letters to the editor, citation of,  325 
 Leu, Erin,  90–92 
 library catalogs,  269–270 
 library research methods,  269–272 
 Lincoln, Abraham,  4–7, 19, 44, 227, 
513–515   
 literary analysis,  534–578 
 active reading in,  535–541 
 of character,  542–543 
 interpretation in,  543–544 
 of narrative structure,  541–542 
 student sample of,  573–577 
 of style,  543 
 of tone,  543 
 writing,  544 
 literature,  534–578 
 active reading of,  535–541 
 analyzing connections in,  
541–543  
 paraphrasing,  536, 538–540 
 readings,  545–572 
 summarizing,  536, 538 
 logic,  6–7, 73 
 logical fallacies,  72, 162–169 
 ad hominem,  167 
 Habel, Ian,  200–201 
 hasty generalizations,  162, 163 
 “Helping Students Find Their Place 
in the World” (Allen), 
 456–458 
 “Help Those Who Help, Not Hurt, 
Themselves” (Brahmstedt), 
 168–169 
 Hornaday, Ann,  353–358 
 “Hostages Reportedly Dead in 
 Algerian Oil Field Siege” 
(Dettmer),   59–60 
 Housman, A. E.,  548–549 
 “How Can We Ban Insults Against 
Jews but Not Muslims?” 
(Saletan),   93–96 
 “How the Future Will Judge Us” 
(Appiah),   525–529   
 “How to Get Doping Out of Sports” 
(Vaughters),  437–440 
 humor,  292 
 hyperbole,  45 
 “The Idiocy of Urban Life” (Fairlie), 
 13 
 ignorance, illogic based on,  162 
 “Immigrate, Assimilate” (Chua), 
 491–496 
 immigration, readings on,  482, 
491–511 
 induction,  151–152 
 inductive arguments.  See 
 investigative arguments 
 inferences,  76–77 
 influences, in causal arguments, 
 226, 227 
 informal language,  110 
 “In Praise of a Snail’s Pace” 
( Goodman),  51–56 
 Internet,  272–273 
 guidelines for searching,  273 
 readings on,  379–397 
 sources in reference lists (APA), 
 335–337 
 sources in Works Cited (MLA), 
 326–329 
 interpretation of literature,  543–544 
 interviews,  274–275, 328, 333 
 introductions 
 citation of,  322 
 writing,  290–292 
 investigative arguments,  102, 135–148 
 drafting,  137 
 evidence analysis for,  138 
 gathering and analyzing evidence 
for,  136–137 
 planning,  137 
 revising,  139 
 student essay example,  139–144 
 irony,  45, 101 

584 
INDEX
 premises,  153–156 
 primary sources,  276 
 problem definitions,  242 
 problem/solution arguments, 
 236–238 
 analyzing,  242–245 
 characteristics of,  241–242 
 drafting,  246–247 
 planning,  246 
 process of elimination,  228 
 “Promise” (Dunbar),  535, 540, 543, 544 
 proofreading,  111, 300 
 proposal arguments.  See problem/
solution arguments  
 proximate causes,  226, 227 
 pseudonyms,  320 
 Psychology and the Environment 
(Shean),   463 
 Publication Manual of the 
 American Psychological 
Association,   330 
 punctuation 
 for in-text citations,  330–331 
 in parenthetical citations,  315 
 with quotations,  26–27 
 in reference lists,  334, 335, 336 
 in Works Cited,  319, 320, 323 
 purpose 
 in arguments,  101–103 
 in reading,  13 
 of research papers,  298 
 rhetorical context and,  36–37 
 understanding the author’s 
intended,   6–7, 49, 278 
 purpose statements,  13–14, 292 
 qualifiers of arguments,  86, 87 
 questionnaires,  275–276 
 questions, in opening paragraphs, 
 291, 292 
 quotation marks,  21, 26, 46 
 single,  27 
 quotations,  25–28 
 in conclusions,  296–297 
 excessive,  290 
 guidelines for,  26–28 
 in-text citations of,  331 
 parenthetical citation of,  315 
 Raleigh, Sir Walter,  547–548 
 “Rather Than Pay Athletes, Show 
Them Respect” (Jenkins), 
 431–433 
 Rawls, Waite,  227 
 reading 
 active,  13–18, 535–541 
 critical,  1–33 
 literature,  534–578 
 summary writing based on,  10–13 
 in parenthetical citations,  314–318 
 in research papers,  300 
 sources without,  317 
 “Paragon or Parasite?” (Mullins), 
 187–189 
 paragraphs 
 conclusion,  296–298 
 opening, writing effective, 
 290–292 
 writing unified,  292–298 
 parallelism,  43 
 paraphrases,  18–20 
 of literature,  536, 538–540 
 plagiarism and,  282, 284 
 parenthetical citations (MLA),  
288–289, 313–318  
 of complex sources,  316–318 
 placement of,  315 
 publication information in,  318 
 simplest patterns of,  314 
 Parker, Kathleen,  414–416 
 “The Passionate Shepherd to His 
Love” (Marlowe),  546–547 
 pathos,  73 – 74 
 periodicals, citation of 
 APA,  334–336 
 MLA,   268, 268 f, 327 – 328 
 periods, with quotation marks,  26 
 person, grammatical,  289 
 personification,  44 
 Peterson, Alan,  573–577 
 Petri, Alexandra,  64–66 
 phone calls, citation of,  333 
 photographs, reading,  122, 123 f 
 pie charts,  127, 130 f 
 Pinker, Steven,  203–205 
 plagiarism,  281–287 
 common knowledge and,  283 
 signal phrases and,  283–285 
 unintentional,  283–284 
 plays, citation of,  328 
 poems.  See also literature 
 citation of,  327 
 understanding,  535, 539–540 
 Pogue, David,  216–218 
 policy, claims of,  84, 102 
 Pollitt, Katha,  482–485 
 position papers,  209–223 
 analyzing,  211 
 characteristics of,  210–211 
 drafting,  211–212 
 planning,  211–212 
 revising,  213 
 student essay example,  213–216 
 post hoc fallacy,  165 
 “Poverty in America: Why Can’t 
We End It?” (Edelman), 
 248–251 
 precipitating causes,  226, 227 
 prefaces, citation of,  322 
 prejudices, illogic based on,  162 
Modern Language Association —Cont.
 student essay example in, 
 300–311 
 Works Cited,  278, 288–289, 
310–311 
 “A Modest Proposal” (Swift), 
 251–258 
 Morozov, Evgeny,  390–394 
 Mullins, Laura,  187–189 
 “My Big Fat Straight Wedding” 
( Sullivan),  402–406 
 “The Myth of Male Decline” 
(Coontz),   406–410   
 narrative poems,  540 
 narrative structure, analysis of, 
 541–542 
 Natarajan, Priya,  243–245 
 Navarro, Joe,  144–148 
 “The New Digital Divide” 
 (Crawford),  383–387 
 newsgroups, Internet,  337 
 non sequitur,  163 – 164 
 Norell, Mark,  151–152 
 note-taking,  281, 287 
 Novacek, Michael,  465–468 
 “Now That It’s All Over, Let’s Eat!” 
(Barry),  47–49 
 “The Nymph’s Reply to the 
 Shepherd” (Raleigh),  
 547–548  
 Obama, Barack H.,  529–533, 532 f 
 “Of Losers and Moles: You Think 
Reality TV Just Writes 
Itself?” (Speight),  350–353 
 “On Climate Change, Government Is 
Not the Answer” (Carden), 
 474–476 
 “The Ones Who Walk Away from 
Omelas” (Le Guin),   550–555   
 online databases,  271–273, 325–329 
 online news source, citation of,  326 
 online sources,  271–273, 326–329, 
335–337   
 opinions, documentation of,  283 
 Orbit ad,  125 
 Orenstein, Peggy,  380–383 
 organization,  45 
 of arguments,  107–108 
 of research papers,  287–288, 299 
 revising for,  299 
 outlines,  300 
 oversimplification,  162–166 
 overstatement,  162–163 
 page numbers 
 in in-text citations,  331 

 
INDEX 
585
 secondary,  276 
 studying, guidelines for,  281 
 synthesizing,  295–296 
 working bibliographies of,   
266–269  
 Sowell, Thomas,  205–207 
 Speight, Derrick,  350–353 
 sports, readings on,  422–443 
 square brackets,  26, 28, 318, 335 
 Stanton, Elizabeth Cady,  169–172 
 stanza form of poems,  540 
 statistics,  128, 132, 133–135, 195–196 
 opening with,  291 
 Steinem, Gloria,  417–421 
 Sterling, Bruce,  43 
 “The Story of an Hour” (Chopin), 
 536–538, 542, 544 
 Strait, Patricia B.,  500–511 
 straw man fallacy,  166–167 
 structure.  See organization 
 style, analyzing,  38–49, 543 
 denotative and connotative word 
choice,   39–41 
 drafting,  50–51 
 hyperbole, understatement, irony, 
 45–46 
 level of diction,  42 
 metaphors,  44 
 organization and examples,  45 
 planning,  49–50 
 repetition,  45 
 sentence structure,  42–44 
 tone,  41–42 
 of two of more sources,  56–61 
 writing about,  49–56 
 style, editing for,  299 
 Sullivan, Andrew,  184, 402–406 
 summaries,  5, 10–13 
 of literature,  536, 538 
 “Supremacy Crimes” (Steinem), 
 417–421 
 Suro, Roberto,  496–500 
 surveys,  275–276 
 Swift, Jonathan,  251–258 
 tables,  127, 133 f, 134 , 135 f, 138 
 Tannen, Deborah,  7–10, 11–12 
 “Taxi” (Lowell),  550 
 television programs,  275, 328 
 “Tell Us What You Really Are: The 
Debate over Labeling 
Genetically Modified 
Food” (Donaldson),  279 
 tense, grammatical,  289, 538 
 “Things People Say” (Tyson), 
 172–177 
 Thompson, Derek,  453–455 
 “Threat to Free Speech at Universities” 
(Lukianoff),  88–90  
 Thurow, Lester,  231 
 of position papers,  213 
 of problem/solution 
arguments,   247 
 proofreading,  111 
 of research papers,  298–300 
 rewriting in,  298–299 
 of style analysis,  51 
 tone and word choice,  110–111 
 rewriting.  See revision 
 rhetorical context,  35–38 
 Riley, Naomi Schaefer,  449–453 
 “The Rise of the New Groupthink” 
(Cain),  14–18 
 Rogerian approach,  103, 212 
 Rogers, Carl,  103 
 Rosenberg, Mark,  488–491 
 Saletan, William,  93–96 
 sarcasm,  101 
 Scheuler, Thomas R.,  282 
 scholarly projects, citation of,  327 
 secondary sources,  276 
 “Second Inaugural Address” 
( Lincoln),  513–515 
 “see also” notes,  318 
 semicolons, with quotation marks,  27 
 “‘Senseless’ Is Not Studying Gun 
Violence” (Dickey and 
Rosenberg),  488–491 
 sentence structure,  42–44 
 Shakespeare, William,  539, 543 
 Shean, Glenn,  463 
 Sheeran, Kristen,  478–480 
 “Show Them the Money” (Yee), 
 426–430 
 Siegler, Mark,  103 
 signal phrases,  283–285, 294–295 
 Simard, Caroline,  236–238 
 Singer, Peter A.,  103 
 “The Sixth Extinction: It Happened 
to Him. It’s Happening to 
You.” (Novacek),  465–468 
 slippery slope argument,  164 
 social media, readings on,  379–397 
 “Sonnet 116” (Shakespeare),  539, 543 
 sonnets,  539, 540 
 sources 
 acknowledging informally,  20–25 
 analyzing style of,  38–49 
 credibility of,  107 
 current,  278 
 editing for,  299 
 evaluating,  276–278 
 guiding readers through,  293–294 
 locating,  269–273 
 plagiarism of,  281–286 
 primary,  276 
 responding critically to,  34–62 
 responding to,  4–10 
 rhetorical context of,  35–38 
 reading journals,  14 
 readings 
 on America’s colleges,  444–462 
 on America’s past, present, and 
future,  512–533 
 on the environment,  463–480 
 on the Internet and social media, 
 379–397 
 on laws and rights,  481–511 
 of literature,  545–572 
 on marriage and gender issues, 
 398–421 
 on the media,  349–378 
 on sports,  422–443 
 reasons, in arguments,  71 
 rebuttals,  87, 102, 202 
 recordings, citation of,  328 
 red herrings,  166 
 reference collection, library,  
270–271, 326  
 reference lists (APA),  333–337 
 refutations,  87, 102, 202 
 Rejali, Darius,  112–115 
 remote causes,  226 
 repetition,  45 
 reports, citation of,  335 
 reprints, citation of,  321 
 research,  7, 273–278 
 research papers,  262–279 
 avoiding plagiarism in,  281–287 
 drafting,  288–298 
 evaluating sources for,  276–278 
 field research for,  273–276 
 formatting,  300 
 in-text documentation in, 
 288–289 
 locating sources for,  269–273 
 organizing,  287–288 
 proofreading,  300 
 revising,  298–300 
 student essay example,  300–311 
 time management for,  288 
 titles for,  298 
 topic selection for,  263–265 
 working bibliographies for, 
 266–269 
 writing,  280–311 
 writing style for,  289–290 
 writing tentative claims for, 
 265–266 
 research proposals,  265–266, 287 
 resolution, in literature,  542 
 reviews,  199, 200–201 
 revision 
 of arguments,  108–111, 139 
 of causal arguments,  231–232 
 checklist for,  51, 111 
 of definition arguments,  186 
 editing in,  109–110, 299 
 of evaluation arguments,  199 
 of investigative arguments,  139 

586 
INDEX
 “Winchester’s Alchemy: Two Men 
and a Book” (Habel), 
 200–201 
 Woods, Tiger,  195–196 
 word choice,  39–40, 100–101 
 plagiarism and,  284 
 “Words We Remember” (Luntz), 
 366–378 
 working bibliographies,  266–269 
 Works Cited lists (MLA),  278, 
288–289, 300  
 books in, complete,  319–321 
 books in, partial,  322–323 
 government documents in,  329 
 in-text citations and,  314, 315 
 nonprint sources in,  327–329 
 periodicals in,  323–325, 327–328 
 student example of,  310–311 
 Web sources in,  325–327 
 World Wide Web.  See Internet 
 writing.  See also revision 
 about literature,  544 
 about style,  49–56 
 arguments,  98–119 
 beginnings, effective,  290–292 
 benefits of skill in,  3–4 
 conclusions,  296–298 
 formatting,  300, 318–319, 331, 337 
 introductions,  290–292 
 investigative arguments,  
135–148  
 literary analysis,  534–578 
 organization in,  45, 107–108, 
287–288, 299  
 paraphrases,  18–20, 282, 284, 
538–540  
 paraphrasing,  18–20 
 researched essays,  280–311 
 research papers,  262–279 
 role in,  4 
 signal phrases in,  283–285, 
294–295  
 style for research,  289–290, 299 
 summaries,  5, 10–13, 536, 538 
 synthesizing sources in,  295–296 
 Yee, Donald H.,  426–430 
 “Your Brain Lies to You” (Wang and 
Aamodt),   79–80   
 “Your Most Powerful Currency: Your 
Vote” (Chaudary),  516–517 
 Zakaria, Fareed,  513 
 “ Zero Dark Thirty and the New 
 Reality of Reported 
 Filmmaking” (Hornaday), 
 353–358 
 Zimring, Franklin E.,  285–286 
 graphics,  127–131 
 in investigative arguments, 
 135–139 
 judging authorities in,  132–133 
 reading,  127–131 
 responding to,  121–127 
 statistics,  132–135 
 visuals,  292 
 volume numbers,  316 
 Walker, Sienna,  362–366 
 Wang, Sam,  79–80 
 “Want More Scientists? Turn Grade 
Schools into Laboratories” 
(Natarajan),   243–245   
 warrants, in arguments,  81–82, 85, 
87, 132, 160–161, 231  
 Web sources.  See Internet 
 wecansolveit.org ad,  477–478 
 “We Can't Afford the True Cost of 
Gun Crime” (Dvorak), 
 485–488 
 Wegner, Daniel M.,  387–390 
 “We Made Ourselves Anew, and 
Vowed to Move Forward 
Together” (Obama),  529–533 
 “We Still Aren‘t Good Enough” 
(King),  522–525 
 “What’s a College Education Really 
Worth? Not Enough” 
(Riley),   449–453   
 “What’s More Expensive Than 
 College? Not Going to 
 College” (Thompson), 
 453–455 
 “What’s Up Doc? A Bloody Outrage, 
That’s What” (Ellison), 
 358–362 
 “When Societies Collide: Part Three: 
Finding the Best Fit Immi-
gration Model” (Strait), 
 500–511 
 “Where Have All the Good Coaches 
Gone?” (Greenwell),  
 434–437 
 White, E. B.,  44 
 “Who Does the Talking Here?” 
( Tannen),  7–10, 11–12 
 “Why I Blog” (Sullivan),  184 
 “Why Kids Cheat at Harvard” 
(Gardner),  458–460 
 “Why Women Are Paid Less Than 
Men” (Thurow),  231 
 “Why Your Office Needs More Bratty 
Millennials” (Matchar), 
 232–235 
 Wikipedia,  271 
 Will, George,  182, 460–462 
 Willingham, Daniel T.,  468–470 
 title pages,  300 
 titles 
 in active reading,  13 
 capitalization of,  21 
 choosing effective,  298 
 of graphics,  128 
 in italics,  21–22 
 quotation marks around,  21 
 restating in introductions,  292 
 of sources, referring to,  21 
 “To His Coy Mistress” (Marvell), 
 545–546 
 tone,  110–111, 543 
 topics 
 in arguments,  72 
 audience knowledge of,  
99–100 
 claims based on,  287–288 
 for research papers,  264–265 
 selecting for arguments,  104 
 “Torture Is Wrong—But It Might 
Work” (Bloche),  115–118 
 “To Track My Thief” (Pogue), 
 216–218 
 Toulmin, Stephen,  81–87, 107 
 transition words,  109–110 
 translations, citation of,  320 
 “Trash Talk: Reflections on Our 
Throwaway Society” 
 (Kennedy),  219–222 
 tricolons,  6 
 Trifles (Glaspell),  556–572 
 “Trust Me, I‘m a Scientist” 
( Willingham),  468–470 
 Tyson, Neil deGrasse,  172–177 
 understatement,  45 
 Underwood, Anne,  12–13 
 “Un-Hitching the Middle Class” 
(Parker),   414–416   
 unity, in paragraphs,  292–293 
 URLs, citation of, 326, 335–336. 
 See also Internet; online 
databases   
 USA Today,  121 
 Vachss, Andrew,  181 
 values 
 in arguments,  72, 83–84, 102, 
209–223  
 claims of,  83–84, 102, 209–223 
 in position papers,  210–211 
 virtues vs.,  182 
 Vaughters, Jonathan,  437–440 
 videos, citation of,  328 
 virtues,  182 
 visual arguments,  120–126, 137, 
477–478  

