R E A L
W O R L D
InDesign
®CS6
ADOBE
®
OlAv MArtIn KvErn, DAvID BlAtnEr, AND BOB BrInghurSt
INDUSTRIAL-STRENGTH pUbLISHING TECHNIQUES
What designers and 
production artists 
need to know
Tips and tricks for 
maximum efficiency 
For print and web / 
mobile devices
www.allitebooks.com

    c6
www.allitebooks.com

TTThhhiiisss   pppaaagggeee   iiinnnttteeennntttiiiooonnnaaallllllyyy   llleeefffttt   bbblllaaannnkkk   
www.allitebooks.com

Real World  
Adobe InDesign CS6
by
Olav Martin Kvern
&
David Blatner
&
Bob Bringhurst
www.allitebooks.com

•
for Amy and Max
& 
Gabriel and Daniel
&
Wendy, Luke, and Max
    c6
Olav Martin Kvern, David Blatner, and Bob Bringhurst
Copyright © 1 by Olav Kvern, David Blatner, and Bob Bringhurst
Pchpt 
1 Eighth Street 
Berkeley, California 1 
(1) -1 
(1) -1 (fax)
Find us on the web at: www.peachpit.com 
To report errors, please send a note to errata@peachpit.com
Peachpit Press is a division of Pearson Education
Project Editor: Susan Rimerman 
Production Editor: Lisa Brazieal 
Indexer: Jan C. Wright 
Interior Design/Composition: Olav Martin Kvern, David Blatner, and Bob Bringhurst  
Cover Design: Charlene Charles-Will 
Cover Illustration: John Weber
tc  ht
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form by any means, elec-
tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the pub-
lisher. For information on getting permission for reprints and excerpts, contact: permissions@peachpit.com.
Ntc  Lty
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every precaution has 
been taken in the preparation of the book, neither the authors nor Peachpit shall have any liability to any person 
or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the instruc-
tions contained in this book or by the computer software and hardware products described in it.
tmk
Adobe and InDesign are registered trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other 
countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. 
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trade-
marks. Where those designations appear in this book, and Peachpit was aware of a trademark claim, the des-
ignations appear as requested by the owner of the trademark. All other product names and services identified 
throughout this book are used in editorial fashion only and for the benefit of such companies with no intention 
of infringement of the trademark. No such use, or the use of any trade name, is intended to convey endorsement 
or other affiliation with this book..
ISBN-13: --31-361-
ISBN-1: -31-361-
      6      3    1
Printed and bound in the United States of America
www.allitebooks.com

c t t 
Contents
90
www.allitebooks.com

v     c6
248
www.allitebooks.com

4
www.allitebooks.com

v     c6
588
www.allitebooks.com

92
www.allitebooks.com

x     c6
Chpt 12 
Scripting  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 693
Be Not Afraid  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 694
System Requirements  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 694
Learning About InDesign Scripting  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 697
 Thinking About Scripting  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 700
Using the Scripts Panel and the Script Label Panel   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .701
Getting Started  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .703
More Fun with Scripting  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 706
End Script  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 708
Chpt 13 
Digital Publishing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 709
Hyperlinks  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 711
Bookmarks  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .718
Buttons and Forms  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .719
Multi-State Objects  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .727
Audio and Video  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .729
Animation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .733
Page Transitions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .739
Previewing Interactive Documents   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 740
Presentation Mode  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 740
Interactive PDF Export .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .741
SWF Export  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .743
FLA Export   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .745
EPUB Export  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .745
Exporting HTML   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .755
Digital Publishing Suite  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 760
Web Publishing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 766
Bonus Chapter  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14-1
Bonus Appendix  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .15-1

t c t 
We’re publishers—just like you. We’ve been through the long shifts, 
entering and editing text, setting type, importing images, and trying 
to get files to print. On most of those late nights and early mornings, 
we could have been home in bed if we had known just one key piece 
of information. But we weren’t. There was no one there to tell us.
We’re here to tell you.
If some piece of information in this book saves you one late night, 
we will have succeeded in our purpose.
How This Book Was Produced
To answer the question we’ve been asked so many times: Yes, we pro-
duced this book in Adobe InDesign. We created art using Snapz Pro, 
SnagIt, Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign’s tools.
We used Adobe’s Minion Pro family for our body text—a work-
horse typeface that manages to look both modern and classical at the 
same time. For code, we used TheSansMonoCondensed, by Lucas de 
Groot (from lucasfonts.com).
Bonus Materials
If we included everything we wanted—obscure features, charming 
anecdotes, and so on—this book would be over 2,000 pages.
We cut a lot of information out of this book to keep the size down. 
Bonus materials include XML workflow information (an entire chap-
ter), scripting resources, and more. To access this material on the 
web, you will need to register your book. Go to this link:
www.peachpit.com/realworldindesigncs6
After you’ve registered, click “Access to protected content” next to 
the book title in your registered products list.

x     c6
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Adobe’s InDesign team and all the other folks at or formerly
at Adobe who helped support this book—including Michael Ninness, 
Lynly Schambers-Lenox, Whitney McCleary, Chad Siegel, Bur Davis, 
Angie Hammond, Matt Phillips, Tommy Donovan, Douglas Water-
fall, Eric Menninga, Kiyo Toma, Chris Kitchener, David Stephens, 
Jonathan Brown, Alan Stearns, Dov Isaacs, Zak Williamson, Paul 
Sorrick, Mark Niemann-Ross, Christine Yarrow, Lee Huang (Ole’s 
neighbor), John Hake, Adrian O’Lenskie, Colin Fleming, Harrison 
Liu, and the rest of the Adobe Developer Technologies group. 
We appreciate the growing web of InDesign users and train-
ers with whom we love to trade cool tips and tricks, including Bob 
Levine, Anne-Marie Concepción, Sandee Cohen, Claudia McCue, 
Steve Werner, Pariah S. Burke, Scott Citron, Rufus Deuchler, Diane 
Burns, Avery Raskin, Dave Saunders, Branislav Milic, Mordy Gold-
ing, Mike Rankin, Michael Murphy, Pam Pfiffner, and Ted LoCascio.
Thanks to Jan C. Wright for our index. She won the 2009 ASI/H.W. 
Wilson Award for Excellence in Indexing for a previous edition—the 
first time a technical book has ever won the award.
Thanks to our friends at Peachpit Press for their patience, support, 
professionalism, patience, and understanding (and did we mention 
patience?), especially Susan Rimerman and Lisa “see myk” Brazieal.
David: “My deepest appreciation to my wife and partner, Debbie 
Carlson, as well as to our sons Gabriel and Daniel, who ensured that 
sanity wouldn’t gain the upper hand. My thanks, too, go to Anne-
Marie, Niyaz, Ted Falcon, and many other friends and helpers.”
Ole: “Thanks to my incredible friends, to my partner, Amy Lanset, 
and to my son, Max Olav Kvern, for their love and support.”
Bob: “I’m grateful for my wife Wendy, as well as to my twin sons 
Luke and Max, who agreed to be ignored for a couple months.”
Olav Martin Kvern 
okvern@ix.netcom.com
David Blatner 
david@indesignsecrets.com
Bob Bringhurst 
bobbringhurst@gmail.com

1
Come on in! Let us show you around. We’ll be your tour guides to 
the world of InDesign. We’re here to tell you what’s what, what’s 
where, and how it fits together. This chapter is all about InDesign’s 
user interface—the myriad windows, panels, menus, and other gad-
gets InDesign displays on your screen. It tells you what they all are, 
and what we call them. This is important, because not everything in 
InDesign is clearly labeled—as you read through the techniques in 
this book, you need to know that we mean this button over here, and 
not that button over there.
This chapter also contains lots of tips and tricks for working with 
InDesign’s user interface. These are the “little things” that make 
all the difference between enjoying and hating the time you spend 
working with InDesign (or any other program, for that matter). The 
point is to get you up to speed with all of these new tools so that you 
can get on with your work.
If you have used earlier versions of InDesign, you’re no doubt 
wondering: does Adobe have to change the user interface with each 
new version? We don’t know. Probably.
Ready? Let’s start the tour.
A Note About Keyboard Shortcuts: Throughout this book, we will 
refer to keyboard shortcuts using the format: Mac OS/Windows, as 
in “Command-Z/Ctrl-Z” (this is not necessarily in our order of plat-
form preference, but it is in alphabetical order).
Workspace

1

2     6
Another Note About Keyboard Shortcuts: Since you can redefine 
most of the keyboard shortcuts in InDesign, we can’t guarantee that 
your keyboard shortcuts will match ours. And we can’t follow every 
keyboard shortcut in the text with the disclaimer, “…or the shortcut 
you’ve defined for this action.” As you read this, bear in mind that 
we’re using the shortcuts from the default keyboard shortcut set.
Yet Another Note About Keyboard Shortcuts: A few of InDesign’s 
default keyboard shortcuts—especially those for selecting tools—do 
not use a modifier key (by “modifier key,” we mean Command, Con-
trol, Option, Ctrl, Alt, Shift, and so on). If you’re editing text, you 
can’t use these keyboard shortcuts without deselecting the text, or 
you’ll end up entering characters in the text.
The keyboard shortcut to switch to the Pen tool, for example, is 
“P.” If you press the shortcut while the cursor is in text, you’ll enter 
the character “P.” If you use InDesign to set type (as most of us do), 
you’ll almost certainly want to add a modifier key to the unmodified 
keyboard shortcuts you use most often.
Layout and Story Windows
When you open or create an InDesign document, you view and   
work on the publication using one or more windows (see Figure 1-1). 
InDesign windows come in two flavors: layout windows give you a 
view of a page or spread; story windows show a section of text in a 
document. You can have multiple windows of either type open at 
once. We’ll cover story windows in more detail in “The Story Editor,” 
in Chapter 3, “Text.”
The view of the document you see in a layout window can be mag-
nified or reduced, and each layout window can be set to a different 
magnification. Since magnification is primarily a way of moving 
around in your publication, we’ll cover it later in this chapter, in 
“Publication Navigation.”
On the Mac OS, you can choose to have InDesign keep its windows 
inside a single frame or to treat each window as a separate item. Turn 
on the Application Frame option from the Window menu to do the 
former; turn it off if you prefer to accidentally switch out of InDe-
sign by clicking on the desktop or a window belonging to some other 
application. If you turn this option off, the close/minimize/maxi-
mize buttons will disappear from the Application Bar and appear on 
each window.
Application Frame

 1. k 3
Title tab
InDesign menu bar
Minimize button
Maximize button
Close button
Horizontal ruler
Tools panel
Pasteboard
Horizontal ruler guide
Vertical ruler
Application bar
Windows version
Bleed
Control panel (docked at the 
top of the screen by default, 
but we like it better this way)
Floating panel
Vertical scroll bar
Zero point marker
Zoom button
Close button
On the Mac OS, the  
InDesign main menu 
appears across the top  
of the screen, not below  
the application bar.
Hide button
Mac OS X version
Figure 1-1
InDesign Windows
Horizontal scroll bar
Story window
Page
Page field
First page button
Previous page button
Last page button
Page pop-up menu
Status pop-up menu
Preflight icon
Preflight status
Preflight pop-up menu
Next Page button

4     6
At the top of the screen, you’ll usually see the Application Bar (see 
Figure 1-2), which contains controls for changing the workspace and 
window arrangement, changing window magnification, launching 
Adobe Bridge, and searching Adobe’s online InDesign help. 
The appearance of the Application Bar differs slightly between 
the Windows and Mac OS versions of InDesign. In Windows, you’ll 
see the control menu, close/minimize/maximize buttons, and you 
might see the main menu (if the window is maximized). The main 
menu on the Mac OS appears at the top of the screen, and is not asso-
ciated with the window.
On the Mac OS, you can turn the Application Bar on or off—it’s 
an option on the Window menu (when Application Frame is off).
Application Bar
Figure 1-2
Application Bar
At the top of a document window you’ll see the title bar or title tab, 
which contains the name of the document. If the document has not 
been saved, an asterisk (*) appears next to the name.
To close a window, press Command-W/Ctrl-W (or Ctrl-F4 in 
Windows). To close all windows, press Command-Option-Shift-W/
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-W. If you have unsaved changes in any of the docu-
ments you’re closing, InDesign will ask if you want to save them.
Like most other page layout programs, InDesign is built around the 
metaphor of the traditional layout table. In the days before this desk-
top publishing fad came along, we would lay out our pages on a table, 
drafting board, or desk. As we did our layout, we’d place our waxed 
galleys of type and artwork on the pasteboard, an area off the page. 
We would then move the items onto our layout as they were needed. 
The pasteboard is the same in InDesign—an area off the page on 
which you can place elements for future use (see Figure 1-3). 
The pasteboard is not a fixed size, as it was in PageMaker, and it’s 
not shared between spreads—each spread has its own pasteboard (as 
in QuarkXPress). You can use areas of the pasteboard for temporary 
storage of the elements you’re working with—just drag the elements 
off the page, and they’ll stay on the pasteboard until you need them 
(again, this is just like an old-fashioned layout board).
Title Bar
Pasteboard
Go to Bridge
Magnification field
View Options pop-up menu
Workspace pop-up menu
Search field
Screen Mode pop-up menu
Arrange Document pop-up menu

 1. k 5
Item stored on the  
pasteboard for future use
Document pages
Pasteboard
By the way, you can also make the height of the pasteboard larger 
(providing more space above and below the page); we cover that in 
“Guides and Pasteboard Preferences,” later in this chapter.
The most obvious, least convenient, and slowest way to change your 
view of your publication is to use a scroll bar (that is, to click in a 
scroll bar, drag a scroll handle, or click the scroll arrows). For more 
on better ways to get around, see “Publication Navigation,” later in 
this chapter.
The Page field/pop-up menu and its attached navigation buttons give 
you a way to get from one page to another. Click the Previous Page 
button to move to the previous page in your publication, or click the 
Next Page button to move to the next page. Alternatively, you can 
click the First Page button to go to the first page in the publication, or 
the Last Page button to go to the last one.
If you know exactly which page you want to go to, choose the 
page number from the Page pop-up menu or enter the page number 
in the Page field. You can jump directly to the Go To Page dialog box 
by pressing Command-J/Ctrl-J.
Enter a magnification percentage in this field in the Application Bar, 
or choose one from the attached pop-up menu, and InDesign mag-
nifies or reduces the view of the document you see in the window. 
There are better ways to do this, as we show in “Publication Naviga-
tion,” later in this chapter.
The Preflight area (the icon and related pop-up menu) in the lower-
left of window shows you the preflight status of the document. For 
more on the Preflight feature, refer to Chapter 11, “Printing.”
Scroll Bars
Page Field and   
Page Buttons
Zoom Level
Preflight
Figure 1-3
Pasteboard

6     6
The Context 
menu on the 
rulers is the 
quickest way 
to change 
measurement 
units.
Points
Picas
Inches
Inches decimal
Millimeters
Centimeters
Ciceros
Agates
Pixels
Custom (16 points)
Shadow cursors display 
the current position of the 
cursor on the rulers.
Figure 1-4
Rulers
Figure 1-5
Shadow Cursors
The Status pop-up menu lets you display the document in its folder, 
in Bridge, or in Mini Bridge. Choose Reveal in Finder (Mac OS) or 
Reveal in Explorer (Windows) to open the folder containing the 
document. Choose Reveal in Bridge to display the folder in Bridge. 
Choose Reveal in Mini Bridge to display the folder in Mini Bridge.
Pressing Command-R/Ctrl-R displays or hides InDesign’s rulers—
handy measuring tools that appear along the top and left sides of 
a publication window (see Figure 1-4). The rulers are marked off in 
the units of measurement specified in the Units & Increments Pref-
erences dialog box. The increments shown on the rulers vary with 
the current magnification; in general, you’ll see finer increments and 
more ruler tick marks at 800% size than you’ll see at 12% size.
As you move the cursor, lines in the rulers (we call them “shadow 
cursors”) display the cursor’s position on the rulers (see Figure 1-5). 
To change the units of measurement used by a ruler, Control-
click/Right-click the ruler to display the Context menu. Choose a 
new measurement system from the menu, or choose Custom to enter 
a custom measurement increment (if you do this, InDesign displays 
the Custom Measurement Unit dialog box, where you can enter the 
measurement unit you want to use).
The intersection of the zero measurement on both rulers is called the 
zero point. To change the location of the zero point, drag the zero 
point marker (see Figure 1-6).
As you drag, intersecting dotted lines show you the position of 
the zero point. Stop dragging, and the rulers will mark off their 
Status Pop-Up Menu
Rulers
Zero Point

 1. k 7
Position the cursor over the 
zero point marker.
Drag the zero point marker.
Stop dragging, andInDesign 
moves the zero point.
Figure 1-6
Moving the Zero Point
Figure 1-7
Locking the Zero Point
Managing Multiple Windows
To open more than one window on a document, choose “New 
Window” from the Arrange submenu of the Window menu. Now 
that you have two windows open, you can arrange them by choosing 
either Tile Windows Horizontally or Tile Windows Vertically from 
the Arrange submenu of the Window menu (see Figure 1-8). Choose 
Cascade from the Arrange submenu of the Window menu to stack 
the open document windows on top of each other. You can other 
arrangement options from the Arrange Documents pop-up menu on 
the Application bar.
Choose Lock Zero 
Point from the  
Context menu.
To unlock the  
zero point, use  
the Context menu.
Locked zero 
point.
Unlocked 
zero point.
increments based on the new position of the zero point marker. To 
reset the zero point to the default location, double-click the zero 
point marker.
To lock the position of the zero point, use the Context menu. 
Point at the zero point, then hold down Control and click (Macin-
tosh) or click the right mouse button (Windows). Choose Lock Zero 
Point from the Context menu (see Figure 1-7). To unlock the zero 
point, display the Context menu and turn off Lock Zero Point.
www.allitebooks.com

8     6
When you choose Cascade, 
InDesign stacks the open 
windows. To bring any 
window to the front,   
click its title bar.
When you choose Tile from the Arrange submenu 
of the Window menu, InDesign arranges the open 
windows to fill the screen.
The Arrange Documents pop-up 
menu on the Application Bar  
provides even more window 
arrangements.
InDesign highlights the title 
bar of the active window.
In either view, you can  
rearrange and resize  
windows to create  
custom views.
Figure 1-8
Window Views
To switch from an active document window to an inactive doc-
ument window, click any part of the inactive window or choose a 
window name from the bottom of the Window menu. Or, press 
Command-`/Ctrl-` (accent grave) to between open windows.
Click the split layout view icon in the lower right corner to split 
the currently document (see Figure 1-9). Sometimes it’s easier to dis-
play pages in multiple windows than it is to scroll or zoom from page 
to page. Think about using multiple windows on a single document 
in the following situations:
▶When you find yourself jumping back and forth between two 
or more locations in a publication, such as a master page and a 
layout page.
▶When you need to copy an object or objects from one page to 
another page that’s several pages away.
▶When you’re trying to fit copy into a story that spans several 
pages. Make one window focus on the end of the story, and you 
can view the end of the story as you edit text.
▶When you’re working with alternate layouts in the same 
document.

 1. k 9
There’s no trick to removing a view—simply close the window, 
and it disappears from your Windows menu.
You can also have as many different documents (files) open as 
you like. You switch from one publication to another by choosing a 
window name from Window menu, or by clicking on their windows.
To close all open windows, hold down Option as you click the 
Close box (Macintosh) or hold down Alt as you click the Close button 
(Windows). Or press Command-Option-Shift-W/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-W.
InDesign’s Panels
The best way to work with InDesign’s panels is to have the minimum 
number of them open at once, to combine panels into functional 
groups and workspaces, and to learn and master the keyboard short-
cuts for working with and navigating through panels. That’s what 
this part of the book is about.
InDesign’s panels work two ways—they display information 
about the document or the selected object, and they provide controls 
for changing the publication and the objects in it.
When a particular window, field, or control is active, we say it has 
“focus”—it’s receiving any keystrokes you might press. If you’re press-
ing keys, and yet no text is appearing in the selected text frame, it’s 
because something else—another window or field—has focus.
When you choose a menu option or click a button in a panel, 
InDesign applies the change and returns focus to your page layout. 
When you press Tab to move ahead one field (or Shift-Tab to move 
All About Focus
Split layout icon
Figure 1-9
Split Layout View

10     6
back one field), InDesign applies any change you made and shifts 
focus to the next (or previous) panel field. InDesign offers a number 
of keyboard shortcuts for controlling keyboard focus:
▶Press Enter/Return to apply a value you’ve entered in a panel 
field and return focus to your page.
▶Press Shift-Return/Shift-Enter to apply the value you’ve entered 
in a panel field and keep that panel field in focus.
▶Return to the last-used panel field by pressing Command-
Option-~/Ctrl-Alt-~ (tilde; that’s the key in the upper-left corner 
of the keyboard). The panel must be visible for this to work. To 
change this, look for “Activate last used field in panel” in the 
Views and Navigation product area of the Keyboard Shortcuts 
dialog box (see “Keyboard Shortcuts,” later in this chapter).
▶In any of the “list” panels (the Swatches panel, for example), 
press Command-Option/Ctrl-Alt and click in the list. This 
transfers focus to the list. Press the up and down arrows, or type 
the name of an item to select that item from the list.
▶Double-clicking the name of an item in many of the panels (the 
Layers panel, for example), you can edit the name of the item.
Use keyboard shortcuts to show and hide panels and save yourself 
extra mouse movement (see Table 1-1). If a panel is open but hiding 
behind other panels in a group, pressing the keyboard shortcut 
brings the panel to the front. To close a panel, press the shortcut 
again, click the panel tab, or click the Close button on the panel’s 
title bar (the “X”).
Zipping and Unzipping Panels. It’s easy to run out of room on your 
screen to see anything but the panels. You can shrink a panel down 
to just its tab and title bar by clicking the area at the top of the panel, 
away from the title tab (see Figure 1-10). When you want to display 
the entire panel, click the area at the top of the panel again. 
Displaying and   
Hiding Panels
Figure 1-10
Zipping and 
Unzipping Panels
Click the area 
at the top of 
the panel…
…and InDesign “zips” the 
panel. Click again to restore the 
panel to its original size.
You can also do this by clicking the little minimize/
maximize button (the “-” near the top right corner of 
the panel). It’s a lot harder to hit.

 1. k 11
To display this panel:
Press:
Align
Shift-F7
Attributes
None/Alt-W, B
Character
Command-T/Ctrl-T
Character Styles
Command-Shift-F11/Shift-F11
Check Spelling
Command-I/Ctrl-I
Color
F6
Control
Command-Option-6/Ctrl-Alt-6
Find/Change
Command-F/Ctrl-F
Effects
Command-Shift-F10/Ctrl-Shift-F10
Glyphs
Shift-Option-F11/Shift-Alt-F11
Gradient
None/Alt-W, D
Index
Shift-F8
Info
F8
Layers
F7
Links
Command-Shift-D/Ctrl-Shift-D
Object Styles
Command-F7/Ctrl-F7
Pages
Command-F12/F12
Paragraph
Command-Option-T/Ctrl-Alt-T
Paragraph Styles
Command-F11/F11
Pathfinder
None/Alt-W, J, P
Preflight
Command-Shift-Option-F/
Ctrl-Shift-Alt-F
SWF Preview
Command-Shift-Return/
Ctrl-Shift-Enter
Scripts
Command-Option-F11/Ctrl-Alt-F11
Story
None/Alt-T, R
Stroke
Command-F10/F10
Swatches
F5
Table
Shift-F9
Tabs
Command-Shift-T/Ctrl-Shift-T
Text Wrap
Command-Option-W/Ctrl-Alt-W
Tools
None/Alt-W, T
Table 1-1
Panel Keyboard 
Shortcuts

12     6
Click this button…
Continue clicking the 
button, and you will 
cycle through the pan-
el’s various states, and 
will eventually arrive at 
a minimized panel.
…InDesign expands 
the panel to display 
additional options.
To change the size of a 
panel, drag the resize 
box.
Figure 1-13
Resizing Panels
Figure 1-11
Reducing a  
Panel to an Icon
Figure 1-12
Showing/Hiding  
Panel Options
Click the bar at 
the top of the 
panel…
…and InDesign collapses the 
panel to an icon.
Collapse to Icons button
Hiding All Panels. Press Tab to hide all displayed panels; press it 
again to display them. Press Shift+Tab to hide panels without hiding 
the Tools panel. These shortcuts don’t work with an active text cursor.
Reducing a panel to an icon. Zipping a panel makes it smaller, but to 
make it smaller still, you can reduce the panel to an icon. To do this, 
double-click the bar at the very top of the panel or click the very tiny 
Collapse to Icons button (see Figure 1-11).
Click again to expand the panel.
Displaying options. Many of InDesign’s panels can be set to dis-
play all of the available options for a particular feature, or a subset 
of those options. To expand the panel to show all its features, select 
Show Options from the panel menu, or click the little arrow icon to 
the left of the panel name (see Figure 1-12).
Resizing panels. To resize a panel, drag the Resize box at the panel’s 
lower-right corner (see Figure 1-13). If a panel doesn’t have a Resize 
box, you can’t resize it. You can drag the sides of some of the panels.

 1. k 13
Figure 1-14
Grouping Panels
Snapping panels into position. When you drag a panel near the edge 
of another panel, InDesign snaps the edge of the panel you’re moving 
to the closest edge of the other panel. This makes it easy to arrange 
and resize panels in relation to other panels.
Grouping and separating panels. When you first launch InDesign, 
you’ll notice that some panels are combined. For example, Paragraph 
Styles and Character styles are grouped together. You can rearrange 
any of these panels, pull panels groups apart, or combine the panels 
any way you want (see Figure 1-14). We all have different work habits, 
and tabbed panels give us a way of customizing InDesign to fit our 
particular habits and needs.
Drag the panel tab into 
the area at the top of 
another panel or panel 
group.
InDesign groups the panels.
To remove a panel from a 
panel group, drag the panel 
out of the group.
To combine panels, drag the tab of one panel into the area at the 
top of another panel (Adobe calls this a “drop zone”). When you 
combine two or more panels, you are creating a “panel group.” A 
panel group behaves as if it is a single panel—the panels move, resize, 
and zip/unzip as a unit.
In any panel group, only one panel can be “on top” at a time; 
only the tabs of the other panels in the group are visible. To display 
another panel in the group, click the panel’s tab or press the key-
board shortcut for the panel.
Stacking panels. Another way to customize the layout of InDesign’s 
panels is to “stack” one panel on another. When you do this, both 
panels remain visible (in contrast to grouped panels, where only the 
uppermost panel is visible), and move, hide, display, or resize as a 
single panel. 

14     6
To do this, drag the tab of a panel into the area at the bottom of 
another panel. InDesign highlights the bottom of the target panel. 
Stop dragging and InDesign stacks the panels (see Figure 1-15).
Drag the tab of one panel into the 
bottom of another panel. InDesign 
displays a highlight when the panels 
are ready to stack.
Stop dragging and release the 
mouse button. InDesign stacks 
the two panels (they will now 
move as a single unit).
Figure 1-15
Stacking Panels
Docking panels. Another way to show and hide panels is to use 
InDesign’s “dock” feature. When you drag a panel tab within a few 
pixels of the left or right edge of the screen or the application frame, 
InDesign adds the panel to a dock, a special area at either side of the 
screen. Panels in the dock are shown as icons, either with or with-
out the name of the panel, depending on the width of the dock (see 
Figure 1-16).
To expand a docked panel, click the panel’s icon or press the pan-
el’s keyboard shortcut. To collapse the panel again, click its tab (or 
press the keyboard shortcut again).
To dock all of the panels in a panel group, drag the top of the 
panel group into the dock or hold down Option/Alt as you drag the 
panel tab into the dock area. 
You can’t move the Control panel or the Tabs panel into the 
dock areas at the sides of the workspace. You can, however, dock the 

 1. k 15
Figure 1-16
Docking Panels
Drag the panel 
into the dock 
area.
InDesign adds the   
panel to the dock.
Click the top of the panel to 
reduce the panel to an icon.
To display a docked panel, 
click the panel icon. Click 
the top of the panel to put it 
away again.
You can change the width   
of the dock by dragging   
its edges.
When you select Auto-Collapse Icon 
Panels from the dock Context menu, 
panels will hide themselves whenever 
they lose focus.
Control panel to the top or bottom. When you do this, the Control 
panel isn’t reduced to an icon.
To turn a docked panel back into a floating panel, drag the panel’s 
icon out of the dock. Hold down Option/Alt and drag a panel group 
to convert the entire group to a floating panel group. 
Small Panel Rows. To reduce the height of each item in any of the 
“list” panels (such as the Paragraph Styles and Layers panels), choose 
Small Panel Rows from the panel’s pop-up menu (see Figure 1-17).
Figure 1-17
Small Panel Rows
Choose Small 
Panel Rows from 
the panel menu…
…and InDesign reduces 
the height of each item.

16     6
When you want:
Enter:
Example:
points
pt
136 pt
points
0p
0p136
picas
p
1p
picas and points
p
1p6
inches
i*
1.56i
millimeters
mm**
2.45mm
ciceros
c
3c
ciceros and didots
c
3c4
agates
a***
3a
pixels
px
136 px
* or “in,” or even “inch” if you feel the need to type the extra characters.
** Oddly enough, you have to type “mm,” even though there is no other mea-
surement that starts with “m.”
*** or “ag,” if you feel the need to type the extra characters.
Table 1-2
Measurement Overrides
Overriding Units of Measurement. Being able to switch from one 
measurement system to another is great, but what do you do when 
you want to enter a value in a measurement system other than the 
one currently selected? Do you have to go to the Units & Increments 
Preferences dialog box and switch to another measurement system? 
No—all you need to do add a “measurement override” when you 
enter the value. Want to enter 115.3 points in a field that’s currently 
showing decimal inches? It’s easy: enter “115.3 pt,” or even “0p115.3” 
in the field, and InDesign will take care of the conversion for you. 
You can use these shortcuts in any numeric field in any InDesign 
panel or dialog box. Table 1-2 shows you how to enter measurement 
overrides. 
You can also cycle through measurement units by pressing Com-
mand-Option-Shift-U/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-U when any measurement field 
has focus (note, though, that this changes the measurement system 
in all fields and rulers).
Doing Arithmetic in Fields. You can add, subtract, multiply, or 
divide in any numeric field in any InDesign panel or dialog box. 
Want an object to be half its current width? Type “/2” after the value 
in the W (width) field in the Transform panel and press Enter. Want 
an object to move two picas to the right? Enter “+2p” (yes, all of the 
measurement unit overrides shown above work with these opera-
tions) after the value shown in the X field in the Transform panel. 
Enter “*” to multiply, or “-” to subtract. You get the idea.

 1. k 17
You can also enter percentages as part of any arithmetic opera-
tion. For example, if you replace a value with “25%” and press Enter, 
InDesign enters one quarter of the value for you.
Starting with InDesign CS6, you can string together multiple cal-
culations, such as “2p+3i-1p6”—especially handy during tax season.
Using the Tools Panel
If the publication window is the layout board where you collect the 
galleys of type, and illustrations you want to use in your publication, 
the Tools panel is where you keep your waxer, X-Acto knife, T-square, 
and bandages. (Note to youngsters: there were tools used in the early 
days of page layout. You don’t have to understand how they work to 
use the corresponding tools in InDesign. But it helps.)
Some of the following descriptions aren’t going to make any sense 
until you understand how InDesign’s points and paths work, and 
that discussion falls in Chapter 5, “Drawing.” You can flip ahead and 
read that section, or you can plow through this section and figure it 
out as you go. It’s your choice, and either method works.
You can break InDesign’s Tools panel (as shown in Figure 1-18) 
into conceptual sections.
▶Selection tools (the Selection, Direct Selection, Page, Gap, Con-
tent Collector and Content Placer tools) select objects, pages, 
or space between objects. You can do different things with the 
objects depending on the selection tool you’ve used.
▶Tools for drawing basic shapes (the Rectangle, Polygon, Ellipse, 
and Line tools) and their equivalent frames (Rectangle Frame, 
Polygon Frame, and Ellipse Frame tools) draw complete paths 
containing specific numbers of points in specific positions on 
the path.
▶Path-drawing and editing tools (the Pen, Add Point, Delete 
Point, Convert Point, Pencil, Eraser, Smooth, and Scissors tools) 
draw paths point by point (or, in the case of the Scissors tool, 
delete points or split paths).
▶Transformation tools (the Rotate, Shear, Scale, and Free Trans-
form tools) change the rotation angle, size, and skewing angle of 
objects on your pages.
▶Text editing tools (the Type tool and Path Type tool) give you a 
way to enter and edit text (the latter along a path). The Note tool 
adds non-printing notes to text.
www.allitebooks.com

18     6
▶Navigation tools (the Zoom and Hand tools) help you move 
around in your publication.
▶Object formatting tools (the Fill and Stroke selectors, the Gradi-
ent tool, and the Gradient Feather tool) provide ways to apply 
formatting to objects.
When you see a tiny arrow in the corner of a tool icon,  
more tools lurk beneath the surface.
To select a “hidden” tool, position the cursor over 
a tool, then hold down the mouse button.
InDesign displays a “flyout” menu  
containing the available tools.
Choose a tool from the 
menu and release the 
mouse button.
Tool name
Shortcut
Selection
V
Direct Selection
A
Page
Shift-P
Gap
Content Collector
B
Content Placer
B
Type
T
Path Type
Shift-T
Line
\
Pen
P
Add Point
+
Delete Point
-
Convert Point
Shift-C
Pencil
N
Smooth
Erase
Ellipse
L
Tool name
Shortcut
Ellipse Frame
Rectangle
M
Rectangle Frame
F
Polygon
Polygon Frame
Scissors
C
Free Transform
E
Rotate
R
Scale
S
Shear
O
Gradient
G
Gradient Feather
Shift-G
Note
Eyedropper
I
Measure
K
Hand
H
Zoom
Z
Fill (X)
Stroke(X)
Swap fill/stroke (Shift-X)
Click this button to switch 
between different Tools panel 
views (single column, double 
column, and single row).
Default fill/stroke (D)
Apply Color (,)
Apply Gradient (.)
Apply None (/)
To switch to any tool 
temporarily, hold down 
the shortcut keystroke for 
that key. When you release 
the key, the previous tool is 
selected again.
Formatting affects container
Formatting affects text
Normal View Mode (W)
Preview Mode (W)
Figure 1-18
The Tools Panel

 1. k 19
The tool descriptions below are brief and are only intended to 
give you a feeling for what the different tools are and what they do. 
To learn more about entering text with the Type tool, see Chapter 
3, “Text.” For more on drawing objects with the drawing tools, see 
Chapter 5, “Drawing.” For more on working with the Transforma-
tion tools, see Chapter 9, “Transforming.”
Tool Hints. The Tool Hints panel not only shows which shortcut 
activates each tool, but also which modifier keys work with the tool. 
Choose Utilities from the Window menu, and then choose Tool 
Hints to open the Tool Hints panel. Then select a tool to see how to 
use it. 
Spring-loaded tools. Here’s an Illustrator feature that finally made 
its way into InDesign. While you’re using one tool, you can tempo-
rarily switch to another tool. While one tool is selected, press the 
tool shortcut—and keep holding it down—perform your action, and 
when you release the shortcut key, the original tool is still active. We 
love it for quickly using the Direct Selection tool (A) when we’re 
drawing with the Pen tool, or switching temporarily to the Selection 
tool (V) to nudge an object when we’re using the new Gap tool. Try it.
Changing the Tools Panel View. You can display the Tools panel 
in three different arrangements: single column, double column, and 
single row (horizontal). You can toggle between these views by click-
ing the tiny double-arrow icon at the top of the panel.
Tools Panel Keyboard Shortcuts. You can choose most of the tools in 
the Tools panel using keyboard shortcuts such as “F” for the Frame 
tool (no Command/Ctrl or other modifier key necessary). This is 
usually faster than going back across the screen to the panel. Note, 
however, that you can’t press these while you’re editing text. That’s 
why we like to add additional keyboard shortcuts (see “Keyboard 
Shortcuts,” later in this chapter) to the tools we use most often; for 
example, on David’s system, Command-Shift-1/Ctrl-Shift-1 switches 
to the Selection tool when he’s editing text.
The Selection tool is the swiss-army knife of the Tools panel. Use it to 
select, resize, scale, and rotate objects. You can even manipulate con-
tent within frames by dragging that thing that looks like a donut (it’s 
actually called the Content Grabber). Press V to select the Selection 
tool (when the cursor is not in text). The Selection tool’s versatility 
Selection Tool 

20     6
is why the InDesign team dumped the Position tool and buried the 
Rotate tool under the Free Transform tool.
When you double-click a text frame with the Selection tool, you’ll 
switch to the Type tool. When you double-click the contents of an 
object with the Selection tool, you’ll switch back and forth between 
selecting the contents and selecting the frame.
We’ll go into more detail on using the Selection tool. See “Select-
ing and Deselecting,” in Chapter 2, “Page Layout,” for more about 
making selections.
The Direct Selection tool (press A) is for selecting objects that are 
inside other objects, such as the following.
▶Individual points on paths. For more on editing the shape of a 
path, see Chapter 5, “Drawing.”
▶Component paths of compound paths. For more on working 
with compound paths, see Chapter 5, “Drawing.”
▶Objects inside groups. For more on selecting objects inside 
groups, see Chapter 2, “Page Layout.”
▶Objects pasted inside other objects. For more on working with 
path contents, see Chapter 9, “Transforming.”
Use the Page tool for creating different page sizes within a document. 
To create a different page size, press Shift+P to select the Page tool, 
and click the page in the layout to select it. Then use the options in 
the Control page to change the page layout. 
For more on working with the Page tool, see Chapter 2, “Layout.”
Use the Gap tool to adjust the spacing between objects. If you select 
the Gap tool and try to use it without knowing what it does, you’ll 
probably get frustrated because it utterly refuses to select objects.
Press U to select the Gap tool, place the pointer between objects, 
and drag to change the gap between aligned objects. Shift-drag 
to move the gap between only the two nearest objects; Ctrl-drag/
Command-drag to resize the gap instead of moving it; Alt-drag/
Option-drag to move the gap and objects in the same direction. 
Ctrl+Alt-drag/Command+Option-drag to resize the gap and move 
the objects. Adding the Shift key to any combination affects only the 
two nearest objects.
For more on working with the Gap tool, see Chapter 9, 
“Transforming.”
Direct Selection Tool 
Page Tool 
Gap Tool 

 1. k 21
When you select the Content Collector tool, click objects or stories to 
add them to the Content Conveyor at the bottom of the screen. You 
can then use the Content Placer Tool to copy and link these objects 
from the Content Conveyer into another layout or document. Press 
B to switch between the Content Collector and Content Placer tools. 
You enter and edit text using the Type tool. To create a text frame, 
select the Type tool and drag the tool in the publication window. 
For more on entering, editing, and formatting text, see Chapter 3, 
“Text.” To select the Type tool, press T. When you have the Selection 
or Direct Select tool chosen in the Tool panel, you can switch to the 
Type tool automatically by double-clicking any text frame. InDesign 
places the text cursor as close as possible to where you double-clicked.
Use the Path Type tool to enter and edit text on a path (Adobe calls 
this the “Type on a Path” tool). To add text to a path, select the Path 
Type tool and click the tool on a path. A flashing text insertion point 
(or text cursor) appears on the path. At this point, text you enter will 
flow along the path. See Chapter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics.” To 
select the Path Type tool, press Shift-T.
You use the Note tool to add non-printing notes to text. Click the 
Note tool in text, and InDesign will display a window you can use to 
enter the text of the note, or to jump to the next or previous notes in 
the document. We’ll talk more about notes in Chapter 3, “Text.”
You use the Pen tool to draw paths containing both straight and 
curved line segments (that is, paths containing both curve and 
corner points). Click the Pen tool to create a corner point; drag to 
create a curve point. Press P to select the Pen tool. 
Under the Pen tool, you’ll find the Add Point tool, the Delete 
Point tool, and the Convert Point tool.
For more (much more) on working with the Pen tool (and its vari-
ants) to draw and edit paths, see Chapter 5, “Drawing.”
If you’re one of the millions of computer users who find the Pen 
tool—and the whole process of drawing by manipulating points, line 
segments, and control handles—confusing, give the Pencil tool a try. 
With the Pencil tool (press N), you can sketch free form paths. As 
you drag, InDesign creates a path that follows the cursor, automati-
cally placing points and adjusting control handles as it does so.
If you don’t like something about a path you’ve drawn using the 
Pencil tool, you can adjust it using any of InDesign’s other drawing 
Content Collector Tool 
Type Tool 
Path Type Tool 
Note Tool 
Pen Tool 
Pencil Tool 

22     6
tools (including that scary Pen tool). You might want to start with 
the other tools that share the same space in the Tools panel: the 
Smooth tool and the Eraser tool (see below).
Select a path—any path—and drag the Smooth tool over it. It’ll get 
smoother. Not smooth enough yet? Drag again. As you drag the 
Smooth tool, InDesign adjusts the points and control handles that 
define the path to create a smoother transition from one line segment 
to another. InDesign often removes points during this process. If you 
continue to repeat the smoothing process, we think you’ll eventually 
end up with a simple curve between two points.
The Eraser tool erases line segments and points. To use the Eraser 
tool, select a path, then drag the eraser tool over part of the path. 
InDesign splits the path and removes the line segments and points 
where you dragged the Eraser tool.
Use the Line tool to draw straight lines—paths containing two corner 
points. If you hold down Shift as you drag the Line tool, the lines you 
draw will be constrained to 0-, 45-, and 90-degree angles. Press \ 
(backslash) to select the Line tool.
Use the Ellipse tool to draw ellipses and circles. Hold down Shift 
as you drag the Ellipse tool, and InDesign draws circles. Press L to 
select the Ellipse tool.
Use the Rectangle tool to draw rectangles. If you hold down Shift as 
you drag, you draw squares. Press M to select the Rectangle tool.
If you need a rectangle with rounded corners, draw the rectan-
gle using the Rectangle tool, then choose Corner Options from the 
Object menu to display the Corner Options dialog box (you can also 
get to this dialog box via the context menu). The Corner Options 
dialog box can provide a variety of other corner shapes, as discussed 
in Chapter 5, “Drawing.”
The Polygon tool makes it easy to draw equilateral polygons, such as 
pentagons, hexagons, and dodecagons. (Polygons are closed geomet-
ric objects that have at least three sides; they’re equilateral if all sides 
are the same length.) You can also use the Polygon tool to draw stars.
To change which polygon the Polygon tool draws, double-click 
the tool in the Tools panel. InDesign displays the Polygon Settings 
dialog box (see Figure 1-19). Enter the number of sides you want 
in the Number of Sides field. If you want the polygon to be a star 
Smooth Tool 
Eraser Tool 
Line Tool 
Ellipse Tool 
Rectangle Tool 
Polygon Tool 

 1. k 23
polygon, enter a percentage (from 0 to 99 percent) in the Star Inset 
field. If you don’t want the polygon to be a star polygon, enter 100 
percent in the Star Inset field.
Want to impress your friends? Select the Polygon tool and start 
dragging a shape. Press the left and up arrow keys several times to 
create a grid of polygons. While still dragging, press the Spacebar, 
and press the left and up arrow keys again. Because you pressed the 
Spacebar, the arrow keys adjust the star inset and number of polygon 
sides. Press the Spacebar again to switch back to grid mode.
To rotate the selected object (or objects), select the Rotate tool from 
the toolbox (press R) and then drag the tool on your page. When you 
select the Rotate tool, InDesign displays the transformation center 
point icon on or around the selected object. The center point icon 
sets the center of rotation (the point you’ll be rotating around), and 
corresponds to the selected point on the Proxy in the Transform and 
Control panels. Drag the transformation center point icon to a new 
location (or click one of the points in the Proxy) to change the point.
Hold down Shift as you drag the Rotate tool to constrain rotation 
to 45-degree increments (as you drag the Rotate tool, InDesign snaps 
the selection to 0, 45, 90, 135, 180, 225, 270, and 315 degree angles).
To scale (or resize) an object, select the object, select the Scale tool, 
and then drag the tool in the publication window. When you select 
the Scale tool, InDesign displays the transformation center point 
icon on or around the selected object. The location of the center point 
icon sets the center of the scaling, and corresponds to the selected 
point on the Proxy in the Transform and Control panel. Drag the 
transformation center point icon to a new location (or click one of 
the points in the Proxy) to change the point you’re scaling around.
Hold down Shift as you drag a corner handle to retain the object’s 
proportions as you scale it. When you scale an object that has a 
stroke and Adjust Stroke Weight When Scaling is turned on in the 
Transform panel, the stroke may appear disproportional (thicker 
in some places and thinner in others) and the stroke weight in the 
Strokes and Control panels appears incorrect. You can fix both of 
these problems by choosing Redefine Scaling as 100% from either 
the Transform or Control panel menus.
Rotate Tool 
Scale Tool 
Figure 1-19
Polygon Settings

24     6
Shearing, or skewing, an object alters the angle of the vertical or 
horizontal axes of the object. This makes it appear that the plane 
containing the object has been slanted relative to the plane of the 
publication window. To shear an object, drag the Shear tool (press O) 
in the publication window. As you drag, InDesign shears the object. 
When you shear an object, InDesign distorts the stroke weights 
of the paths in the selection. The Redefine Scaling as 100% feature 
mentioned above will fix this distortion, too.
The Free Transform (press E) tool is a combination of the Scale, 
Rotate, and Selection tools, all bundled into a single tool. What the 
tool does depends on the position of the cursor. For more on working 
with the Free Transform tool, see Chapter 9, “Transforming.”
▶When the cursor is above one of an object’s selection handles, 
the Free Transform tool acts as the Scale tool. Drag the Free 
Transform tool, and you scale the object around its center point. 
▶When the cursor is just outside one of the selection handles, the 
Free Transform tool behaves as if it were the Rotate tool. Drag 
the tool to rotate the object. 
▶When the Free Transform tool is inside the bounds of the selec-
tion, it acts as a “move” tool—drag the tool to move the object.
The Eyedropper tool (press I) can pick up formatting attributes 
(from the fill and stroke of a path to the character and paragraph 
formatting of text) and apply them to objects, or sample a color in an 
imported graphic and add it to your Swatches panel.
To “load” the Eyedropper tool, click the tool on an object (the 
object doesn’t have to be selected). If you have an item selected when 
you click, InDesign applies the attributes of the item under the cursor 
to the selected item. Then click the “loaded” Eyedropper tool on an 
object to apply the formatting (see Figure 1-20).
Double-click the Eyedropper tool to display the Eyedropper 
Options dialog box. Use this dialog box to define the attributes sam-
pled and affected by the Eyedropper tool (see Figure 1-21).
The Measure tool—which is usually under the Eyedropper tool—
gives you a way to measure distances and angles (see Figure 1-22).
To measure the distance between two points, select the Measure 
tool (press K) and drag it from one point to the other. When you drag 
the Measure tool, InDesign displays the Info panel. The D field in the 
Info panel shows the distance between the two points.
Shear Tool 
Free Transform Tool 
Eyedropper Tool 
Measure Tool 

 1. k 25
Figure 1-20
Eyedropper 
Tool Options
Figure 1-22
 Measure Tool
Drag the Measure tool 
between two points, 
and the Info panel 
will show you the 
distance between the 
points.
Select an object or a series 
of objects and then choose 
the Eyedropper tool from the 
Tools panel.
Position the Eyedropper tool 
over an object that has the 
formatting you want to apply.
Click the Eyedropper 
tool. InDesign applies the 
formatting of the object 
beneath the cursor to the 
selected objects.
To format text using the 
Eyedropper tool, select the 
text using the Type tool.
Here’s another method.
Select the Eyedropper tool 
from the Tools panel.
Position the cursor over an 
object and click. InDesign 
loads the Eyedropper tool 
with the formatting 
attributes of the object.
Click another object 
(it doesn’t have to be 
selected). InDesign 
applies the format-
ting attributes to the 
object.
Figure 1-21
Eyedropper Tool

26     6
To measure an angle, select the Measure tool and drag it between 
two points—this creates one side of the angle. Next, hold down 
Option/Alt and drag from one of the end points of the line created 
by the Measure tool. This creates the other side of the angle. The Info 
panel displays the angle in the Angle field (it also displays the length 
of the two sides of the angle in the D1 and D2 fields).
Use these tools to apply gradients or gradient feather fills, or to adjust 
fills you’ve applied. When you drag the tool, you’re setting the loca-
tion of the beginning and ending points of the gradient. We discuss 
gradients and blends in Chapter 5, “Drawing.”
The Scissors tool cuts paths or points. Select a path, choose the Scis-
sors tool (or press C), and then click the path. InDesign splits the 
path at the point at which you clicked.
The Hand tool lets you scroll around your page; we explore how best 
to use it in “Publication Navigation,” later in this chapter. Double-
click the Hand tool to set the view to Fit Spread in Window.
Use the Zoom tool to change the magnification in a publication 
window. To switch to the Zoom tool, press Z. To switch to the Zoom 
tool temporarily, hold down Command-Spacebar/Ctrl-Spacebar 
(when you’re done using the tool, InDesign will select the tool you 
were using before you switched to the Zoom tool).
Once you’ve switched to the Zoom tool, click the tool on the 
area you want to magnify, or drag a selection rectangle around it. 
To zoom out, hold down Option/Alt—you’ll see that the plus (“+”) 
inside the Zoom tool changes to minus (“-”)—and then click or drag 
to zoom out.
For more on using the Zoom tool, see “Publication Navigation,” 
later in this chapter. Double-clicking on the Zoom tool jumps to 
100-percent View, but pressing Command-1 is easier and faster.
The Fill and Stroke buttons, or “selectors,” near the bottom of the 
Tools panel control what part (the fill or the stroke) of the selected 
path or text is affected when you apply a color. To make a selector 
active, click it. Here are two very useful shortcuts:
▶Swap colors—apply the color assigned to the fill to the stroke, or 
vice versa—click the swap fill and stroke icon (or press Shift-X).
▶Press X (when you’re not editing text) to switch between the Fill 
selector and the Stroke selector.
Gradient Tool and   
Gradient Feather Tool 
Scissors Tool 
Hand Tool 
Zoom Tool 
Fill and Stroke 

 1. k 27
Beneath the Fill and Stroke buttons, you’ll see two very small but-
tons—the Formatting Affects Container button and the Formatting 
Affects Text button. Click the former button to apply the fill or stroke 
to the text frame; click the latter to apply it to the text.
As your eye proceeds down the Tools panel, you’ll find three 
more buttons—they’re shortcuts for applying colors or gradients, or 
for removing a fill or stroke from an object. Click the Apply Color 
button to apply the current color (in the Color panel or Swatches 
panel) to the fill or stroke of the selected object. The state of the Fill 
and Stroke selector determines which part of the object is affected. 
Click the Apply Gradient button to apply the current gradient (in 
the Swatches panel or the Gradient panel), and click the Apply None 
button to remove the fill or stroke from the selected object.
As you’d expect, InDesign has shortcuts for these buttons, too. 
▶To apply the most recently used color to the current fill or stroke 
(which attribute is affected depends on which selector is active), 
press , (comma—again, this won’t work when text is selected).
▶Press . (period) to apply the current gradient.
▶Press / (slash) to remove the fill or stroke from the selected 
object or objects.
For more on applying colors, see Chapter 10, “Color.”
Other Panels
Most of InDesign’s other panels are discussed in the other chapters 
of this book. But there were a few (pesky) panels that didn’t really fit 
in the other chapters, so we’ll talk about them in this section.
If you’re exporting a large file to PDF or IDML format, you can keep 
working in InDesign during the export. The Background Tasks 
panel shows the process’s status. Choose Utilities from the Window 
menu, and then choose Background Tasks.
The Info panel displays information about the selected object, or, if 
no objects are selected, about the current location of the cursor (see 
Figure 1-23).
▶When you select a character, it shows you the Unicode value  
of the character. Select text, and, the panel displays a count of 
characters, words, lines, and paragraphs in the selection.
Background   
Tasks Panel
Info Panel
www.allitebooks.com

28     6
▶When you select a frame or line, the Info panel displays the 
stroke and fill colors.
▶Select a graphic, and the panel shows the file type (EPS, TIFF, 
PSD), resolution, and color space (RGB, CMYK, or Grayscale). 
InDesign can’t extract the resolution from EPS and PDF.
Use the Library panel (or panels, as you can have multiple libraries 
open at once) to store and retrieve commonly used items (see Figure 
1-24). Does your company or client have a logo they like to plaster all 
over every publication you lay out? Put it in a library. Open library 
files just as you open InDesign documents or book files—using the 
Open and New options on the File menu.
Library Panel
Library panel in 
Thumbnail view.
Library panel in 
List view.
Library panel menu
Display Item Information button
Show Subset button
New Item button
Delete Item button
When you click the Display Item Information button, 
InDesign displays the Item Information dialog box.
You can use this field to 
add notes to the library 
item—this can help a 
great deal when you’re 
searching for an item.
When you click the Show 
Subset button, InDesign   
displays the Subset dialog   
box. Set parameters and   
click the OK button, and 
InDesign displays the   
library items that match.
Item preview
Figure 1-24
Library Panel
Figure 1-23
Info Panel

 1. k 29
Context Menus
Context menus are menus that pop up at the location of the cursor, 
and change according to the location of the cursor and the object 
you have selected (see Figure 1-25). On the Macintosh, you summon 
a context menu by holding down Control as you click the mouse 
button. In Windows, click the right mouse button.
Context menus give you a great way to do a lot of things—from 
changing the formatting of the selected objects to changing your 
magnification. Let’s face it—your attention is where the cursor is, 
and there’s a limited amount of it. Dragging the cursor across the 
screen to reach a menu or button is distracting and time-consuming. 
Many of InDesign’s panels (such as the Pages, Paragraph Styles, 
and Links panels) feature Context menus of their own. These menus, 
for the most part, replicate the options on the panel menu, but save 
you a trip across the panel to get at the menu.
Context menus also show the shortcut keys for the commands on 
the menu—a handy reminder.
Hold down Control and 
click to display the Context 
menu on the Macintosh; 
in Windows, click the right 
mouse button.
The Context menu 
looks like this 
when you have text 
selected.
The Context menu looks 
like this when you have 
a graphic selected.
Many panels also   
feature Context menus.
Figure 1-25
Context Menus
Keyboard Shortcuts
We hate it when software manufacturers change the keyboard short-
cuts we know and love. Especially when they change an easy-to-
reach, frequently used shortcut to one that’s difficult to use. InDesign 

30     6
gives us something we’d like to see in every application—editable 
keyboard shortcuts. This means that we can make the program’s key-
board shortcuts work the way we think they ought to.
You can redefine those that correspond to menu commands—you 
can’t redefine some of the keyboard shortcuts that modify mouse 
actions. To define or redefine a keyboard shortcut, follow these steps 
(and take a look at Figure 1-26).
1. Choose Keyboard Shortcuts from the Edit menu. InDesign  
displays the Keyboard Shortcuts dialog box.
2. To create a new shortcut set, click the New Set button. To use an 
existing set, choose the set’s name from the Set pop-up menu (if 
that’s all you want to do, you can skip to Step 7). To delete a set, 
choose the set’s name and click the Delete Set button.
3. Choose an option from the Product Area pop-up menu. InDe-
sign fills the Commands list with the available commands for 
the corresponding area of the program.
4. Select a command from the list. InDesign displays the current 
shortcut (or shortcuts) assigned to the command.
5. To remove a selected shortcut, click the Remove button. To 
assign a shortcut to a command, or to replace an existing short-
cut, move the cursor to the New Shortcut field and press the keys 
you want to use for the shortcut.
6. Click the Assign button to assign a shortcut to the command, 
or (if you had a shortcut selected) click the Replace button to 
replace the selected shortcut. Note that a single command can 
have multiple shortcuts assigned to it. If you want, you can save 
your changes without closing the dialog box by pressing the Save 
button.
7. Once you’ve changed all of the shortcuts you want to change, 
click the OK button to close the dialog box and save the set.
Keyboard shortcut sets are saved in the Presets > InDesign Short-
cut Sets folder in your InDesign folder. Want to take your keyboard 
shortcuts with you to another machine? Take the shortcuts file from 
your machine and copy it into the InDesign Shortcut Sets folder of 
the copy of InDesign you’ll be using. Open the Keyboard Shortcuts 
dialog box and choose your shortcut set from the Sets pop-up menu.
To return to InDesign’s default keyboard shortcuts, all you need 
to do is choose the Default set from the Set pop-up menu.

 1. k 31
Click the New Set button, 
or choose the QuarkXPress 
4.0 shortcut set from the Set 
pop-up menu.
If you’re creating a new set, InDesign displays 
the New Set dialog box. Enter a name for 
your set and click the OK button.
If you loaded the QuarkXPress 
4.0 set, and don’t want to edit 
any shortcuts, click the Save 
button, then close the dialog 
box.
Select an option from the 
Product Area pop-up menu.
Select a command.
You can remove the 
existing shortcut by 
selecting it and clicking 
the Remove button.
Enter the new   
shortcut and click 
the Assign button. If 
it’s already asigned 
to another command 
(as it is here), clicking 
Assign removes the 
conflicting shortcut.
If a keyboard shortcut 
is already assigned to 
a command, InDesign 
displays the name of 
the command here. 
InDesign assigns the  
shortcut to the command.
Figure 1-26
Editing Keyboard 
Shortcuts
When you select an option 
from this pop-up menu…
…InDesign displays a list of 
the available commands.
When you select a com-
mand, InDesign displays the 
shortcut in this field.

32     6
To view all of the shortcuts in a set, select the set from the Set 
pop-up menu, then click the Show Set button. InDesign displays a 
list of the shortcuts in the set using the default text editor on your 
system (TextEdit on the Macintosh; Notepad in Windows). You can 
print or save this file for your reference.
Setting the context. You can have a keyboard shortcut do different 
things. You might want Command-T/Ctrl-T to open the Text Frame 
Options dialog box when you’re editing text and open the Table 
Options when your cursor is in a table. To do this, select a context 
from the Context pop-up menu before you click the Assign button.
A few thoughts on making up your own shortcuts. There are two 
approaches to making up your own keyboard shortcuts. The first is 
assign shortcuts using a key that has something to do with the name 
of the command—like “P” for “Print.” Usually, these shortcuts are 
easy to remember. Another, and, in our opinion, better, approach is 
to analyze the way you work with commands, and then take the com-
mands you use most often and assign them shortcuts that are easy to 
reach with one hand (usually the left hand, given that the shortcuts 
for copy, cut, and paste are all on the left side of the keyboard).
What’s the most frequently used keyboard shortcut? For us, it’s 
got to be Fit Page In Window, because we navigate by zooming in 
with the Zoom tool, then zooming out to the Fit Page In Window 
view, and then zooming in on another part of the spread. The default 
shortcut for the Fit Page In Window view, Command-0/Ctrl-0 
doesn’t work for us. It’s a long reach for the left hand, and 0 (zero) is 
a difficult key to hit without looking at the keyboard. Consider using 
Command-Shift-W/Ctrl-Shift-W—it’s an easy, one-handed reach.
Customizing Menus
In addition to being able to customize keyboard shortcuts, you can 
also change InDesign’s menus. That said, you can’t change them 
much. You can hide menu items, and you can change their color, but 
you can’t add them (except via scripting).
To edit InDesign’s menus, follow these steps (see Figure 1-27).
1. Choose Menus from the Edit menu. InDesign displays the Menu 
Customization dialog box. 
2. Select a menu set from the Set pop-up menu, if necessary.

 1. k 33
3. Select a menu type (Application Menus or Context and Panel 
Menus) from the Category pop-up menu.
4. Select the menu you want to edit. It can sometimes take guess-
work to find the right menu, but keep at it—they’re all there.
5. Once you’ve found the menu item you want, you can hide it  
by clicking the “eye” icon (or show it by clicking the box in the 
Visibility column). To change the menu item’s color, click the 
text in the Color column—InDesign displays a pop-up menu 
you can use to select another color.
6. To save the menu set, click the Save button, or click Save As to 
save a new menu set.
7. Click the OK button to close the dialog box.
To return to InDesign’s menu defaults, choose Reset Menus from 
the Workspace submenu of the Window menu. Or you can display 
the Menu Customization dialog box and select the InDesign Defaults 
menu set from the Set pop-up menu.
To display hidden menu items, hold down Command/Ctrl as you 
display the menu, or choose Show All Menu Items.
Menu sets are saved as XML and are given the file extension 
“.inms”. If you need to find one, search for the name of the menu set. 
Only the differences between the default set and the custom set are 
saved in the file. Ole has (once again) spent way too much time root-
ing through the menu customization files.
Figure 1-27
Customizing Menus
You can show or hide menu 
items by clicking in the   
Visibility column (the   
“eye” icon indicates that   
the menu item is visible).
To change the color of the menu item, click “None” 
in the Color column and then choose a color from 
the pop-up menu that appears.
Menu item with a custom 
color applied to it.

34     6
Figure 1-28
Customizing the  
Control Panel
The Control panel is great, but many selected options, 
such as alignment buttons, end up off the screen.
To move the alignment but-
tons farther to the left (and, 
therefore, make them appear), 
choose Customize from the 
Control panel menu.
While we’re showing a pretty 
specific customization in 
this example, the point is 
that you can reconfigure the 
Control panel to better suit 
your needs and workflow.
Also note that we’re only 
showing the right end of the 
panel; if we reduced it to 
fit our layout, the controls 
would be invisible.
Use the controls in the  
Customize Control Panel 
dialog box to turn off the  
options you don’t use.
Previously hidden buttons now appear.
Customizing the Control Panel
The Control panel can take the place of a number of other panels, 
and thereby save you a great deal of space on your screen. But it’s 
even better than that—you can change the controls that appear in 
the Control panel. If, for example, you’re like Ole and do not care 
about object effects and text wrap, you can do away with them and 
save the space for more worthy interface items. Doth the text skew-
ing control offend thee? Pluck it out!
You can turn controls in the Control panel off or on to make it 
more to your liking. To do this, choose Customize from the Control 
panel menu. InDesign displays the Customize Control Panel dialog 
box (see Figure 1-28). You can’t change the order in which the con-
trols appear, and you can’t add different controls.
Saving and Loading Workspaces
Once you’ve gotten your panels and menus set up just the way you 
want them, you can save them—their locations and states—to a work-
space. You can load that workspace to return to that arrangement.
You can set up special configurations for specific tasks—you 
might want to have one set of panels for working with paths; an-
other for entering text and typesetting, and still another for creating 
bookmarks and hyperlinks. With InDesign’s workspace manage-
ment, you can dramatically reduce the number of panels you have 
on your screen.

 1. k 35
To save a workspace, choose Save Workspace from the Work-
space submenu of the Window menu. InDesign displays the Save 
Workspace dialog box. Enter a name for the workspace and press 
the OK button to save the workspace. InDesign adds the workspace 
name to the list of available workspaces (see Figure 1-29).
To apply a workspace, choose the workspace name from the 
Workspace submenu of the Window menu. After a (relatively) brief 
pause, InDesign resets your panels to the configuration saved in the 
workspace. You can assign keyboard shortcuts to the workspaces in 
the Window Menu area of the Edit Keyboard Shortcuts dialog box 
(see “Keyboard Shortcuts,” earlier in this chapter).
Once you have your workspaces set up the way you like them, it’s 
a good idea to back up the file containing them. It’s called “Active-
Workspace.xml” and you can find it by searching your hard drive.
To save the current arrangement of  
InDesign’s panels, choose Save Work-
space from the Workspace menu.
You can choose to have the 
workspace set panel locations 
and/or menu customizations.
Enter a name for 
your workspace.
Figure 1-29
Saving a Workspace
Setting Preferences
Why do applications have Preferences dialog boxes? It’s simple: 
there’s often more than one “right” way to do something. Rather 
than dictatorially decide to limit users, InDesign gives you a choice. 
Preferences are one way you can control the appearance and behav-
ior of the program. They’re a place where you can customize the pro-
gram to better fit your work habits and personality.
To display InDesign’s Preferences dialog box, choose General 
from the Preferences submenu (under the InDesign menu on the 
Macintosh, or the File menu in Windows), or press Command-K/
Ctrl-K. The Preferences dialog box contains a number of panels—
each listed along the left side for you to click on. 
Have you ever been frustrated when a preference option doesn’t 
stick? You change a preference, and end up with the old setting when 

36     6
you open a new document. That’s because some preference settings 
affect only the current document, while other settings affect all doc-
uments. If you want a preference option to affect all new documents 
you create, close all documents before changing the settings.
The General pane of the Preferences dialog box (see Figure 1-30) is 
the “kitchen sink” of the Preferences dialog box universe—it con-
tains the things that didn’t fit anywhere else. All options in the Gen-
eral pane are application-specific.
Page Numbering. The options on the View pop-up menu change the 
way InDesign displays page numbers in the Pages panel. When you 
choose Absolute Numbering, InDesign numbers the pages sequen-
tially, starting with page one, and pays no attention to the page 
numbering options of any of the sections in the publication. Choose 
Section Numbering to have InDesign display page numbers based 
on the page numbering options you’ve set up in the Section Options 
dialog box for each section. For more on setting up sections and 
numbering pages, see Chapter 2, “Page Layout.”
Always Subset Fonts with Glyph Counts Greater than 2000. Whew. 
This one takes a bit of rapid-fire explaining. When InDesign sends a 
font to a printer (or into an exported file), you can choose to include 
all of the characters in the font, or to include only those characters of 
the font that are used in the document. The latter option is called a 
font “subset” (see Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting”).
While we generally think that you should include all of the char-
acters in a font (you never know when you might need them, and 
disk space/network bandwidth are both cheap these days), we have to 
say that some fonts are huge. Some OpenType fonts actually include 
tens of thousands of character glyphs. Turning this option on lets us 
download complete character sets of standard Western fonts without 
forcing us to download all of Kozuka Gothic Pro just because Ole felt 
the need to spell out “furi kuri” in Katakana.
Prevent Selection of Locked Objects. In previous versions of InDe-
sign, you could select locked objects. People complained, so Adobe 
decided to make a change. In InDesign CS5 and later, you can’t select 
locked objects—unless you uncheck this option.
When Scaling Options. When you scale an object, how should it be 
reflected in the interface? For example, if you double the scale of a 
text frame with 12-pt text, what should appear in the Control panel? 
General Preferences

 1. k 37
Figure 1-30
General Preferences
If Apply to Content option is on, “24 pt” appears for Font Size and 
the Scale values are reset to 100%. If Adjust Scaling Percentage is on, 
“12 pt(24)” is displayed for Font Size, and the Scale values are 200%. 
There is one benefit to turning Adjust Scaling Percentage on: You can 
always reset the text frame to 100 percent size in the Control panel 
or Transform panel, returning the text to its original, pre-scaled size. 
When you turn on Apply to Content, it can be hard to get back to the 
original size. See Chapter 9, “Transforming.”
Reset All Warning Dialogs. Many of InDesign’s warning dialog 
boxes include a “never ask me this question again” option. If you 
have checked this option, and, for whatever reason, want to see the 
dialog box again, click the Reset All Warning Dialogs button.
The Interface pane of the Preferences dialog box (see Figure 1-31) 
gives you a way to customize a variety of user interface behaviors. 
These settings affect the application, not individual documents.
Tool Tips. To view the names of control in InDesign’s panels or their 
associated keyboard shortcuts, choose Fast or Normal from the Tool 
Tips pop-up menu. When you do, InDesign displays a small window 
containing a tool’s name when your cursor passes over the tool. Tool 
tips do not work for every tool or control in every panel. Once you’re 
familiar with InDesign, turn this option off—showing tool tips does 
slow down the application.
Show Thumbnails on Place. When you place a file, you can have 
the cursor display a tiny preview of the incoming content. To do 
this, turn the Show Thumbnails on Place option on. To show an icon 
instead (which is what we strongly prefer), turn this option off.
Interface Preferences
www.allitebooks.com

38     6
Show Transformation Values. When creating or moving an object, 
notice those numbers in the grey box that show the X, Y coordinates? 
Those are transformation values (or “smart cursors”), and you can 
turn them off.
Enable Multi-Touch Gestures. If you’re running InDesign on a Mac 
or Windows Vista or later, you can take advantage of multi-touch 
gestures when using your mouse. For example, the rotate gesture 
rotates the spread, and the swipe gesture scrolls up and down.
Highlight Object Under Selection Tool. In Preview mode, moving 
the cursor over objects highlights the objects. If you don’t like the 
resulting flashing effect, turn off this option.
Floating Tools Panel. You can choose to display the Tools panel in 
one of three arrangements: Single Row, Double Column, or Single 
Column. Choose the option you like best.
Auto-Collapse Icon Panels. When you add panels to the dock, you 
can display the panels as icons. When you turn this option on, InDe-
sign will automatically close docked panels after you use them.
Auto-Show Hidden Panels. When you press Tab or Shift-Tab to hide 
panels, mousing over the side of the document window shows the 
panels temporarily.
Open Documents as Tabs. Turn this option off to have documents 
appear as floating windows; turn it on to have documents appear in 
tabbed panels.
Figure 1-31
Interface Preferences

 1. k 39
Enable Floating Document Window Docking. When this option 
is on, you can dock floating document windows (just as you would 
dock panels). 
Hand Tool. Determine the balance between performance and visual 
quality when you scroll through a document, which causes text and 
images to be greeked.
Live Screen Drawing. Do you want the image to redraw when you 
move an image? If Immediate is in, the image redraws while you 
drag. If Never is on, dragging an image moves only the frame, and 
then image is moved when you release the mouse button. If Delayed 
is on, the image redraws only if you pause before dragging.
Greek Vector Graphics on Drag. Select this option if you’re experi-
encing performance issues while dragging large vector graphics.
Tip: If you’re looking to turn off things like the Content Grabber and 
Live Corners, check the Extras submenu on the View menu.
The Type pane of the Preferences dialog box (see Figure 1-32) affects 
the way that InDesign formats and displays text in your publications. 
Use Typographer’s Quotes. Using “typewriter” quotation marks and 
apostrophes (" and ') instead of their typographic equivalents (“, ”, ‘, 
and ’) is one of the hallmarks of amateur desktop publishing design. 
Fortunately, you don’t need to remember obscure shortcuts because 
when you turn on the Use Typographer’s Quotes option, InDesign 
Type Preferences
Figure 1-32
Type Preferences 

40     6
enters the correct quotation marks for you as you type normal 
straight quotes. This option is document specific.
Type Tool Converts Frames to Text Frames. When this option is 
turned on, clicking a frame with the Type tool will convert it to a text 
frame, even if the content type is set to Unassigned or Graphic. To 
prevent the Type tool from converting frames to text frames, turn 
this option off. This option is application specific.
Automatically Use Correct Optical Size. This setting only comes 
into play when you’re working with multiple master fonts—and 
then only with those fonts that have a defined optical size axis (not 
all multiple master fonts do). If your font fits this description, feel 
pleased that you’re among a tiny handful of people on the planet, and 
that turning on Automatically Use Correct Optical Size forces the 
font to use an optical size axis that matches the point size of the text, 
regardless of the optical size axis setting of the instance of the font. 
When this option is off, InDesign uses the optical size axis setting of 
the font instance. This option is document specific.
Triple Click to Select a Line. When the Triple Click to Select a Line 
checkbox is on, triple-clicking the Type tool in text selects the line 
you’re clicking on and quadruple-clicking selects the paragraph; 
when this option is off, triple-click to select a paragraph and qua-
druple-click to select the entire story. Since we can’t agree on the 
“correct” setting for this option, we leave it up to you. This option is 
application specific.
Apply Leading to Entire Paragraphs. While you might, in rare 
instances, want to vary the leading of lines in a paragraph, you’d 
probably prefer to use a single leading value for all lines in a para-
graph (if you’re coming to InDesign from QuarkXPress, Frame-
Maker, or Microsoft Word this is the behavior you expect).
By default, InDesign applies leading at the character level, which 
means that you might accidentally create uneven leading between 
lines of a paragraph. To force InDesign to use a single leading value 
for an entire paragraph, turn on the Apply Leading to Entire Para-
graphs option. When you do this, the largest leading value in the 
paragraph sets the leading of the paragraph. Note that this doesn’t 
affect any leading that you set while this preference was turned 
off—only leading you apply from here on out. That means you can 
get the best of both worlds: Leave it turned on most of the time and 
turn it off on the rare occasions that you want to adjust leading on 

 1. k 41
a line-by-line basis. This option is document specific (see Chapter 4, 
“Type”).
Adjust Spacing Automatically when Cutting and Pasting Words. 
What should InDesign do when you paste a word into text? Should 
it add space before and after the word, if necessary? If you think it 
should, turn this option on. Note that InDesign will not insert space 
before sentence-ending punctuation, regardless of the state of this 
option. This option also controls whether InDesign removes extra 
spaces when you press Delete. This option is application specific.
Font Preview Size. This option turns the font preview in the various 
font menus (in the Control panel, Type menu, and Character menu) 
on or off, and controls the size of the text used in the menus. Turning 
this option off dramatically speeds up the font menu display. Select 
typefaces based on printed examples, not from a screen. 
You can also specify the number of recently used fonts to dis-
play, and you can indicate whether the list of recent fonts is sorted 
by alphabet or by recent use. These options are application specific.
Drag and Drop Text Editing. Turn on the Enable in Layout View 
option to enable drag and drop text editing in layout view; turn on 
Enable in Story Editor to make it work in the story editor. These 
options are application specific. For more on drag and drop text edit-
ing, see Chapter 3, “Text.”
Smart Text Reflow. The options in this section define the way that 
InDesign adds pages when you create overset text by editing a story. 
The Add Pages To pop-up menu defines where you want to add pages: 
at the end of the story, the end of the section, or at the end of the 
document. 
Turn on Limit to Primary Text Frames to force InDesign to add 
the text to text frames defined on the master pages. Leave this option 
off to add new text frames based on the area within the margins of 
the new pages.
The Preserve Facing-Page Spreads option does just what it says it 
does—if your editing would cause a single page to be added in the 
middle of the document, InDesign will add a spread to maintain the 
pagination of the pages following the added page.
Turn this option on to allow InDesign to delete pages when your 
editing empties the text frames on the page. This option only comes 
into play when the emptied text frame(s) are the only objects on the 
page. These options are document specific.

42     6
The options in the Advanced Type pane provide additional control 
over text formatting. For more on superscripts, subscripts, and small 
caps, see Chapter 4, “Type.”
Character Settings. When you apply Superscript or Subscript to 
text, InDesign scales the selected characters and shifts their baseline 
position. (This doesn’t apply to OpenType formatting.) How can you 
control the amount of scaling and baseline shift? That’s where the 
options in this section come in. The Size fields are percentages of the 
size of the selected characters (you can enter from 1 to 200 percent); 
the Position fields are percentages of the leading (you can enter from 
–500 to 500 percent). When you apply Small Caps formatting to text, 
InDesign scales the selected characters by the percentage you enter 
in the Small Cap Size field (from one to 200 percent).
Note that these settings affect all superscript, subscript, and small 
caps formatting you’ve applied throughout your current document. 
(This is the way that QuarkXPress handles these formatting attri-
butes, but it’s unlike PageMaker, where superscript, subscript, and 
small caps formatting options are set at the character level.) These 
options are document specific. For more on superscript, subscript, 
and small caps, see Chapter 4, “Type.”
Use Inline Input for Non-Latin Text. When you’re entering char-
acters that are outside the range of the Western character set (like 
Japanese, Chinese, or Korean), you can use one of (at least) two meth-
ods to get the characters into the text frame. You can use the Input 
Method Editor (or IME) that comes with your operating system 
(usually typing characters in a separate floating window), or you can 
use the inline text entry method (where you type right in the text 
frame). We think it’s much easier to type “inline,” along with all the 
other text. This option is application specific.
Composition is the process of making type fit in the columns and 
pages in your publication. The options in the Composition Prefer-
ences pane of the Preferences dialog box relate to various aspects of 
InDesign’s text composition features. Composition preference set-
tings are application specific. To really understand how composition 
works, see Chapter 4, “Type.”
Highlight. The options in the Highlight section help you spot com-
position problems before they become printed mistakes. All three 
options work the same way: when they spot a composition prob-
lem (a place where InDesign has had to break your rules to lay out a 
Advanced Type 
Preferences
Composition   
Preferences

 1. k 43
publication, or where InDesign lacks the font to properly compose 
a piece of text), they “highlight” the text by drawing a colored bar 
behind it.
▶Keep Violations. In the Keep Options dialog box (choose Keep 
Options from the Paragraph panel’s menu), you’ll see a vari-
ety of settings that determine the way a paragraph deals with 
column and page breaks. These settings, collectively, are called 
“keeps.” InDesign will sometimes have to disobey your keeps 
settings. Keeps violations are rare, but you can easily spot them 
when you turn this option on.
▶H&J Violations. When InDesign composes text, it tries to 
follow the guidelines you set in the Justification dialog box, but, 
sometimes, it can’t. In those cases, InDesign applies word spac-
ing that’s looser or tighter than the minimum or maximum you 
specified. This is known as an “H&J violation.” When you turn 
this option, InDesign highlights the problem lines by display-
ing a yellow bar behind the text. The intensity of the tint used to 
draw the bar gives you a rough indication of the severity of the 
“violation”—the more saturated the yellow, the greater the varia-
tion from your settings. See Figure 1-33.
▶Substituted Fonts. When you turn on this option, InDesign 
highlights text that uses fonts that aren’t currently have loaded. 
The highlight color is pink. See Figure 1-34.
Figure 1-34
Highlighting 
Font Substitution
Highlighted font substitu-
tion. The substituted text 
appears in the default font.
Font (Poetica 
Chancery) 
present
Font missing
When you turn on the H&J 
Violations option in the 
Highlight section of the 
Text Preferences dialog box, 
InDesign highlights lines of 
text that break the spac-
ing rules you entered in the 
Justification dialog box.
Figure 1-33
Highlighting 
Composition Problems

44     6
Figure 1-35
Highlighting 
Glyph Substitution
Highlighted glyph substitution
Figure 1-36
Highlighting 
Custom Tracking 
and Kerning
The paragraph style applied 
to this paragraph specifies a 
tracking value.
Manual kerning
Figure 1-37
Justifying Text Next 
to an Object
Justify Text Next to an 
Object off
Justify Text Next to an 
Object on
▶Substituted Glyphs. InDesign has various features that replace 
characters in your text with other characters, such as ligatures, 
swashes, ordinals, and so on (most of these options are on the 
Character panel menu). To see the places where InDesign has 
applied these special characters, turn on the Substituted Glyphs 
option. The highlight color is purple. See Figure 1-35.
▶Custom Tracking/Kerning. To see the places in your text that 
have had custom kerning or tracking applied to them, turn on 
this option. When you do this, InDesign highlights any text 
containing manual kerning (i.e., kerning that was not applied by 
one of the automatic kerning methods), or tracking values other 
than zero with a blue-green tint. See Figure 1-36.
Justify Text Next to an Object. When an object bearing a text wrap 
appears in the middle of a column of text, should InDesign justify 
the text around the wrapped object? If so, turn on Justify Text Next 
to an Object. Note that this option has no effect on text wraps that do 

 1. k 45
not split a line into two or more parts. The authors suggest that you 
never create a design that would cause you to care about this option 
one way or the other. See Figure 1-37.
Skip by Leading. When a text wrap breaks a text column, and the 
text in the text column is aligned to a baseline grid, should the text 
continue to align to the baseline grid, or should it get as close to the 
text wrap boundary as possible? We like to turn Skip by Leading on 
to make sure the text aligns to the baseline grid. For more on this 
topic, see Chapter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics.”
Text Wrap Only Affects Text Beneath. Many QuarkXPress users get 
confused when using text wrap (runaround) in InDesign because 
text can wrap even when the wrapping-object is underneath the 
text frame (in the page’s stacking order or layer order). If you don’t 
like this behavior, you can turn on the Text Wrap Only Affects Text 
Beneath checkbox. There are pros and cons to both methods. For 
more on this topic, see Chapter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics.”
We’ve all got favorite units of measure—Ole is partial to furlongs and 
stone, while David prefers cubits—so we should be able to choose 
the measurement system we use to lay out our pages. That’s what the 
Units & Increments pane is for (see Figure 1-38). Units & Increments 
preferences are document specific.
Ruler Units. The Origin pop-up menu sets the default location of 
the ruler zero point. Choose Spread to have InDesign position the 
zero point at the upper-left corner of the spread. Choose Page, and 
InDesign locates the zero point at the upper-left corner of the page. If 
you have three or more pages in a spread, you might want to choose 
Spine to place the ruler zero point at the binding spine.
Use the Horizontal and Vertical pop-up menus to select the mea-
surement units (inches, inches decimal, picas, points, millimeters, 
agates, ciceros, and pixels) you want to use for the rulers. In addi-
tion to the measurement systems, you can use custom increments 
for either or both rulers. When you choose Custom, you can enter a 
value in the field (see “Rulers,” earlier in this chapter).
As you set up a publication’s measurement units, there are two 
things you should keep in mind:
▶You can use the Context menu to change ruler units—Control-
click (Macintosh) or right-click on the ruler in the document 
window, and InDesign displays a Context menu containing the 
Units & Increments 
Preferences

46     6
same options as you see in the Units & Increments Preferences 
dialog box.
▶You can always override units of measurement in any field in any 
panel or dialog box in InDesign. For more on entering measure-
ment unit overrides, see “Overriding Units of Measurement,” 
earlier in this chapter.
Stroke. Change the Stroke values to Points, Millimeters, or Pixels to 
affect the Weight value in the Stroke panel and any other place where 
you can change the stroke width. This options is especially useful for 
web documents.
The Text Size unit of measurement is no longer available. Text is 
always displayed in points.
Point/Pica Size. This option changes the definition of the size of a 
point (and, therefore, the size of a pica). The modern (i.e., post-desk-
top publishing) standard for the size of a point is 72 points per inch.
If using your old Compugraphic E-scale is more important to you 
than anything else in life, feel free to set this option to something 
other than PostScript (72 pts/inch). Just don’t tell us about it, or insist 
that we should do the same.
Keyboard Increments. What happens when you push an arrow key? 
That depends on the settings you’ve entered in the following fields.
▶Cursor Key. When you have an object selected using the Selec-
tion or Direct Select tool, you can move it by pressing the arrow 
keys. How far do you want it to move with each key press? Enter 
that value in this field.
▶Size/Leading. When you have text selected, you can increase or 
decrease the size and/or leading of the text by pressing keyboard 
Figure 1-38
Units & Increments 
Preferences

 1. k 47
shortcuts (by default, you press Command-Shift->/Ctrl-Shift-> 
to increase the size of the text; Command-Shift-</Ctrl-Shift-< to 
decrease the size; Option-Up arrow/Alt-Up arrow to increase the 
leading; or Option-Down arrow to decrease the leading). How 
much larger or smaller should the point size or leading get with 
each key press? Enter the amount you want in this field.
▶Baseline Shift. When you have selected text using the Type tool, 
you can increase baseline shift by pressing (by default) Option-
Shift-Up Arrow/Alt-Shift-Up Arrow, or decrease baseline shift 
by pressing Option-Shift-Down Arrow/Alt-Shift-Down Arrow. 
How much baseline shift should each key press apply? Enter the 
amount you want in this field.
▶Kerning. When the text cursor is between two characters, you 
can apply kerning by pressing Option-Left Arrow/Alt-Left 
Arrow or Option-Right Arrow/Alt-Right Arrow. When a range 
of text is selected with the text tool, pressing this shortcut 
applies tracking. Enter the kerning amount you want to apply 
(in thousandths of an em) in this field.
InDesign can display two different types of grid: baseline and docu-
ment. You control various aspects of their appearance using the 
options in this pane (see Figure 1-39). Both grids are very similar to 
the guides (ruler guides, margin guides, and column guides), and 
have a similar effect on items on your pages. Grid preferences are 
document specific.
Baseline Grid. The baseline grid is an array of horizontal guides that 
mark off the page in units equal to a specified leading amount (note 
that the baseline grid isn’t really a “grid,” as it has no vertical lines). 
▶Color. Choose a color for the baseline grid using the Color 
pop-up menu. 
▶Start. Enter a value in the Start field to set the distance from the 
top of the page at which you want the baseline grid to begin. 
▶Increment Every. Enter a distance—in general, the leading value 
of your publication’s body text—in the Increment Every field. 
▶View Threshold. Set the magnification at which the grid 
becomes visible in the View Threshold field.
Document Grid. The document grid is a network of horizontal and 
vertical guidelines—something like graph paper.
Grids Preferences
www.allitebooks.com

48     6
▶Color. Choose a color for the grid using the Color pop-up menu. 
▶Gridline Every. Enter the distance you want between grid lines 
in this field. 
▶Subdivisions. Just as the document grid divides the page, sub-
divisions divide the grid into smaller sections. The number you 
enter in this field sets the number of subdivisions between each 
grid line. If you don’t want to subdivide the document grid, enter 
1 in this field. InDesign displays the grid subdivision lines using 
a tint of the color you specified for the document grid.
Grids in Back. Turn on the Grids in Back option to make both grids 
appear at the bottom of the stacking order rather than on top of your 
page objects.
Use the Guides and Pasteboard pane of the Preferences dialog box 
(see Figure 1-40) to set the color for displaying margin, column, bleed, 
and slug guides, as well as the preview color of the pasteboard. Why 
isn’t there an option for setting the color of ruler guides? Because 
you don’t have to use the same color for all of your ruler guides—you 
specify the color using the Ruler Guides dialog box. The color prefer-
ences are application specific.
(Tip: Changing your pasteboard color to black before showing a 
client boosts the apparent contrast and looks cool. You could also 
change the preview color for each stage of a job—first draft could 
be pink, second draft green, and so on. But remember that any color 
other than neutral gray may make your page or images look like they 
have a slight color cast on screen; that’s just the way the human eye 
works.)
Guides and Pasteboard 
Preferences
Figure 1-39
Grids Preferences 

 1. k 49
Snap to Zone. Use the Snap to Zone option to set the distance, in 
screen pixels, at which guides begin to exert their mysterious pull on 
objects you’re drawing or dragging. This option is document specific.
Guides in Back. Turn on Guides in Back to position the guides at 
the bottom of the stacking order of the layer they’re on. We’ve never 
figured out a good reason to turn this feature off. This option is docu-
ment specific.
Smart Guide Options. InDesign’s Smart Guides feature displays 
information about objects as you move, resize, or create them, and 
gives you a way to snap to other object locations on the page (see 
Figure 1-41). This is a terrific feature, but bear in mind that it can 
interfere with snapping to the grid or guides. These options are appli-
cation specific.
Pasteboard Options. The Vertical Margins field sets the distance 
from the top or bottom of the page to the outside edge of the paste-
board. To make your pasteboard taller, increase this value; to make 
it shorter, decrease the value. This option was called Minimum Ver-
tical Offset in InDesign CS4 and is the equivalent of the old Paste-
board XTension for QuarkXPress (but without the associated bugs 
and troubles). The Horizontal Margins field sets the width of the 
pasteboard on both sides of the spread. These options are document 
specific.
The Dictionary pane of the Preferences dialog box controls the 
spelling and hyphenation dictionaries used in the document (see 
Figure 1-42). This looks like it would set the default dictionary for 
Dictionary Preferences
Figure 1-40
Guides & Pasteboard 
Preferences 

50     6
Figure 1-41
Smart Guides
a document, but it does not. It’s very rare that you would need to 
change these, unless you were using a third-party plug-in offering 
different hyphenation and spelling dictionaries. Choose a diction-
ary from the Language pop-up menu to choose the vendor of your 
choice from the Hyphenation and Spelling pop-up menus. The 
default changed from Proximity to Hunspell. Hunspell offers open 
source support for custom dictionaries, which is especially useful for 
less common languages such as Hungarian.
You can add additional dictionaries for each language by clicking 
the New User Dictionary or Add User Dictionary buttons. The Lan-
guage setting is application specific; all other Dictionary preferences 
are document specific
Double Quotes. Enter the pair of characters you want to use for 
double quotes, or select them from the pop-up menu.
Single Quotes. Enter the pair of characters you want to use for single 
quotes, or select them from the pop-up menu.
Compose Using. When you add a word to your user dictionary 
(including changes you make to hyphenation points), InDesign 
adds the word to the user dictionary’s exceptions list. Choose User 
Dictionary to use the exceptions list in the current user dictionary; 
choose Document to use the hyphenation exceptions stored in the 
document; or choose User Dictionary and Document to use both 
exception lists.
When you turn on Smart 
Guides, InDesign displays 
guides as you move 
objects. In this example, 
it’s showing us that the 
center of the square 
we’re moving aligns with 
the center of the larger 
square.
When your turn on 
the Smart Dimensions 
option, InDesign displays 
guides when nearby 
objects are the same size. 
In this example, InDesign 
shows us that the height 
of the two rectangles is the 
same.

 1. k 51
User Dictionary Options. Choose Merge User Dictionary into Doc-
ument to copy the hyphenation and spelling exceptions list from the 
user dictionary into each document you open. Clearly, this isn’t an 
option you want to turn on if you frequently open documents cre-
ated by other people. 
Choose Recompose All Stories When Modified to recompose all 
stories in a document when the user dictionary changes (or when 
you change the setting of the Compose Using pop-up menu). Recom-
posing all stories in a document can be a time-consuming process; 
most of the time, we think you should leave this option turned off.
The options in the Spelling pane of the Preferences dialog box give 
you control over InDesign’s spelling checker and dynamic spelling 
feature (see Figure 1-43). Spelling preferences are application specific.
Spelling. There’s not much to the options in the Spelling section. 
Turn on Misspelled Words to check for spelling errors. Turn on 
Repeated Words to check for “the the” and other repetitions. Turn 
on Uncapitalized Words to check for common capitalization errors, 
and turn on Uncapitalized Sentences to find sentences that do not 
start with a capital letter.
Dynamic Spelling. Turn on the Enable Dynamic Spelling option to 
have InDesign mark possible spelling errors in text (this feature is 
very similar to the dynamic spelling features in Word or other word 
processors). You can specify the colors InDesign uses to mark mis-
spelled words, repeated words, uncapitalized words, and uncapital-
ized sentences using the pop-up menu associated with each type of 
spelling error. For more on dynamic spelling, see Chapter 3, “Text.”
Spelling Preferences
Figure 1-42
Dictionary Preferences 

52     6
InDesign’s Autocorrect feature can fix misspelled words as you type. 
To turn the Autocorrect feature on or off, and to add or remove words 
from the list of misspellings and their corresponding corrections 
(see Figure 1-44). Autocorrect preferences are application specific. 
For more on using the Autocorrect feature, see Chapter 3, “Text.”
The option in the Notes pane of the Preferences dialog box control 
the appearance of notes in your documents. Notes preferences are 
application specific. For more on using the Autocorrect feature, see 
Chapter 3, “Text.”
Note Color. Choose the color you want to use for notes. You can 
select either a fixed color or the User Color (which you can define by 
choosing User from the File menu).
Show Note Tool Tips. When this option is on, you can position the 
cursor over a note and see a tool tip that includes user information 
and a short excerpt of the note. With this option turned off, you’ll 
have to open the note in the Notes panel to see this text.
Include Note Content When Checking Spelling. Do you want to 
check the spelling of the text in notes? If so, turn this option on.
Include Note Content in Find/Change Operations. Do you want to 
include notes when you find and change text? If you do, turn this 
option on.
Inline Background Color. Sets the background color for the notes 
displayed in the Story Editor.
Autocorrect   
Preferences
Notes Preferences
Figure 1-43
Spelling Preferences 

 1. k 53
Figure 1-44
Autocorrect Preferences
The options in the Track Changes pane of the Preferences dialog box 
control the appearance of edited text in the Story Editor (see Figure 
1-45). The idea of tracking changes is to see which changes were made 
by another person so that you can accept or reject them. Or, if you’re 
the other person who jumps into someone else’s file, you can turn 
on Change Tracking to let the author know what you’ve done to the 
precious publication. Keep in mind that the change tracking shows 
up only in the Story Editor, not in the layout. Track Changes prefer-
ences are application specific. We’ll have more to say about tracking 
changes in Chapter 3, “Text.”
Show. You can change the appearance of Story Editor text that’s been 
added, deleted, or moved when Track Changes is turned on. Turn 
off Added Text, Deleted Text, or Moved Text if you don’t want any 
of these types of changes to be tracked. For example, if you care only 
about new text, turn off Deleted Text and Moved Text.
For each option, set the display appearance. By default, all changes 
have the same Text settings as the Story Editor text—that’s what the 
parentheses in (Text Color) mean. All changes are also highlighted 
with your user color. (Choose User from the File menu to change 
the user color.) If Prevent Duplicate User Colors is selected, you may 
be assigned a color that differs from the one you select in the User 
dialog box.
By default, Marking is set to None. Unless you have an excellent 
reason for doing so, don’t change the Marking setting for any of the 
options.
Track Changes 
Preferences

54     6
Change Bars. Change bars appear in the margin of the story editor 
next to any text that is added, deleted, or moved. If the Story Editor 
looks too busy visually, turn off Change Bars. You can change the 
color of change bars, and decide whether you want them on the left 
or right side.
Include Deleted Text When Spellchecking. Depending on your 
workflow, it can be annoying to include deleted text when you’re 
checking spelling, or it can be annoying not to include deleted text. 
You decide.
The options in the Story Editor Display pane of the Preferences 
dialog box control the appearance of Story windows in the document 
(see Figure 1-46). The idea of the Story Editor is to make text edit-
ing easier on your eyes, but it’s up to you to decide what that means. 
They’re your eyes, after all. Story Editor preferences are application 
specific. We have more to say about the Story Editor and story win-
dows, as you’ll see in Chapter 3, “Text.”
Text Display Options. The options in the Text Display Options sec-
tion set the font, font size, spacing, and background and foreground 
colors displayed in story windows. The Theme pop-up menu con-
tains several preset color combinations. The Enable Anti-Aliasing 
option smooths the edges of text in story windows.
Cursor Options. The options in the Cursor Options section con-
trol the appearance of the cursor as it moves through text in a story 
Story Editor Display 
Preferences
Figure 1-45
Track Changes 
Preferences

 1. k 55
Figure 1-46
Story Editor Display 
Preferences Dialog Box
window. Turn the Blink option on to make the cursor blink, or turn 
it off to prevent the cursor from blinking. We had actually finally 
expunged the memory of the 1980s Block cursor from our minds 
when Story Editor brought it all back for us.
The options in the Display Performance pane of the Preferences 
dialog box control the way that InDesign draws text and graphics 
on your screen. The choices you make in this pane can dramatically 
speed up—or slow down—drawing and redrawing the screen (see 
Figure 1-47). Display Performance preferences are application spe-
cific, and have no effect on printing to PostScript/PDF printers.
Default View Settings. Choose an option on the Default View pop-up 
menu to set the default view setting for the document. Perhaps we’re 
just middle-of-the-road guys, but we like to choose Typical.
Preserve Object-Level View Settings. The Preserve Object-Level 
View Settings option tells InDesign to save any display settings you’ve 
applied to images when you save the document and then reopen it. 
When it’s turned off, InDesign forgets all the display settings. While 
it seems like a good idea to turn this on, it can increase the time it 
takes to open your documents, so we usually leave it off.
Adjust View Settings. You can apply one of three display settings—
which are named “Optimized,” “Typical,” and “High Quality”—to 
any InDesign window or object, and you can define the parameters 
of each setting. Note that the names of these settings do not neces-
sarily apply to the quality of the display; “High Quality” can be rede-
fined to produce a lower quality display than “Optimized.” 
To edit the parameters of a view setting, choose the setting and 
then adjust the values of the options.
Display Performance 
Preferences

56     6
Figure 1-47
Display Performance 
Preferences
This text changes to Gray 
Out or High Resolution, 
depending on the slider 
setting.
▶Raster Images. This slider defines the method InDesign uses 
to draw imported bitmap images (TIFF, JPEG, GIF). Note that 
images saved in the EPS (including DCS) and PDF formats are 
considered “vector graphics.” See Figure 1-48. 
Choose Gray Out to draw every image as a gray box. Choose 
Proxy to have InDesign construct a low-resolution screen ver-
sion of the imported graphic and use that image for display at all 
magnification levels. When you choose High Resolution from 
the Raster Images slider, InDesign gets its information about 
how to render an image from the original file that’s linked to 
your publication, which means that InDesign renders the best 
possible display of the image for the current magnification.
This setting has no effect on the way the images print.
▶Vector Graphics. Choose an option from the slider to define the 
method InDesign uses to display vector graphics (EPS and PDF). 
See Figure 1-49.
Choose Gray Out to draw every graphic as a gray box. 
Choose Proxy to have InDesign construct a low-resolution 
screen version of the imported graphic and use that image 
for display at all magnification levels. When you choose High 
Resolution from the Vector Graphics slider, InDesign gets its 
information about how to render the graphic by reinterpreting 
PostScript/PDF instructions in the graphic file. InDesign then 
renders the best possible view of the graphic for the current 
screen resolution. Note, however that this process can be very 
time consuming.

 1. k 57
Figure 1-48
Raster Images 
View Settings
Proxy
High resolution
Gray out
Figure 1-49
Vector Graphics 
View Settings
High Resolution
Proxy
▶Transparency. The Transparency slider controls the appearance 
of transparency on your screen—it has nothing to do with the 
way that transparency prints. Choose Off to omit previews for 
transparency altogether, or choose Low Quality, Medium Qual-
ity, or High Quality to control the accuracy of the preview. See 
Figure 1-50.
▶Enable Anti-Aliasing. Anti-aliasing smooths the edges of InDe-
sign objects by adding pixels around the edges of the object. See 
Figure 1-51.
▶Greek Type Below. It takes time to draw text characters, and, 
frankly, it’s not always worth doing. You might have noticed that 
when you zoom out to the 12.5% page view, InDesign doggedly 
Figure 1-50
Transparency 
View Settings
Off
Low Quality
Medium Quality
High Quality
www.allitebooks.com

58     6
Figure 1-51
Anti-Aliasing
Anti-aliasing off (enlarged)
Anti-aliasing on (enlarged)
attempts to give the best preview it can of the (now very tiny) 
text on your pages. To tell InDesign not to bother, and to speed 
up your screen redraw, use greeking.
When you enter a value in the Greek Type Below field that’s 
greater than zero, InDesign displays text characters that are equal to 
or smaller than that value as a gray bar (see Figure 1-52).
The value shown in the field is in points, but it doesn’t refer to 
the point size of the text. Instead, it refers to the size of the text 
as it appears on your screen at the current magnification. The 
advantage of using this option is that the gray bar draws much 
faster than the actual characters. Greeking has no effect on text 
composition.
▶Use Defaults. Click this button to return the options for the 
selected display setting to their default value.
What is the color “black” in your documents? Is it always 100 per-
cent black ink (or “100K black”)? Or is it sometimes a “rich black,” a 
color made up of large percentages of other inks? The options in the 
Appearance of Black pane of the Preferences dialog box control the 
on-screen, exported, and printed appearance of both 100K black and 
rich black colors. The best way to understand what the settings in the 
Appearance of Black panel of the Preferences dialog box (see Figure 
1-53) is to look at the example graphics in the dialog box. These pref-
erences are application specific.
Appearance of Black 
Preferences
Figure 1-52
Greeking
Greeking off
Greeking on

 1. k 59
Figure 1-53
Appearance of  
Black Preferences
On Screen. When you choose Display All Blacks Accurately, InDe-
sign will display 100K black as a dark gray and rich black(s) as RGB 
black (the darkest color your monitor can represent). When you 
choose Display All Blacks As Rich Black, both 100K black and rich 
black(s) will appear as RGB black. 
Printing/Exporting. When you choose Output All Blacks Accurately 
and print to a non-Postscript printer or export to an RGB file format, 
InDesign will print (or save) 100K black as gray and rich black(s) as 
RGB black. Choose Output All Blacks As Rich Black, and InDesign 
will print (or save) both 100K black and rich black(s) as RGB black.
Overprint [Black] Swatch at 100%. If you always want objects col-
ored with the [Black] swatch to overprint, turn this option on. This 
setting overrides any changes you might make in the Print dialog 
box. Note that this setting only affects that swatch; it has no effect 
on any other black swatch (even solid black!), which will print solid 
black and still knock out whatever is behind it even if this option is 
on (see Chapter 10, “Color”).
The File Handling pane contains options for importing files and 
setting the location of InDesign’s temporary files. All but one File 
Handling preferences are application specific; the option for creating 
links applies only to the document.
Document Recovery Data. As you work with InDesign, the program 
saves information about your preference settings and keeps a record 
of changes you make to your document. While this makes for a lot of 
disk-writing activity, it also gives you InDesign’s multiple undo and 
document recovery features.
File Handling   
Preferences

60     6
To change the folder InDesign uses to store its temporary files, 
click the Choose button. InDesign displays a dialog box. Locate and 
select the folder you want to use and click the OK button.
Why would you want to change the location? InDesign’s tempo-
rary files—in particular the file recovery information, can get quite 
large. You might want to move them to a larger drive to free disk space 
on your system drive, or to a faster drive to improve performance.
Number of Recent Items to Display. Enter the number of recent files 
you want to display on the Open Recent submenu of the File menu.
Always Save Preview Images with Documents. Turn this option on 
to save a preview image of the document with the document file. You 
can also choose how many pages have preview thumbnails. The pre-
view slightly increases the file size. We leave this turned off.
Snippet Import Options. When you import an InDesign snippet 
(see Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting”), you can choose to have 
the snippet appear at its original location (that is, the position it 
occupied in its document of origin), or at the current cursor location. 
To do the former, turn on Position at Original Location; to do the 
latter, turn on Position at Cursor Location.
Check Links Before Opening Document. Turn this option on to 
have InDesign check the link status of the imported files in the docu-
ment as you open the document; turn it off to manage links yourself 
using the Links panel (see Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting”).
Find Missing Links Before Opening Document. If you have turned 
on the Check Links Before Opening Document option, you can 
also choose to have InDesign look for missing links as it opens the 
document.
Create Links When Placing Text and Spreadsheet Files. When you 
imported text or Excel files into InDesign 1.x and 2, InDesign always 
maintained a link to the original file on disk (unless you manually 
unlinked it in the Links panel). This caused all sorts of confusion, so 
Adobe made it a preference. Now, by default, imported non-picture 
files are not linked. If you want them to be linked, then turn on the 
Create Links When Placing Text and Spreadsheet Files option. We 
discuss this in more depth in Chapter 3, “Text.”

 1. k 61
Preserves Image Dimensions When Relinking. When you use the 
Links panel to update or relink a the linked graphic, should the new 
or updated graphic be scaled to match the dimensions of the existing 
graphic, or should it take on the same scaling as the existing graphic? 
To do the former, which can result in the replacement graphic being 
distorted, turn this option on.
When you copy data out of an application and switch out of that 
application, the program writes data to the system Clipboard so that 
it can be pasted into other applications. Applications often post mul-
tiple data formats to the Clipboard in the hope that at least one of 
them will be readable by the application you want to paste the data 
into. In InDesign, you use the Clipboard Handling pane of the Pref-
erences dialog box to control the way that InDesign works with the 
Clipboard. Clipboard preferences are application specific.
Prefer PDF When Pasting. Some applications (notably Illustrator) 
can put PDF format data on the system Clipboard. InDesign can 
paste this data as an imported PDF graphic. Whether this is a good 
thing is debatable—personally, if we want an Illustrator PDF file in 
InDesign, we’d much rather save it to disk and import it using Place 
(see Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting”). However, sometimes 
we want to paste Illustrator paths into InDesign as editable objects 
(rather than as a non-editable graphic). If you want to paste paths 
from Illustrator, turn off the Prefer PDF When Pasting option.
Copy PDF to Clipboard/Preserve PDF Data At Quit. InDesign can 
put PDF data on the Clipboard, too. This lets you copy something 
out of InDesign and paste it elsewhere, such as Illustrator (which 
can convert the PDF into editable objects). If you want InDesign to 
put PDF data on the Clipboard, turn on the Copy PDF to Clipboard 
option. Turn on Preserve PDF Data at Quit to prevent InDesign from 
clearing the Clipboard when you quit.
When Pasting Text and Tables from Other Applications. When you 
switch from one application to another, copied text typically appears 
on the Clipboard as both RTF and plain text. RTF carries format-
ting with it; plain text doesn’t. If you want to retain the RTF for-
matting when you paste text into InDesign from Microsoft Word or 
some other program, turn on the All Information (Index Markers, 
Swatches, Styles, etc.) option. To have pasted text take on the attri-
butes of the text you’re pasting it into, turn on the Text Only option.
Clipboard Preferences

62     6
Setting Defaults
“Defaults” are the settings you begin with when you start InDesign. 
InDesign’s defaults control page size, fill stroke color, available styles, 
type settings, and other details. InDesign has two kinds of defaults—
application defaults and document defaults. Application defaults 
determine the appearance and behavior of all new publications; 
document defaults control the specifications of objects you create in 
a particular publication. 
Neither document defaults nor application defaults change any 
existing objects or publications—you can change the defaults at any 
time without harming publications you’ve already laid out.
When you create a new InDesign publication, do you immedi-
ately add a set of colors to the Colors panel, display the rulers, and 
add styles to the Style panel? Wouldn’t it be great if you could tell 
InDesign to create new documents using those settings?
You can. To set InDesign’s application defaults, close all publi-
cations (without closing InDesign), then, with no publication open 
(what we like to call the “no pub state,” or, as our good friend Steve 
Broback would say, “Utah”), add or remove styles and colors, set 
type options, and otherwise make the changes you’ve been making 
in each new publication. The next time you create a new InDesign 
publication, it’ll appear with the settings you specified.
Some document properties cannot be set as application defaults—
you cannot, for example, create a new layer or add master pages.
You may occasionally want to delete your preferences and start from 
scratch. To do this, hold down Command-Option-Shift-Control (on 
the Mac OS) or Ctrl-Alt-Shift (in Windows) as you start InDesign.
Publication Navigation
InDesign offers three ways to change your view of the publica-
tion: zooming, scrolling, and moving from page to page. Zooming 
changes the magnification of the area inside the window. Scrolling 
changes the view in the window without changing the magnification. 
When you zoom in and out on a page, you are using an electronic 
magnifying glass, first enlarging a particular area of a page and then 
reducing your screen view so that you are seeing the entire page or 
pages at once. InDesign lets you magnify or reduce your screen view 
from 5 percent to 4,000 percent.
Reverting to InDesign’s 
Original Defaults
Zooming

 1. k 63
Zooming with the View menu. The View menu offers InDesign’s 
“standard” magnifications, or views, and provides keyboard short-
cuts for most of them (see Table 1-3). In fact, some of the keyboard 
shortcuts in the table should probably just be committed to memory, 
as they don’t appear in the View menu—such as Command-2/Ctrl-2 
to zoom to 200-percent view, and Command-Option-2/Ctrl-Alt-2 to 
zoom back to the last magnification you used. 
All of these commands except Fit Page in Window and Fit Spread 
in Window center the selected object in the window. If you don’t 
have an object selected, these shortcuts zoom in or out based on the 
center of the current view. Fit Page In Window centers the current 
page in a publication window. This makes Fit Page In Window the 
perfect “zoom-out” shortcut.
Zooming to actual size (100%) in InDesign CS6 is more accurate 
than in previous versions. InDesign does calculations based on the 
monitor’s resolution. If you don’t believe us, get out a ruler and check.
Zooming with the Zoom tool. Another method: choose the Zoom 
tool, point at an area in your publication, and click. InDesign zooms 
to the next larger view size (based on your current view—from 100% 
to 200%, for example), centering the area you clicked on. Hold down 
Option/Alt and the plus (“+”) in the Zoom tool changes to a minus 
(“-”). Click the Zoom tool to zoom out.
Fit Selection In Window. Another view command we use all of the 
time is Fit Selection In Window. Don’t bother looking for it on the 
View menu—it’s not there. Instead, it appears on the context menu 
when you have an object selected. It does just what it says—zooms 
(in or out) on the current selection and centers it in the publication 
window (see Figure 1-54). Press Command-Option-=/Ctrl-Alt-= to 
To zoom to this view:
Press:
Actual size (100%)
Command-1/Ctrl-1
200%
Command-2/Ctrl-2
400%
Command-4/Ctrl-4
50%
Command-5/Ctrl-5
Fit Page in Window
Command-0/Ctrl-0
Fit Spread in Window
Command-Option-0/Ctrl-Alt-0
Zoom in
Command-+/Ctrl-+
Zoom out
Command-- (minus)/Ctrl--(minus)
Last zoom
Command-Option-2/Ctrl-Alt-2
Table 1-3
View Shortcuts

64     6
zoom to the Fit Selection In Window view. When text is selected, this 
shortcut fits the text frame containing the text in the window.
Switching to the Zoom Tool. Press Command-Spacebar/Ctrl-Space-
bar to temporarily switch from any tool to the Zoom tool to zoom 
in; or hold down Command-Option-Spacebar/Ctrl-Alt-Spacebar to 
zoom out.
Zooming with “Power Zoom.” We’re not kidding—that’s what it’s 
called. To use this feature, switch to the Hand tool, then hold down 
the (left) mouse button. After a second, InDesign displays a red 
frame in the window. You can move the mouse to change the area 
selected, and you can make the frame larger or smaller using the 
mouse scroll wheel. When you release the mouse button, InDesign 
zooms in or out to fit the area in the window (see Figure 1-55).
The Best Way to Zoom. To zoom in, press Command/Ctrl and hold 
down Spacebar to turn the current tool (whatever it is) into the Zoom 
tool, then drag the Zoom tool in the publication window. As you 
drag, a rectangle (like a selection rectangle) appears. Drag the rect-
angle around the area you want to zoom in on, and release the mouse 
button. InDesign zooms in on the area, magnifying it to the magnifi-
cation that fits in the publication window (see Figure 1-56).
To zoom out, use one of the keyboard shortcuts—Command-0/
Ctrl-0 (for Fit Page In Window) is especially handy. It’s even better if 
you redefine the shortcut to make it easier to reach with one hand—
why take your hand off of the mouse if you don’t need to?
It doesn’t really matter where 
the selection is hiding. Press 
Command-Option-=/Ctrl-
Alt-= (or choose Fit Selection 
in Window from the Context 
menu)…
…and InDesign will find it and  
display it front and center.
Figure 1-54
Fit Selection in Window

 1. k 65
Entering a magnification percentage. To zoom to a specific magni-
fication percentage, enter the percentage in the Magnification field 
and press Return/Enter. InDesign zooms to the percentage you spec-
ified (centering the selection, if any, as it does so).
As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, we rarely use the scroll bars 
to scroll. So how do we change our view of our publications? We use 
the Hand tool (also known as the “Grabber Hand”).
Scrolling with the Hand tool. So how do you use the Hand tool? 
Sure, you can always click on the Hand tool in the Tools panel, or 
press H to switch to the Hand tool. But it’s better to use the keyboard 
Scrolling
Figure 1-55
Power Zoom
Switch to the Hand tool, then 
hold down the left mouse 
button. InDesign displays 
a red frame in the window 
(you’ll just have to imagine 
that this is red).
Use the scroll wheel to enlarge or 
reduce the frame, and move the 
mouse to change its posion.
Release the mouse button, 
and InDesign fits the 
framed area in the window. 
Drag the Zoom tool around the area 
you want to magnify.
InDesign zooms in on the area you 
defined by dragging.
Hold down Command-
Spacebar/Ctrl-Spacebar to 
switch to the Zoom tool.
Figure 1-56
Drag Magnification

66     6
shortcut that always works, no matter what tool you have selected: 
Option/Alt-spacebar (see Figure 1-57). This shortcut is temporary—
release it, and you’ll go back to whatever tool you had selected.
The Hand tool even works inside the Pages panel (though you 
don’t need to hold anything down or choose a tool to use it there).
Scrolling as you drag objects. Don’t forget that you can change your 
view by dragging objects off the screen. If you know an object should 
be moved to some point outside your current view, select the object 
and do one of the following things:
▶To scroll down, drag the cursor into the scroll bar at the bottom 
of the publication window. Don’t drag the cursor off the bottom 
of the screen—InDesign won’t scroll if you do this.
▶To scroll to the right, move the cursor into the vertical scroll bar, 
or drag the cursor off of the left edge of the screen.
▶To scroll to a point above your current view, drag the cursor into 
the horizontal ruler. 
▶To scroll to the left, drag the cursor into the vertical ruler (or off 
the screen, if the ruler is not visible). 
The window scrolls as long as the mouse button is down. Some-
times it’s the best way to get something into position.
InDesign won’t let you drag objects to an area in the publication 
window that is behind a panel. If you drag the cursor into any panel 
other than the Library panel, InDesign displays the “prohibited” 
symbol. When you drop objects you’re dragging into an area cov-
ered by a panel, InDesign bounces the objects back to their original 
locations. You can’t hide panels while you’re dragging objects, so you 
might want to hide the panels before you begin dragging.
Hold down Option-Spacebar/Alt-
Spacebar to switch to the Hand tool, 
then drag the Hand tool to scroll.
When the publication window looks 
the way you want it to, stop dragging.
Figure 1-57
Using the Hand Tool

 1. k 67
Scrolling with a Scroll Wheel. If your mouse has a scroll wheel, 
InDesign probably supports it (no promises—there are lots of differ-
ent mice). Move the scroll wheel to scroll the window up and down, 
or hold down Option/Alt as you move the scroll wheel zoom.
The scroll wheel even works inside panels—this is especially 
useful in the Pages panel, but it also comes in handy when you need 
to scroll through long lists of styles in the Paragraph Styles panel.
If you have a fancy mouse and you’re running InDesign in Win-
dows Vista, Windows 7, or on a Mac, turn on Enable Multi-Touch 
Gestures in Interface preferences to do things like rotating the spread 
using the rotate gesture.
One of the best navigation shortcuts doesn’t appear in the menu: 
Command-J/Ctrl-J, for Go To Page (it displays the Go to Page dialog 
box—where you can enter the page you want to jump to).
Two of the most useful page-navigation features in the Layout 
menu have odd names (Go Back and Go Forward) and are set apart 
in the menu. How do these work? Let’s say you’re working on page 9 
when you jump to page 25 to make a quick change and then jump to 
page 81 to see how the change affected the end of the story. Now you 
can press Command-Up Arrow/Ctrl-Up Arrow (Go Back) to jump 
back to page 25, and press it again to return to page 9. Want to return 
to page 25? Press Command-Down Arrow (Go Forward). 
Managing InDesign’s Plug-Ins
Everything you see in InDesign is provided by a plug-in. The “appli-
cation” itself is little more than a plug-in manager. The functions we 
traditionally think of as being central to a page layout application—
things like text composition, text editing, or basic drawing tools—
they’re all plug-ins. We’re not kidding.
This means that you can turn plug-ins on and off to customize 
InDesign to the way that you work and the publications you work 
with. Specifically, you can turn off the plug-ins you don’t use. You 
can also add third-party plug-ins to add custom features to InDesign.
To define the plug-ins InDesign will load the next time you start 
the program, choose Manage Extensions from the InDesign menu 
(on the Macintosh), or from the Help menu (in Windows). The 
Adobe Extension Manager opens. This command used to be called 
Configure Plug-ins in previous versions. You can create and manage 
sets of plug-ins.
Jump to Page

68     6
On with the Tour
At this point in the InDesign tour, we’ve seen most of the sights. Don’t 
worry if you’re a little confused—it’s hard to take it all in at once. In 
the following chapters, we’ll help you put the tools in context—so 
far, we’ve just talked about what the tools are. In the rest of the book, 
we’ll talk about what you can do with them.
Text place icon (manual flow)
Text place icon (semi-automatic flow)
Text place icon (autoflow)
Graphic place icon
Image place icon
Text place icon (in frame)
Text place icon (autoflow, in frame)
Image place icon (in frame)
Graphic place icon (in frame)
PDF place icon
Multi-file place icon
Figure 1-58
Place Icons
Why would you want to turn plug-ins off? Simple—to reduce the 
amount of memory taken up by InDesign and to increase the speed 
of the application (slightly).
Some plug-ins are required by InDesign—they’re the ones with 
the little padlock next to them. But all of the other plug-ins are fair 
game. Never use the Info panel? Turn it off!
Place Icons
When you place (that is, import) a file or take another action that 
loads text or a graphic, InDesign changes the cursor into an icon 
called a “place icon,” or “place gun” (see Figure 1-58). Click the place 
icon to specify the position of the upper-left corner of the incoming 
file, or drag the place icon to define the width and height of the file. 
We’ll talk more about place icons in the next chapter, and again in 
Chapter 3, “Text” and Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting.”

69
Now that you know what’s what, and what’s where, in InDesign, it’s 
time to create an InDesign publication and set up some pages. As 
you work your way through the process of defining the page size, 
margins, column layout, and master pages for your new publication, 
think ahead. How will the publication be printed? How will it be 
bound? Will you need to create a different version of the publication 
for a different paper size (such as switching from US Letter to A4 for 
an international edition)? Will you need to create a different version 
of the publication for online distribution?
We know that having to think about these things and make design 
decisions early in the process can be boring. And InDesign makes it 
relatively easy to make changes to your layout late in the produc-
tion process. Easy, but not without a certain amount of trouble. How 
high is your threshold of pain? Will it decrease as your deadline 
approaches? You decide.
Page Layout

2

70     6
Creating a New Publication
When you choose New Document from the New submenu on the File 
menu, InDesign displays the New Document dialog box (see Figure 
2-1). You use the controls in this dialog box to set up the basic layout 
of the pages in your publication. Don’t worry—you’re not locked into 
anything; you can change these settings at any time, or override any 
of them for any page or page spread in your publication.
▶Intent. Choose Print for documents that will end up on paper. 
Choose Web or Digital Publishing if you’re creating an interac-
tive document and want to use settings for the web or mobile 
devices; the settings switch to landscape orientation, pixels for 
units of measurement, RGB color settings, and non-facing pages. 
Beginning with InDesign CS6, you can change a document’s 
Intent setting. However, you cannot use different Intent settings 
within the same document.
…or enter a custom page 
size using these fields.
Choose a page size from 
this pop-up menu…
Enter the number 
of columns and 
the width of the 
gutter between 
columns. This 
setting can be 
overridden on 
document pages 
or master pages.
Enter page margin settings 
in the fields in this section. 
Note that the margin settings 
of individual pages override 
these settings.
Inside margin
Outside margin
If you turn off the Facing 
Pages option, the “Inside” 
and “Outside” fields change 
to read “Right” and “Left.”
To show Bleed 
and Slug, click 
the More Options 
button. To hide 
them, click Fewer 
Options.
Figure 2-1
The New Document 
Dialog Box

 2.  yu 71
▶Number of Pages. How many pages do you want? We tend to 
start with one page and add pages as we go along, but you might 
want to think ahead and add a bunch at once. 
▶Start Page #. Type the starting number of the page. If you type 
an even number for Start Page #, the publication begins with a 
two-page spread. In InDesign, odd numbers always start on the 
right-hand page (recto) page.
▶Facing Pages. If you’re creating a single-sided document—like 
an advertisement, poster, or handbill—leave Facing Pages 
turned off. Turn it on for books and magazines, which usually 
have both left- (verso) and right-hand (recto) pages.
▶Primary Text Frame. Should InDesign create a text frame on 
the master page? If so, turn the Primary Text Frame option on. 
The width and height of this “automatic” text frame are defined 
by the area inside the page margins; its column settings cor-
respond to the column settings for the page. The Primary Text 
Frame option has different behavior than the Master Text Frame 
option in previous InDesign version, as we’ll discuss later in this 
chapter.
▶Page Size. Pick a page size according to the final size of your 
document. If this is a print document, that means the size 
after trimming, not the paper you’re printing on. The Page 
Size pop-up menu lists most of the standard sizes—including 
common screen resolutions for interactive documents—but you 
can always enter your own page width and height (when you do 
this, the Page Size pop-up menu changes to “Custom”). To create 
a new page size, choose Custom Page Size, specify the settings 
you want, and click OK. Presto! The page size appears in the 
list—much easier than editing the New Doc Sizes.txt, which you 
had to do in previous versions. 
▶Columns. When you specify that a document should have more 
than one column, InDesign adds column guides. Next, enter the 
amount of space to leave between columns in the Gutter field. 
Column guides can be overridden on both document pages and 
master pages.
▶Margins. Use the fields in the Margins section of the dialog 
box to specify the size of the margins on all four sides of a page. 
When you turn on the Facing Pages option, “Left” and “Right” 
change to “Inside” and “Outside.” You can always change your 
margin guides later, on a specific page or for a master page.

72     6
If you can’t see the Bleed and Slug fields, click the More Options 
button. These fields let you define guides on the pasteboard and 
effectively extend the print area of your document.
What’s the difference between the bleed and the slug? Usually, 
people put things in the bleed area that have to do with their design 
(typically objects that bleed off the edge of the page), and put job 
tracking and other document information in the slug area. But the 
real difference, from an InDesign point of view, is that they have 
independent printing controls. You might choose to include the slug 
area when printing proofs and then omit the slug when printing your 
final version. (Here in rainy Seattle, we are very familiar with slugs.)
Do you find that you frequently have to change the settings in the 
New Document dialog box? If you have particular page sizes and 
margin settings that you use all of the time, consider making a docu-
ment preset. The easiest way to make one is to type all the values 
(page size, margin, bleed and slug settings, and so on) into the New 
Document dialog box, click the Save Preset button, and give your 
preset a name.
The next time you want to create a document based on that preset, 
you can select the name from the Document Preset pop-up menu at 
the top of the New Document dialog box. You can also make, delete, 
or edit document presets by choosing Define from the Document 
Presets submenu (under the File menu). The Define Document Pre-
sets dialog box also lets you save presets to disk or load presets from 
disk—very helpful if you need to send a document preset to someone 
else in your workgroup.
Bleed and Slug
Document Presets
Figure 2-2
The Open a File 
Dialog Box
The option you choose 
from the Files of Type 
menu determines which 
files you see in the file list. 
Locate and select a file.
Click the Open button to 
open the publication.
Choose Normal to open the 
publication; choose Original 
to open and edit a file you’ve 
saved as an InDesign 
template file; and choose 
Copy to open a file as an 
untitled publication.
This is the Windows version, 
of course. The Mac OS   
version is similar. Sort of.

 2.  yu 73
By the way, for those who care about terminology, the difference 
between a preset and a style has to do with how InDesign behaves 
when you later change the preset or style. Let’s say you save a Docu-
ment Preset, make three new documents based on that preset, and 
then change the definition of the preset. InDesign doesn’t change the 
documents you already made. Now let’s say you define a paragraph 
style in a document, apply it to three paragraphs, and then go back 
and change the style definition. InDesign applies the change to all 
of the paragraphs formatted using that style. (We cover paragraph 
styles in Chapter 4, “Type.”)
Skip the dialog box. If you use a specific document preset all of the 
time, why in the world should you have to look at the New Docu-
ment dialog box every time you create a layout? You don’t. You can 
bypass the dialog box by holding down the Shift key while select-
ing the preset name from the Document Presets submenu (under the 
File menu). Or, instead of pressing Command-N/Ctrl-N to create a 
new document, press Command-Option-N/Ctrl-Alt-N. This creates 
a new document using the settings you used most recently.
The Document Preset feature is great, but some people create the 
same kind of document day in and day out. If you’re one of those 
folks, you should probably change the values in the default New Doc-
ument dialog box (the way it first opens). You can do this by choosing 
Define from the Document Presets submenu (under the File menu) 
and editing the Default preset.
But wait, there’s more! If you always want your new documents 
to have certain paragraph styles, character styles, and colors, create 
them while no documents are open. Every new document you build 
from then on will have these settings.
Opening Publications
When you choose Open from the File menu, or press Command-O/
Ctrl-O, InDesign displays the Open a File dialog box (see Figure 2-2). 
Locate and select the InDesign document you want to open, then 
click the Open button and InDesign opens the selected document in 
a new window.
There are two “twists” InDesign adds to the standard process. 
The first has mainly to do with publications you’ve saved as tem-
plates (also known as “stationery” on the Macintosh), or documents 
you want to treat as templates (later in the chapter, we’ll describe 
Setting New   
Document Defaults

74     6
templates). To open a copy of the file, turn on the Open Copy option. 
InDesign opens an untitled copy of the file you selected. To open a 
template file for editing, turn on the Open Original option.
The second twist has to do with opening files created in previous 
versions of InDesign. Unlike most programs, InDesign doesn’t just 
open earlier version’s files—rather, it actually converts them to InDe-
sign files. It takes longer than you might expect (though usually not 
too long), and the file opens with “[Converted]” in the title bar. You 
can’t save converted files; you have to use Save As. 
In fact you may find your files open as [Converted] even after 
installing a minor InDesign update or an update to a plug-in. Again, 
the theory is that this is all for your safety, so you won’t accidentally 
replace an earlier version, but it can be frustrating at times.
QuarkXPress and PageMaker Files. InDesign can also open some 
PageMaker or QuarkXPress files. Select the file you want to convert, 
and then click the Open button. (To do this in Windows, choose the 
file type you want to open from the Files of Type pop-up menu, or 
choose All Documents.) InDesign converts the file and opens it as a 
new, untitled InDesign publication. However, before you convert a 
file, we strongly encourage you to open it in QuarkXPress or Page-
Maker, make sure the images are all linked properly and available on 
a local hard drive, and perform a Save As to save a clean copy of the 
file for conversion. And after you open it in InDesign, clean it up by 
exporting it to IDML format.
How well does this conversion process work? That depends on the 
publication you’re trying to open, but you should never expect the 
conversion process to be perfect. There are simply too many differ-
ences in the capabilities of the different products.
InDesign also does a good job of converting text formatting, 
though line endings may change. The following sections provide 
more detail on what you can expect to see when you convert publica-
tions from other page layout programs.
InDesign can open QuarkXPress 3.3-4.11 documents and templates, 
including multi-language QuarkXPress Passport files. This useful 
ability is subject to a number of terms and conditions, which we’ll 
outline in this section. First, InDesign cannot open:
▶QuarkXPress files from version 5, 6, 7, or 8. You can, of course, 
open a QuarkXPress 4.x document saved from version 5.x.
QuarkXPress Files

 2.  yu 75
▶QuarkXPress documents (any version) created using XTensions 
that require you have the XTension to open the document (the 
infamous Pasteboard XT, for example)
▶QuarkXPress book or library documents
Provided the document you want to convert does not fall into one 
of the above accursed categories, InDesign will convert the docu-
ment setup, pages, and page items into their InDesign equivalents as 
best it can. However, as you might expect, there are still a number of 
details you need to be aware of.
If you need more details about QuarkXPress conversion issues, 
please download this file for more information: 
http://www.indesignsecrets.com/rwid/quark.pdf
As you convert, or prepare to convert, publications from PageMaker 
to InDesign, a few odd things happen for reasons that seem odd 
but make sense when you consider the differences between the two 
programs. For example, all pasteboard objects from PageMaker are 
placed on the pasteboard of the first spread in InDesign, and all 
master page items are assigned to a layer named “Master.”
If you need details about PageMaker conversion issues, please 
download this file for more information: 
http://www.indesignsecrets.com/rwid/pagemaker.pdf
You may experience odd problems with a document converted from 
a previous InDesign version or from QuarkXPress or PageMaker. 
For example, you may not be able to export to PDF or do other tasks 
that you don’t have trouble doing in a different document.
Here’s the cure-all—export the file to IDML format, and then 
open that IDML file and save it. IDML is a purifier of sorts, like the 
waters of Lake Minnetonka.
Saving Publications
To save a publication, choose Save from the File menu (or press Com-
mand-S/Ctrl-S). To save a publication under a different name, choose 
Save As (or press Command-Shift-S/Ctrl-Shift-S), and In Design will 
display the Save File As dialog box. Use this dialog box to set a loca-
tion for the new file, assign a file name, and decide whether the file 
should be saved as a publication file or as a template. 
If you’re trying to save the file in a format other than an InDesign 
file, use the “Export” command. For more on exporting publications 
PageMaker Files
Problems with   
Converted Files?

76     6
or parts of publications in file formats other than InDesign’s native 
format, see Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting.”
Save with an Extension. Windows users always save files with file-
name extensions because Windows requires these in order to figure 
out what files are associated with which applications. InDesign pub-
lications, for example, have the four-letter .indd file name extension. 
InDesign templates (see below) use .indt. We want to encourage Mac 
OS users to use these suffixes, too. In today’s multi-platform world, 
you just never know when your Mac OS InDesign file will need to be 
opened on a Windows machine. File-name extensions are ugly, but 
they’re a fact of life.
If you need to base a new publication on the design of a publication 
you’ve already laid out, and want to make sure you don’t save over 
the original file, create a template.
When you try to open a file that was saved as a template, InDesign 
automatically opens a copy of the file. If, at that point, you try to save 
the file, InDesign will display the Save As dialog box.
To save an InDesign publication as a template, choose Save As 
from the File menu. In the Save As dialog box, enter a name for 
the template file and then choose InDesign CS6 Template from the 
Format pop-up menu (on the Macintosh) or the Save As Type pop-up 
menu (in Windows). Click the Save button to save the template file. 
You can also create a template by locking the file. On the Macin-
tosh, select the file in the Finder, choose Get Info from the File menu 
(or press Command-I), and then turn on either the Locked or the 
Stationery Pad checkbox in the Get Info dialog box. In Windows, 
right-click on the file’s icon, choose Properties, and turn on the 
Read-Only feature in the Properties dialog box.
Actually, any InDesign file can act as a template, no matter how 
you’ve saved it. When you open any publication via the Open dialog 
box and turn on the Open Copy option, InDesign opens it in a new, 
untitled publication, just as though it were a template.
After a year or so of legal wrangling with Adobe, David was finally 
able to post the excellent templates that used to ship with InDesign:
http://indesignsecrets.com/indesign-templates
InDesign CS6 gives you a way to “save back” to InDesign CS5.5, 
InDesign CS5, and InDesign CS4. To do this, you export a file using 
the InDesign Markup format, or IDML, and then open that file 
in the older version of InDesign. Make sure you’re using the most 
recent InDesign version by choosing Updates from the Help menu.
Saving As a Template
Saving for   
Earlier Versions   
of InDesign

 2.  yu 77
Want to save back to InDesign CS3 or earlier? Sorry. You have 
to open the IDML file in InDesign CS4 and export as INX. To save 
down even further, you have to export one version at a time.
To export a file as IDML, choose Export from the File menu, 
select the InDesign Markup format, and then save the file. You can 
also save down using the Save As dialog box. For more on the IDML 
file format, see Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting.”
Crash Recovery
It will happen. At some point, your computer will suddenly stop 
working. Or the software we jokingly refer to as the “operating 
system” will fail for some unknown reason.
At this point, it’s natural to assume you’ve lost work—and maybe 
that you’ve lost the file forever. That is, after all, the way things work 
in most other programs.
But it’s not true for InDesign. InDesign keeps track of the changes 
you’ve made to a document—even for an untitled document you 
haven’t yet saved. When you restart InDesign after a system, the pro-
gram uses the contents of a folder named “InDesign Recovery” to 
reconstruct the publication or publications that were open when you 
crashed—even if you hadn’t saved them yet. Because of this auto-
matic “backup”system, you’ll be right back where you left off.
If you don’t want to recover the most recent changes you made to 
a publication before a crash (which you might want to do if you felt 
that your changes caused the crash), delete the files in the folder. This 
folder appears in different places on different operating systems, so 
the best way to find it is to use your operating system’s Search utility 
to find a folder called “InDesign Recovery.”
You should also delete these files if InDesign is crashing on 
startup as it tries to read the recovery information (this is pretty rare). 
In this case, a file has been damaged and cannot be opened—you’ll 
have to try opening the original document (or rebuild the document 
from scratch, if you hadn’t saved the file).
Setting Basic Layout Options
You can always change the margins, columns, page size, and page 
orientation of a publication. You do this using the Margins and Col-
umns dialog box, and you can apply these changes to any page, page 
spread, or master page in a publication. 

78     6
Page size and page orientation affect the entire document (you can’t 
mix page sizes and page orientations in a file), and you use the Docu-
ment Setup dialog box (press Command-Option-P/Ctrl-Alt-P to dis-
play this dialog box, or choose Document Setup from the File menu) 
to change these settings. To change the page size, choose a new page 
size for the publication from the Page Size pop-up menu (or enter 
values in the Width and Height fields); to change the page orienta-
tion, click the button corresponding to the orientation you want.
Usually, InDesign centers the page items on the new page size—
that is, each page grows equally on all four sides. However, if you 
have turned on the layout adjustment feature (from the Layout menu), 
InDesign moves objects and guides on your pages when you change 
the page size or page orientation, sometimes in unexpected ways. See 
“Adjusting Layouts,” later in this chapter, for more on this topic.
You aren’t stuck with the margin and column setup you specified in 
the New Document dialog box—you can change margin and column 
settings for any page, at any time. To change margin and column set-
tings, navigate to the page you want to change, then choose Margins 
and Columns from the Layout menu (see Figure 2-3). Click the OK 
button to close the dialog box, and InDesign applies the new margin 
and column settings. While you can make these changes to any 
page, it’s likely that you’ll most often be making changes to master 
pages. Keep in mind that these margin and column settings affect 
the page, but not text frames. Use the Text Frame Options dialog box 
to change columns within frames.
You can create columns of unequal width by dragging the column 
guides (see “Adjusting Column Guides,” later in this chapter).
What happens to the objects on a page when you change the 
margin and column settings for that page? Do they reposition them-
selves relative to the new margins? Or do they stay put? That depends 
on the settings in the Layout Adjustment dialog box. See “Adjusting 
Layouts,” later in this chapter, for more on adjusting layouts.
Changing Page Size 
and Orientation
Specifying Margins 
and Columns
Figure 2-3
Margins and Columns 
Dialog Box
The value you enter here sets 
the number of column guides.
This value sets the distance 
between column guides.
The “Inside” and 
“Outside” labels 
have been improp-
erly aligned for 
several versions 
now. We don’t 
know why.

 2.  yu 79
Pages and Spreads
When you work with a document, you construct the document out 
of pages and spreads. You won’t get far in InDesign without master-
ing the Pages panel, the primary tool for creating, arranging, delet-
ing pages, and applying master pages. It’s also a great way to navigate 
from one page to another. 
The following are brief descriptions of the controls found in the 
Pages panel (see Figure 2-4).
▶Spread and page icons. These icons represent the document 
pages and master pages in your publication. You can drag these 
pages around in the Pages panel to change the page order, or 
apply master pages to document pages (or other master pages), 
or create new master pages (by dragging document pages into 
the master page area of the panel).
▶Edit page size button. Click this button to apply a different page 
size to the selected page.
▶New page button. Click this button to create a new document 
page. Hold down Command/Ctrl and click this button to create 
a new master spread.
▶Delete page button. Click this button to delete the selected page 
or pages.
▶Master/Document page separator. This bar separates the master 
pages in your publication from the “normal” document pages. 
You can drag the separator up or down.
▶Resize box. Drag this icon to resize the Pages panel.
Pages Panel Options
Master pages area
Document pages area
Click to add a new document page.
Selected spread
Click to remove the selected page.
Letters inside the pages 
indicate the master spread 
applied to the page.
You can drag this 
separator bar 
This icon indicates that the 
page contains transparency.
Resize box
Figure 2-4
Pages Panel
Alternate layout header

80     6
To change the appearance of the panel (and you really should), 
choose Panel Options from the panel menu (see Figure 2-5). The 
options in the Panel Options dialog box can be used for good or evil.
▶Icon Size. The options on this pop-up menu define the size of 
the page icons (from Extra Small to Extra Large). in the Pages 
panel. The Small option remains our perennial favorite.
▶Show Vertically. Under Masters, turn on Show Vertically to 
arrange the spreads in the Pages panel vertically, centered 
around the spine. What happened to the Show Vertically option 
under Pages? To display the icons horizontally, vertically, or 
vertically with the Alternate Layout header, choose View Pages 
from the Pages panel menu, and select an option (see Figure 2-6).
▶Show Thumbnails. You can show little pictures of the stuff on 
your pages by turning on the Show Thumbnails option. There is 
a slight performance penalty to pay for having this turned on, so 
we usually leave it off.
▶Pages/Masters On Top. This option controls the arrangement 
of the document/master spreads areas in the panel. If you 
prefer having the master spreads at the top of the panel (as in 
QuarkXPress), choose Masters on Top; we prefer Pages on Top 
since we manage pages far more often than master pages. 
▶Resize. Choose Pages Fixed to prevent the document area from 
resizing, or Masters Fixed (our favorite) to do the same for the 
masters area of the panel. Choose Proportional to resize both 
areas by the same amount.
The Panel Options dialog 
box (choose Panel Options 
from the Pages panel menu) 
gives you a way to control the 
appearance of the panel.
Figure 2-5
Pages Panel Options

 2.  yu 81
Align page thumbnails 
horizontally, vertically, or by 
Alternate Layout sections.
Drag to change the order of 
alternate layout sections.
You can apply a little color bar to the page thumbnails in the Pages 
panel. For example, you can use different color labels for master 
pages and the layout pages they’re applied to.
▶In the Pages panel, select the pages to which you want to apply 
color labels. From the Pages panel menu, choose Page Attri-
butes > Color Label, and then pick a color.
If you apply a color to a master page, all pages to which the master 
is applied will have the same color by default. If you don’t want 
master color labels to be applied to document pages, uncheck Use 
Master Color in the Color Label submenu.
InDesign makes a distinction between targeting a page or spread and 
selecting a page or spread (see Figure 2-7):
▶A page (or spread) is targeted if it is the page onto which the  
next new objects will be placed.
▶A page (or spread) is selected if the next page action—such as 
duplicating the spread or changing its margins—will affect it.
The target page and the selected page can be different pages—you 
can be viewing one page while your actions affect another. By default, 
the page you are looking at is the one that is targeted. But if you’re 
zoomed back so that more than one page or spread is visible on 
screen, you can target and select any page or spread by clicking on it.
To select a page, click the page icon in the Pages panel. To select a 
spread, click the numbers beneath the page icons. 
Adding Color Labels
Selecting Pages   
and Spreads
Figure 2-6
Horizontal or Vertical 
Page Display

82     6
Click a page icon to select the 
page. In this example, page 2 
is selected, but pages 6-7 are 
the active spread.
Double-click the label of a 
spread (the name or page 
numbers beneath the spread 
icon) to select the spread and 
make it the active spread.
Figure 2-7
Selecting Pages  
and Spreads
Double-click a page icon 
to jump to that page; hold 
down Option/Alt as you 
double-click to display 
the page at Fit Page in 
Window view.
Figure 2-8
Navigating with the 
Pages Panel
To select more than a single page at a time, select the first spread, 
then hold down Shift as you select the other pages. Hold down Com-
mand/Ctrl as you click pages to select non-contiguous pages.
Double-click a page icon (or the page numbers beneath the 
spread) to select that page or spread, display it in the publication 
window, and target it. You can hold down Option/Alt as you double-
click a page icon, and InDesign changes the page view to the Fit Page 
in Window view (see Figure 2-8).
The same goes for master pages. If you’re looking at document 
pages, you can select a master page in the Pages panel (click on it 
once), open the Margins and Columns dialog box (from the Layout 
menu) and make changes. The changes are applied to the master 
page, which then ripple through to the document pages that you see.
Adding Pages
To add a page to your publication, do any of the following.
Click the Add Page button. InDesign adds a page to the publication 
and displays the new page in the publication window (see Figure 2-9). 
At the same time, InDesign applies the most recently applied master 

 2.  yu 83
Click the 
Create New 
Page button…
…and InDesign  
adds a page after the  
selected page or spread.
Hold down Command/
Ctrl as you click to add a 
new master spread.
Figure 2-9
The Add Page Button
page to the new page. (You can also press Command-Shift-P/Ctrl-
Shift-P to add a page.) If you hold down Option/Alt as you click the 
Add Page button, InDesign displays the Insert Pages dialog box (see 
below). If you press Command/Ctrl as you click the Add Page button, 
InDesign adds a new master page.
Choose Insert Pages from the Pages panel menu. InDesign displays 
the Insert Pages dialog box (see Figure 2-10). Enter the number of 
pages you want to add in the Pages field. Use the Insert pop-up menu 
to select the position at which you want the inserted pages to appear. 
If you want to apply a master page or spread to the pages, choose 
that master page from the Master pop-up menu. Click the OK button 
to add the pages. If you hold down Option/Alt, InDesign turns the 
Cancel button into the Reset button. Click the Reset button, and the 
controls will be set back to the state they were in when you opened 
the dialog box.
Drag a master spread icon into the document pages area of the 
Pages panel. This creates a new document page or page spread and 
applies the master page to it. To create a page without applying a 
master page to it, drag and drop the None master page in the docu-
ment pages area.
Hold down Option/Alt as you drag a page or page spread icon. Just 
as you can copy an object on a page by Option/Alt-dragging it on the 
page, you can duplicate document or master pages by Option/Alt-
dragging them in the Pages panel (see Figure 2-11). 
Choose Duplicate Spread from the Pages panel’s menu. This dupli-
cates the selected spread (including any page objects on the spread’s 
pages) and adds it to the current section.

84     6
Choose Insert Pages from 
the Pages panel menu or 
Option/Alt-click the New 
Page button...
Figure 2-10
Using the Insert  
Pages Dialog Box
Enter the number of pages 
you want to add.
Use these controls to tell 
InDesign where you want   
to add the pages.
Choose a master spread to 
apply to the new pages.
Click the OK button, and InDesign 
adds pages to the document.
Select a page or 
spread icon.
Hold down Option/
Alt and drag.
Drop the icon where 
you want to add the 
page (or spread).
Figure 2-11
Drag and Drop 
Duplication
Arranging Pages
Ordinarily, the pages in your publication are arranged into spreads 
according to the state of the Facing Pages option in the New Docu-
ment and Document Setup dialog boxes. If you’ve turned the Facing 
Pages option on, InDesign arranges the majority of pages into two-
page spreads (the first page is a single page spread). If the Facing 
Pages option is off, InDesign makes each page in the publication into 
a single page spread.

 2.  yu 85
But you’re not limited to these arrangements of pages and spreads. 
At any point, in any section of your publication, you can create a 
spread—also called an “island spread”—containing anything from 
one to ten pages.
An island spread pays no attention to the default arrangement of 
pages, but follows its own whim. It doesn’t matter what you do—you 
can add or remove pages that precede the island spread in a section, 
and the island spread will remain unchanged.
To create an island spread, select a spread and then turn off Allow 
Selected Pages to Shuffle from the Pages panel menu. InDesign dis-
plays brackets around the name of the spread to indicate that it’s an 
island spread (see Figure 2-12). Selecting more than a single spread 
before you choose this option converts all of the spreads to separate 
island spreads; it does not join them into a single island spread.
When you drag a page or spread into an island spread, InDesign 
adds the pages of the spread to the island spread. When you drag a 
page out of an island spread, InDesign does not set the page as an 
island spread (that is, the pages of the island spread do not inherit the 
spread’s “island” quality).
Select a spread in   
the Pages palette.
Turn off the Allow Selected 
Spread to Shuffle option from 
the Pages panel menu.
Figure 2-12
Creating an  
“Island Spread”
InDesign converts the spread 
to an island spread.
To add a page to an 
island spread, select 
a page icon…
…and drag it into or 
adjacent to the island 
spread.
InDesign adds the 
page to the island 
spread.
Brackets around the spread’s 
label indicate that the spread 
is an island spread.

86     6
Usually, when you drag pages around in the Pages panel, InDesign 
shuffles all the pages around to accommodate the change. That is, if 
you add a page in a facing pages document between pages 3 and 4, 
the left-hand page 4 gets shuffled over to become a right-hand page 
5, which pushes page 5 over, and so on. However, you can cause all 
kinds of curious mayhem if you turn off the Allow Document Pages 
to Shuffle feature in the Pages panel menu. When this is off, InDe-
sign won’t shuffle the pages; rather it just moves and adds pages. For 
example, in the scenario above, the new page would be added to the 
spread of either pages 2 and 3, or the spread of 4 and 5 (creating a 
three-page spread).
Which spread gets the page is subtle: As you drag a page between 
two spreads in the Pages panel, you’ll see a dark vertical line. If you 
move the cursor a little closer to the spread on the left, the dark line 
will jog to the left a pixel or two. Move the cursor to the right, and 
the line jogs to the right. That’s the only indication as to which spread 
(the one to the left or to the right) the page will be added.
Perhaps you want the first page of your facing-pages publication 
to begin on a left-hand page? Turn off Allow Document Pages to 
Shuffle, then drag the first page to the left until you see a tiny black 
arrow pointing to the left. When you let go, the page moves over.
Here’s one more time you might want to turn off the Allow Docu-
ment Pages to Shuffle feature: If you have a facing pages document 
and you want to bleed an object into the inside of a spread (that is, 
the object looks like it’s bleeding into the binding), you need to sepa-
rate the left- and right-pages in the spread. Turn off Allow Document 
Pages to Shuffle, then drag one of the pages away from the spread 
until you see a dark vertical bar. When you let go, the pages is sepa-
rated. Of course, if you’re going to bleed into the binding, make sure 
your printer and their imposition software can handle this correctly.
While dragging pages around in the Pages panel is fun, it’s faster 
and more precise to choose Move Pages from the Pages submenu 
(under the Layout menu) or from the Pages panel menu. This dis-
plays the Move Pages dialog box, which you can use to move pages in 
the current document, or to other documents (see Figure 2-13).
Shuffling Pages
Figure 2-13
Move Pages Dialog Box
If you’re moving the pages to another document,  
you can choose to delete the pages from the current 
document as you do so.
Enter the range of pages   
you want to move…
…and specify the 
 destination for the pages 
using these controls.

 2.  yu 87
Creating pages of different sizes
InDesign now offers a feature that people have been requesting for 
years—the ability to use multiple page sizes in the same document.
Should you use different page sizes in a document? That all 
depends on what you’re trying to do. To avoid potential printing 
complexity, you’re sometimes better off keeping different page sizes 
in different documents and using the Books feature to synchronize 
styles, swatches, and other common design elements. But there are 
other situations in which having different page sizes in a document 
saves time and effort. Examples:
Book cover with a spine. You may not know the exact width of the 
spine until late in the process. Keeping the spine in the same docu-
ment as the front and back covers allows you to alter the spine width 
up to the last minute while still sharing the design with the cover 
pages (see Figure 2-14).
Company stationery. Use the same logo and address block for a let-
terhead, envelope, and a business card.
Gate fold for a magazine. Does your magazine require a little fold-
out flap for the cover? Or a centerfold? Instead of using a separate 
document for extra wide pages, apply a different page size and use 
the new widgets in the Print dialog box to print them separately.
Use either of these methods to apply a different page size to pages:
▶To create a different page size quickly, select the page in the 
Pages panel. Then choose a preset from the Edit Page Size menu 
at the bottom of the pages panel.
Figure 2-14
Multiple Page Sizes 
in Same Document
This book cover consists of 
three different pages.

88     6
Use the Page tool to select 
one or more pages, and then 
change the page settings in 
the Control panel.
▶To take a more advanced approach, use the Page tool to click a 
page in the layout window (or double-click the selected page in 
the Pages panel). Then use the options in the Control panel to 
determine the page dimensions (see Figure 2-15).
As a rule, you should create a master page with a different size, 
and then apply the master to the document page. That way, you’ll 
avoid a sticky situation in which a master is applied to a document 
page with different dimensions.
Figure 2-15
Multiple Page Sizes
The header from the master 
page is cut off on the layout 
page that has a smaller page 
size...
...so we turned on Master 
Page Overlay and dragged 
the overlay frame to the left .
Figure 2-16
Master Page Overlay

 2.  yu 89
In some cases, you may want one master page to apply to different 
page sizes. For example, you may want a company logo to appear on 
a master page, and you want that same logo to appear on an envelope 
and a business card. In that case, you can use the Master Page Over-
lay to position the logo properly on the page (see Figure 2-16).
If you try to apply a master to a page that doesn’t have its same 
page dimensions, you have the choice of keeping the custom page 
size or overriding it with the master’s page size.
When you select a page using the Page tool, the Control panel 
displays options for creating a different page size. Adjust the Y value 
to determine where the page appears vertically in relation to the rest 
of the spread.
To create the new page size, specify Height and Width values, or 
select a preset from the menu. You can also change the orientation by 
clicking the Portrait or Landscape icon. The Control panel has three 
check boxes that need their own explanation.
Enable Layout Adjustment. Keeps objects aligned to margins when 
you change page size. See “Adjusting Layouts” later in this chapter.
Show Master Page Overlay. When the page has a different size than 
its master page, turning on Master Page Overlay will let you move 
the master page items.
Objects Move with Page. Select this option if you want the objects 
to move along with the page when you change the X and Y values or 
drag the page to move it within the spread. Option/Alt-drag the page 
using the Page tool to move the page with or without moving objects 
on the page—the opposite of this option’s selection status.
When you send a job to the printer, make sure you let the printer 
know your document has multiple page sizes. If you need the print 
the document yourself, the Print dialog box includes a set of icons 
that lets you select and print all the matching page sizes. We’ll talk 
more about this in Chapter 11, “Printing.”
Rotating Spreads
When your design calls for rotated pages or graphics, you can either 
rotate the page, which we just covered above, or you can use Rotate 
Spreads feature to rotate only the view of the page. You can rotate 
any spread (or individual page, in a non-facing pages document) by 
selecting it in the Pages panel and choosing Page Attributes > Rotate 

90     6
Spread View > 90°CW, 90°CCW, or 180° from the Pages panel sub-
menu (or the Context menu, if you right-click or Control-click on a 
spread in the panel; see Figure 2-17). In case you’re wondering, those 
“CW” abbreviations stand for “clockwise” and “counter-clockwise.”
Rotating the spread only affects the view; this has no effect on 
printing or exporting your document. You can save the rotation 
with your document, but if you plan on handing the document off 
to someone else, you might consider removing the rotation, just so 
you don’t freak them out—to do that, choose Clear Rotation from 
the Rotate Spread View submenu. On the other hand, it’s a wonder-
ful practical joke to rotate one spread in the middle of a document 
180 degrees. 
When a spread is rotated, InDesign places a special icon next to it 
in the Pages panel (unless your icons are set to “Small”).
Defining Sections
Sections define ranges of pages in a document, and give you a way 
to use multiple page numbering styles in a single document. Using 
sections, you can combine front matter numbered using lowercase 
roman numerals (i, ii, iii) followed by regular pages numbered using 
Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3). 
Sections can also add a page numbering prefix or define section 
marker text—the sort of thing you’d see in a magazine layout con-
taining a special advertising section. A section can also be an alter-
nate layout, covered later in this chapter.
Figure 2-17
Rotating a Spread
Icon indicating this spread is rotated 
(rotated in view mode, not output)
Rotating your spreads 
is especially good when 
you’re making a calendar 
or any document with a 
horizontal spine.
Right-clicking (or Control-
clicking with a one-button 
mouse) on a page or spread 
displays this Context menu.

 2.  yu 91
InDesign’s sections features makes setting up these sorts of varia-
tions easy. You can have multiple sections in an InDesign docu-
ment, and each section can have its own starting page number, page 
numbering system, page numbering prefix, and section marker text. 
Every InDesign file has one section, beginning on the first page.
To define a new section, follow these steps (see Figure 2-18).
1. Select the page icon in the Pages panel that represents the first 
spread in the section.
2. Choose Numbering & Section Options from the panel’s menu 
or from the Context menu. InDesign displays the Numbering & 
Section Options dialog box. 
3. Make sure the Section Start option is on, and then use the 
controls in the New Section dialog box (see descriptions below) 
to specify the page numbering options of your new section, then 
click OK. InDesign adds a little black triangle above the page 
icon in the Pages panel to indicate a section start.
When you want to edit a section, you can repeat the process above 
or just double-click the black triangle icon in the Pages panel.
Page Numbering. If you want InDesign to continue the page 
numbering from the previous section, choose the Automatic Page 
Choose Numbering & Sec-
tion Options from the Pages 
panel or Context menu. 
InDesign displays the New 
Section dialog box
Turn on the Start Section option.
The options in the Document 
Chapter Numbering   
area are related to the   
Book feature, and are   
discussed in Chapter 8, 
“Long Documents.”
Select a page  
numbering style.
Enter the text you want 
to have appear when 
you insert a section 
marker character.
InDesign creates 
a new section.
The first page of a document is 
always a section start
Figure 2-18
Defining Section 
Options

92     6
Numbering option. Otherwise, turn on the Start Page Numbering 
At option and enter a starting page number in the associated field.
Section Prefix. You can enter a label for your section in the Section 
Prefix field (you can enter up to eight characters). This is primarily 
helpful when you have multiple sections with the same page num-
bering. For example, you might have page 1 in Section A and another 
page 2 in Section B. You could type “A-” and “B-” in the Section 
Prefix fields. You then have to type the prefix when using the Go To 
Page feature, or when printing or exporting specific pages. 
If you want your prefix to also show up on your documents when 
you use the automatic page number feature, turn on the Include 
Prefix when Numbering Pages checkbox.
In some earlier versions of InDesign, the program automatically 
added the baffling “Sec1:” prefix, which we found incredibly annoy-
ing; we’re pleased to report that it doesn’t do that anymore. Note that 
this means that you can have both the section prefix text and the 
section marker text appear on the page (see “Section Marker,” below).
Style. Choose the page numbering style you want (roman numerals, 
Arabic numerals, or upper- or lower-case letters).
Section Marker. If you want InDesign to enter text on some or all 
of the pages of the section (such as the chapter name) automatically, 
enter that text in this field. Most of the time, you use this field for the 
name of the section itself—but you can enter anything (up to around 
100 characters). See “Adding Section Marker Text,” below.
Numbering Pages
While you can always type the page number of a page into a text 
frame, there’s an easier way to number a page. By entering a page 
number marker, you can have InDesign automatically number the 
page for you. If you move the page, or change the page numbering for 
the section containing the page, InDesign updates the page number.
To enter a page number marker, click the Type tool in a text frame 
and do one of the following (see Figure 2-19):
▶Display the Context menu, then choose Auto Page Number from 
the Insert Special Character submenu.

 2.  yu 93
▶Choose Auto Page Number from the Insert Special Character 
submenu of the Type menu.
▶Press Command-Shift-Option-N/Ctrl-Shift-Alt-N.
If you’re on a master page, you’ll see the master page prefix (if 
you’re on master page “A,” for example, you’ll see an “A”); if you’re on 
a document page, you’ll see the page number itself.
Adding Section Marker Text
To have InDesign automatically “type” the section marker text that 
you specified in the Section Marker field of the Numbering & Section 
Options dialog box, click the Type tool in a text frame and choose 
Section Name from the Insert Special Characters submenu (under 
the Type menu or the context menu; see Figure 2-20). If you’re on 
a master page, however, you’ll just see the word “Section.” Later, 
when you change the contents of the Section Marker field, InDesign 
changes the text on the document pages.
One common use for section markers is running heads at the 
top or bottom of the page. For example, you could create a single 
InDesign document with 10 sections—one for each chapter. Instead 
of creating 10 master pages—each one identical except for the run-
ning head that indicates the section name—you could insert a Section 
marker on a single master page and then simply update the Section 
field (in the Section & Numbering dialog box) for each section.
To be honest, however, our use of the section marker character 
has diminished since InDesign added text variables, which can “pull” 
the text from a heading or a chapter opener and put it in the header 
even more easily. We cover text variables in Chapter 3, “Text.”
Click the Type tool in a 
text frame, and then press 
Command-Option-Shift-N/
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-N, or choose 
Current Page Number from 
the Markers submenu of the 
Insert Special Character sub-
menu of the Context menu.
InDesign inserts a page 
number marker at the 
location of the cursor.
If the text frame is on a master 
spread, you’ll see a letter 
corresponding to the prefix of 
the master spread. On document 
pages, InDesign displays the 
actual page number.
Figure 2-19
Inserting Page Numbers

94     6
Most of the time, you’ll probably want to enter automatic page 
number and section marker characters on your master pages—but 
you can also enter them directly on document pages.
Working with Master Pages
Master pages (more accurately called master spreads) are the back-
ground on which you lay out your publication’s pages. When you 
assign a master spread to a document page, InDesign applies the 
margin and column settings of the master spread to the page. Any 
page items on the master spread also appear on the document page, 
on the layers they occupy on the master spread. Master page items 
cannot be edited on document pages unless you choose to override 
the items from the master pages (see “Overriding Master Items”).
Click the Type tool in 
a text frame. (In this 
example, we’ve added a 
section marker to a text 
frame at the edge of the 
page; we then rotated the 
text frame 90 degrees.)
Choose Section 
Marker from the 
Markers submenu 
of the Insert Special 
Character submenu 
of the Context menu.
If you’re on a master   
page, you’ll see “Section” 
where you entered the   
section marker.
If you’re looking at a   
document page, you’ll see 
the text you entered in the 
Section Marker field of 
the Numbering & Section 
Options dialog box.
Figure 2-20
Inserting Section 
Marker Text

 2.  yu 95
If you’re a long-time QuarkXPress user, you’re probably familiar 
with the technique of putting items on master pages to use as a “tem-
plate” for document pages. However, in QuarkXPress, each master 
page object is immediately accessible (“clickable”) on the document 
page. Therefore, some people used master pages in XPress as a kind 
of alternative to the Clipboard. That doesn’t work very well in InDe-
sign, because InDesign protects master page items so you don’t acci-
dentally change them. We cover that in more detail in “Overriding 
Master Items,” later in this chapter.
However, in general, you should put items on master pages that 
you do not expect to override on document pages. In fact, because 
In Design can flow text into the area defined by the margins (a feature 
QuarkXPress lacks), even master text frames are rarely needed.
To create a new master spread, use any of the following techniques:
▶Hold down Command/Ctrl as you click the Add Page button 
at the bottom of the Pages panel. InDesign adds a new master 
spread to the publication. You can display the New Master 
dialog box by holding down Command-Option/Ctrl-Alt while 
you click.
▶Choose New Master from the Pages panel menu. InDesign dis-
plays the New Master dialog box (see Figure 2-21).
▶Drag a spread from the document pages section of the Pages 
panel into the master pages section (see Figure 2-22). If you’ve 
already laid out a document page using the layout you’d like to 
use as a master page, this is the easiest way to transfer that layout 
to a master page. When you do this, InDesign creates a new 
master page with the margins, column guides, ruler guides, and 
content of that document page. The new master spread is based 
on the master spread applied to the example document pages 
(see “Basing One Master Spread on Another”).
▶To duplicate a master page you’ve already created, hold down 
Option/Alt as you drag and drop the existing master spread icon 
in the master pages area of the Pages panel. InDesign creates a 
copy of the master spread. Alternately, choose Duplicate Master 
Spread from the Pages panel menu.
You can also import master spreads from another InDesign docu-
ment. To do this, choose Load Master Pages from the Pages panel 
menu. InDesign displays the Open A File dialog box. Locate and 
select an InDesign document, and click the OK button. 
InDesign Is Not 
QuarkXPress
Creating   
Master Spreads
Importing Master 
Spreads

96     6
Choose New Master 
from the Pages panel 
menu or Command-
Option-click/Ctrl-Alt-
click the New Page 
button.
Enter a prefix for the master spread.
Enter a name for the master 
spread, if you want.
Choose an existing master 
spread from this pop-up 
menu to base the new master 
spread on that spread.
Enter the number of pages 
in the master spread, and 
click OK.
InDesign creates  
a new master spread.
Figure 2-21
Creating a Master 
Spread
Drag the page spread into  
the master spreads area of  
the Pages palette.
InDesign creates a new master  
spread with the same margins,  
guides, and page objects.
Figure 2-22
Basing a Master Spread 
on a Document Spread
If the document includes master pages with the same name as 
master pages in the current document, InDesign displays the Load 
Master Pages Alert dialog box. You can replace the existing master 
spreads, or rename the incoming master spreads.
If you re-import master spreads from the same document at a 
later date, InDesign will update the master spreads. This gives you 
a way to “synchronize” master spreads between documents without 
having to use the Book feature. (However, if you are using a book 
panel, using the Synchronize feature may be even easier. We discuss 
that in Chapter 8, “Long Documents.”)

 2.  yu 97
Copying Master Spreads Between Documents. To copy selected 
master spreads from one document to another, you can use drag 
and drop. Select the source document and drag the master page icon 
from the Pages panel into the other document. Drop the icon, and 
the master page is copied over.
Alternatively, you can select the master pages and choose Move 
Pages from the Pages panel menu. This displays the Move Pages 
dialog box, where you can specify the destination for the pages.
When you copy document pages between documents, InDesign 
also copies any master pages that were applied to those document 
pages. If the two documents have master spreads with the same 
name, the master spread isn’t copied.
Imagine that you produce a catalog, and that, over the course of a 
year, you produce seasonal issues of the catalog. The basic design 
elements—the section, margins, columns, and page numbering—
remain the same throughout the year, but the colors used, and the 
page footers change with each issue. Do you have to create a new 
set of master spreads for each issue? Not when you have InDesign’s 
ability to base a master spread on another master spread, you don’t.
When you base a new master spread on an existing master spread, 
the new master inherits the properties of the existing master spread. 
We refer to the relationship between the original style and the new 
style as a “parent/child” relationship. Once you’ve applied a master 
spread to another master spread, you can add to it or override page 
elements on the pages of the “child” spread, just as you can from any 
document page (see “Overriding Master Items,” below).
Here’s how inheritance works: When you change any of the attri-
butes defined by the “parent” spread, those changes appear in the 
“child” spread. When the attributes between a “child” spread and its 
“parent” spread differ, those attributes are controlled by the “child” 
spread. Take a look at the (somewhat overwrought) example in 
Figure 2-23 on the next page, and you’ll see what we mean.
You can base one master page on another by picking a master 
page from the Based on Master pop-up menu in the New Master 
dialog box. Or drag the parent master on top of the child master in 
the Pages panel.
Applying Master Pages and Master Spreads
To apply a master page or master spread to a document page (or even 
to another master page), do one of the following.
Basing One Master 
Spread on Another

98     6
TimeTravelTickets offers 
time travel to great perfor-
mances in history. Their 
catalog is divided into 
sections based on the century 
of the performance, each 
section is divided into 
the categories “Theatre,” 
“Music,” and “Dance.” We’ve 
set up master spreads to 
reflect the organization of 
the catalog.
All master spreads are based on 
master spread “A” (which we’ll 
apply to all of the pages in the 
“Theatre” category).
Master spread “A” applied   
to a document page.
Enter the text of 
the bleed tab.
Master spread “B” uses 
a different color scheme 
and replaces the word 
“Theatre” with “Music,” but 
is otherwise identical 
to master spread “A.”
Here’s an example of 
master spread “B” in 
another section (note the 
differing section text).
Master spread 
“B” is based on 
master spread 
“A.”
…and that change will be 
reflected in all of the “child” 
master spreads.
Ready to update the catalog? 
Enter a new season and 
year in the page footer of the 
“parent” master spread…
See how easy it was to 
update all of the catalog’s 
master spreads for a new 
season? While a layout 
like this takes time to set 
up initially, it can save you 
lots of time and trouble in 
the long run.
Figure 2-23
Basing One Master 
Spread on Another

 2.  yu 99
▶Drag and drop the master page spread icon or master page icon 
on a page icon. Usually, this just affects a single page, but if you 
move the cursor carefully around the icons until a thick black 
line appears around the whole spread, the master page is applied 
to all pages in the spread. This is a slow and tedious process 
which you’ll perform once and then never do again.
▶Select a master page in the Pages panel and then choose Apply 
Master to Pages from the Pages panel menu (see Figure 2-24). 
Choose Apply Master 
to Pages from the 
Pages panel menu.
InDesign displays the Apply 
Master dialog box.
Choose the name of the 
master spread you want to 
apply from the Apply Master 
pop-up menu.
Enter the range of pages you want 
to apply the master spread to.
Figure 2-24
Applying Master 
Spreads Using the Apply 
Master to Pages Option
Enter the page, or pages, to which you want to apply the master 
spread. To enter non-contiguous pages, enter commas between 
the page numbers (“1, 3, 10, 12, 22”), or enter page ranges (“55-
73”), or mix ranges and individual pages (“1, 3, 7-13, 44”).
▶Select a page or pages and then Option/Alt-click on the master 
page. This is the fastest method, period.
To edit the items on a master spread, display the master spread. There 
are several ways to do this, but the two easiest methods are either 
to double-click the master spread’s label in the Pages panel or press 
Command/Ctrl-J (to jump to the Page field), type the prefix (such as 
typing “B” for the “B-Master”) and press Enter.
Once you’re viewing a master page, you can edit the master 
spread’s margins guides, ruler guides, and page items just as you 
would any items and attributes of a document spread.
Editing Master Spreads

100     6
Master Options. You can also select a master page and then choose 
Master Options from the Pages panel menu to change the master 
page’s prefix, name, or based-on status. Shortcut: click on the master 
page in the Pages panel, not the icon (to select it) and then Option/
Alt-click on the master page’s label to open the same dialog box.
To remove a master spread from a document, select the master spread 
in the Pages panel, then choose Delete Master Spread from the Pages 
panel menu. You can also drag the master page to the Delete button 
at the bottom of the Pages panel.
In InDesign CS6, master text frames seem to have been replaced by 
primary text frames. Have no fear—at least of primary text frames. 
(Fear of snakes, spiders, and redheads is perfectly reasonable.)
It’s important to understand that primary text frames haven’t 
replaced master text frames. A primary text frame is a specific kind 
of master text frame. “Regular” master text frames behave the same 
way they did in earlier InDesign versions. The primary text frame is 
different from a master text frame in two significant ways:
▶In layout pages, you don’t need to override a primary text frame 
by Ctrl/Command+Shift clicking. Simply clicking it selects the 
frame or places a cursor. Word of caution: If you have a full-page 
primary text frame, doing simple tasks like creating a text frame 
or deselecting objects can drive you nuts, at least until you get 
used to it.
Deleting   
Master Spreads
Primary Text Frames
If you click on the frame you want 
to change, nothing happens. This is 
probably a good thing, as it prevents 
you from accidentally changing 
master items.
In this example, we want to 
create a new master spread 
based on the “A-Theatre” 
master spread. In the new 
spread, we want to change 
the word “Theatre” to 
“Music.”
So, hold down  
Command-Shift/Ctrl-Shift…
…and click the object. InDesign 
copies the object to the current page 
and marks it as a “local override.”
Now you can edit or format the text.
Figure 2-25
Overriding a 
Master Item

 2.  yu 101
▶When you apply a different master page to a layout page, the 
story running through the primary text flow frames reflows into 
the primary text flow frames from the newly-applied master. The 
previous master’s primary text flow frames are removed, making 
it easy to apply a new layout to existing pages (see Figure 2-26).
To create a primary text frame, select Primary Text Frame in the 
New Document dialog box. You can also click the primary icon in 
the upper left corner of the text frame on a master page, or right-click 
a text frame and choose Primary Text Frame. You can have only one 
primary text frame per master page. However, you can have a pri-
mary text frame on different master pages. The primary text frame 
on the master page cannot contain text.
A good approach for creating articles is to create a primary text 
frame on the page the starts the article and then a different primary 
text frame for the masters applied to the rest of the pages in the arti-
cle. In the layout pages, thread the text frames together to create one 
main story for the article.
Figure 2-26
Primary Text Frame vs. 
Master Text Frame
Create B-Master with 
primary text frame (left), 
and then apply it to the 
layout page (right).
With a regular master 
text frame, the incoming 
text frame is added...
...but with a primary text frame, 
the incoming primary text frame 
replaces the current one.

102     6
Are the items from your master page too distracting? No problem: 
Select Hide Master Items from the View menu. Later, when you want 
to see the completed page, select Show Master Items.
Overriding Master Items
Want to modify or delete a master page item from a document page, 
but leave all of the other master pages items alone? Wait! Don’t cover 
the master page item with a white box! There’s a better way. InDesign 
calls it “overriding” a master page item. 
To override a master page item, hold down Command-Shift/Ctrl-
Shift and click the master page item (or, if you’re using the Type tool, 
click inside the master page item). InDesign “unlinks” the master 
page item, so you can select it, format it, or delete it as you would any 
other page item (see Figure 2-25). You can also override everything 
on any page(s) selected in the Pages panel by choosing Override All 
Master Page Items from the panel menu.
Notice that we put “unlink” in quotation marks above, indicating 
that the objects aren’t really unlinked from their master page. You 
can return an overridden master page item to its original state by 
selecting the object and choosing Remove Selected Local Overrides 
from the Pages panel menu (see Figure 2-27). If you’ve made some 
terrible mistake, you can return one or more pages’ worth of over-
ridden objects by selecting the pages in the Pages panel and choosing 
Remove All Local Overrides from the panel menu. 
Hiding Master Items
…and choose Remove Selected Local 
Override from the Pages panel menu.
To remove a local override, 
select the object… 
Figure 2-27
Removing 
Local Overrides
InDesign removes the 
object and displays the 
original master object.

 2.  yu 103
Maintaining Some Links. Overridden items are not entirely free 
of the influence of their master page counterpart. If you override a 
frame and then move it on the document page, the position of that 
item is no longer linked to the position of the master page item. How-
ever, if you change the fill of the master page item, those changes do
flow through to the overridden master page.
If you want to totally unlink an object from the master page, so 
that nothing you do on the master will affect the item on the docu-
ment page, first override the item, and then—while it’s still selected—
choose Master Pages > Detach Selection from Master from the Pages 
panel menu or deselect everything and select Detach All Objects 
from Master.
Reapplying Master Pages. When you reapply the master page to a 
document page containing overridden or detached items, the origi-
nal master page items reappear on the document page, but the over-
ridden page items are not deleted. This isn’t usually a good thing—it’s 
easy to end up with stacks of duplicated objects.
Adjusting Layouts
What happens when you change the margins of a page, or apply a 
different master page? Should the items on the affected pages move 
or resize to match the new page geometry? Or should they stay as 
they are? You decide. 
There are two different features that adjust layout automatically: 
the powerful new Liquid Page Rules and the rigid old Layout Adjust-
ment feature. In any document, you can choose one feature or the 
other, but you can’t use both. Liquid page rules take effect when 
you create alternate layouts or export a digital publication, but not 
when changing page margins and columns or page setup. You can 
use Layout Adjustment when changing margins, columns, and page 
setup.
The InDesign team moved the Layout Adjustment command 
to the Liquid Layout panel. Choose Liquid Layout from the Layout 
menu, and then choose Layout Adjustment from the Liquid Layout 
panel menu to see the Layout Adjustment dialog box (see Figure 
2-28). Here’s a quick walk-through of the controls here.
Enable Layout Adjustment. Turn this option on, and InDesign 
adjusts the position and size of the objects on the affected pages 
according to the settings in this dialog box. With this option off, 

104     6
When the Enable Layout 
Adjustment option is off, 
InDesign does not change 
the position or size of page 
objects when you change the 
geometry of the page…
…even for a change as radical as 
changing page orientation.
Turn on the Enable Layout 
Adjustment option, and 
InDesign changes the posi-
tion and size of page objects 
in response to changes 
in page size, orientation, 
column setup, or margins. 
The options in the Layout 
Adjustment dialog box give you a 
way to “fine tune” the automated 
adjustment process.
Here’s the layout, as adjusted 
by InDesign.
Ruler guide positions are 
very important to the layout 
adjustment feature. In this 
example, changing the page 
size changes the shape and 
position of the graphics—all 
because of their relationship 
to the ruler guides that 
surround them.
As the ruler guides move, InDesign 
resizes the graphics you’ve “stuck” to 
the ruler guides.
Figure 2-28
Adjusting Layouts
InDesign does not change object positions or sizes when you apply 
master pages, change page size, or otherwise change page geometry.
Layout Adjustment can change your file in ways you may not 
expect. For instance, let’s say you have a single-column document 
with a master text frame. If you change the number of columns to 
three while Layout Adjustment is enabled, InDesign replaces the 
single text frame with three threaded frames.

 2.  yu 105
Snap Zone. How close to a guide does an object have to be to be 
affected by layout adjustment? That’s what you’re telling InDesign by 
the value you enter in this field. Objects within the specified distance 
will move or resize; objects outside that range won’t.
Allow Graphics and Groups to Resize. When this option is turned 
off, InDesign will not resize graphic frames or groups of objects while 
adjusting layouts. When it’s on, InDesign resizes graphic frames and 
groups when they extend to the edges of the column or margin. Note 
that InDesign never scales text in a text frame; it may resize the frame 
itself, but not the text inside it. It will, however, scale graphics. This 
is quite powerful, but also quite dangerous. If you have a picture that 
spans from the left margin to the right margin in a single-column 
document, and you use Margins and Columns to split the page into 
two or more columns, this option will scale that picture down into 
the left-most column—probably not what you were hoping for.
Allow Ruler Guides to Move. Should ruler guides move when you 
change the layout of the page or spread? If you’d like the ruler guides 
to move, turn this option on; if not, turn it off. How far guides move 
when you make a layout change depends on a host of issues.
Ignore Ruler Guide Alignments. When this option is off, InDesign 
moves and resizes objects to match the positions of ruler guides in 
the new page layout. When it’s on, InDesign does not consider the 
locations of ruler guides when resizing or moving objects—only the 
location of margin guides and page edges. The effect of this option 
also depends on the state of the Allow Ruler Guides to Move option.
Ignore Object and Layer Locks. What should InDesign do while 
adjusting your layout when it encounters a locked object, or an object 
on a locked layer? When you turn this option on, InDesign will treat 
the objects as if they were unlocked. To leave locked objects alone, 
turn this option off.
It’s All in the Guides. The key thing to remember is that InDesign 
bases all layout adjustment decisions on the positions of margin 
guides, ruler guides, column guides, and page edges. InDesign 
cannot know that you want an object to change its size or position 
unless you somehow associate the object with a guide or a page edge.

106     6
Liquid Page Rules
Liquid page rules determine how content reflows when you create an 
alternate layout or output to a mobile device format. 
The best way to learn this feature is to experiment. Apply liquid 
page rules to a page using either the Liquid Layout panel or the Con-
trol panel when the Page tool is selected. Create a page with multiple 
objects, prop up this book, and start playing. Select the Page tool, 
apply a type of page rule to a page or object, and drag one of the cor-
ners (see Figure 2-29). Don’t worry about messing up the page. When 
you release the mouse button, the page snaps back into place (unless 
you hold down Option/Alt).
Another way to test liquid page rules is to create, delete, and re-
create alternate layouts. Alternate layouts is the companion feature to 
liquid page rules that we’ll cover in a few pages.
You can apply different rules to different pages in a layout, but you 
can apply only one rule per page. If you use liquid page rules, you 
cannot turn on the old Layout Adjustment feature: it’s one or the 
other. Liquid page rules affect all states in a multi-state object, but 
not locked objects.
There are four main types of page rules. Two of them—Scale and 
Re-center—are quick and dirty methods (see Figure 2-30). Scale 
works just like selecting multiple objects and scaling the selection. 
How Liquid Page   
Rules Work
Figure 2-29
Testing Liquid 
Page Rules
Select the Page tool.
Select the Liquid Page Rule.
Drag to resize the page and 
test your liquid rules.

 2.  yu 107
The objects—including text—are scaled up or down when the page is 
resized. Re-center keeps the objects in the center of the layout with-
out scaling objects or changing the distance between them. With 
basic designs, using one of these options might be all you need.
The other two methods—Guide-Based and Object-Based—give 
you much more control, but they require some setup effort.
In addition to the four page rule types, you can also choose Off or 
Controlled By Master. Choosing Off leaves the objects in place when 
the page resizes. Choosing Controlled By Master uses whichever page 
layout rule is applied to the master page assigned to the current page. 
If you select this option, be prepared to answer the question, “Wait, 
why didn’t resizing the page affect my objects?” with the answer, “Oh, 
because I applied a different page rule to the master page.”
You drag a special kind of guide called a “liquid guide” onto the page. 
The frame of any object it touches scales either away from or toward 
the guide as the page resizes, which seems backwards for some of us. 
If you want both sides of the object to scale, drag both horizontal and 
vertical guides that touch the object (see Figure 2-31).
If your layout includes adjacent objects with different scaling 
requirements, don’t use guide-based rules. Instead, use object-based 
rules so that you can control each object individually. We in the 
Real World InDesign Complex are tempted to recommend using 
only object-based rules for complex layouts, but we’ve heard enough 
designers we respect tell us they love using liquid guides.
Guide-Based Rules
Figure 2-30
Scale and Re-Center 
Liquid Page Rules
In each alternate layout, the 
page size increased by 50%....
When the Scale rule is used, 
objects are scaled up.
When the Re-Center rule is 
used, objects remain cen-
tered on the new page.

108     6
To create a liquid guide, select the Page tool, and then drag a 
guide out of the ruler the same way you create a regular ruler guide. 
You can also hold the mouse button over a layout guide and click 
the “adornment” to toggle between a ruler guide and a liquid guide. 
If you right-click the guide, you can select options from the context 
menu. A normal ruler guide is a solid cyan line by default. A liquid 
guide is a dashed blue line by default.
Object-based page rules resize objects based on rule settings applied 
to each object. These settings determine whether objects are resized 
horizontally or vertically, and which side(s) of the page the object is 
pinned to. When you’re working with object rules, keep the Page tool 
selected and the Liquid Layout panel open (see Figure 2-32).
The ability to pin an object to one or more sides of the page gives 
you a lot of control. A pinned object remains the same distance from 
any page edge it’s pinned to no matter how the page is resized. For 
example, if the new layout’s page is taller and wider, a non-pinned 
object will be further from the page edges than a pinned object. 
Unfortunately, you can’t pin objects to each other.
You can apply object rule settings to an object using two differ-
ent methods: (1) select the Page tool, and then select an object, and 
Guide adornment
Object-Based Rules
Figure 2-31
Guide-Based 
Liquid Page Rule
We added a horizontal and 
vertical liquid guide, and 
then resized the layout.
Oops. We need to go back 
and keep the vertical liquid 
guide away from these text 
frames.
The title and the background 
image scaled perfectly.

 2.  yu 109
(2) select an object with the Selection tool, and then use the Liquid 
Layout panel to specify options. We prefer the first method because it 
lets us test right away by dragging a corner handle with the Page tool.
To change settings, you can either select options in the Liquid 
Layout panel or click the dots that appear when you use the Page tool 
to select an object.
The liquid page rules affect the frames of objects, but what happens 
to placed images and text in frames? Nothing, unless you change 
some settings. Let’s go over a few features you can use to improve 
liquid layout.
Liquid Page Rules with 
Other Features
Figure 2-32
Object-Based 
Liquid Page Rule
Select the Page tool, and 
choose the Object-Based rule 
for the page.
The inner circles indicate 
whether the object will resize 
with the page; the outer 
circles pin the object to edges 
of the page. When you click 
the dots to toggle a setting, 
the change is reflected in the 
Liquid Layout panel.
Create an alternate 
layout to appy the 
object rules. It also 
applies frame fitting 
and text frame options. 
Notice that the resized 
text frame now has 
only two columns 
instead of three.
Select each object with the 
Page tool, and indicate what 
happens to the object when 
it’s resized.

110     6
Frame Fitting Options. Select the object, open the Frame Fitting 
Options dialog box, and choose Auto Fit. Unless you have a good 
reason to do otherwise, select Fill Frame Proportionally. You should 
also specify an option from the Align To proxy. Center usually works 
well, but for some images, specifying a different alignment preserves 
the image’s focal point. For example, to keep the bird in Figure 2-32 
in view, we selected the upper left corner of the proxy.
Flexible Width Columns. In the Text Frame Options dialog box, 
select Flexible Columns and specify a maximum width value. As the 
page resizes, the number of columns changes—especially useful for 
converting between horizontal and portrait layouts. Again, in Figure 
2-32, the number of columns changed from 3 to 2 when we created 
the alternate layout.
Auto-Size Text Frames. This option can be useful for growing or 
shrinking text frames in a specific direction, especially after chang-
ing styles or other formatting. Be careful with this feature. For exam-
ple, if you combine it with Flexible Width Columns, the settings will 
battle each other, and you’ll end up being unable to resize your text 
frame properly, perhaps leading to uncontrollable sobbing. 
Primary Text Frame. When you create alternate layouts or export 
and view the publication on a device, pages might need to be removed 
or added. When pages are added, the text in the primary text frame 
story flows onto new pages.
Alternate Layouts
The ability to create alternate layouts within documents is one of 
those delightful new features that should please both print and digi-
tal publishers. Let’s look at two ways to use this feature:
▶Example 1: You need to print a postcard in three different sizes: 
3"x5", 4"x6", and 5"x7". Instead of creating three separate docu-
ments, you can build your postcard design in one size and then 
create alternate layouts for the other two sizes. You can establish 
parent/child links between the text and objects in the different 
layouts so that making one change can ripple through all layouts.
▶Example 2: You’re creating a DPS magazine article that you want 
to appear on the iPad, the Kindle Fire, and various Android tab-
lets. You want to create both horizontal and vertical layouts (for 

 2.  yu 111
when the device is rotated), and you want to create 2048x1536, 
1232x752, 1024x768, and 1024x600 folio sizes. Instead of creat-
ing eight different documents, you need to create only one docu-
ment with multiple layouts (see Figure 2-33).
An alternate layout is essentially a different page numbering sec-
tion in the document. When you create an alternate layout, a new set 
of master pages is created in the target size and applied to the newly 
added layout pages.
InDesign can make automatic layout adjustments based on the 
liquid page rules you set up, leaving you with minimal—or no—
extra layout work. You just need to tell InDesign what to do.
When you first look at alternate layouts, it’s hard to grasp everything 
at once. You can do a lot of setup work to improve alternate layout 
results—especially tinkering with the companion feature, Liquid 
Page Rules—but that’s difficult to do until you understand the basics 
of creating an alternate layout. Let’s walk through the main steps.
1. Create the design for the first layout. As always, use styles when-
ever possible. To take advantage of pagination reflow features, 
set up a primary text frame on one or more master pages.
2. For advanced layout adjustment, set up liquid page rules by 
either adding liquid guides or applying rules to each object. 
Make other changes to anticipate layout changes, such as apply-
ing frame fitting options and specifying text frame options to 
change the number of columns, for example. See the previous 
section, “Liquid Page Rules.”
Creating Alternate 
Layouts
The master pages for each 
layout are duplicated and 
resized.
Each layout has the same 
content formatted for a dif-
ferent size. Each article has 
both a horizontal and verti-
cal layout, and each pair 
of layouts targets a specific 
device size.
Figure 2-33
Alternate Layouts 
in Pages Panel

112     6
3. Choose Create Alternate Layout from the Layout menu or from 
the header menu in the Pages panel. The Create Alternate dialog 
box appears (see Figure 2-34). Let’s walk through the settings.
From Source Pages. Choosing source pages is especially important 
when you’ve created multiple alternate layouts. The source layout 
you choose becomes the parent in the parent/child relationship. For 
example, if you’ve created the horizontal and vertical layouts of an 
iPad article and you’re ready to create layouts for a different device, 
you can base each new layout on either the existing horizontal or 
vertical layout.
To create an alternate layout for only a few pages, add a colon 
followed by the page range, such as “iPad H:1” to affect only the first 
page. Use the same page range techniques you use when printing.
Page Size. Different presets appear depending on the document’s 
Intent setting. If the Intent is set to Print, you get options such as 
Letter and A4. If it’s set to Web, you get a list of pixel dimensions. 
And if it’s set to Digital Publishing, you get target devices such as the 
iPad and Xoom. You can also specify a custom size.
Pay attention to the orientation setting: Landscape or Portrait. 
InDesign doesn’t always pick the logical orientation as the default.
One more thing: We like to keep the alternate layout names short 
and simple. It simplifies printing or exporting page ranges, and it 
reduces clutter in the Pages panel.
Liquid Page Rule. This is the most important setting. It determines 
what happens to the items on your page. The Scale and Re-Center 
options offer basic layout adjustments, while Guide-Based and 
Object-Based require custom setup work. See the “Liquid Page Rules” 
section earlier in this chapter.
Figure 2-34
Create Alternate Layout
Mobile device settings 
appear because the docu-
ment’s Intent is set to Digital 
Publishing.

 2.  yu 113
Link Stories. Select this option to establish a parent/child link 
between the text frames in the source layout with the equivalent text 
frames in the new layout. Selecting this option has the same effect 
as copying a text frame and choosing Place and Link from the Edit 
menu (described in “Chapter 7: Importing and Exporting”). To con-
trol which attributes trigger a modified link, choose Link Options 
from the Links panel menu.
Copy Text Styles to New Style Group. This option takes all the para-
graph and character styles and places them in a new group in the 
styles panel. Copying styles is especially useful when the new layout 
is significantly larger or smaller than the source layout, such as when 
you’re creating articles for the iPhone instead of the iPad. When you 
need to edit text, you can update links to pick up text edits while still 
preserving style differences.
The styles in the target layout are not linked to each other. If you’re 
using alternate layouts for a big project such as DPS magazine folios, 
set up a master document with edited styles. Once you create the 
alternate layouts, import (load) the styles in the master document 
into the document to replace the styles.
Smart Text Reflow. It’s a bit odd that this preference setting shows 
up here in this dialog box, but it’s a good reminder that you can turn 
on or off Smart Text Reflow, which adds or removes pages as text 
becomes overset in the primary text frame. This option mirrors the 
setting in Text preferences. But you should go into Text preferences 
and make sure all the Smart Text Reflow options are set up properly. 
For example, we like to select Delete Empty Pages even though it’s 
not the default setting.
Choose options from the 
menu at the top of each 
alternate layout section.
If you don’t see the alternate 
layout header menus in your 
Pages panel, choose View 
Pages > By Alternate Layout 
from the Pages panel menu..
Figure 2-35
Alternate Layout
Header Options

114     6
Suppose you don’t like the alternate layout you created. If you catch 
the problem right away, just choose Undo. 
If you can’t choose Undo and want to delete the alternate layout, 
you might be tempted to just delete the section in the Pages panel. If 
you do that, you’ll leave behind any master pages and style groups 
that were created. Instead, choose Delete Alternate Layout from 
the header menu in the Pages panel (see Figure 2-35). You can also 
choose Delete Pages from this pop-up menu to leave the master 
pages behind for a reason known only to you.
After you create your alternate layouts, you likely have some fine-
tuning to do. Adjust the new layouts as needed, and edit or import 
the copied styles if needed to conform to the new target.
Play attention the links you set up in your document. As a rule, 
keep your parent layout on the left side of the Pages panel. When 
you need to edit text, make the edits in the parent layout, and then 
double-click the “modified” link icons in the child layouts.
In some cases, you might want to establish two different parents 
for your layouts. For example, in a digital publishing article, you 
might want to start with a parent horizontal layout and create a ver-
tical layout based on the horizontal one. You could then create the 
alternate horizontal layouts based on the original horizontal layout, 
and the alternate vertical layouts based on the original vertical layout. 
If you want text edits to ripple through the different layouts, you edit 
text in the main horizontal layout, and then update the links in the 
child (and grandchild) layouts.
These options will be more significant when EPUB 3 readers that 
support pagination become available.
Choose Liquid HTML5 Pagination Options from the header 
menu above the layout in the Pages panel. When the content reflows, 
choosing Automatic causes the design elements that aren’t part of the 
primary story to be evenly distributed among the new pages. Choos-
ing At End of Layout preserves (as much as possible) the look of the 
designed pages, but flows excess text onto new empty pages inserted 
after the last designed page. In addition, specify which master page is 
applied to the added pages—a simple but important step.
How do you mark a page as optional? Select the page in the Pages 
panel, and then choose View Pages > Optional in HTML5 from the 
panel menu. This is especially useful if a page has only a pull quote, 
for example. In the Pages panel, the page numbers of optional pages 
are enclosed in parentheses.
Deleting Alternate 
Layouts
Editing Alternate 
Layouts
Liquid HTML5   
Pagination Optionss

 2.  yu 115
Selecting and Deselecting
Before you can act on an object, you have to select it (see Figure 2-36). 
Sounds simple, but in InDesign you can quickly get in a messy situ-
ation if you don’t pay attention to what, exactly, is selected on your 
page and how you selected it. That’s why we recommend that even 
experienced users read through this carefully.
The Selection Tool. The Selection tool is the swiss-army knife of the 
Tools panel. Use the Selection tool to select, rotate, resize, reposi-
tion, crop, and scale frames and frame content. The Content Grab-
ber—the donut that appears when you mouse over a graphic—lets 
you quickly reposition content within a frame, just by clicking and 
dragging (see Figure 2-36).
You select objects or groups of objects with the Selection tool 
by clicking on them, dragging the selection rectangle (marquee) 
over the objects, or by Shift-selecting (select one object, hold down 
Shift, and select another object). When you mouse over an object, 
InDesign highlights the object that will be selected when you click. 
The selected object’s selection handles and the object’s bounding 
When you select an object using 
the Selection tool, InDesign displays 
the objects’s selection handles and 
bounding box.
When you select an object using 
the Direct Selection tool, InDesign 
displays the points on the path(s)  
of the object.
Selection handles
Bounding box
When you drag a selection rectangle 
around an object or objects…
…InDesign selects all of the objects 
that the selection rectangle touches.
The proxy in the Transform 
panel and Control panel 
represents the selection 
handles of the selected 
object.
Proxy
Figure 2-36
Selecting Objects

116     6
The Content Grabber appears when 
you mouse over a frame with con-
tent using the Selection tool.
Dragging the Content Grabber 
moves (pans) the content within the 
frame—without switching to the 
Direct Selection tool.
box—the smallest rectangular area capable of enclosing the selection. 
The selection handles on the bounding box also correspond to the 
points on the proxy in the Transform panel.
By the way, if the Content Grabber irritates you, choose Hide 
Content Grabber from the View > Extras submenu.
You can also select everything on the current spread by choosing 
Select All from the Edit menu (or pressing Command/Ctrl-A) while 
using either selection tool.
The Direct Selection Tool. As we noted in “Using the Tools Panel” in 
Chapter 1, “Workspace,” when you click an object using the Direct 
Selection tool, InDesign displays the points on the object’s path—
whether it’s a line or a frame. You can also use the Direct Selection 
tool to select objects nested inside other objects (see “Selecting Inside 
Objects,” below). The most common example is selecting a picture 
inside a graphic frame—the frame and the picture are two separate 
objects in InDesign, and you can use the Direct Selection tool to 
select the frame (by clicking on its edge) or the picture (by clicking 
anywhere inside the frame). You can also select frame contents by 
clicking the Content Grabber using the Selection tool. 
You can drag a selection marquee using the Direct Selection tool, 
too, just as you can with the Selection tool—InDesign selects the 
points on the objects within the selection, even if they’re in more 
than one object. To select all the points on a line or frame, hold down 
Option/Alt while you click the path with the Direct Selection tool.
Deselecting. To deselect all selected objects, click an uninhabited 
area of the page or pasteboard, or, better yet, press Command-Shift-
A/Ctrl-Shift-A. We’ve developed this keyboard shortcut into some-
thing of a nervous tic; there are so many times you need to make 
Figure 2-37
Content Grabber

 2.  yu 117
sure everything is deselected. For example, when you create a new 
color, InDesign applies that color to whatever you have selected. If 
you don’t want this, you’d better deselect everything first!
Sometimes, you have to select an object that’s behind another object. 
You might, for example, need to select and edit a background graphic 
behind a text frame. Do you need to drag the text frame out of the 
way? Or hide the layer containing the text frame? There’s a better 
way: Click the Selection tool on the object on top of the stack, then 
press Command/Ctrl and click again. InDesign selects the next 
object in the stack. Each successive click selects the next object down 
in the stack (see Figure 2-38). If you click too far, you can move back 
up the stack by Command-Option/Ctrl-Alt-clicking.
When overlapping objects are exactly or nearly the same in size, 
it can be difficult to see which object in a stack is selected. Don’t 
start dragging objects out of the way—look for clues. The color of 
the selection handles, the state of the Fill and Stroke buttons in the 
Toolbox, and the Stroke panel all provide information that can help 
you determine which object is selected.
If you’re having a difficult time selecting through overlapping 
or nested objects, use the Control panel icons for selecting contain-
ers, contents, and next/previous objects. Another useful method is 
opening a layer in the Layers panel, locating the object, and choosing 
Select Item(s) from the Layers panel menu. 
InDesign also has menu items and keyboard shortcuts for selecting 
objects on your page. The menu items live in the Select submenu, 
under the Object menu, but we only use them if we forget the key-
board shortcuts (below). Note that these features differ from the click-
through method; Command/Ctrl-click selects through an object to 
one directly beneath it. The Select features select from among all the 
objects on a spread. For example, if you have four small frames, one 
in each corner of a page (whether they’re overlapping or not), you can 
select among them with these shortcuts.
▶To select the topmost object beneath the current selection, based 
on the stacking order on the page (see “Stacking Objects,” later 
in this chapter) press Command-Option-Shift-] / Ctrl-Alt-Shift-] 
or choose First Object Above from the Select submenu.
▶To select the object behind the currently selected object in a stack 
of objects, press Command-Option-[ / Ctrl-Alt-[ or choose Next 
Object Below from the Select submenu. Pressing the keyboard 
Selecting   
Through Objects
Keyboard Selections

118     6
The first click selects the object on  
top of the stack of objects…
Want to select an object 
that’s behind other objects? 
You don’t need to drag 
objects out of the way. 
Instead, hold down  
Command/Ctrl and click 
the Selection tool above the 
object you want to select.
…but each subsequent click selects the 
next object in the stack.
Text frame selected
Background graphic selected
Figure 2-38
Selecting Through 
Objects
shortcut again once you reach the bottom of the stack will select 
the topmost object.
▶To select the object above the currently selected object in a stack 
of objects, press Command-Option-] / Ctrl-Alt-] or choose Next 
Object Above from the Select submenu.
▶To select the bottommost object below the selected object, press 
Command-Option-Shift-[ / Ctrl-Alt-Shift-[ or choose Last 
Object Below from the Select submenu.
Sometimes, you need to select an object that you’ve pasted inside 
another object, or to select an object inside a group. The Direct Selec-
tion tool, as you might expect, is the tool you’ll usually use to do this, 
and the process is called “subselection.” (When Ole selects an object 
that’s inside another object, he actually says the object is “subse-
lected.” David, who felt subselected through much of his childhood, 
prefers the term “select-challenged.”)
Note that InDesign treats groups and page items that happen to 
contain other items in the same way. You don’t have to ungroup a 
group, or remove objects from their containing object to select and 
edit them—you can select them, and then work with them just as you 
would any other object. To select an object inside another object, you 
can use any of the following approaches.
▶Using the Selection tool, click an object to select the group. 
Double-click an object to select the object (see Figure 2-39). To 
direct-select the object, press A. Note that in previous versions, 
double-clicking an object switches to the Direct Selection tool.
▶Select the Direct Selection tool, and click the element that you 
want to edit. InDesign temporarily highlights the object as you 
Selecting   
Inside Objects

 2.  yu 119
Click the group with the Selection 
tool to select the group.
Double-click one of the objects in the 
group to select the object.
Figure 2-39
Subselecting Objects 
Inside Groups
mouse over it, making it easy to see what will be selected when 
you click.
▶Select the group or containing object with the Selection tool, 
then choose Content from the Select submenu of the Context 
menu. This selects an object. If necessary, choose Next Object or 
Previous Object from the Select submenu of the Context menu 
until the object you want is selected.
▶Select the group or containing object with the Selection tool, 
then click the Select Content button in the Control panel. If nec-
essary, click the Select Next Object and Select Previous Object 
buttons until the object you want is selected (see Figure 2-40).
Guides
InDesign can display five types of guides: margin guides, column 
guides, ruler guides, liquid guides, and Smart Guides. Guides are 
nonprinting guidelines you can use for positioning objects on the 
pages and pasteboard of an InDesign publication. Margin guides 
appear inside the page margins for a particular page. Column guides 
are actually pairs of guides that move as a unit. The space between 
the two guides making up the column guide is the gutter, or column 
spacing. This built-in spacing makes these guides good for—you 
guessed it—setting up columns. A ruler guide is a horizontal or ver-
tical guideline you can use as an aid to aligning or positioning page 
items. A liquid guide helps determines whether page items are scaled 
when guide-based liquid page rules are applied. A Smart Guide is 
a guide that temporarily appears on page to help you position an 
object while you place or move it.
You use guides to mark a position on the page or pasteboard. The 
most important thing about guides is not just that they give you a 
Press the Escape 
key to “back out” 
of subselected 
objects, one object 
at a time.

120     6
Figure 2-40
Control Panel  
Selection Buttons
Click the Select Content 
button again to select an 
object inside the group.
We’ve pasted a group of star 
polygons inside this circle.
Select Container
Select Container
Select Previous
Select Next
At any point, you can click the 
Select Container or Select Content 
button to move the selection up or 
down in the hierarchy of objects 
inside the circle.
Click the Select Content button 
to select the group within the 
circle.
Click Select Next Object in 
Group or Previous Object in 
Group to select other objects 
in the group.
visual reference for aligning objects to a specific location, but that 
they can exert a “pull” on objects you’re moving or creating. To turn 
on that “pull,” choose Snap to Guides from the from the Grids & 
Guides submenu of the View menu. When this option is on (it’s on by 
default), and you drag an object within a certain distance of a guide, 
InDesign snaps the object to the guide.
This is one of our favorite psychocybernetic illusions—as an object 
snaps to a guide, your nervous system tells you that your hand can 
feel the “snap” as you drag the mouse. Turning on Snap to Guides 
can’t physically affect the movement of your mouse, of course, but 
the illusion is very useful. 
When you want to drag an object freely, without having it snap to 
any guides it encounters on its path across the publication window, 
turn Snap to Guides off. Do not try to align an object to a guide while 

 2.  yu 121
When InDesign’s Snap to Guides 
feature is turned off, it’s easy to think 
that you’ve gotten an object into  
perfect alignment with a guide…
…but zooming in will often show you 
that you’ve missed the guide. Turning 
on Snap to Guides can help.
Figure 2-41
Don’t Trust Your Screen
Snap to Guides is turned off, however—there aren’t enough pixels 
available on your screen to allow you to do a good job of this at any 
but the highest magnifications (see Figure 2-41).
Objects do not snap to guides when guides are hidden. This 
includes guides that are on a hidden layer. However, they do snap to 
guides that are invisible due to being in Preview mode.
Also, on the Mac OS, you can disable Snap to Guides temporar-
ily by holding down the Control key while you’re dragging—unless 
Smart Guides is enabled (see “Smart Guides,” later in this chapter).
Tired of looking at all of the guides? To hide all guides, choose Hide 
Guides from the Grids & Guides submenu of the View menu (press 
Command-;/Ctrl-;). To display the guides again, choose Show Guides 
(or press the keyboard shortcut again).
You can also make guides disappear by changing the view thresh-
old (see Figure 2-42). For the document grid, baseline grid, margin 
guides, and column guides, you set the view threshold using the 
Grids panel of the Preferences dialog box (see Chapter 1, “Work-
space”). For individual ruler guides, use the View Threshold field in 
the Ruler Guides dialog box (select a guide and choose Ruler Guides 
from the Layout menu or the Context menu).
While column guides are very similar to ruler guides, they have an 
important distinction: they can affect text flow. When you click the 
text place icon in a column created by column guides, InDesign flows 
the text into the column. By contrast, ruler guides have no effect on 
text flow. For more on flowing text, see Chapter 3, “Text.” 
The method you use to adjust the position of column guides 
depends on what you’re trying to do. If you’re trying to divide the 
area inside the page margins into equal columns, select the page and 
Hiding and   
Displaying Guides
Adjusting   
Column Guides

122     6
enter a new value in the Number field in the Columns section of the 
Margins and Columns dialog box (from the Layout menu).
If, on the other hand, you’re trying to get columns of unequal 
width, you can start by adding evenly-spaced column guides, and 
then adjust each one by dragging them to the left or right on the page 
(see Figure 2-43). You might have to unlock the column guides first; 
see “Locking and Unlocking Column Guides,” below.
You can’t adjust the distance between the column guides (the 
“gutter”) by dragging—instead, you’ll have to go to the Margins and 
Columns dialog box. To change the gutter width, enter a new value 
in the Gutter field (see Figure 2-44). When you open the Margins 
and Columns dialog box after you’ve set up a custom column guide 
arrangement, InDesign displays “Custom” in the Number field. Do 
not enter a number in this field, or InDesign will move your column 
guides so that they again evenly divide the space between the mar-
gins. If you change the gutter width without touching the Number 
field, InDesign leaves your column guides in their original positions, 
but changes the space inside each guide.
You should also bear in mind that text frames can, by themselves 
contain multiple columns of equal width, independent of the Mar-
gins and Columns setting. For more on this topic, see Chapter 3, 
“Text.” Sometimes it’s easier to work with a single multi-column text 
frame than with multiple single-column text frames.
You can lock and unlock column guides, just as you can ruler guides. 
To lock the column guides, choose Lock Column Guides from the 
Grids & Guides submenu of the View menu; to unlock the guides, 
choose Unlock Column Guides.
Locking and Unlocking 
Column Guides
Now you see ’em…
…now you don’t.
The View Threshold of these 
ruler guides is set to 100%…
…the View Threshold 
of these ruler guides is 
set to the default: 5%.
Figure 2-42
Guide View Threshold

 2.  yu 123
To create a new ruler guide, position the cursor over one of the rulers 
(for a horizontal ruler guide, move the cursor to the vertical ruler; for 
a vertical ruler guide, use the horizontal ruler), then click-and-drag. 
As you drag, InDesign creates a new ruler guide at the location of the 
cursor. When you’ve positioned the ruler guide where you want it, 
stop dragging (see Figure 2-45). Hold down the Shift key while drag-
ging a guide to make it snap to the nearest increment in the ruler.
Ruler guides can spread across a single page or the entire paste-
board. Release the mouse button while the cursor is over the page, 
you get a page guide; if the cursor is over the pasteboard, you get a 
pasteboard guide. You can hold down Command/Ctrl as you drag 
the guide to force the guide to cross the whole pasteboard. To adjust 
this type of ruler guide, drag the guide on the pasteboard or with the 
Command/Ctrl key held down—if you drag it on a page or without 
the modifier key, InDesign will limit the guide to that page.
You can also double-click a ruler to create a new ruler guide—
InDesign creates a guide at the point at which you clicked. While this 
sounds appealing, we actually find it quite difficult to double-click 
exactly where we want the guide to be; it’s often more precise to drag.
Creating a New   
Ruler Guide
When the column guide 
reaches the position you 
want, stop dragging and 
release the mouse button.
Unlock the column guides (if 
necessary), then position the 
Selection tool over a column 
guide and drag.
When you create columns 
of unequal width, InDesign 
displays “Custom” in the 
Number field of the Margins 
and Columns dialog box.
Figure 2-43
Creating Columns of 
Unequal Width
Default gutter 
width of 1 pica.
Note that the 
gutter is resized 
evenly around its 
center point.
Choose Margins and Columns from the 
Layout menu, then enter a new value in 
the Gutter field. 
Figure 2-44
Adjusting Gutter Width

124     6
Want to add a regular grid of ruler guides to your page? Try the 
Create Guides option on the Layout menu (see Figure 2-46). The 
options in the Create Guides dialog box are pretty straightforward—
enter the number of rows and columns you want, and enter the dis-
tance you want between the rows and columns. You can also choose 
to create the guides within the page margins, which is a nice touch. 
In addition, you can choose to remove all existing ruler guides from 
the page as you create the new guides.
You can snap a guide to any control handle of an object. To do this, 
select the object with the Selection or Direct Selection tool, and then 
drag a guide out and drag the cursor on top of any side or corner 
handle—the guide will snap to the handle.
Another way to position ruler guides around a selected object is to 
use the AddGuides script—one of the sample scripts that come with 
InDesign. Run the script by double-clicking the script name in the 
Scripts panel. The script displays a dialog box you can use to set the 
positions of the ruler guides. Click the OK button, and InDesign 
adds guides around the selected object or objects. This script is espe-
cially useful when you’re setting up a publication for use with InDe-
sign’s layout adjustment features.
To select a ruler guide, click on the guide using one of the selection 
tools, or drag a selection rectangle over the guide. This differs from 
PageMaker and QuarkXPress, where you cannot select a ruler guide 
as you would any other object. You can select multiple ruler guides 
at once by dragging a selection rectangle (a marquee) over them or 
Shift-clicking on each guide. If the selection marquee touches an 
object, InDesign selects the object—you cannot select both ruler 
guides and objects in the same selection. When a ruler guide is 
selected, it displays in the layer color of the layer it’s on. You can 
select a locked ruler guide only if the Prevent Selection of Locked 
Objects is turned off.
You can also select all the guides on a spread with a keyboard 
shortcut: Command-Option-G/Ctrl-Alt-G.
To change the location of a ruler guide, do one of the following. 
▶Drag the guide (using the Selection or Direct Selection tool).
▶Select the ruler guide and then enter a new position in the X 
field (for a vertical guide) or in the Y field (for a horizontal guide) 
of the Transform panel or Control panel.
Using Create Guides
Snapping Guides   
to Objects
Adding Ruler Guides 
Around an Object 
Selecting Ruler Guides
Editing Ruler Guides

 2.  yu 125
Position the cursor over a 
ruler, then hold down the 
mouse button…
…and drag. As you 
drag, a ruler guide 
follows the cursor.
When the ruler 
guide reaches the 
position you want, 
stop dragging.
Drag a ruler guide on a page to limit 
the guide to that page…
…or drag the cursor outside the 
spread (or hold down Command/
Ctrl) to create a guide that crosses 
pages in the spread.
To make a ruler guide snap 
to the tick marks on the 
ruler, hold down Shift as you 
drag the ruler guide.
Figure 2-45
Creating a Ruler Guide
Figure 2-46
Using Create Guides
Choose Create Guides from 
the Layout menu. InDesign 
displays the Create Guides 
dialog box.
Fill in guide options 
anc click the OK 
button…
…and InDesign 
creates a grid of 
guides.
▶Select the guide and press an arrow key to “nudge” the guide one 
direction or another.
You can also select more than one ruler guide at a time, and use 
the techniques above to move them, as a unit, to a new location (see 
Figure 2-47).

126     6
You can assign a ruler guide to a layer as you would any other selected 
object—drag the Proxy that appears in the Layers panel up or down, 
then drop it on the layer to which you want to send the guide (see 
Figure 2-48). The guide will appear on top of other objects. To move 
the guides behind other objects on the layer, turn on the Guides in 
Back option in the Guides & Pasteboard panel of the Preferences 
dialog box.
When you create a ruler guide, InDesign applies the default guide 
color (specified in the Guides & Pasteboard panel of the Preferences 
dialog box) and a default view threshold (usually 5%) to the guide, 
but you can change these options if you want (see Figure 2-49).
1. Select the ruler guide (or guides).
2. Choose Ruler Guides from the Layout menu or the context 
menu to display the Ruler Guides dialog box.
3. Choose one of InDesign’s preset colors from the Color pop-up 
menu, or (if you’re really finicky) select Custom to create a 
custom guide color.
4. You can also change the view threshold of the selected ruler 
guide by entering a new value in the View Threshold field. The 
percentage you enter is the percentage magnification at and 
above which you want the ruler guide to appear. Enter 5% to 
make the guide visible at all magnifications. If you change this 
to 100%, the guide will be visible at 100-percent view or higher 
(closer), but will be invisible at anything less than 100-percent 
view.
5. Click the OK button to close the Ruler Guides dialog box.  
InDesign displays the guide (or guides) in the color you chose.
Why would you want to assign different colors to guides? Guides 
are such useful tools that we find we use lots of them. Color coding 
guides for different tasks makes it easier for us to see what’s going on. 
One set of guides, for example, might be used for aligning captions in 
one illustration; another set might be used in a different illustration. 
Applying colors, changing view thresholds, and assigning guides to 
layers helps control the way that InDesign draws the guides in the 
publication window.
Note that guides always take on the layer selection color of their 
layer when they’re selected.
Moving a Ruler Guide 
to a Specific Layer
Setting Guide Options

 2.  yu 127
To lock the position of a selected ruler guide, choose Lock from the 
Object menu (or press Command-L/Ctrl-L), or display the Context 
menu and choose Lock. Once you’ve locked the position of a ruler 
guide, you can change the color of the guide, move the guide to 
another layer, change its view threshold, or copy the guide, but you 
can’t change its position. 
To unlock the guide, select the guide and choose Unlock from the 
Context menu. Of course, you can also lock the position of guides by 
locking the layer containing the guides.
To lock all guides, press Command-Option-;/Ctrl-Alt-; (or choose 
Lock Guides from the Grids & Guides submenu of the View menu 
or the Context menu). When you do this, you’re locking more than 
Locking Ruler Guides
Drag a selection 
rectangle over the 
guides you want 
to move.
InDesign selects 
all of the guides 
touched by the 
rectangle.
Drag the guides.
Stop dragging 
when the guides 
reach the location 
you want.
Figure 2-47
Moving Multiple Guides
These guides are on the 
“text” layer and are selected.
Drag the selection proxy 
(representing the guides) 
to another layer.
At this point, the guides 
appear to be in front of the 
text—guides always come to 
the front when selected.
The guides are actually 
behind the text, as you can 
see when we deselect them.
Figure 2-48
Guides and Layers

128     6
guide position—you won’t be able to select a guide until you choose 
Unlock Guides (from the Grids & Guides submenu of the View menu 
or from the Context menu) or press the keyboard shortcut again.
To delete a ruler guide (or guides), select the guide (or guides) and 
press the Delete key. Trying to drag the guide onto a ruler or out 
of the publication window (the technique used in PageMaker and 
QuarkXPress) simply scrolls your view of the publication window. 
So don’t bother dragging the guide; just press Delete.
If you need to delete all the guides on a spread, choose Delete All 
Guides on Spread from the Grids & Guides submenu of the View 
menu.
You can also copy selected ruler guides and paste them into other 
spreads or publications. When you paste, the guides appear in the 
positions they occupied in the original spread provided the page 
sizes are the same. If the page sizes are not the same, InDesign gets 
as close to the original positions as it can.
But wait! It gets better! You can use InDesign’s Step and Repeat 
feature to duplicate ruler guides. For more on Step and Repeat, see 
Chapter 9, “Transforming.” This is a great way to create custom grids, 
though the Document Grid feature (see below) is even better.
When you’re dragging objects around your page, trying to line them 
up in just the right position, it’s sure nice to get a little help. Smart 
Cursors and Smart Guides to the rescue! The Smart Cursors feature 
displays measurements alongside your cursor whenever you create a 
frame (even when placing an image) move an object, or transform it 
(resize, scale, or skew it; see Figure 2-50).
The Smart Guides feature displays temporary guides as you drag 
objects around your page (see Figure 2-51). For example, if you drag 
an object so that its left edge aligns with the left edge of another 
object on your page, a smart guide suddenly appears, indicating the 
relationship. Smart guides act as though the Snap to Grid feature is 
always on, so if you see a smart guide, you can let go of the mouse 
Deleting Ruler Guides
Copying Ruler Guides
Smart Guides   
and Cursors
Enter a view threshold percentage.
Choose a color from   
this pop-up menu.
Select a guide, then choose 
Ruler Guides from   
the context menu or   
the Layout menu.
Figure 2-49
Setting Guide Options

 2.  yu 129
button confident that the object you were dragging has snapped to 
the proper alignment.
Note that smart guides only pay attention to objects on the same 
spread, and only those you can see in the document window. So, if 
you zoom in so that you can only see objects on the lower half of 
your page, the Smart Guides feature ignores objects on the top half. 
Similarly, it ignores objects on hidden layers.
Smart Guides also treats the center of each page as an object—as 
you drag an object, smart guides will appear when it’s horizontally 
or vertically centered on the page. These guides are a different color 
than normal smart guides; they match your margin guide color.
Smart Spacing. Not only does Smart Guides pay attention to align-
ing the edges and centers of objects, it also watches the amount of 
space between objects. For example, if you have three objects on 
a page and start dragging the second one, you’ll see smart guides 
appear when the space between the first two objects is equivalent 
to the space between the second two. These “Smart Spacing” guides 
have small arrowheads on them.
Smart Transformations. Smart Guides also watches for simi-
lar transformations—what Adobe calls “Smart Dimensions.” For 
instance, let’s say you have an object rotated on your page. Then you 
select another object and start rotating it (we discuss the Rotation 
tool and other ways to transform objects in Chapter 9, “Transform-
ing”). Smart Dimensions sees the first rotated object and snaps to the 
same rotation value. Curiously, this works even if the other object is 
on another page (as long as you’re zoomed out).
Smart Preferences. Like so many other features in InDesign, you 
can customize several aspects of Smart Guides so that it better works 
for you. First, if you don’t like the default lime-green color, you can 
change that in the Guides & Pasteboard pane of the Preferences 
dialog box (press Command/Ctrl-K). 
In the same place, you’ll find four checkboxes: Align to Object 
Center, Align to Object Edges, Smart Dimensions, Smart Spacing. 
The first two control what parts of objects InDesign takes into con-
sideration when displaying smart guides. Note that even if you turn 
For more on scaling, rotat-
ing, and so on, see Chapter 
9, “Transforming.”
Figure 2-50
Smart Cursors
When resizing
When rotating

130     6
off Align to Object Center, objects will still align to the horizontal 
and vertical centerpoint of each page. 
The second two checkboxes enable or disable Smart Dimensions 
and Smart Space, as described above.
Disabling Smart Guides. As cool as the Smart Guides feature is, it 
often just drives us batty, kicking in at times we just don’t want it 
to. Fortunately, you can enable or disable it with a quick Command/
Ctrl-U. (Or you can do it the slow way and choose Smart Guides 
from the Grids & Guides submenu, under the View menu.)
When you disable Smart Guides, you may wonder why the X and 
Y values still appear when you move objects. InDesign doesn’t con-
sider that little gray box part of Smart Guides. To get rid of it, turn off 
the Show Transformation Values in Interface preferences.
Grids
InDesign can display two different grids: the document grid and the 
baseline grid. Both grids are arrangements of guides spaced a speci-
fied distance apart. (The baseline grid is not truly a grid, as it has 
no vertical guidelines.) You’ll find the settings for both grids in the 
Grids Preferences dialog box, as described in Chapter 1, “Workspace.”
To display a grid, choose the corresponding option (Show Docu-
ment Grid or Show Baseline Grid) from the Grids & Guides sub-
menu of the View menu, or from the Context menu (when nothing is 
Smart Spacing guide 
with double arrowheads 
displays when spacing 
between objects is equal.
Smart guide indicates that 
the right edge of the object 
we’re dragging is aligned 
with the right edge of the 
object below it.
Figure 2-51
Smart Guides

 2.  yu 131
selected, and when a tool other than the Type tool is active). You can 
also hide or show the document grid by pressing Command-’/Ctrl-’.
If the magnification of the current publication window is below 
the view threshold of the baseline grid, you’ll have to zoom in to see 
the grid (see Figure 2-52). 
As we mentioned earlier, the grids aren’t very useful without the 
relevant “snap.” The regular Snap to Guides option (from the Grids & 
Guides submenu of the View menu) affects the baseline grid guides 
when they’re visible, but not the document grid—you’ll need to use 
the Snap to Document Grid feature (on the Grids & Guides submenu 
of the View menu) for that. In fact, when the Snap to Document Grid 
option is turned on, objects snap to the document grid even when 
the grid is not visible. (David likes this because the document grid is 
useful for aligning objects but distracting to his eye.)
Normally, only frames and lines snap to the baseline grid, but the 
feature’s name implies that you can also snap the baselines of text to 
these guides—a very useful typesetting feature. We discuss working 
with text leading grids and the baseline grid in Chapter 4, “Type.”
Stacking Objects
Page items on an InDesign page can be arranged in front of or behind 
each other. You can imagine that every object exists on an invisible 
plane that it cannot share with other objects, if you like. These planes 
can be shuffled to place one object above another, or behind another.
You can set the magnification at 
(and above) which the baseline 
grid becomes visible using the 
View Threshold field in the Grids 
Preferences dialog box.
If you’ve chosen Show Baseline  
Grid, but the baseline grid has  
not appeared…
…it’s because you haven’t zoomed in 
enough to cross the view threshold. 
Once you do, you’ll see the grid.
Figure 2-52
Setting the View 
Threshold of the 
Baseline Grid

132     6
To bring an object to the front, 
select the object…
…and then press Command-
Shift-] or Ctrl-Shift-]. InDesign 
brings the object to the front.
To send an object to the back of the 
current layer, select the object…
…and then press Command-
Shift-[ or Ctrl-Shift-[.
Note that bringing an object 
to the front or sending it 
to the back only changes 
its position in the stacking 
order of the current layer. 
Objects on other layers can 
still appear in front of objects 
brought to the front; objects 
on layers behind the current 
layer will still appear behind 
objects sent to the back.
Figure 2-53
Bring to Front and 
Send to Back
Simple stacking isn’t the only way to control the front-to-back 
order of objects on a page—layers are another, and usually better, 
method (we cover layers in the next section). Arranging objects on 
a single layer, however, is very similar to tasks we perform every day 
as we stack and sort physical objects (our lives, for example, seem to 
revolve around stacks of paper).
Each layer in InDesign has its own stacking order and you can 
move an object to the front, or send an object to the back of the layer 
it occupies (see Figure 2-53). To bring an object to the front, Choose 
Bring to Front from the Arrange submenu (under the Object menu or 
the context menu). Or you can press Command-Shift-] / Ctrl-Shift-]. 
To send an object to the back, choose Send to Back from the Arrange 
submenu. Alternately, you can press Command-Shift-[ / Ctrl-Shift-[.
You can also choose to bring objects closer to the front or send 
them farther to the back in the stacking order of objects on a layer 
(see Figure 2-54). To bring an object closer to the front (in front of the 
next higher object in the stacking order), choose Bring Forward from 

 2.  yu 133
the Arrange submenu (under the Object menu or the context menu) 
or press Command-] / Ctrl-]. To send an object backward, choose 
Send Backward or press Command-[ / Ctrl-[.
In QuarkXPress, text wrap is affected by the stacking order of objects 
on the page. If a text box is above a wrapped object, the text avoids 
the text wrap area; if it’s behind/below the wrapped object, the text 
ignores the text wrap. While there is nothing inherently logical or 
intuitively obvious about this behavior, many people have gotten 
used to it. 
To make InDesign behave this way, turn on the Text Wrap Only 
Affects Text Beneath option in the Composition panel of the Prefer-
ences dialog box. Once you’ve done this, the stacking order of objects 
on the page will have an effect on text wrap (see Figure 2-55).
For more on working with text wrap, see Chapter 6, “Where Text 
Meets Graphics.”
Layers
InDesign’s layers are transparent planes on which you place page 
items. You’ve probably heard that layers are a way to organize your 
publication (that’s what all the marketing materials say, after all). But 
there’s far more to InDesign’s layers than just organization—layers 
Text Wrap and   
Stacking Order
Select an object.
Note that the stacking order 
includes all of the objects on the 
layer containing the object you’re 
moving. If the next object in the 
stacking order does not intersect 
the object you’re moving, you won’t 
see any change on your screen.
Press the shortcut 
again to move the 
object farther back 
in the layer’s 
stacking order.
You can also press 
Command-] or 
Ctrl-] to move the 
object forward.
Press Command-[ or Ctrl-[ 
to send the object backward.
Figure 2-54
Bring Forward  
and Send Backward

134     6
Figure 2-55
Stacking Order  
and Text Wrap
When the Text Wrap 
Only Affects Text Beneath 
option is off, the text wrap 
affects all text frames, 
regardless of their position 
in the stacking order.
When the option is off, the 
text wrap does not affect 
text frames in front of the 
wrapped object.
The text frame is in front of 
the wrapped object.
Note that you can also pre-
vent a text wrap from affect-
ing a text frame by turning 
on the Ignore Text Wrap 
option in the Text Frame 
Options dialog box.
give you control over what parts of your publication display and 
print, and whether they can be edited or not.
InDesign’s layers have a few characteristics you should understand 
before you start using them. First, layers affect an entire document—
not individual pages or page spreads. Next, layers created in one 
document do not affect layers in another document. As far as we can 
tell, there’s no technical limit to the number of layers you can have in 
a publication; it’s possible to make hundreds or more of them if you 
have enough memory. But just because you can do that doesn’t mean 
that you should. Too many layers can make a publication difficult to 
manage.
Layers are especially useful when you’re working with pages 
containing slow-drawing graphics, when your publication features 
complicated stacks of objects, or when you want to add a nonprint-
ing layer of comments or instructions to a publication. Layers are 
also helpful when you want to create “conditional” layers containing 
differing text or graphics (you could create multiple versions of the 
publication in different languages, for example, and store all of the 
versions in a single publication).
Layers Basics

 2.  yu 135
You use the Layers panel to create, edit, rearrange, and delete layers 
(see Figure 2-56). You can also use the Layers panel to hide, lock, and 
arrange objects on a layer, and to move objects in and out of groups. 
To display the Layers panel, choose Layers from the Window menu 
(or press F7). The Layers panel is chock full o’ features; let’s look at 
them one at a time.
New Layer. To create a new layer, click the New Layer button at the 
bottom of the panel or select New Layer from the Layers panel menu 
(see Figure 2-57). InDesign normally adds new layers above the layer 
selected in the Layers panel, but you can tell the program to add the 
layer immediately beneath the currently selected layer by holding 
down Command/Ctrl as you click the New Layer button. Hold down 
Command/Ctrl+Shift as you click the New Layer button to create 
new layers at the top of the panel.
If you want to name the layer (we think you should) or change 
any other options, hold down the Option/Alt key when you click this 
button to display the New Layer dialog box. (You can also get to this 
dialog box by double-clicking the layer after creating it.) We cover 
the controls in this dialog box in “Layer Options,” below.
Delete Layer. Click the Delete Layer button to delete the selected layer 
or layers (to select more than one layer, hold down Command/Ctrl 
 as you click each layer). If the layer you have selected contains objects, 
InDesign warns you that deleting the layer will delete the objects.
Collapse/expand arrows. Click the down arrow next to a layer to 
display the objects that are on that layer and on the current spread. 
You can hide, lock, and arrange objects on layers (see Figure 2-58).
The Layers Panel
Selection proxy
Target (active) layer
Layer names
Show Layer icon
Locked layer
Hidden layer
Hidden object
Locked object
Unlocked layer 
Layer selection color
InDesign reduces the 
height of the list items 
in the Layers palette.
To reduce the amount of vertical 
space taken up by the Layers 
panel, choose Small Panel Rows 
from the Layers panel menu.
Figure 2-56
Layers Panel

136     6
You can also click the down arrow next to a group of objects to 
display the objects that make up that group. You can drag other 
objects into that group to make it part of the group, and you can 
drag objects out of the group.
Show/Hide column. When you see an “eye” icon in the left-most 
column of the Layers panel, that layer or object is visible. When 
there’s no icon next to a layer in this column, all of the objects on 
the layer are hidden (invisible). If there’s no icon next to an object, 
that object is hidden. Click once in this column to change from one 
state to another. You can’t select or edit objects on hidden layers, and 
objects on hidden layers don’t print.
Often, you want to hide all the layers in a publication except one. 
It’s easy: hold down Option/Alt as you click in that layer’s Show/Hide 
column (or choose Hide Others from the Layers panel menu). Click-
ing again in the column while holding down Option/Alt will show 
all layers, which is equivalent to choosing Show All Layers from the 
Layers panel menu (see Figure 2-59). Use the same Option/Alt trick 
to show or hide all the objects in a layer except one.
Click the New Layer button.
InDesign adds a new layer.
Or choose New 
Layer from the 
Layers panel 
menu (or Option/
Alt-click the New 
Layer button)
Enter a name for the layer 
(optional, but a good idea).
Set other layer options.
Choose a layer color   
from the pop-up menu.
Click the OK button, and 
InDesign adds the new 
layer to the Layers palette.
Figure 2-57
Creating a Layer

 2.  yu 137
Lock/Unlock column. Click in the second column to lock a layer or 
object. InDesign displays the “lock” icon in that column. To unlock 
the layer or object, click the icon.
You can’t select objects on locked layers (so you can’t move or 
format them, either), and you can’t assign objects to locked layers. 
When you want to lock all of the layers in a publication except one, 
hold down Option/Alt and click in the lock/unlock column (or 
choose Lock Others from the Layers panel menu). To unlock every 
layer, hold down Option/Alt and click the lock/unlock column (this 
is the same as choosing Unlock All Layers from the panel menu).
Target layer icon. The target layer icon (it looks like a little fountain 
pen nib) shows you which layer is the “target layer”—the layer on 
which InDesign will place any objects you create, import, or paste. 
Making a layer the target layer does not assign any currently selected 
objects to that layer.
Selection Proxy. When you select an object on your page, InDesign 
highlights the name of the layer containing the object and sets that 
layer as the target layer. In addition, InDesign displays a small square 
to the right of the layer name. This square is the Selection Proxy, 
which represents the layer or layers containing the selected objects 
(just as the proxy in the Transform panel “stands in” for the bound-
ing box of the selection). To move objects from one layer to another, 
drag the Selection Proxy to another layer (see Figure 2-60).
Figure 2-58
Arranging, Hiding, and 
Locking Objects within 
a Layer
Click the down arrow to   
display objects on a layer   
on the current spread.
The rectangle moves   
to the front.
The circle is locked, as   
indicated by the lock icon.
The line is hidden.

138     6
While this method of moving objects from one layer to another 
makes it difficult to accidentally move objects, it also makes it diffi-
cult to move objects from multiple layers to a single layer. To accom-
plish this, you’ll have to make multiple trips up and down the Layers 
panel, selecting and moving the proxy for each layer in the selection.
Note that you can also copy an object from one layer to another 
by holding down Option/Alt and dragging the Selection proxy. Plus, 
you can even move objects to a locked or hidden layer—to do this, 
press Command/Ctrl as you drag the selection proxy to the layer. 
To copy objects as you move them to a hidden or locked layer, hold 
down Command-Option/Ctrl-Alt as you drag.
Here’s a quick rundown of each of the controls in the New Layer and 
Layer Options dialog boxes.
Layer name. InDesign assigns a default name to each layer you create, 
but we think it’s better to enter a layer name that means something 
in the context of your publication. It’s far easier to remember that the 
enormous, slow drawing image of grazing Herefords is on the layer 
you’ve named “Big Slow Cows” than it is to remember that you’ve 
placed the image on the layer named “Layer 51.”
Layer color. Each layer has its own color that helps you see which 
objects are on which layers. When Show Frame Edges (in the View 
menu) is turned on, InDesign uses the layer color for the outlines of 
frames and other objects. When you select an object, its selection 
handles appear in the selection color of that layer. If you don’t pick 
a color yourself, the program picks one for you automatically. To 
change a color later, either double-click a layer in the Layers panel, or 
select a layer and choose Layer Options from the Layers panel menu. 
We have never felt the need to change a layer’s selection color in an 
actual project, but it’s nice to know that you can.
Show Layer. Should the layer be visible, or hidden? This option per-
forms the same task as the show/hide column in the Layers panel.
Layer Options
Point at the layer’s 
Visibility icon, hold 
down Option/Alt…
…and click. InDesign 
hides all of the other 
layers.
Press Option/Alt and 
click again to make the 
layers visible.
To hide all but one layer, 
follow these steps.
Figure 2-59
Showing and Hiding 
Other Layers

 2.  yu 139
Lock Layer. Should the layer be locked or unlocked? This option per-
forms the same task as the lock/unlock column.
Show Guides. Remember that you can put ruler guides on layers. But 
should those guides be visible or hidden? If you want to hide just this 
layer’s guides, turn off the Show Guides option.
Lock Guides. Should the guides on this layer be locked or unlocked? 
By default they’re unlocked; turn this option on to lock ’em.
Suppress Text Wrap When Layer is Hidden. People complained to 
high heaven because InDesign 2 couldn’t turn off the text wrap on 
objects that were on hidden layers. Fortunately, now you can. This is 
helpful if you’re trying out a number of different designs, each on its 
own layer. As you hide a layer, you don’t want its graphics to affect 
the other layers!
This object is on the layer 
named “D layer.”
Move the cursor over 
the selection proxy 
representing the object.
Drag the selection 
proxy to another layer.
Drop the selection 
proxy. InDesign moves 
the object to the layer.
Object is now on the 
layer named “A layer.”
Figure 2-60
Moving an Object 
to a Layer

140     6
Paste Remembers Layers. This option doesn’t appear in the Layer 
Options dialog box; rather it’s in the Layers panel menu. The Paste 
Remembers Layers option takes care of a question: “If I copy objects 
from several layers and then paste, where should the pasted objects 
end up?” Should they be placed on the target layer (in a stack corre-
sponding to their layer order)? Or should they be placed on the layers 
they originally came from?
We think you’ll turn this option on and leave it on. If you do this, 
you’ll be able to copy layers between publications. To do this, select 
objects on different layers in one publication, then copy them, and 
then switch to another publication and paste. When you paste, the 
layers will appear in the publication’s Layers panel.
If layers with the same names already exist in the publication, 
InDesign moves the incoming objects to the corresponding layers, 
which is why you might want to turn the Paste Remembers Layers 
option off. If you don’t turn it off, and if the layer stacking order is 
not the same as it was in the publication you copied the objects out of, 
the appearance of the pasted objects might change.
To delete a layer, select the layer and choose Delete Layer from the 
Layers panel menu or click the Delete Layer button. As we noted ear-
lier, if there are any objects on the layer, InDesign warns you first 
(because deleting a layer also deletes its objects). To delete all of the 
unused layers (layers that have no objects assigned to them) in a pub-
lication, choose Delete Unused Layers from the Layers panel menu.
To change the stacking order of layers, drag the layer up (to bring 
the layer closer to the front) or down (to send the layer farther to the 
back) in the Layers panel. As you drag, InDesign displays a horizon-
tal bar showing the position of the layer. When the layer reaches the 
point in the list at which you want it to appear, stop dragging and 
InDesign moves the layer (and all the objects on it) to a new location 
(see Figure 2-61).
To combine a series of layers into a single layer, select the layers and 
then choose Merge Layers from the Layers panel menu. InDesign 
merges the layers into a single layer—the first layer you selected (see 
Figure 2-62). Note that merging layers sometimes changes the stack-
ing order of objects on the merged layers.
To move a layer from one publication into another publication, make 
sure you’ve turned on the Paste Remembers Layers option (on the 
Layers panel menu), then copy an object from that layer and paste it 
Deleting Layers
Changing Layer   
Stacking Order
Merging Layers
Moving Layers from 
One Publication   
to Another

 2.  yu 141
into the publication that lacks that layer. When you paste, InDesign 
adds the layer to the list of layers.
Here’s a bonus tip: You can select all the objects on a layer by 
Option/Alt-clicking on the layer in the Layers panel. Now you can 
copy and paste these objects to copy the contents of the layer to 
another document.
In older page layout software (such as QuarkXPress or PageMaker), 
objects on master pages are always displayed behind document page 
objects. This means that page numbers often end up being hidden by 
items on your document pages, and that you may have to copy the 
master page item to your document page to get it to display or print.
In InDesign, objects on master pages are arranged according 
to their layer. This means that you can put page numbers on the 
Layers and   
Master Pages
The selected object is on the 
layer named “A layer.”
Move the cursor over 
the layer you want to 
move.
Drag the layer to a 
new position in the 
Layers palette.
The layer named “A layer” 
is now the layer closest 
to the front.
When the layer 
reaches the location 
you want, stop  
dragging. InDesign 
changes the layer 
stacking order.
Figure 2-61
Changing Layer 
Stacking Order

142     6
Select a series of layers and 
choose Merge Layers from 
the Layers panel menu.
InDesign moves the 
objects on the layers 
to the first layer you 
selected, then deletes 
the other layers. The 
stacking order of the 
objects is retained.
Figure 2-62
Merging Layers
uppermost layer without worrying about them being obscured by 
images or other page items on the document pages.
Grouping Objects
What does it mean to “group” objects in a page layout program? 
When you group objects, you’re telling the application to treat the 
objects as a single object. The objects in the group move and trans-
form (scale, skew, and rotate) as a unit.
To group the objects in a selection, press Command-G/Ctrl-G 
(or choose Group from either the Object menu or the context menu). 
Note that you can’t have objects in a group when they’re each on 
different layers, so when you group the objects, the group moves to 
the top-most layer of the selection (see Figure 2-63). To ungroup a 
selected group, press Command-Shift-G/Ctrl-Shift-G (or choose 
Ungroup from the Context menu or the Object menu). 
To select (or “subselect”) an object inside a group, double-click 
the object using the Selection tool. By the way, don’t forget that you 
can group together groups—each group acting as a single object in 
the larger group.
An easy way to add objects to an existing group is using the Layers 
panel. Use the Layers panel to drag items into and out of groups. You 
can’t group objects from different layers.

 2.  yu 143
Locking Object Positions
When you want to keep somebody from changing the location of an 
object, you can lock it by selecting it and then pressing Command-L/
Ctrl-L (or choose Lock from the context menu or the Object menu). 
When an object is locked, the Prevent Selection of Locked Objects 
option in General preferences determines whether you can select it. 
If this option is turned on, you can’t select locked objects. Just click 
the lock icon to unlock it, or choose Unlock All on Spread from the 
Object menu. If the option is turned off, you can select an object, 
but you can’t change its position on the page or pasteboard. You can, 
however, move the object to another layer (we’re not sure why; per-
haps it’s a bug). When you try to drag a locked object, the cursor 
turns into a “padlock” icon (see Figure 2-64).
You can also lock the layer that contains the object (see “Layers,” 
earlier in this chapter). Unfortunately, even graphics and text on 
locked layers can still be changed if you try hard enough: changes 
made with the Find/Change panel and the Links panel can still affect 
locked objects and layers (which is usually what you want, anyway).
Select the objects   
you want to group.
Press Command-G/Ctrl-G.  
InDesign groups the objects. You can 
move, scale, shear, or rotate the group 
as you do any other single object. 
To select an object inside the group, 
 double-click the object.
To ungroup, select a group and press 
Command-Shift-G/Ctrl-Shift-G.
Groups can come in handy 
when you’ve created an 
assemblage of objects you 
want to treat as a single 
object. In addition, grouping 
objects speeds up screen 
redraw—InDesign draws 
selection handles for one 
object, rather than for all of 
the objects in the group.
Figure 2-63
Grouping and 
Ungrouping Objects
When you select a group 
with the Selection tool,   
InDesign displays a dashed 
line around the group.

144     6
Deleting Objects
Deleting objects on your page is simple: Just select one or more items 
with the Selection or Direct Selection tools and press the Delete 
key. If you want a slower method, choose Clear from the Edit menu 
instead. If you’re really trying to kill time, and you’re using the Mac 
OS, you can drag the object from the page into the operating system’s 
Trash icon. Why? Because you can.
Finding and Changing Objects
Have you ever had a client/boss/whatever look at your near-final 
layout and express a need to make vast, far-reaching changes in the 
color, stroke weight, or other attributes of the graphic elements on 
the pages? Have you ever spent the night clawing your way through 
a document, changing fills and strokes to meet their unreasonable 
requests?
We have, so we’re very happy that InDesign can now find and 
change objects by their formatting (and other) attributes, just as we 
can find and change text. (Actually, we now make extensive use of 
object styles, so our threshold of pain is a little higher than it once 
was, but the addition of object find/change is still welcome.)
To find and change objects by their attributes, follow these steps 
(see Figure 2-65).
Select an object and press 
Command-L/Ctrl-L or  
choose Lock from  
the Context menu. 
The padlock icon indicates the object is 
locked. Click to unlock the object.
Figure 2-64
Locking and 
Unlocking Objects

 2.  yu 145
1. Press Command-F/Ctrl-F to display the Find and Change panel. 
Click the Object tab if it is not already active.
2. Click the Specify Attributes to Find button to display the Find 
Object Format Options dialog box. Work your way through the 
various panels of this dialog box to define the attributes of the 
object you want to find. Click the OK button to close the dialog 
box.
3. Click the Specify Attributes to Change button to display the 
Change Object Format Options dialog box. Work your way 
Figure 2-65
Finding and Changing 
Object Formatting
In this example, we want to 
search for the objects with a 
gray stroke and change the 
stroke to black. We also want 
to reduce the stroke weight.
Please imagine that there are  
hundreds of these, on dozens  
of pages.
Press Command-F/Ctrl-F to display the   
Find/Change panel. Click the Object tab, then 
click the Specify Attribute to Find button.
Use the Find Object Format Options dialog box to set up 
the attributes you want to find. Click the OK button when 
you’re done, then, back in the Find/Change panel, click 
the Specify Attributes to Change button.
Use the Change Object Format Options dialog 
box to set up the replacement attributes, then 
press OK to return to the Find/Change panel.
The Find/Change panel 
displays the formatting 
attributes you selected. 
Click the Change All 
button…
…and InDesign changes the objects whose   
formatting matches the attributes you selected.

146     6
through the various panels of this dialog box to set the format-
ting you want to apply to the objects you find. Click the OK 
button to close the dialog box.
4. At this point, you can do either of the following:
▶You can choose to have InDesign change the formatting of all 
of the qualifying objects by clicking the Change All button.
▶You can find each occurrence of the formatting you specified 
and decide whether to replace it or not. To do this, click the 
Find button, view the found object, and then click the Find 
Next, Change, or Change/Find button. The Find Next button 
moves on to the next instance of the formatting without
making any changes; the Change button replaces the format-
ting of the found object and waits to see what you’ll do next. 
The Change/Find button replaces the object, then finds the 
next instance.
A Good Foundation
Being methodical every now and then can save a lot of trouble later. 
Setting up master pages, defining layers, creating layout grids and 
ruler guides are not the most glamorous parts of InDesign, but they’re 
a good place to spend a little organizational energy. Far from cramp-
ing your creative style, paying attention to basic layout options—at 
the very beginning of the production process, if possible—sets the 
stage on which you produce and direct the play of your publications.

147
Text is the stream of characters that inhabit your publications. Text 
is not about what those characters look like (that’s “type,” the topic 
of the next chapter)—it’s about the characters themselves, and the 
containers that hold them.
All text in an InDesign document exists in one or more stories. A 
story consists of at least one text container: the container is usually a 
text frame, but can sometimes be a path text object. A story can be as 
small as a single, unlinked text frame, or as large as a series of hun-
dreds of linked text frames containing tens of thousands of words 
and spanning hundreds of pages. 
Text frames (see Figure 3-1) are similar to the text “boxes” found 
in QuarkXPress, and they’re also similar to the text “blocks” found 
in PageMaker. In our opinion, InDesign’s text frames present a “best 
of both worlds” approach—you get the flexibility and fluidity of Page-
Maker’s text blocks combined with the precision of QuarkXPress’ 
text boxes.
Text, in a word, is what publications are really all about. A picture 
might be worth a thousand words, but they’re not very specific words. 
When you create a poster for a concert, for example, the text is what 
tells the viewer where the concert will be presented, at what time, 
and on which date. The point of using an image, color, or a stylish 
layout is to get people to read the text. 
Text

3

148     6
This chapter is all about how to get text into your InDesign docu-
ments—how to create and edit text frames, enter text, edit text, and 
import text files. It’s also about creating text variables and condi-
tional text, checking the spelling of the text in your publication, and 
about finding and changing text.
Creating Text Frames
Before you can add text to your InDesign publication, you’ve got to 
have something to put it in: a text frame. To create a text frame, you 
can use any or all of the following methods.
▶Draw a frame using one of the basic shape tools or the frame 
drawing tools. To convert the frame to a text frame, select the 
frame and choose Text from the Content submenu of the Object 
menu (see Figure 3-2). If you have turned on the Type Tool 
Converts Frames to Text Frames option in the Type panel of the 
Preference dialog box, you can also convert the frame by click-
ing the Type tool inside the frame.
▶Drag the Type tool to create a frame whose height and width are 
defined by the area you specified by dragging (see Figure 3-3).
▶Drag a text place icon. The text place icon appears whenever you 
import a text file, or click the in port or out port of a text frame 
(see Figure 3-4). See “Importing Text” later in this chapter.
▶Deselect all (Command-Shift-A/Ctrl-Shift-A) and then paste  
text into the publication (or drag it out of another application 
and drop it into the publication, which accomplishes the same 
thing). InDesign creates a text frame containing the text.
▶Drag a text file (or series of text files) out of your operating  
system’s file browser (the Finder on the Macintosh, or the 
Windows Explorer in Windows) and drop it into an InDesign 
publication.
Figure 3-1
Text Frame Anatomy
In port
Out port (for linking text 
frames together)
When you turn on the Show Text 
Threads option (press Command-
Option-Y/Ctrl-Alt-Y), InDesign 
displays lines representing the 
links between text frames.

 3. x 149
Click the Type tool inside   
the frame, or…
…select Text from the Content 
submenu of the Object menu.
InDesign converts the graphic 
frame to a text frame.
Note that InDesign does not always require you to create a text 
frame before you add text, as (for example) QuarkXPress does. Most 
of the text frame creation methods described previously dynamically 
create a text frame as you enter, import, or paste text.
Once you’ve created a text frame, you can change its size, shape, 
and rotation angle just as you would any other object you’ve created 
(see Chapter 5, “Drawing” and Chapter 9, “Transforming”). You can 
also change the shape of the text frame using InDesign’s drawing 
and path editing tools (see Chapter 5, “Drawing”).
Text can also appear on a path—for more on this topic, see Chap-
ter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics.”
Figure 3-2
Converting Any Frame 
to a Text Frame
Figure 3-3
Drag the Type Tool
Figure 3-4
Drag a Text Place Icon
Drag the Type tool.
InDesign creates a text frame 
that’s the width and height you 
specified by dragging.
Select the Type tool.
You “load” a text place icon 
by placing a text file or by 
clicking the in port or out 
port of a text frame.
…to create a text frame that’s the 
width and height you specified by 
dragging.
Drag the text place icon…

150     6
Setting Text Frame Options
Text frames have attributes that are not shared with graphics frames 
or with frames whose content is set to “Unassigned.” To view and 
edit these attributes, choose Text Frame Options from the Type 
menu, or press Command-B/Ctrl-B, or hold down Option/Alt as you 
double-click the frame with either selection tool. InDesign displays 
the Text Frame Options dialog box (see Figure 3-5). 
Use this dialog box to set the text frame’s column attributes, inset 
spacing, first baseline calculation method, and auto-fit behavior.
InDesign text frames can contain up to 40 columns—enter the 
number of columns you want in the Number field. To define the dis-
tance between columns, or “gutter,” enter a value in the Gutter field.
Column width. InDesign lets you determine the width of a text 
frame by the width of its columns. When you type the number of col-
umns in the Text Frame Options dialog box and click OK, InDesign 
divides the current width of the text frame into columns for you. 
However, if you specify a value in the Width field, then the program 
changes the width of your text frame so that the columns will fit.
The Fixed Column Width option tells InDesign what to do with 
your text frame when it gets wider or narrower. When you turn this 
option on, you’ll notice that when you resize the text frame it snaps 
to widths determined by the fixed widths of the columns (and gut-
ters) it contains (see Figure 3-6). If you leave this option turned off, 
the column widths change when you resize the frame.
Columns and   
Text Frames
As in many other dialog 
boxes and panels, the 
“chain” icon enforces   
the same spacing in all   
associated fields.
Figure 3-5
Text Frame Options

 3. x 151
When you turn on the Fixed 
Column Width option, 
InDesign resizes the text 
frame based on the column 
width you entered (rather 
than evenly dividing the 
width of the text frame into 
columns of equal width).
When you resize a text 
frame that has a fixed 
column width…
…InDesign will “snap” 
the frame widths based 
on that column width. No 
matter how narrow you 
make the frame, it will 
always contain at least 
one column of that width.
Choose Flexible Column Widths to adjust the number of col-
umns dynamically when the text frame is resized—especially useful 
for text frames in a liquid layout. Set a maximum width threshold, 
and the number of columns adjusts dynamically when the text frame 
is resized (see Figure 3-7). 
When there isn’t enough text to fill a multi-column text frame, 
the Balance Columns option tells InDesign to keep the height of the 
columns as close to the same height as possible, leaving empty space 
at the bottom of all the columns rather than just the last one.
Regardless of the options in this dialog box, we have to point out 
that a layout created using multi-column text frames is far less flex-
ible than the same layout using single column text frames. For exam-
ple, you cannot change the width or height of just one of the columns 
in a multi -column text frame.
Specifying a Flexible Width 
threshold allows the number 
of columns to change 
dynamically when the page 
width changes.
Resizing this page 
with the Page tool 
not only resizes 
the text frame 
but also changes 
the number of 
columns. 
Figure 3-6
Fixed Column Width
Figure 3-7
Flexible Column Width

152     6
The values you enter in the Inset Spacing section of the Text Frame 
Options dialog box control the distances InDesign will push text 
from the edges of the text frame. You can enter an inset distance 
from 0 to 8640 points (or about 120 inches). To enter different values 
for each field, you’ll have to turn off the Make All Settings the Same 
option (the little chain thingy). Unfortunately, you can’t enter nega-
tive values to make the text hang out of the text frame.
Inset distances work in conjunction with (and in addition to) the 
margins of the paragraphs in a text frame (see Figure 3-8). In general, 
we prefer to work with the text inset values set to zero, and use the 
left and right indent values of individual paragraphs to control the 
distance from the edges of the text to the edges of the text column. 
However, these inset features are sometimes helpful when you need 
to move all the text in a frame up or down slightly without moving 
the frame itself.
Setting Text   
Frame Insets
Enter inset distances in the 
fields in the Inset Spacing 
section of the dialog box to 
push text away from the 
edges of the text frame.
Paragraph indents are 
applied in addition to the 
text frame inset distances.
When you select the text frame with 
the Selection tool, InDesign displays 
the text inset boundary.
By default, InDesign applies no 
inset—note that this differs from most 
versions of QuarkXPress, which apply 
a one point inset by default.
Figure 3-8
Text Frame Insets

 3. x 153
To keep text in a text frame from obeying a text wrap, select the 
frame, open the Text Frame Options dialog box, and then turn on 
the Ignore Text Wrap option (see Figure 3-9).
Note that in this case (where the text was on top of the offending 
graphic) you could also turn on the Text Wrap Only Affects Text 
Beneath option in the Composition Preferences dialog box. This 
preference affects all text wraps in your file (see Chapter 6, “Where 
Text Meets Graphics”).
Vertical justification controls the vertical position of the text in a text 
frame (see Figure 3-10). To set the vertical justification method used 
for a text frame, select the text frame, display the Text Frame Options 
dialog box, and then choose a method from the Align pop-up menu.
▶Top. Aligns the text to the top of the text frame, positioning the 
first baseline of text in the frame according to the method you’ve 
selected from the Offset pop-up menu (see above).
▶Center. InDesign centers the text between the bottom of the text 
frame and the top of the first line of text (taking the baseline 
options into account). Note that the text may be mathematically 
centered, but might not appear centered in some cases. In these 
relatively rare cases, you may have to work with the First Base-
line or Baseline Shift settings to center the text.
Ignoring Text Wrap 
Vertical Justification
When you try to place 
a text frame on top of a 
graphic that has a text wrap, 
InDesign pushes the text out 
of the frame.
Unless, that is, you display 
the Text Frame Options 
dialog box (select the text 
frame and press Command-
B/Ctrl-B) and turn on the 
Ignore Text Wrap option.
Text wrap boundary
Once you do this, text 
in the text frame ignores 
the text wrap.
Figure 3-9
Ignoring Text Wrap

154     6
When you enter zero, InDesign  
applies leading to make the text  
fill the height of the text frame.
When you enter a value, InDesign 
applies paragraph spacing up to that 
amount before changing the leading.
When you choose Center 
from the Align pop-up menu, 
you might want to choose the 
Cap Height or Ascent option 
from the Offset pop-up 
menu (in this case, choosing 
Leading is not a good idea, 
as it pushes the text away 
from the visual center of the 
text frame).
When you choose Justify 
from the Align pop-up menu, 
InDesign adds space to force 
the text to fill the height 
of the frame. The method 
InDesign uses is based on 
the value you enter in the 
Paragraph Spacing Limit 
field (you can enter values 
from 0 to 8640 points).
▶Bottom. Aligns the baseline of the last line of text in the text 
frame to the bottom of the frame. When you choose this 
method, the Offset pop-up menu has no effect.
▶Justify. Adds vertical space to the text in the text frame (using 
paragraph spacing and/or leading to add this space) to fill the 
text frame with the text. Note that using the Justify method will 
not pull overset text into the text frame; it only adds space. The 
first line of the text frame will remain where it was, based on the 
First Baseline setting.
Paragraph Spacing Limit. When you choose Justify from the Align 
pop-up menu, InDesign activates the Paragraph Spacing Limit con-
trol, which sets the maximum amount of space you’ll allow between 
paragraphs in the text frame. Once the space between paragraphs 
reaches this value, InDesign adjusts the leading of each line in the 
text frame, rather than adding space between paragraphs. To keep 
Figure 3-10
Vertical Justification

 3. x 155
Example font is Minion Pro; 
example leading is 24 points.
Distance from the top of the text 
frame to the first baseline:  
24 points.
Distance from the top 
of the text frame to  
the first baseline: 
15.6000316143036 
points.
Distance from the top 
of the text frame to  
the first baseline: 
10.4640212059021 
points.
Distance from the top  
of the text frame to the 
first baseline: 
17.44775390625 points.
All baseline distances calcu-
lated using Neo-Atlantean 
super science, and will vary 
from font to font.
Distance from the top of the text 
frame to the first baseline:  
24 points.
If you use the Fixed or 
Leading options, you can 
know exactly where the first 
baseline of text will fall in 
relation to the top of the text 
frame, regardless of the font 
or the point size of the text. 
InDesign from changing leading at all, enter a large value (up to 8640 
points) in this field. On the other hand, if you really want InDesign 
to change the leading instead, enter zero.
Non-Rectangular Frames. Select this option to apply vertical justifi-
cation to elliptical frames or frames with corner effects.
The Offset pop-up menu in the First Baseline section of the Text 
Frame Options dialog box offers five methods for calculating the 
position of the first baseline of text in a text frame: Ascent, Cap 
Height, Leading, x Height, and Fixed (see Figure 3-11).
If you use either the Ascent or Cap Height method, the tops of 
characters in your text frames will touch the top of the text frame 
(when the top frame inset is zero). Choosing x Height is similar: the 
tops of the lower-case characters will bump up against the top of 
the frame. These settings come at a price: it’s almost impossible to 
calculate the distance from the top of the frame to the baseline of the 
first line of text in the frame (without resorting to scripting).
In addition, using these methods means that InDesign will vary 
the leading of the first line when you enter characters from different 
fonts in the line, or change the size of characters, or when you embed 
inline graphics in the line. 
Setting First   
Baseline Position
Figure 3-11
Baseline Position

156     6
Is that bad? It is, if you care about type.
It’s important that you know exactly where the first baseline of 
text in a text frame will appear, relative to the top of the text frame. 
Why? Because if you know the position of the first baseline, you can 
snap the top of the text frame to your leading grid—and rest secure 
in the knowledge that the first baseline will fall on the next baseline.
To control the location of the first baseline of text in a text frame, 
choose either Leading or Fixed from the Offset menu in the First 
Baseline section. When you choose Leading, the first baseline is one 
leading increment from the top of the text frame—regardless of the 
size of the characters (or the height of inline graphics) in the line. 
When you choose Fixed, you can specify exactly how far from the 
top of the frame the first baseline should fall using the Min field. 
The Min field for the Offset settings other than Fixed means, 
“between the Min value and what the Offset would be ordinarily, use 
the larger value.”
For more on leading, see Chapter 4, “Type.”
So you’re typing away in a text frame, minding your own business, 
when all of a sudden you reach the end and get the dreaded red plus 
sign—overset text. With Auto-Size, that doesn’t happen. You can 
make the text frame expand or shrink to fit edited or reformatted 
text in any direction.
For a pull-quote in the middle of a page, you can expand the 
text frame on all four sides. For sidebar text, you can allow only the 
bottom of the text frame to resize (see Figure 3-12). Auto-Size works 
Auto-Size Text Frames 
Figure 3-12
Auto-Sizing 
Text Frames
The bottom of this text 
frame expands as text 
is added, or it shrinks 
as text is removed, up 
to the Minimum Height 
value (15p in this case).
Selecting this option 
makes the bottom of the 
text frame resize.

 3. x 157
only for unthreaded frames or the last frame in a thread. And while 
we’re pointing out limitations, don’t combine Auto-Size with the 
Flexible Columns option. It’s like combining beer and ice cream.
In the Text Frame Options dialog box, choose the Auto-Size tab. 
First, choose the direction in which you want the text frame to resize. 
Then use the proxy to indicate whether the text frame should resize 
from all four sides, two sides, or just one side. 
The No Line Breaks option that’s available when the width can be 
resized. If this option is not selected, no line breaks are added auto-
matically. If it’s selected, InDesign tries to minimize width expan-
sion by breaking lines to fill available vertical space.
 Here are a couple of other tricks to auto-resize frames. If a text 
frame is overset, double-click a corner handle to resize it automati-
cally in that direction. Or, if there isn’t enough text to fill the text 
frame, double-click a corner handle to shrink the frame to the text 
(see Figure 3-13).
Spanning and Splitting Columns
In earlier versions of InDesign, if you wanted a heading to span mul-
tiple columns, you had to create a separate text frame for the head-
ing. Now you can span a heading across multiple columns, which is 
sometimes called a "straddle head" (see Figure 3-14). You can also 
split a paragraph into multiple columns—especially useful for a list 
within an article (see Figure 3-15).
▶To span or split columns quickly, select text, display the para-
graph options in the Control panel, and then choose an option 
from the Span Columns menu.
▶To span or split columns and bring up a dialog box that lets you 
adjust the spacing, choose Span Columns from the Paragraph 
Figure 3-13
Snap Resizing 
Text Frames
Double-click a handle to 
resize the text frame.

158     6
panel menu or the Control panel menu. Or, Option/Alt-click the 
Span Columns button.
In the Span Columns dialog box, you can specify the number of 
columns to span or sub-columns to split into, but more important, 
you can change the spacing before or after the spanning or splitting 
paragraphs. If you’re like us, you probably wonder what the differ-
ence is between changing the spacing in the dialog box versus using 
the Space Before/Space After settings in the Control panel. The 
answer is a bit odd. If you change the before/after spacing in one 
location, the changes in one UI area aren’t reflected in the other, and 
the higher value wins out.
If you’re splitting columns, you can also change the inside gut-
ters (the spacing between the sub-columns) and the outside gutters 
(the spacing between the outside of the sub-columns and the main 
column’s inset).
As a general rule, avoid combining footnotes with paragraphs 
that split into or span columns. When determining where footnotes 
should go, InDesign divides a page with spanning or split columns 
into sections. If you insert a footnote in a split column paragraph, the 
...and then click the Span Columns button in the Control 
panel, and choose Span All.
Select the heading you want 
to straddle...
Figure 3-14
Spanning Columns

 3. x 159
footnote text appears at the bottom of the split columns, not at the 
bottom of the text frame. Even worse, if you insert a footnote in text 
above split paragraphs, the footnote appears above the split para-
graphs rather than at the bottom of the text frame. It can get ugly fast.
If you need to add a paragraph to a set of split columns, just 
choose the same split setting. InDesign combines all paragraphs 
with the same split setting into the same block.
If you plan on repeating straddle heads or splitting columns in 
your document, you’ll want to create a paragraph style with the set-
tings you need.
Linking and Unlinking Text Frames
You can link one text frame to another to make the text continue—
or “flow”—from frame to frame. In InDesign, the controls for link-
ing and unlinking text frames are the “in port” and “out port” icons 
on the text frames themselves. The process of linking text frames in 
InDesign is similar to working with the “windowshade handles” on 
PageMaker text blocks, and should feel familiar to PageMaker users. 
There’s no need to go to the Toolbox to get a special “linking” tool, as 
there is in QuarkXPress.
When you link text frames together, you’re threading stories 
through the text frames. When you place text to create a series of 
linked text frames, you’re flowing text.
The text in a story has a direction—it has a beginning, a middle, 
and an end. When we speak, in this section, of a particular text frame 
Select the text, and choose 
Span Columns from the 
Paragraph panel menu...
...then choose choose Split 
Column, and fine-tune the 
spacing settings.
Figure 3-15
Splitting Columns

160     6
appearing before or after another, we’re talking about its position in 
the story, not relative to its position on the page.
The way that InDesign displays the in port and out port of a text 
frame tells you about the text frame and its position in a story (see 
Figure 3-16). 
▶When the in port or out port is empty, no other text frame is 
linked to that port. When both ports are empty, the text you see 
in the text frame is the entire story.
▶When you see a plus sign (+) in the out port, it means that not 
all of the text in the story has been placed. The remaining (or 
“overset”) text is stored in the text frame, but is not displayed.
▶When you see a triangle in the in port or the out port (or both), 
InDesign is telling you that the text frame is linked to another 
text frame.
To link one text frame to another, choose the Selection or Direct 
Selection tool, then click either the in port or the out port of a text 
frame. InDesign displays the text place icon. Place the cursor over 
another frame (when you do this, InDesign displays the text link 
icon, which either looks like a little chain or like some text inside big 
parentheses, depending on what type of frame you’re hovering over) 
and then click. InDesign links the two frames (see Figure 3-17). That 
sounds pretty simple, but there are a number of details you should 
keep in mind:
▶Unlike QuarkXPress, InDesign can link two text frames when 
both frames contain text. When you do this, the stories in the 
Linking Text Frames
This text frame contains all of the text in a story. How can you tell?
The in port is empty, and…
…the out port is also empty.
This text frame is at the start 
of a story, because the in 
port is empty.
When you see a triangle in 
the out port, it means that 
the text frame is linked to 
another text frame.
A “+” in the out port means that the text 
frame is the last text frame in a story, 
and that there’s more text to place (the 
unplaced text is called “overset” text).
Figure 3-16
In Ports and Out Ports

 3. x 161
text frames are merged into a single story. If the text in the first 
text frame did not end with a carriage return, InDesign will run 
the text in the second text frame into the last paragraph of the 
first text frame (see Figure 3-18).
▶Unlike PageMaker’s text blocks, InDesign frames can be linked 
when they’re empty. This means you can easily set up text lay-
outs without having the copy in hand and without resorting to  
a “dummy text” placeholder.
▶The port you click (the in port or the out port) sets the position 
of the link in the sequence of linked text frames making up the 
story. If you click the out port, the text frame you link to will 
come after the current text frame. If you click the in port and 
then another frame, this second frame will come earlier in the 
story (see Figure 3-19).
Select a text frame and click its out port.
InDesign displays the text place icon.
InDesign changes 
the text place 
icon to the link 
icon.
Click the link 
icon on the frame. 
InDesign links 
the two frames.
Position the text place 
icon over a frame. 
If you’ve turned on the Show 
Text Threads option (on the 
Extras submenu of the View 
menu), InDesign will display 
a line linking the out port of 
one text frame with the in 
port of another.
At this point, you can also 
create a new text frame by 
dragging the text place icon. 
The new frame will be linked 
to the text frame you clicked.
You can also 
click the in port 
to load the text 
place icon.
Figure 3-17
Linking Text Frames

162     6
▶When you click the out port of a text frame that contains more 
text than it can display (that is, an out port that displays the “+” 
symbol), the additional text will flow into the next text frame in 
the story (see Figure 3-20).
▶You don’t have to link to another text frame—you can also create 
a link to a graphic frame or a frame whose content type has been 
set to “None.”
▶To create a new text frame that’s linked to an existing text frame, 
click the in port or out port of the existing frame and then drag 
the text place icon.
▶As you link and unlink text, InDesign changes the appearance 
of the cursor to give you a clue about what you’re doing or are 
about to do.
▶What if you have a “loaded” text place cursor and then realize 
that you need to scroll, or turn to another page? No problem—
you can scroll, zoom, turn pages, create or modify ruler guides, 
and create new pages.
▶To “unload” the text place cursor (disable it, like if you change 
your mind midstream), click on any tool in the Toolbox (or just 
press a key to switch tools, like “V” for the Selection tool).
To break a link between text frames, double-click the in port or out 
port on either side of the link (see Figure 3-21). When you break 
a link between text frames that have text content, the text usually 
becomes overset text.
Alternatively, you can click the out port of one frame and then 
click the next frame in the thread (see Figure 3-22). When you move 
Link icon
Unlink icon
Unlinking Text Frames
Two unlinked text frames.
Click the out port of one of the 
frames to load the text place icon.
Click the text place icon on  
the other frame.
InDesign links the two frames. 
If the first frame did not 
end with a carriage return, 
InDesign runs the text from 
the first paragraph of the 
second frame into the last   
paragraph of the first frame.
Figure 3-18
Linking Stories

 3. x 163
the text place icon over the next frame, InDesign displays the Unlink 
Text icon (which is subtly different than the Link Text icon). Click 
the Unlink Text icon on the frame, and InDesign breaks the link.
When you break a link in the middle of multiple frames, the links 
before and after the break remain. If boxes A, B, C, and D are linked 
together, and you break the link between B and C, then C and D will 
stay linked together (even though there won’t be any text in them).
What happens to text frame links when you delete or cut a linked 
text frame or series of linked text frames? First, InDesign does not 
delete any text in the story—unless you select all of the frames in the 
story and delete them. Otherwise, InDesign flows the text contained 
by the frames you’ve deleted into the remaining frames in the story. 
If you want to delete text, you have to select it using the Type tool first. 
For more on selecting text, see “Editing Text,” later in this chapter.
When you cut or copy linked text frames, then paste, InDesign 
maintains the links between the duplicated frames—but not between 
the duplicates and the original frames or any other frames (see Figure 
3-23). The copies of the frames contain the same text as the originals.
A side effect of this behavior is that you can copy text frames from 
a story that are not linked to each other, and, when you paste, the text 
Cutting and Pasting 
Text Frames
Two unlinked 
text frames.
When you load 
the text place 
icon by clicking 
the out port…
…and link to 
another text 
frame…
…that frame 
becomes the next 
frame in the story.
If, on the other 
hand, you load 
the text place icon 
by clicking on an 
in port…
…the frame you link to 
becomes the previous 
text frame in the story.
This text frame contains overset 
text. When you link it to another 
text frame…
…InDesign places the overset text 
in the following text frame (in this 
example, all of the text in the story 
has been placed).
Figure 3-19
Controlling the Order 
of Text Frames in a 
Story
Figure 3-20
Placing Overset Text

164     6
frames will be linked. This can come in handy when you’re trying to 
split a story that is in multiple frames (see in Figure 3-24).
It’s easy to add a text frame in the middle of a sequence of linked text 
frames. Just follow these steps (see Figure 3-25).
1. Use the Selection tool to click the out port at the point in the 
story at which you want to add the new frame.
2. Drag the text place icon to create a new text frame, or click an 
existing, empty, unlinked frame.
InDesign only lets you link to empty and unlinked frames unless 
you’re adding frames to the beginning or end of your thread.
Flowing Text
When you select Place from the File menu (and then choose a text 
file), or use the Selection tool to click the in port or out port of a text 
frame, your cursor changes to the text place icon. You can drag the 
text place icon to create a text frame, or you can click on an existing 
frame to flow text into it. Flowing text is all about the care, mainte-
nance, and feeding of the text place icon (see Table 3-1 for more on 
text place icons).
The text place icon can also show a preview of the text you’re about 
to place. For more on this, see the description of the Show Thumb-
nails on Place option in the Interface panel of the Preferences dialog 
box in Chapter 1, “Workspace.”
Once you’ve “loaded” the text place icon, you can use one of 
InDesign’s four text flow methods: Manual text flow, Semi-automatic 
text flow, Automatic text flow, or Super Autoflow. These determine 
Adding a New   
Frame to a Story
Select a text frame and double-click 
the out port (or in port).
InDesign breaks the link at the 
point at which you clicked.
Move the text place icon over the 
next (or previous, if you clicked 
an in port) text frame. InDesign 
displays the unlink icon.
InDesign breaks the link between 
the two text frames.
Select a text frame then click 
the out port (or in port). 
InDesign displays a text 
place icon. 
Figure 3-21
Unlinking Text Frames
Figure 3-22
Another Method

 3. x 165
In this example, we’ve selected the 
second and third text frames in a 
story. When we copy and paste…
…InDesign retains the link between 
the two copied frames.
In this example, we’ve selected the 
first and third text frames in a story. 
When we copy and paste…
…the duplicate frames are linked—
even though the frames were not 
directly connected to each other.
Click the out port of a text 
frame at the point at which 
you want to add the new 
frame (or click the in port 
of the following frame).
InDesign displays the 
text place icon.
Drag the text place icon.
InDesign creates a new 
text frame and adds the 
text frame to the story.
To add a text frame at the 
beginning of the story, click 
the in port of the first text 
frame in the story.
Figure 3-23
Cutting and Pasting 
Linked Frames
Figure 3-24
More About Copying  
and Pasting Linked 
Frames
Figure 3-25
Adding a New Frame  
to a Story

166     6
what happens when you click or drag the text place icon. Here’s the 
lowdown.
▶Manual text flow. By default, InDesign uses the manual text 
flow method. When you click the text place icon on your page, 
or drag the text place icon, InDesign creates a new text frame 
and flows the text into it (see Figure 3-26). When you click the 
text place icon in between column guides, the width of the text 
frame is determined by the width of the column you clicked in; 
the height of the frame is the distance from the point at which 
you clicked the text place icon to the bottom of the column (see 
Figure 3-27). In a one-column document, the text frame reaches 
from the page’s left to right margins. InDesign then flows the 
text into the new text frame. When you click the text place 
icon on an existing text frame or series of linked text frames, 
InDesign flows the text into the frame or frames. In either case, 
once InDesign is done flowing the text, the text place icon  
disappears and you’re back to whatever tool you had selected 
before you loaded the text place icon. To continue placing text, 
click the out port to reload the text place icon.
▶Semi-automatic text flow. Semi-automatic text flow is almost 
exactly like manual text flow—the difference is that InDesign 
reloads the text place icon. The advantage? You don’t have to 
click the out port of a text frame to reload the text place icon. To 
turn on semi-automatic text flow, hold down Option/Alt when 
the text place icon is visible. InDesign displays the semi-auto-
matic text place icon (see Figure 3-28).
Icon:
What it means:
Manual text flow. Click to flow text into a frame; click 
in a column to create a frame that’s the width of the 
column, or drag to create a frame.
Semi-automatic text flow. InDesign “reloads”  
the text flow icon after each click or drag.
Super Autoflow text flow. Click to place all of the text 
in the story (InDesign adds pages as necessary).
Automatic text flow. InDesign flows the story to all 
empty pages, but does not add pages.
The text flow icon is above a guide or grid “snap” point.
The text flow icon is above a frame; clicking will place 
the text in the frame.
Table 3-1
Text Place Icons

 3. x 167
▶Automatic text flow. Automatic text flow—which you get if you 
hold down both Option/Alt and Shift—places as much text in 
the story as can fit on the pages in your document (the cursor 
looks like a solid down arrow). InDesign adds text frames as 
necessary on each subsequent column or page (and links them 
together, of course), but it won’t add additional pages to your 
document.
▶Super Autoflow. Hold down Shift, and the text place icon turns 
into the autoflow icon. Click the autoflow icon, and InDesign 
places all of the text, creating new frames and pages as neces-
sary (see Figure 3-29). When you click the autoflow icon in a 
text frame or series of linked text frames, InDesign duplicates 
that frame (or frames) on any new pages it creates, automatically 
links the frames, and places the text in the frames. When you 
click the autoflow icon in a column, InDesign creates a new text 
frame in each column (adding pages until it has placed all of the 
text in the story).
If you want InDesign to add text frames and/or pages as you type, 
use the options in the Smart Text Reflow section of the Type panel of 
the Preferences dialog box, as described in Chapter 1, “Workspace.”
When you want to shrink a text frame so that it’s just big enough 
to fit its content (for a photo caption, for example), you’ve got a 
number of different methods you can call on. First, you can press 
Shrinking Text Frames
Load the text place icon (by 
placing a text file or clicking 
the in port or out port of any 
text frame).
InDesign displays the manual  
text flow icon. Drag the icon.
InDesign flows text into the area 
you defined by dragging.
Load the text place icon.
 InDesign displays the 
manual text flow icon.
Click the manual text flow  
icon in a column.
InDesign flows the text into the 
column. Click the out port to reload 
and place more text.
Figure 3-26
Manual Text Flow
Figure 3-27
Manual Text Flow and 
Column Guides

168     6
Load the text place icon.
 InDesign displays the 
manual text flow icon.
Hold down Shift to switch to the 
Super Autoflow text flow icon, then 
click the icon in a column.
InDesign flows the text into the 
available columns or text frames, 
and continues adding new text 
frames and pages until there’s no 
more text left to place.
Command-Option-C/Ctrl-Alt-C, to fit the frame to its content. You 
can also double-click any of the text frame’s edges with the Selection 
tool to shrink the text frame in a specific dimension (see Figure 3-30).
Entering Text
The simplest way to get text into the text frames in your InDesign 
publications is to type it. To do this, create a text frame by dragging 
the Type tool, or select the Type tool and click in a frame (again, it 
doesn’t have to be a text frame). You can also double-click with either 
Load the text place icon.
 InDesign displays the 
manual text flow icon.
Hold down Option/Alt to switch to 
the semi-automatic text flow icon, 
then click the icon in a column.
InDesign flows the text into the 
column, then automatically reloads 
the text place icon.
Click the semi-automatic text flow 
icon in the next column. InDesign  
creates a new text frame and links it  
to the previous text frame.
Repeat this process until you’ve 
placed all of the columns of text you 
want to place.
Figure 3-28
Semi-Automatic  
Text Flow
Figure 3-29
Super Autoflow

 3. x 169
Double-click the top or bottom 
edge of a text frame…
Double-click the left or right 
edge of a text frame…
Double-click one of the  
corners of the text frame…
…and InDesign shrinks the 
frame vertically.
…and InDesign shrinks the 
frame horizontally.
…and InDesign shrinks the frame 
horizontally and vertically.
the Selection tool or the Direct Selection tool to automatically switch 
to the Type tool. All these methods place a blinking text cursor (or 
“text insertion point”) inside the text frame. Type, and the characters 
you type will appear in the text frame.
We don’t know about you, but we’re not getting any younger, and we 
have trouble remembering exactly which keys to press to produce 
certain special characters. If you’re like us, you’ll appreciate the list 
of common character shortcuts in Table 3-2. InDesign lists these 
shortcuts in the Insert Special Character, Insert Break Character, 
and Insert White Space submenus (under the Type menu, or in the 
Context menu, see Figure 3-31). 
All of the keyboard shortcuts for these special characters can be 
redefined and/or added (for those characters lacking a default key-
board shortcut) by selecting Keyboard Shortcuts from the Edit menu 
and then navigating to the Type Menu section.
Inserting Special   
Characters
Figure 3-30
Shrinking Text Frames

170     6
Special character:
What you press:
Bullet (•)
Option-8/Alt-8
Column break
Keypad Enter
Copyright symbol (©)
Option-G/Alt-G
Discretionary hyphen
Command-Shift--/Ctrl-Shift--
Ellipsis (…)
Option-;/Alt-;
Em dash (—)
Option-Shift--/Alt-Shift--
Em space
Command-Shift-M/Ctrl-Shift-M
En dash (–)
Option--/Alt--
En space
Command-Shift-N/Ctrl-Shift-N
Even page break
undefined
Figure space
undefined
Flush space
undefined
Frame break
Shift-Keypad Enter
Hair space
undefined*
Indent to here
Command-\/Ctrl-\
Next page number
Command-Option-Shift-] 
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-]
Non-breaking hyphen
Command-Option--/Ctrl-Alt--
Non-breaking space
Command-Option-X/Ctrl-Alt-X
Odd page break
undefined*
Page break
Command-Keypad Enter 
Ctrl-Keypad Enter
Page number
Command-Option-Shift-N 
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-N
Paragraph symbol (¶)
Option-7/Alt-7
Previous page number
Command-Option-Shift-[ 
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-[
Punctuation space
undefined
Trademark (™)
undefined
Left double quote (“)
Option-[/Alt-[
Left single quote (‘)
Option-]/Alt-]
Right double quote (”)
Option-Shift-[/Alt-Shift-[
Right single quote (’)
Option-Shift-]/Shift-Alt-]
Straight single quote
Control-'/Alt-'
Straight double quote
Control-Shift-'/Ctrl-Alt-'
Section symbol (§)
Option-6/Alt-6
Thin space
Command-Option-Shift-M 
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-M
Registered trademark (®)
Option-R/Alt-R
Table 3-2
Entering Special  
Characters

 3. x 171
Click the Type tool   
in a text frame.
Display the context 
menu and choose 
a special character 
from the Insert 
Special Character 
submenu.
InDesign enters 
the character.
In this example, the section 
marker text (in the Section 
Options dialog box) is   
“Sixteenth Century.”
We’re sometimes stumped when it’s time to type a dagger (†) or a cir-
cumflex (ˆ). And we often spend time hunting through the Character 
panel (on the Mac OS) or Character Map (in Windows) looking for 
the right character in a symbol font (such as Zapf Dingbats). 
If you also have this problem, you’ll love the Glyphs panel. A 
“glyph” is the term for a specific shape of a character. To open this 
panel, choose Glyphs from the Type menu (see Figure 3-32).
While the text cursor is in a text frame, choose the font, then dou-
ble-click a character from the list of characters in the Glyphs panel. 
InDesign inserts the character at the location of the cursor.
Now here’s the cool part: If a character can be found inside a font, 
you can use it—even if the character is outside the range of charac-
ters supported by your system. For instance, many fonts have a 1/2 
character, but there’s no way to type it on the Mac OS. This seems 
like a silly feature—after all, why would fonts contain characters that 
would be inaccessible to any other program? We don’t know, mate, 
but they do. Fonts have all kinds of foreign-language characters, 
weird punctuation, and even ornaments that simply can’t be used 
in QuarkXPress or other programs. But the Glyphs panel makes it 
easy to get to them. Characters such as “fi” and “fl” ligatures, which 
aren’t part of the Windows character set, suddenly become available 
(without switching to an “expert” font). It’s well worth your time to 
trawl through your fonts just to see if there’s anything you can use 
that you haven’t been using.
Recently used glyphs. The Glyphs panel keeps track of the glyphs 
you’ve inserted, and displays them in the Recently Used section of 
the panel. If you don’t see this section, choose Show Options from 
the Glyphs panel menu. To clear the list, choose Recently Used from 
the Delete Glyph Set submenu of the Glyphs panel menu.
Inserting Glyphs
Figure 3-31
Entering Special  
Characters Using the  
Context Menu

172     6
Choose Glyphs from   
the Type menu.
Click the Type tool in a text frame.
Select a font 
family and 
type style, then 
double-click a 
character…
…and InDesign inserts 
the character.
Click these buttons to 
reduce or enlarge the 
size of the character 
display.
If you’ve selected an OpenType 
font, you can choose alternate 
character glyphs from the 
pop-up menus associated with 
each character.
The Show menu provides a 
number of ways to sort and 
display the glyphs avail-
able in the font. One of our 
favorites is Alternates for 
Selection, which appears 
when you have text selected.
Select some text…
…and choose Alternates 
 for Selection from the   
Show menu.
If the font contains alternate 
glyphs for the selected   
characters, they will appear 
in the Glyphs panel.
Note that this particular alternate glyph won’t appear   
unless you have Discretionary Ligatures turned on. 
Double-click the alternate glyph to 
replace the selected characters.
Figure 3-32
Inserting Characters 
Using the Glyphs  
Panel

 3. x 173
Missing characters. You’ve got to keep in mind that just because 
one font has a particular glyph doesn’t mean that another font will. 
When you use the Glyphs panel, InDesign remembers the Unicode 
value for that glyph. When you change fonts, the program tries to 
find the same Unicode value in the new font. If the font designer 
didn’t include that glyph, or assigned a different Unicode value, 
InDesign displays the dreaded pink highlight instead of the glyph.
Glyph Sets. You’ve spent hours looking, and you’ve finally found 
the perfect ornament characters for your publication. Unfortunately, 
they’re in three different fonts. Wouldn’t it be great if you could save 
those three characters in a special place to access them later? That’s 
where glyph sets come in. To make a new glyph set to store your 
characters, choose (surprise!) New Glyph Set from the Glyphs panel 
menu (see Figure 3-33). Then, the next time you find a character you 
love, click it and choose your set from the Add to Glyph submenu (in 
the panel menu). You can mix and match fonts in a set, and have as 
many different sets as you want.
InDesign lists your glyph sets in the View Glyph Set submenu of 
the Glyphs panel menu; once you select a set, you can insert a glyph 
into the current text frame by double-clicking it.
By default, glyphs in a set remember what font they came from. 
So, when you insert a glyph from a set, InDesign assigns the proper 
font. However, sometimes you want to insert a character in the cur-
rent font of the selected text. You might want to include the one-half 
(1/2) symbol in your set, but want it to appear in the current font. To 
do this, select the name of the glyph set from the Edit Glyph Set 
submenu of the panel menu, select the character, and turn off the 
Remember Font with Glyph checkbox. InDesign indicates that this 
character can be in any font with a little “u” symbol in the panel.
The client wants to see the new layout. But the writer won’t give you 
the text. You’re stuck—a layout looks incomplete without text, and 
the humorless client is scared by the text from your latest sci-fi short 
story. What you need is something that looks like text, but isn’t really 
text at all.
Dummy text is a meaningless stream of fake Latin text that looks 
very much like real text. It’s just the thing you need to survive your 
meeting and get that approval your business depends on.
InDesign makes it easy to add dummy text to a text frame—select 
the text frame using the Selection tool, or click the Type tool in a text 
frame and choose Fill with Placeholder Text from the context menu 
(or from the Type menu). InDesign fills the text frame with dummy 
Dummy Placeholder 
Text

174     6
To associate a 
specific glyph with a 
specific font, select 
the glyph and check 
this option (and 
choose the appropri-
ate font and font 
style, if necessary).
To create a glyph set, choose 
New Glyph Set from the 
Glyphs panel menu.
Enter a name for your 
glyph set and click the 
OK button.
To add a character to a 
glyph set, select the char-
acter and then choose the 
glyph set from the Add to 
Glyph set submenu of the 
Glyphs panel menu. A glyph 
set can contain characters 
from multiple fonts.
To display the glyph set in the Glyphs 
panel, choose the glyph set’s name from 
the View Glyph Set submenu.
To make changes to the glyph 
set, select the glyph set name 
from the Edit Glyph Set 
submenu of the Glyphs panel 
menu. InDesign displays the 
Edit Glyph Set dialog box.
text (see Figure 3-34). InDesign’s default dummy text is a random 
compilation of words taken from the Lorum Ipsum text that many 
designers have used over the years. There are two ways to change the 
placeholder text:
▶Hold down Command/Ctrl while choosing Fill with Placeholder 
Text Then pick the language, such as Hebrew or Japanese, in the 
dialog box that appears. Try it—it’s fun.
▶Save a text file in the InDesign folder with the name “Place-
holder.txt” the program will use that text instead. This probably 
isn’t actually useful, but it can make for a clever prank.
Figure 3-33
Inserting Characters 

 3. x 175
Text Variables
Believe it or not, we’ve met a number of graphic designers who are 
scared of the word “variable.” A variable is simply something that 
can change. Text variables in InDesign provide a way for you to 
insert text that can change depending on various factors, such as 
times, dates, and page references. 
It’s important to understand the difference between text variables 
and text variable instances. A text variable is the definition of the 
variable itself; a text variable instance is the marker in the text that 
inserts the content of the text variable. It’s entirely possible to have a 
text variable in a document for which no text variable instance exists 
in the layout (though there’s really no reason to).
Text variables come in a variety of flavors, and are subject to a 
variety of limitations. Let’s take a look at the text variable types.
▶Chapter Number. A text variable that refers to the number of 
the current chapter (chapter numbering is defined by the book 
containing the document—for more on books, see Chapter 8, 
“Long Documents”).
▶Creation Date. A text variable that refers to the date and time 
you created the document (not when you made the variable).
▶Custom Text. A string of any text you can type.
▶File Name. The name of the document.
▶Last Page Number. The number of the last page in the file.
▶Metadata Caption. The metadata of the adjoining (or grouped) 
image is displayed in the text frame. 
▶Modification Date. The date and time of the last modification 
made to the document.
Choose Fill with Placeholder Text from the 
context menu (or from the Type menu)…
…and InDesign fills the selected 
frame with dummy text.
Select a text frame with the 
Selection tool, or click the 
Type tool in a text frame.
Figure 3-34
Filling a Frame with 
Dummy Text

176     6
▶Output Date. The date and time the document was printed.
▶Running Header (Character Style). Refers to the first or last 
instance of text on the page containing the text variable instance 
that has been formatted using a specified character style.
▶Running Header (Paragraph Style). Refers to the first or last 
paragraph on the page containing the text variable instance that 
has been formatted using a specified paragraph style.
If you work on books, as we do, you’re probably curious about 
using text variables for cross references—this is where the “limita-
tions” come in. You can’t refer to an arbitrary string of text using text 
references, which means that you can’t use them for cross references 
to your figure numbers, or to other sections of a book.
Worse, in some ways, is that text variables are considered as a 
single character for purposes of text composition. This means that 
InDesign will not enter a line break inside a text variable instance. 
This was already true for the composition of section markers and 
automatic page numbers, but it can be even more of a problem with 
text variables because they usually more text (see Figure 3-35).
Don’t get us wrong—text variables are a great thing. But we point 
out the problems because we think it’s important that you under-
stand how they work. Before you’re on a deadline.
When you want to see when text is a text variable instance, choose 
Show Hidden Characters from the Type menu. InDesign will display 
a (very pale!) box around each text variable instance in the text.
Each type of variable has its own options. Most of the variable types 
give you the option of adding text before and/or after each variable 
instance, but almost all of them provide other options, see Table 3-3.
Showing Text   
Variable Instances
Text Variable Options
This is the default Output Date text variable. 
It’s fairly short, so it’s not likely to cause any 
serious composition problems.
This is a long text variable that prints the output date. It’s 
treated as a non-breaking sequence of text, and will cause 
composition problems (including overset text).
Figure 3-35
Text Variables  
and Composition

 3. x 177
Before we get into the details of how to create your own variables, 
let’s look at how you can insert a variable at the current cursor loca-
tion. Assuming that you have an active text insertion point in a text 
frame or story, choose the name of the text variable from the Insert 
Variable submenu of the Context menu (see Figure 3-36) or from the 
Insert Variable submenu of the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign adds the text variable instance.
The preset text variables are all well and good, but the real fun lies 
in defining your own. Maybe you just want a more formal time and 
date format, or maybe you want to enter a custom text variable—
either way, it’s easy, and the range of possible text variables is vast 
(even within the limitations we mentioned earlier).
To create a text variable, follow these steps (see Figure 3-37).
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Click the New button. InDesign displays the New Text Vari-
able dialog box. If you had a variable selected when you clicked 
the New button, the dialog box will be filled in with the default 
properties of that variable (as though you duplicated it).
3. Enter a name for the text variable in the Name field.
4. Select a text variable type from the Type pop-up menu. The 
dialog fills in with the options for that variable type.
5. Changes the options to define your new text variable. When the 
settings look the way you want them to, click the OK button to 
close the dialog box and return to the Text Variables dialog box.
6. Click the Done button to close the Text Variables dialog box.
Text variables are stored in the current file. If you want to create 
a text variable that is available in all new documents, define it when 
no documents are open. When you do this, the variable will appear 
in each new document you open.
You can change the definition of a text variable at any time. When 
you edit a text variable, all of the text variable instances of that vari-
able will update to reflect the changes you’ve made. If your variable 
instances are inside paragraphs, be prepared for text to reflow and 
line endings of composed text to change when you edit a variable.
To change the definition of a text variable, follow these steps.
Inserting a   
Text Variable
Creating a   
Text Variable
Editing a Text Variable

178     6
Variable Type
Option
Definition
All Formats (except 
Custom Text)
Text Before
Text to enter before the text variable.
Text After
Text to enter after the text variable.
Chapter Number
Numbering Style
Choose Arabic (1, 2, 3), lowercase Roman 
(i, ii, iii), uppercase Roman (I, II, III), 
lowercase letters (a, b, c), or uppercase 
letters (A, B, C).
Custom Text
Text
Enter the text you want to have appear in 
the text variable instances.
File Name
Include Entire Folder Path
Set this option to true to include the full 
path to the document file.
Include File Extension
Set this option to true to include the file 
extension of the document file.
Last Page Number
Numbering Style 
Choose an option such as Arabic (1, 2, 3) 
or lowercase Roman (i, ii, iii).
Scope
Choose Section to specify the last page 
in the section; choose Document for the 
number of the last page in the document.
Metadata Caption
Metadata
Choose the metadata to display in the 
caption. These options are similar to 
those that appear when you choose File > 
File Info in Photoshop or Illustrator.
Creation Date,
Output Date,
Modification Date
Date Format 
Enter a date format by selecting items 
from the pop-up menu. You can enter 
spaces or punctuation between the time/
date placeholders. See Table 3-4 for a list 
of the placeholders (you can type them 
or choose them from the menu).
Running Header 
(Character Style),
Running Header 
(Paragraph Style)
Style
The character or paragraph style to use.
Use
Choose Last on Page to use the last 
instance of the style on the page; choose 
First on Page to use the first instance.
Delete End Punctuation
Remove the punctuation at the end of 
the text, if any.
Change Case
Choose a case option for the text that 
will appear in the text variable instances.
Table 3-3
Text Variables

 3. x 179
Category
Type
Placeholder
Example
Time
Hour (1-12)
h
1
Hour (01-12)
hh
01
Hour (1-23)
H
1
Hour (01-23)
HH
01
Minute
m
1
Minute (00)
mm
01
Second
s
1
Second (00)
ss
01
AM/PM
a*
AM
Time Zone
zzzz
Pacific Daylight 
Time**
Time Zone (Short)
z
PDT
Day
Number
d
1
Number (01)
dd
01
Name
EEEE
Tuesday
Name (Short)
E
Tue
Month
Number
M
4
Number (01)
MM
04
Name
MMMM
April
Name (Short)
MMM
Apr
Year
Number
yyyy
2007
Number (Short)
y
07
Era
G***
AD
Era (Long)
GGGG
Anno Domini
* Simply enters “AM” or “PM,” does not provide for other capitalization, 
punctuation, or formatting options.
** On the Mac OS, “(CA)” is appended to this example. We don’t know why, 
as there are plenty of people who live in this time zone who do not live in 
California. It’s vaguely offensive.
*** Simply enters “AD” or, we assume, “BC.” Does not provide for other 
capitalization, punctuation (e.g., “A.D.”), or alternative formats (e.g., “CE” 
or “BCE”). If your system clock is entering dates from an earlier or later era, 
there’s probably something wrong.
Table 3-4
Date Format Shortcuts

180     6
Select a text variable from the 
Insert Variable submenu of 
the Context menu.
InDesign inserts a text   
variable instance in the text.
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Select a text variable and click the Edit button. InDesign opens 
the Edit Text Variable dialog box.
3. Make changes in the Edit Text Variable dialog box. When the 
settings look the way you want them to, click the OK button to 
close the dialog box and return to the Text Variables dialog box.
4. Click the Done button to close the Text Variables dialog box.
At this juncture, we are obligated to point out that you can modify 
any of the built-in text variable instances. You could, for example, 
change the Chapter Number instance to enter the creation date, as 
Ole accidentally did when he first tried to create a new text variable. 
We urge you not to do this.
To load text variables from another document, follow these steps (see 
Figure 3-38).
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Click the Load button in the Text Variables dialog box. InDesign 
displays the Open A File dialog box.
3. Locate and select an InDesign document, then click the Open 
button. InDesign imports the text variables from the selected 
document into the current document.
4. InDesign will display the Load Text Variables dialog box, which 
shows a list of the incoming text variables. If the document 
you’ve selected contains text variables with the same name as 
text variables in the current document, you can choose whether 
Loading Text Variables
Figure 3-36
Inserting a  
Text Variable

 3. x 181
Figure 3-37
Creating a Text Variable
Choose Define from the   
Text Variables submenu   
of the Type menu.
InDesign displays the  
Text Variables dialog box. 
Click the New button.
Select the type of text   
variable you want from   
the Type pop-up menu.
After you select a text variable 
type, the dialog box fills in 
with the default settings for 
that type of variable.
Define the text variable by entering text or 
making selections from pop-up menus.
As you edit the text variable, InDesign displays a   
preview of the variable at the bottom of the dialog box.
to override the definitions of the existing text variables or to 
leave them unchanged (by renaming the incoming variable). 
Click the OK button once you’ve finished, and InDesign will 
import the text variables from the selected document.
As usual, if the definition of any text variable used in your text has 
changed, check for text reflow.

182     6
To delete a text variable, follow these steps. Note that you can use this 
process to merge two text variables.
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Select the text variable you want to delete and click the Delete 
button. If the variable has been used in the document, InDesign 
displays the Delete Text Variables dialog box.
3. If you want to replace the text variable with another text vari-
able, select the replacement variable from the Existing Variable 
pop-up menu. To convert all instances of the text variable to text, 
select the Text option. To delete all of the text variable instances 
linked to the selected text variable, select the Nothing option. 
4. Click OK to close the dialog box. InDesign applies the changes 
you’ve specified.
You can delete an individual text variable instance as you would 
delete any other text: Select it and press Delete.
Deleting a   
Text Variable
Figure 3-38
Loading Text Variables
Choose Define from the Text  
Variables submenu of the  
Type menu. InDesign displays  
the Text Variables dialog box.
Click the Load button, then Locate 
and select the file containing the text 
variables you want to load.
After you select a file, InDesign displays a 
list of the text variables in the file. To keep 
a text variable from being loaded, turn off 
(uncheck) the option.
If there are text variables in the selected 
document whose names match the names 
of text variables in the current document, 
InDesign shows that there is a conflict.
Use the pop-up menu to specify the way you 
want InDesign to resolve the conflict.

 3. x 183
You can, at any time, convert text variable instances to normal text, 
in effect “freezing” them in their current state. Of course, if the vari-
able instance is inside a paragraph, this will often cause text to reflow, 
as InDesign is now free to apply its normal text composition rules 
to the text of the variable. You can choose to convert individual text 
variable instances to text, or you can convert all of the text variable 
instances associated with a text variable to text.
To convert an individual text variable instance to text, follow 
these steps (see Figure 3-39).
1. Select the text variable instance with the Type tool.
2. Choose Convert Variable to Text from the Context menu (or 
from the Text Variables submenu of the Type menu). InDesign 
converts the text variable instance to normal text.
To convert all instances of a text variable to text, follow these 
steps. Note that this does not delete the text variable itself.
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Select a text variable and click the Convert to Text button. 
InDesign converts all instances of the text variable to text.
3. Click OK to close the Text Variables dialog box.
Again, we have to point out that this may cause text recomposition 
and reflow. Make certain that the line breaks in the document are 
where they should be after converting the text variable.
You can also use find and change to work with text variable 
instances—see the section on finding and changing text, later in this 
chapter, for more information.
Converting Text   
Variable Instances   
to Text
Figure 3-39
Converting a Text  
Variable Instance to 
Text
Select the text variable instace using the Type 
tool, then Choose Convert Variable to Text 
from the Context menu.
InDesign converts the text variable instance to normal 
text. This will almost certainly cause text recomposition.

184     6
In the following sections, we’ll present “recipes” that show you how 
to use text variables for a variety of common page layout tasks.
Creating a Time and Date Stamp. We often like to enter the date and 
time a file was printed, but we can’t always use the built-in time and 
date stamp from the Print dialog (because the page size is the same 
as the printer paper size). In the past, Ole has created custom print-
er’s marks files that move the page information up onto the page, but 
text variables have rendered that bit of esoteric knowledge obsolete. 
Note, however, that if you plan to omit the time and date stamp from 
your final printed version, you’ll need to make arrangements to sup-
press the printing of the text variables (such as moving them to a 
non-printing layer).
To create a text variable that will print the time and date a file was 
printed, follow these steps.
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Click the New button.
3. Enter a name for the variable and choose Output Date from the 
Type pop-up menu.
4. Enter the placeholders and any punctuation or spacing for the 
date format in the Date Format Field. We use “EEEE, d MMMM, 
yyyy h:mm a zzzz”—not only does it print the date and time in a 
civilized format, but it’s fun to say aloud.
5. Click OK to close the dialog box, then click Done to close the 
Text Variables dialog box.
Simple Custom Text. Many people, on first hearing about custom 
text variables, immediately think that they’d be a good way to 
enter commonly-used text. Don’t do that. There are many other, 
better ways to accomplish the same end (for example, you can trick 
autocorrect into entering text for you, as shown in the section on the 
autocorrect feature, later in this chapter).
Instead, think of custom text variables as a way to enter short 
pieces of text which might change before your layout is finished. To 
do this, follow these steps.
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Click the New button.
Text Variable Examples

 3. x 185
3. Enter a name for the variable and choose Custom Text from the 
Type pop-up menu.
4. Enter the text you want to have appear when you insert the text 
variable.
5. Click OK to close the dialog box, then click Done to close the 
Text Variables dialog box.
Page X of Y. Ever wonder why so many financial and legal docu-
ments use a page numbering scheme that tells you how many pages 
there are in the document? For some documents, the simple knowl-
edge that there is an end is required to maintain one’s sanity.
If, for whatever reason, you need to extend this sort of reassur-
ance to the reader, it’s easy to do using text variables. Just enter an 
automatic page number special character, the text “to,” and insert 
the predefined Last Page Number text variable (see Figure 3-40).
Why didn’t we enter the “to” as part of the text variable? It’s 
because we’re following a general rule of keeping text inserted by 
text variables to a minimum to avoid potential composition prob-
lems. No, you can’t specify the last page of a multi-document book.
Running Headers. Many documents feature a layout in which the 
text of key paragraphs—usually, headings of a given level—appears 
in the header or footer of each page. Note that this text could also 
Enter an 
automatic page 
number marker 
and static text 
(“Page” and “of’’ 
in this example).
Use the Context menu 
to insert the default 
Last Page Number text 
variable.
Header on a master page
Header on a document page
Figure 3-40
Creating a Page X of Y 
Running Header

186     6
appear in a footer, in a tab on the side of the page, or, really, anywhere 
on the page. There’s nothing special about the text variable type that 
limits its use to text frames at the top of the page. That said, InDesign 
refers to this text variable type as a “header,” so we will, too.
To do this, you create a text variable, then insert that text vari-
able in text on the page or on a master page. Follow these steps (see 
Figure 3-41).
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box.
2. Click the New button.
3. Enter a name for the variable and choose Running Header 
(Paragraph Style) or Running Header (Character Style) from the 
Type pop-up menu.
4. Select the style you want to use from the Style pop-up menu.
5. Choose Last on Page or First on Page from the Use pop-up menu. 
6. Set up the controls in the Options section of the dialog box as 
necessary. For example, you’ll almost always want to turn on the 
Delete End Punctuation option.
7. Click OK to close the dialog box, then click Done.
8. Insert the text variable in text using the Insert Variable submenu 
of the Context menu.
In some layouts, you might need to create a pair of text variables. 
In a dictionary-style layout, for example, the left hand page header 
usually contains the first instance of text in a given style on the page, 
while the right hand page contains the last instance of the style (see 
Figure 3-42). If the right hand page is the first page in a section, how-
ever, it typically uses the first instance of the specified style (not the 
last, as would normally be the case for a right hand page). You can 
change the header of the page manually, or you can create a special 
master page to accomplish the same task.
When a page does not contain text formatted with the specified 
style, the variable in the header repeats the text from the previous 
instance of the same text variable. However, InDesign will not carry 
over the last instance of a given style when another instance of the 
same style appears on the page (see Figure 3-43). If this is the style 
of running heading your document calls for, you may have to adjust 
some pages manually.

 3. x 187
Figure 3-41
Creating a Running 
Header Using Text 
Variables
In this example, we created 
two text variables using the 
Running Header (Paragraph 
Style) variable type. We 
then inserted text variable 
instances in text frames on 
the master spread.
InDesign uses the text from 
the first or last instance of 
the specified paragraph style   
in the header on each   
document page.
Phone book Style Running Header. Another use for a running 
header is to show the range of a certain type of paragraph style on a 
given page. In a telephone directory or dictionary, for example, the 
page headers will show you the alphabetical range of names or topics 
shown on the page. Ole, for example, proudly shares a phone book 
page containing family names from “Kustyukov” to “Kwok.”
To set up this type of running header, you’ll need to create two 
text variables: one for the first instance of a given paragraph or char-
acter style on a page, another for the last instance of the same style. 
Then you create a page header that contains instances of both text 
variables, as shown in Figure 3-44.
Metadata Caption. A caption variable displays metadata of an image. 
We talk about metadata elsewhere, but as a quick reminder, you can 
attach information such as name, creation date, and description for 
any image or document. This information is called metadata. You 
can take advantage of image metadata by creating a caption variable 
that displays whatever metadata you want.

188     6
Figure 3-42
Dealing with  
Special Cases in  
Running Headers
In a spread, the header of this right-
hand page would be correct, as it 
lists the text of the last heading on 
the page. If it’s the first page in the 
section, however, it should show the 
text of the first heading, instead.
You can solve this problem 
by creating a new master 
spread. In this master 
spread, the right hand page 
header is set to show the text 
of the first paragraph of a 
given style, rather than the 
last paragraph of that style.
Apply the master spread to the 
opening page, and the text of the 
header will reflect the text of the 
correct paragraph.
Here’s how it works. When the text frame containing the cap-
tion variable is placed next to or grouped with an image, the variable 
displays the metadata of that image. When you create a caption vari-
able, you determine which image metadata is displayed. The most 
common types of metadata are attributes like Name and Description, 
but you can dig deeper and display Focal Length or ICC Profile.
For choosing which metadata to display, keep InDesign’s limita-
tion in mind when it comes to displaying variables—variables do not 
break across lines. So if you create a variable that displays the image’s 
Description metadata, make sure the Description text in your images 
is short enough to fit within a single line of the caption text frame. 
Otherwise, the description text will be crammed together on a single 
line. To work around this, you can convert variables into text, but 
then you break the connection to the metadata.
1. Choose Define from the Text Variables submenu of the Type 
menu. InDesign displays the Text Variables dialog box (see 
Figure 3-45).

 3. x 189
2. Click the New button.
3. Enter a name for the variable and choose Metadata Caption 
from the Type pop-up menu.
4. Choose the item you want to appear in the variable from the 
Metadata pop-up menu.
The header on the master page 
contains two text variables and a 
page number.
With the help of a nested character 
style and two additional text variables, 
you can add a navigational tab on the 
master spread.
The text variables pick up the first 
two characters of the first and last 
appearances of the character style 
on the page.
In many designs, the text of 
this header should reflect the 
text of the previous heading 
style, not the text of the first 
or last paragraph of that 
style on the page. We have 
not found a way to do this 
using text variables.
Figure 3-43
Problems in  
Running Headers
Figure 3-44
Phonebook Style  
Running Header

190     6
5. Specify the Text Before and the Text After.
If you want to create a list of running captions in your document, 
such as Figure 1, Figure 2, and so on, don’t do that here. Instead, 
create a paragraph style that uses a defined list for running cap-
tions. See “Applying Numbering” in Chapter 4, “Type.”
6. Click OK to create the variable, and then click Done.
7. Insert the caption variable into a text frame, and then move that 
text frame next to a placed image (or group it with an image).
How do you change the metadata of an image? Open the image 
in Adobe Bridge, Photoshop, or Illustrator, choose File Info from 
the File menu, and edit the metadata fields. After you edit the image 
metadata, remember to update the image using the Links panel.
For some captions, you want to use several different types of 
metadata, such as Name, Description, Copyright, and Creation Date. 
Unfortunately, you can’t combine these metadata elements into the 
same variable. Instead, create a different variable for each.
For more details on working with captions, see “Figure Captions” 
in Chapter 6, “Text Meets Graphics.”
Insert the variables in the caption 
text frame...
...and then move the text frame 
next to the image.
Figure 3-45
Caption Variables
Specify the type of metadata 
you want to appear in the 
caption. In this example, we 
create several variables to 
use in a caption.

 3. x 191
Cross References
Cross references are a type of hyperlink, but we want to make the 
point that they’re incredibly useful for print publishing. We think 
that they’re great for entering text, which is why we’ll talk about them 
in this chapter, rather than in Chapter 13, “Interactive Documents.”
Cross references give you a way to insert a marker (which Adobe 
calls the “source cross reference”) in text that refers to another piece 
of text (which Adobe calls the “destination text”). We’ll refer to these 
two things as the “marker” and “destination,” respectively. When the 
destination changes, the marker can change.
This is a feature that is particularly dear to our tiny hearts, 
because it means that we can finally number the figures in this book 
automatically, rather than doing it manually.
A cross reference is really made up of four parts: the marker and 
destination we’ve already mentioned, a cross reference format, which 
defines the appearance of the text in the marker, and the text of the 
destination itself. The text of the destination determines a great deal 
about the way you’ll construct all of the parts of the cross reference.
Cross reference markers can refer to two types of destinations: 
the text of a paragraph, or a text anchor. Because text anchors refer to 
hyperlink text destinations, we’ll discuss them later. In this section, 
we’ll talk about using paragraphs as our cross reference destination.
Finally, creating a cross reference pretty much requires that the 
document use paragraph styles. Again, use paragraph styles.
To create a cross reference, follow these steps (see Figure 3-46).
1. Move the text cursor to the location at which you want to insert 
the cross reference marker (or select text you want to replace 
with the marker).
2. Choose Insert Cross Reference from the Hyperlinks and Cross 
References submenu of the Type menu. InDesign displays the 
New Cross Reference dialog box.
3. Choose Paragraph from the Link To pop-up menu if it’s not 
already selected. If the destination paragraph is in another  
document, select the (open) document containing the paragraph  
from the Document pop-up menu.
4. Use the two scrolling lists in the Destination section to set the 
destination paragraph. The list on the left shows the paragraph 
styles in the document; the list on the right displays the text of 
each paragraph in a particular style.
Creating a Cross 
Reference

192     6
Figure 3-46
Creating a  
Cross Reference
…then choose Insert Cross Reference  
from the Hyperlinks and Cross References 
submenu of the Type menu.
Or click the Insert Cross 
Reference icon on the 
Hyperlinks panel.
Select a paragraph   
style in this list.
Select a specific 
paragraph in this 
list (what you see 
is the text of the 
paragraph).
Choose Paragraph.
Select a document.
Select a cross   
reference format.
Click this icon 
to create or edit 
a cross reference 
format.
InDesign adds the cross  
reference marker at the  
location of the selection.
Use the controls in the   
Appearance section to 
change the format of the 
hyperlink, if necessary.
Select some text, or click  
a text cursor in text…
5. Select the cross reference format you want to use from the 
Format pop-up menu. To create a new format, click the pencil 
icon to the right of the pop-up menu (see “Creating or Editing a 
Cross Reference Format,” below).
6. The controls in the Appearance section define the format of the 
hyperlink associated with the cross reference. For most cross 
references in print publications, we think you’ll probably want to 
select Invisible Rectangle from the Type pop-up menu and leave 

 3. x 193
it at that. For more on hyperlink appearances, see Chapter 13, 
“Interactive Documents.”
7. Click the OK button to insert the cross reference marker.
Cross reference formats define the appearance of the marker, includ-
ing both the text of the marker and the formatting applied to it. Just 
as applying a character or paragraph style creates a link between the 
style and the text, applying a cross reference format creates a link 
between the marker and the cross reference format. If you change 
the cross reference format, the corresponding markers will change.
Before you create a cross reference format of your own, it’s a good 
idea to look through the existing ones—you might find exactly what 
you need—and you’ll get an idea of how to construct your own.
To create a new cross reference format, follow these steps (see 
Figure 3-47).
1. Choose Define Cross Reference Formats from the Hyperlinks 
panel menu (display the panel if it’s not already visible). If you’re 
looking at the New Cross Reference dialog box, you can also 
click the pencil icon to the right of the Format pop-up menu. 
InDesign displays the Cross Reference Formats dialog box.
2. Click the Create Format (the “+” below the list of formats) button 
to create a new format. The new format will be based on the 
selected format. InDesign adds a new format to the list. This also 
displays the definition of the format in the Definition field.
3. Enter a name for the format.
4. Construct the format using the other “+” (this one is a pop-up 
menu, and is known as the “Building Block icon”) and the “@” 
pop-up menu (known as “Special Characters icon”). These two 
pop-up menus insert text in the Description field. You can also 
enter the text yourself, once you’re familiar with the syntax.
5. If you want to apply a character style to the marker, turn on the 
Character Style for Cross Reference option and choose a charac-
ter style from the associated pop-up menu.
6. Once everything looks the way you want it to, click the Save 
button to save the cross reference format, then click the OK 
button to close the dialog box.
Creating or Editing 
a Cross Reference 
Format

194     6
Click the + button to add a 
cross reference format.
Click the - button to delete 
the selected cross reference 
format. 
Use the + pop-up menu to add cross 
reference “building blocks” to the 
cross reference format definition.
The cross reference format 
definition can look pretty 
arcane, but don’t let it bother 
you: just select building 
blocks and then enter the 
static text you want.
Figure 3-47
Creating a Cross  
Reference Format
Importing Text
Most of the time, text isn’t originally written using a page layout pro-
gram—it’s written using a word processor (such as Microsoft Word) 
or text editor (such as BBEdit). To get the text into InDesign, you 
must either copy-and-paste or import (or “place”) the text files.
Pasting text. A surprising number of people tell us that their pri-
mary source of text is their e-mail program or Web browser. The 
best way to get text from there into InDesign is to use copy and paste. 
InDesign ignores all formatting when you paste from another pro-
gram. If you want to retain the formatting, turn on the All Infor-
mation option in the When Pasting Text from Other Applications 
section of the Type panel of the Preferences dialog box. This only 
affects text pasted from other programs. To paste text that was copied 
from within InDesign without its formatting, choose Paste Without 
Formatting from the Edit menu (or press Command/Ctrl-Shift-V).
Placing text. InDesign can import text files in a variety of formats, 
including Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, text-only (ASCII or Uni-
code), Rich Text Format (RTF), and InDesign tagged text. You can 
view the complete list of available import filters in the Files of Type 
pop-up menu in the Place Document dialog box in Windows.

 3. x 195
If you don’t see your word processor or text editor listed as one of 
the available import filters, don’t despair. InDesign can import text 
in common “interchange” formats, such as text-only and RTF, and 
chances are good that your word processor or text editor can save 
text in one of those formats.
In addition, InDesign’s tagged text filter can import formatted 
text from any application that can write a text-only file. The tagged 
text format is something like RTF—it’s a text-only format that uses 
special codes to define the typesetting of the text in the file (see 
“Working with InDesign Tagged Text,” later in this chapter). 
To place a text file, follow these steps (see Figure 3-48).
1. Choose Place from the File menu (or press Command-D/Ctrl-D). 
InDesign displays the Place dialog box.
2. Locate and select the text file you want to import.
3. Check Show Import Options to set up the import options you 
want (if necessary), and/or check Replace Selected Item.
▶Show Import Options. Turn on the Show Import Options 
checkbox to display another dialog box containing more 
import options for the specific type of file you’re placing. This 
dialog box appears after you click the Open button to import 
the text file. We use a shortcut: Hold down the Shift key 
while clicking the Open button or while double-clicking a 
text file in the Place dialog box.
▶Replace Selected Item. If you had a frame selected before you 
displayed the Place dialog box, InDesign makes the Replace 
Selected Item option available. Turn this option on to replace 
the contents of the frame (if any) with the text file. If you 
had text selected, or if you had clicked the Type tool in a text 
frame, turning the Replace Selected Item option on inserts 
the text from the file into the text frame.
4. Click the Open Button. If Show Import Options was on (or you 
held down the Shift key), InDesign displays a dialog box con-
taining options for the type of file you selected (see below). 
5. If no frames were selected, InDesign displays the Text Place 
cursor and waits for you to click on a frame or drag one out (see 
“Flowing Text,” earlier in this chapter). If the incoming text file 
contains fonts that aren’t currently loaded, InDesign warns you 
of their presence. If you had selected a frame before opening the 

196     6
Select an unlinked frame 
(optional), then press   
Command-D/Ctrl-D to   
display the Place dialog box.
Turn this option on to replace the contents of the 
selected frame or text, or to insert the file at the   
current text cursor position.
Turn this option on to   
display further import options.
Click the Open button.
Turn this option on to 
have InDesign replace any 
“straight quotes” in the text 
file with proper typographic 
quotation marks.
If you turned on the Show 
Import Options option or 
held down the Shift key when 
clicking Open, InDesign 
displays the Import Options 
dialog box for the file format 
you’re importing.
Click the OK 
button.
InDesign places the text file. If a frame is 
selected, InDesign places the text inside it; 
otherwise, InDesign displays the text place icon.
Figure 3-48
Placing a Text File
Select a file.
Place dialog box, and you turned on the Replace Selected Item 
checkbox, InDesign fills the frame with the file you selected.
InDesign imports the text formatting in Word and RTF text files, 
without any page layout (“page geometry”) information saved in the 
file. This means that InDesign imports paragraph indents, but does 
not import page margins. For a more complete list of the formatting 
imported—or not—by the Word and RTF import filters, see the Fil-
ters ReadMe.pdf file at http://bit.ly/d5Knci.
When you turn on the Show Import Options option and place 
a Word or RTF file, InDesign displays the corresponding Import 
Options dialog box (see Figure 3-49). 
Word and RTF   
Import Options

 3. x 197
Table of Contents Text. Turn this option on to import the table of 
contents text (if any) in the Word/RTF file. However, the table of con-
tents entries lose their special qualities. The page numbers appear as 
they were in the document the last time the file was saved, and do not 
change as you place the text on the pages of your InDesign publica-
tion. The table of contents also loses its navigational (i.e., hyperlink) 
properties. To InDesign, it’s just text. InDesign’s Table of Contents 
feature is not linked with this at all; if you’re going to build a table 
of contents with the InDesign feature, you might as well leave this 
checkbox turned off.
Index Text. Turn this option on to import an index (or indices) 
you’ve inserted in the Word/RTF document. Note that individual 
index entries that you make in Word are imported whether this 
option is on or off; this only controls whether any built indexes get 
imported. We usually leave this turned off.
Footnotes/Endnotes. When you turn on this option, InDesign 
places any footnotes or endnotes at the end of the story. Leave this 
option off to omit any footnote or endnote text.
Use Typographer’s Quotes. Turn on the Use Typographer’s Quotes 
option to convert any straight quotes (i.e., foot and inch marks) to 
proper typographic quotation marks and apostrophes.
Remove Styles and Formatting from Text and Tables. When you 
turn this option on, InDesign strips out any text formatting in your 
file (paragraph and character styles, font, size, color, and so on) and 
places the text using the current default formatting.
Preserve Local Overrides. Turn this option on to retain bold, italic, 
underline, and other local formatting in the incoming text.
Convert Tables To. If you’ve chosen to remove text and table format-
ting (see above), you can choose Unformatted Tables or Unformatted 
Tabbed Text to tell InDesign how to deal with tables. 
Preserve Styles and Formatting from Text and Tables. When you 
turn this option on, InDesign will import text formatting used in the 
Word/RTF document. How, exactly, it does this is determined by the 
controls that become available when you choose this option.

198     6
Figure 3-49
RTF Import Options
If you find yourself 
repeatedly making the 
same choices in this 
dialog box, click Save 
Preset—your preset will 
show up in the Preset 
pop-up menu. This is 
especially helpful when 
using the Customize Style 
Import mapping feature.
Manual Page Breaks. What should InDesign do when it finds a page 
break in the Word/RTF file? We typically want InDesign to ignore 
these, so we choose No Breaks. However, if those breaks are there 
for a good reason, you can choose Preserve Page Breaks or Convert 
to Column Breaks to have InDesign automatically apply the page 
and column break settings (which is usually done manually using 
the Start Paragraph pop-up menu in the Keep Options dialog box).
Import Inline Graphics. If you want to include graphics from the 
Word file, turn this option on. Note, however, that many of the 
graphics embedded in Word/RTF documents are not suitable for 
high resolution printing. In general, it’s best to save the graphics as 
separate files (see the file format discussion in Chapter 7, “Importing 
and Exporting”) and then place them in InDesign.
Import Unused Styles. When this option is turned on, InDesign will 
import character and paragraph styles that are not used in any of 
the text in the incoming document. When it’s off, InDesign does not 
attempt to import the unused styles.
Track Changes. When this option is turned on, markups added 
using the Track Changes feature in Word appear in the InDesign 
Story Editor. InDesign doesn’t automatically apply a user color to 
Word’s markup, so the imported Word markups may have a differ-
ent color. To make the markups consistent, select absolute colors 
(instead of [User]) in Track Changes preferences. We cover tracking 
text changes later in this chapter.

 3. x 199
Import Styles Automatically. The two pop-up menus below this 
option tell InDesign what to do when character and paragraph 
styles in the Word document match the names of existing styles in 
the InDesign document. For both character and paragraph styles, 
you can choose to use the InDesign style definition, redefine the 
InDesign style to match the Word style, or to create a new style for 
each style name conflict. If you choose to take the latter approach, 
InDesign will automatically generate a new name for each style.
Customize Style Import. To get more control over style import, turn 
this option on and click the Style Mapping button. When you do this, 
InDesign displays the Style Mapping dialog box (see Figure 3-50).
Beware the Fast Save. It’s hard to resist the impulse to turn on the 
Allow Fast Saves option in Word’s Options dialog box. It sounds like 
a good idea, but in this case, it isn’t. The Word file format is very com-
plicated, and using this option sometimes produces files that import 
filters can’t read. Heck, when you turn this option on, Word some-
times writes files that Word can’t read. Stop it before it kills again!
Text-only files often arrive full of extra characters—usually spaces 
and carriage returns added to change the appearance of text on 
screen. The options in the Text Import Options dialog box help you 
do some of the clean-up for you (see Figure 3-51).
Character Set. If you’re seeing odd characters in the text files you 
import, it might be that the character set of the computer used to 
create the files is not the same character set as the one in use by your 
copy of InDesign. As you import a text file, you can choose a charac-
ter set that matches the character set of the text file.
Platform. Windows and the Mac OS use different character sets 
and also use different ways of ending a paragraph. If you’re using 
Text-Only   
Import Options
Figure 3-50
Mapping Styles  
on Import

200     6
Windows and know the file came from the Mac OS—or vice versa—
choose the appropriate platform from this pop-up menu.
Set Dictionary To. Use this pop-up menu to apply a default spelling 
and hyphenation dictionary to the incoming text.
Extra Carriage Returns. The people who prepare the text files for 
you want to help. They really do. That’s why they entered all of those 
carriage returns (to force a page break). The only trouble, of course, 
is that they usually make a mess that you’re left to fix. The options 
in the Extra Carriage Returns section of the Text Import Options 
dialog box help you clean up the extra carriage returns.
Use Typographer’s Quotes. We recommend turning on the Use 
Typographer’s Quotes option so that InDesign converts the straight 
quotes to proper typographic quotation marks and apostrophes.
Extra Spaces. Why do people enter extra spaces in text? Usually, 
they’re trying to indicate to you, their trusted typesetter, that they 
want to enter a tab. InDesign can replace some number of spaces in 
the incoming text file with tabs—just enter a value for the number 
of contiguous space characters you want replaced. Note that this 
approach often enters multiple tab characters in the story, but that 
problem is easily cleaned up using Find and Change.
Use the options in the Excel Import Options dialog box to specify the 
range of cells you want to import and the formatting applied to those 
cells (see Figure 3-52). See Chapter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics,” 
for more on what you can do with tables. Remember that InDesign 
can only import Excel tables, not charts. If you need to import a 
graphic chart from Excel, you should probably export it as a PDF file 
(and possibly even open that PDF in Illustrator to fine-tune it before 
saving and importing into InDesign).
Excel Import Options
Figure 3-51
Text Import Options

 3. x 201
View, Sheet, and Cell Range. Use these options to define which 
custom view, worksheet, and range of cells you want. By default, the 
Cell Range field selects cells of the worksheet you’ve selected.
Import Hidden Cells Not Saved in View. Turn this option on to 
import any hidden cells in the Excel file.
Table. By default, InDesign tries to match as much of Excel’s table 
formatting as possible. If you’d prefer to handle formatting your 
table in InDesign, choose Unformatted Table. You can also import 
the table as tab-delimited text by choosing Unformatted Text. 
Cell Alignment. How do you want InDesign to align the text from 
the cells that you’re importing? The default setting is Current Spread-
sheet, which tells InDesign to copy the alignment from Excel.
Import Inline Graphics. Turn this option on to include any inline 
graphics in the spreadsheet. As with importing graphics embed-
ded in Word/RTF files, this can be useful or dangerous, depending 
on the graphics and on your printing process. Again, we think it’s 
best to save the graphics as separate files, in a high-quality graphics 
format, and then place them in InDesign (see Chapter 7, “Importing 
and Exporting,” for more on file formats).
Decimal Places. You can choose the number of decimal places you 
want to use in the imported cells. The cell might show 3.1415926, but 
if you specify three decimal places, 3.142 will appear in the table.
Use Typographer’s Quotes. Unless there’s a good reason to stick with 
straight quote marks in your Excel data, turn on the Use Typogra-
pher’s Quotes to get curly quotes.
Figure 3-52
Excel Import Options

202     6
InDesign’s Tagged Text import filter gives you a great way to get 
formatted text from any application that can create a text-only file. 
When you import a tagged text file, you can set some import options 
(see Figure 3-53). For more on creating tagged text files, see “Work-
ing with InDesign Tagged Text,” later in this chapter. 
Use Typographer’s Quotes. At this point, we’re going to assume you 
know what it does.
Tagged Text   
Import Options
Turn this option on…
…and InDesign will list any 
errors it finds in your tagged 
text file. It will also list a 
number of things that aren’t 
errors, but might be good to 
know about.
Figure 3-53
Tagged Text  
Import Options
Remove Text Formatting. Just because someone gave you a tagged 
text file doesn’t mean you can’t strip out the styles and import simple 
text. To do this, turn on the Remove Text Formatting option.
Remove Text Style Conflicts Using. If the name of an incoming style 
(character or paragraph) matches a style that exists in the publication, 
which style definition should InDesign use? Choose the Publication 
Definition option to apply the formatting defined by your document, 
or Tagged File Definition to import the style defined in the tagged 
text file. When you choose the latter method, InDesign adds the style 
to the publication and appends the word “copy” to the style’s name. 
This does not affect the formatting of any text in the publication.
Show List of Problem Tags Before Place. If you’re not getting the for-
matting you expect from your tagged text files, turn this option on 
to have InDesign display a list of errors. If InDesign does find errors, 
you can choose to place the file, or to cancel the place operation. You 
can write the error list to a text file by clicking the Save Log button.

 3. x 203
Text Files and File Linking
Just as you can choose to link or embed graphics files, you can choose 
to link or embed text files. By default, InDesign embeds text files—to 
maintain a link to the files, turn on the Create Links When Placing 
Text and Spreadsheet Files option in the Text Preferences dialog box.
Linking to text files sounds cool, but watch out: Updating the file 
is the same as re-importing it, so you lose any edits or formatting you 
applied in InDesign. We recommend that you embed your text files. 
To do this, turn this preference off. If you already imported the file, 
break the link by choosing Embed File from the Links panel menu.
You can use several methods to establish parent/child links in text 
frames and objects, including choosing Place and Link from the Edit 
menu. We cover these methods in “Copying and Linking Objects” in 
“Chapter 7: Importing and Exporting.”
Exporting Text
Now and then you need to get your text back out of an InDesign 
publication and back into some other program. You can export the 
text in a variety of text formats. To export a story, follow these steps.
1. Select the story you want to export, and choose Text from the 
Export submenu of the File menu (or press Command-E/Ctrl-E).
2. Choose an export format for the text from the Format pop-up 
menu. Note that some of the items in this pop-up menu, like 
EPS or PDF, don’t export your story; they export the whole page 
(or document). To export the text, choose Text Only (which 
will export the text without any formatting), Rich Text Format 
(RTF), or Adobe InDesign Tagged Text.
3. Specify a name and location for the file.
4. Click the Save button to export the story.
Editing Text
Once you’ve entered or imported text, chances are good you’re going 
to have to change it. InDesign includes most common word process-
ing features, such as the ability to move the cursor through text using 
keyboard shortcuts, check the spelling of text, or find and change 
text and formatting.

204     6
When we’re entering text, one of the last things we want to do is take 
our hands away from the keyboard. We don’t want to have to use the 
mouse to move the text cursor or select text. That’s why we like to use 
keyboard shortcuts to move the cursor and select text—they keep 
our hands where they belong: on the keyboard.
InDesign comes with a fairly complete set of keyboard shortcuts, 
as shown in Table 3-5. Note that some of the shortcuts have several 
keys associated with them—pick the combination that works best 
for you. You can always change the shortcuts by choosing Keyboard 
Shortcuts from the Edit menu.
Whatever keyboard shortcuts you use, remember that you can 
typically add Shift to them to select text as you move. For example, 
Command-End/Ctrl-End jumps to the end of a story, so adding Shift 
to that will select the text to the end of the story.
We like the shortcuts on the numeric keypad, even though it 
takes our right hand away from the “home row.” To use the keypad 
shortcuts, turn Num Lock off.
Mouse clicks. Of course, if you do happen to have one hand on the 
mouse already, you can use various combinations of clicks to select 
text. Which clicks, exactly depends on your preferences settings. 
Double-clicking always selects a word. If you’ve turned on the Triple 
Click to Select a Line option in the Type Preferences dialog box, 
triple-clicking selects a single line (not a sentence), and quadruple-
clicking selects a whole paragraph; if that option is off, triple-clicking 
selects a paragraph and quadruple-clicking selects the entire story.
The Keyboard Dance. Selecting text in InDesign—whether you’re in 
a story window or a document window—is in most ways the same 
as any other program. There is one difference, however, which drives 
us crazy. When you select text using keyboard shortcuts, InDesign 
remembers where the cursor was when you started—but it only 
remembers as long as you hold the modifier keys down. This is a 
subtle thing, and much more difficult to explain than to show.
Here’s an example. You place the text cursor at the beginning of 
this paragraph and then Command-Shift-Down Arrow/Ctrl-Shift-
Down Arrow to select the whole paragraph. Suddenly, you realize 
that you don’t want to select the last character (the paragraph return 
character), so you press Shift-Left Arrow to deselect it. What hap-
pens next depends on whether or not you raised your hand from the 
keyboard. If you keep the Shift key down between the two shortcuts, 
InDesign will deselect the last character (which is what you want). 
If you let go of the keyboard before pressing Shift-Left Arrow, then 
Moving the Cursor 
Through Text

 3. x 205
InDesign sees this as a whole new selection and adds one character 
to the left of the paragraph (the last character in the previous para-
graph) to your selection (which is never what you want). 
At that point, getting the selection you want requires you to extend 
the selection to the right (perhaps by pressing Shift-Right Arrow) 
and then deselect the characters (Shift-Left Arrow, twice). This what 
we call doing the keyboard dance. It’s so bad that we sometimes take 
our fingers off the keyboard and use the mouse.
Choose Show Hidden Characters from the Type menu (or press 
Command-Option-I/Ctrl-Alt-I) to display the carriage returns, tabs, 
spaces, and other invisible characters in the text (see Figure 3-54). 
You can move text from place to place using drag and drop. By de-
fault, drag and drop text editing is turned on for the Story Editor 
view and turned off for layout view. To change these settings, use the 
options in the Type panel of the Preferences dialog box. To use drag 
and drop text editing (see Figure 3-55), follow these steps.
1. Select some text, then hold the cursor over the text until the drag 
and drop icon appears.
2. Drag the text to a new location (to copy the text, hold down 
Option/Alt as you drag). You can drag to the same story, to 
Showing and   
Hiding “Invisibles”
Dragging and   
Dropping Text
To move the cursor:
Press
Right one character
Right arrow, Keypad 6
Left one character
Left arrow, Keypad 4
Right one word
Command-Right arrow 
Ctrl-Right arrow, Ctrl-Keypad 6
Left one word
Command-Left arrow 
Ctrl-Left arrow, Ctrl-Keypad 4
Up one line
Up arrow, Keypad 8
Down one line
Down arrow, Keypad 2
Up one paragraph
Command-Up arrow 
Ctrl-Up arrow, Ctrl-Keypad 8
Down one paragraph 
Command-Down arrow 
Ctrl-Down arrow, Ctrl-Keypad 2
End of line
End, Keypad 1
Start of line
Home, Keypad 7
Start of story
Command-Home/Ctrl-Home, Keypad 7
End of story
Command-End/Ctrl-End, Keypad 1
Table 3-5
Moving the Cursor 
Through Text
Hold down Shift as you press 
these shortcuts to select text 
as you move the cursor.

206     6
End of story
Carriage return
Line end
Space
Em space
Tab
Figure 3-54
Showing Hidden  
Characters
another story, to a text frame in another window or document. 
As you drag, InDesign displays a vertical bar to show you the 
destination. To insert the text without copying its formatting, 
hold down Shift before you drop the text—the text will take 
on the formatting of the surrounding text. To create a new text 
frame as you drop the text, hold down Command/Ctrl as you 
drag the selection. 
3. Release the mouse button to drop the text.
Story Editor
Reading and editing text on-screen is never any fun, and it’s even 
worse when it’s set in 8-point Garamond Extra Condensed Light, 
all caps, and reversed out of a dark background. Eyestrain is one of 
the occupational hazards of graphic design, and tiny, tinted text will 
usually require two of your preferred pain reliever. Sure, you can 
zoom in to read it more easily, but then you have to scroll around to 
see all the text. Is there a way to view your text in a sane, responsible 
manner? There is—it’s called the Story Editor.
Story Editor opens the text of a story in a story window (as 
opposed to a layout window—we discussed the window types in 
Chapter 1, “Workspace”). To open a story window, select some text 
or a text frame and choose Edit in Story Editor from the Edit menu 
(or just press Command-Y/Ctrl-Y).
A story window displays your story in a single column of readable 
text, ignoring font, size, color, indents, and most other formatting 
(see Figure 3-56). The text in the story window won’t have the same 
line breaks as in the document window.
The Story Editor displays the text content of notes, tracked 
changes, and table cells, but inline graphics are shown as icons.

 3. x 207
Figure 3-55
Drag and Drop  
Text Editing
Select some text, then move the cursor over 
the selection. If drag and drop text editing is 
active, you’ll see the drag and drop icon.
Drag the text to a new location. As you 
drag, InDesign displays a vertical bar to 
show the destination of the text.
Stop dragging and release the mouse 
button, and InDesign moves the text 
to the location of the vertical bar.
If you hold down Option as you drag text…
You can also hold down Shift 
as you drag to move or copy 
the text without copying its 
formatting.
…InDesign copies the text 
to the destination.
When you open or select a story window, some InDesign features 
are unavailable. For example, almost every tool in the Tool panel 
becomes grayed out. You can still use all the text-related features: 
apply paragraph and character styles, change text formatting, and so 
on. However, most of the formatting you can apply doesn’t appear in 
the story window (though you can see it in the document window if 
it’s visible in the background). The only formatting that Story Editor 
does display are the bold and italic versions of fonts and small caps—
though it can also list the paragraph style for each paragraph in a 
column along the left side of the window (that’s an option).

208     6
You can have as many story windows open as you want. If you select 
three text frames in the publication and press Command-Y/Ctrl-Y, 
InDesign opens each story in its own window. Story windows appear 
at the bottom of the Window menu. To move from one window to 
the next, press Command-F6/Ctrl-F6, or Command-’.
As you edit in a story window, InDesign doesn’t change the view 
in the layout window, so the layout window might be displaying page 
3 of a long story while you’re making changes to page 23 in a story 
window. If you click the layout window, it comes to the front and 
you’ll see that the text cursor can be in one place in one window and 
somewhere else in another window. Pressing Command-Y/Ctrl-Y 
while you’re in a story window switches to the layout window con-
taining the text, updates the layout window view to display the text 
you’re editing, and matches the cursor position and/or text selection.
The New Window feature (in the Arrange submenu, under the 
Window menu) works on Story Editor windows, too. That means you 
can have two or more story windows open on the same story, each 
looking at a different chunk of text. This is helpful when you need to 
refer to text in one part of the story while editing another.
The Story Editor displays footnotes as an icon—click the icon to 
expand and edit the footnote (see Figure 3-57). You can also choose 
to expand all footnotes by choosing Expand All Footnotes from the 
Story Editor submenu of the View menu, or hide them all by choos-
ing Collapse All Footnotes.
The Story Editor is designed to be utilitarian, not pretty. You can 
spruce it up a bit by changing settings in the Story Editor Preferences 
dialog box (see Figure 3-58). 
Text Display Options. You can select any font and size you want, 
though it behooves you to pick something as readable as possible 
(David likes 16-point Georgia). You can also choose line spacing 
(a.k.a., leading), the text color, whether text should be anti-aliased, 
and a background color for your story windows. The Theme pop-up 
menu offers several text color and background color combinations, 
but you don’t have to use these. These settings have no effect on the 
printed appearance of your text; they’re just for the story windows.
Cursor Options. We’ve never met anyone who wanted to use any-
thing other than the normal, thin cursor (called Standard here). But 
you can choose Thick, Barbell, or Block. (The Block option really 
Multiple Windows
Footnotes in   
the Story Editor
Story Editor Options

 3. x 209
complements the “DOS look” described above.) And if a blinking 
cursor drives you mad, turn off the Blink option.
Paragraph styles column. Use this control to change the size of the 
paragraph style column (the column on the left in a story window).
Track Changes
InDesign now includes an editing tool that’s been available in 
InCopy for years. When you turn on Track Changes, the Story Editor 
displays markup highlighting for text that’s been added, deleted, and 
moved (see Figure 3-59). Changes are not reflected in the layout view, 
and the change markups cannot be printed or exported.
In a typical workflow, the author sends the publication to an 
editor. The editor turns on Track Changes, edits the text, and sends 
the publication back to the author. The author then uses the Track 
Changes panel to accept or reject the changes.
Figure 3-56
Story Editor
Clicking the paragraph 
style name will not select 
the paragraph, as it does in 
PageMaker.
The vertical depth in the 
left column is in inches, 
mm, points, or whatever the 
measurement system is.
Figure 3-57
Story Editor  
and Footnotes
Footnote marker.
Double click the footnote 
marker to expand and edit 
the footnote text.

210     6
Track Changes must be turned on for InDesign to create markups. 
If you edit text with Track Changes turned off, there is no way to view 
the changes after the fact.
▶To display the Track Changes panel, choose Track Changes from 
the Editorial submenu of the Window menu.
▶Click Enable Track Changes in Current Story to let InDesign 
keep track of changes. Turn this option off and then on again, 
and change tracking resumes with all changes highlighted.
Most of the Track Changes options you’ll need to use are right 
there at the top of the Track Changes panel. There are a few addi-
tional options in the panel menu, such as Enable Track Changes in 
All Stories and Accept Change, Find Next.
You might enjoy being able to reject changes based on commenter. 
Bob once received a lot of odd comments when a reviewer used 
InCopy to test procedures from an InDesign user guide.
If you need to track changes frequently, you’ll want to assign key-
board shortcuts to the commands you use most often.
Notes
You can attach notes to text in an InDesign story. The Notes panel is 
the key to managing notes (see Figure 3-60). Notes provide a great 
Figure 3-58
Story Editor  
Display Preferences
We trust that you will use 
these settings responsibly.
No, no, no!

 3. x 211
Figure 3-59
Track Changes 
in Story Editor
Text moved to here...
...from here
Added text
Deleted text
Turn on Track Changes
Hide markups in Story Editor
Go to next/previous change
Accept or reject changes
way to add comments or other information to text—especially when 
you’re working with editors (even if they use InCopy). Notes can be 
created, edited, converted to text, or deleted, and can be viewed in the 
Story Editor or the Notes panel. You won’t be able to see your notes in 
the Layout view, though you will be able to see the note anchor when 
you click the Show/Hide Notes button in the Notes panel. 
Notes take on the current “user color,” which is based on the user 
name. To change the current user name or user color, choose User 
from the File menu and enter a new name and user color.
You can use the Notes panel to jump from one note to another 
note using the Go to Next Note or Go to Previous Note buttons.
To create a note, do any of the following (see Figure 3-61).
▶Click the Type tool in text at the location at which you want to 
insert the note, display the Notes panel, and then choose New 
Note from the Notes panel menu (or click the New Note button).
▶Select the Note tool and click it in text. The Notes panel appears.
▶Choose New Note from the Notes menu. InDesign displays the 
Notes panel.
▶Select a range of text, then choose Convert to Note from the 
Notes menu (or from the Notes panel menu).
After creating a note using any of the first three approaches shown 
above, you can type the text of your note in the Notes panel. 
Creating Notes

212     6
To view the content of the note, either select the note and display the 
Notes panel, or open the story in the Story Editor. Choose Expand/
Collapse Notes in Story to display the notes if they are not already 
visible.
To delete an individual note, place the cursor immediately after it 
and press Delete/Backspace. To delete the note from the Notes panel, 
navigate to the note and then click the Delete Note button at the 
bottom of the panel. To delete all notes in a story, choose Remove 
Notes from Story from the Notes menu or the Notes panel menu.
To convert a note to text, select the note (or the note anchor, in layout 
view) and choose Convert to Text from the Notes menu. Alternatively, 
you can navigate to the note using the Notes panel, then choose Con-
vert to Text from the panel menu. Text can be also be copied out of a 
note and pasted into normal text.
Using Adobe InCopy
We don’t ordinarily talk about buying additional programs in this 
book, but we need to make a quick exception for Adobe InCopy, a 
word processor that is designed to work with InDesign documents—
sort of a Story Editor on steroids. While it’s not part of the Creative 
Editing Notes
Deleting Notes
Converting Notes   
to Text
Notes panel with Note 
Info displayed.
Notes panel buttons
Notes panel without 
Note Info.
Show/Hide Notes
Go to Note Anchor
Go to Next Note
Go to Previous Note
New Note
Delete Note
Figure 3-60
Notes Panel
The Go to Next Note and Go to Previous Note 
buttons will not become active until you click 
the Type tool in a story that contains notes.

 3. x 213
Suite, it’s well worth buying if you work with text heavy publications, 
especially if you’re collaborating with other people. 
With InCopy you can write or edit stories using all of the text-
formatting features available in InDesign, using the same paragraph 
and character styles, with the knowledge that what you set in InCopy 
will appear the same in InDesign. InCopy lets you see your stories in 
story mode (like Story Editor), layout mode (as though you’re seeing 
the layout in InDesign, but can only edit the story), or galley mode 
(like story, but you actually see the line breaks). 
Checking Spelling
Toward the end of a project, we always fall prey to the delusion that 
everything, every last word, on all of our pages, is misspelled. We 
find ourselves staring blearily at relatively simple words. Is “dog” 
really spelled “D-O-G?” In our typical pre-deadline panic, we don’t 
know. Everything looks wrong.
InDesign can check the spelling of any text in an InDesign text 
frame, and can also catch duplicated words (“the the”) and possible 
capitalization errors. InDesign uses the language dictionary or dic-
tionaries associated with your text to perform the spelling check.
To check spelling, follow these steps (see Figure 3-62).
1. Press Command-I/Ctrl-I (or choose Check Spelling from the 
Edit menu). InDesign starts to check the spelling of the cur-
rent selection, story, or document (depending on the current 
Figure 3-61
Adding a Note
Click the Type tool in text, 
then choose New Note from 
the Notes panel menu.
InDesign adds a note at the 
location of the cursor. You’ll 
be able to see the note anchor 
in layout view. (If you can’t 
see the note anchor, click the 
Show/Hide Notes button at 
the bottom of the panel.)
Enter text in the 
Notes panel.

214     6
selection) and displays the Check Spelling panel when it finds a 
suspect word. You can leave the panel open while editing text.
2. At this point, you can define the scope of the spelling check 
using the Search pop-up menu. Note that InDesign can check 
the spelling of all of the open publications, if you want, or you 
can restrict the spell check to the current story, or—if you have 
one or more words highlighted—even just to the selected words.
3. Whenever InDesign finds a suspect word, you can:
▶Skip the word without making any change. To do this, 
click the Skip button. To have InDesign ignore every 
occurrence of the word, click the Ignore All button.
▶Replace the word with one of the suggestions. Select the 
suggestion, and InDesign enters the suggested word in 
the Change To field. Click the Change button to replace 
the selected word with the suggestion. Click the Change 
All button to replace every instance of the selected text 
with the text in the Change To field.
▶Enter replacement text in the Change To field. Click the 
Change button to replace the selected word with the text 
you’ve entered, or click the Change All button to replace 
every instance of the selected text.
▶Add the word to the user dictionary. This is a good thing to 
do with technical terms and names that appear frequently in 
your publications. For more on entering words in the diction-
ary, see “Adding Words to the User Dictionary.”
After you’ve taken any of the above actions, InDesign contin-
ues with the spelling check.
4. When you’ve finished checking the spelling of the publication 
(or publications), you can click the Done button to close the 
Check Spelling panel.
Let’s talk about dictionaries for a moment. Dictionaries contain infor-
mation that helps you check spelling and hyphenate words. You can 
add words to dictionaries, and you can create or install new diction-
aries. InDesign used to include the Proximity dictionary by default. 
Starting with InDesign CS5.5, Hunspell became the default diction-
ary. What does this mean? If you’re just using English, you most 
likely won’t notice any differences in spell-checking or hyphenation. 
Types of Dictionaries

 3. x 215
If you’re working with non-English languages, Hunspell dictionaries 
do a much better job with hyphenation in particular.
You can download and install additional spelling and hyphen-
ation dictionaries for other languages from the OpenOffice website: 
http://bit.ly/g8NFqY.
We use lots of words in our publications that aren’t found in the 
InDesign dictionary. Even quite common, household words such 
as “Kvern,” “Blatner,” and “Bringhurst” will provoke an angry query 
from the spelling checker. You can allay InDesign’s fears by enter-
ing these words in a separate dictionary, the “user dictionary.” When 
InDesign can’t find a word in its dictionary, it consults the user dic-
tionary. If a word appears in both the standard dictionary (which 
can’t be edited) and the user dictionary, InDesign favors the word in 
the user dictionary.
You can add a word to the user dictionary in two ways: from 
within the Check Spelling panel or from the Dictionary panel. When 
you’re checking your document’s spelling and a “misspelled” word 
pops up, you can simply click the Add button. To add or remove 
items from your user dictionary, you can open the Dictionary panel 
by choosing Dictionary from the Spelling submenu of the Edit menu 
(see Figure 3-63). You can edit the dictionary while checking spelling.
1. Enter the word you want to add in the Word field of the Diction-
ary panel, if necessary (if you’re in the middle of a spelling check, 
InDesign enters the unknown term in the field).
2. Click the Hyphenate button when you want to view the word’s 
hyphenation points (see Chapter 4, “Type”). InDesign displays 
the proposed hyphenation points in the word.
Adding Words to the 
User Dictionary
InDesign scrolls to display 
any suspect words it finds 
while checking spelling.
You can choose to replace 
the suspect word with a word 
from the dictionary, or skip 
the word, or add the word to 
your user dictionary.
Figure 3-62
Checking Spelling

216     6
Hyphenation points are ranked—the best break is a single 
tilde (“~”), the next best point is two tildes (“~~”), and the least 
good is three tildes (“~~~”). You can enter hyphenation points 
in words you’re adding to the user dictionary, or change the 
hyphenation points of words already in the user dictionary.
If you do not want InDesign to hyphenate the word, enter a 
tilde before the first character of the word.
3. Choose either the user dictionary or your document’s name 
from the Target pop-up menu. Generally, you’ll want to add 
words to the user dictionary which can be used by all your  
documents. However, if you choose your current file, then  
the word will only appear spelled correctly in that document, 
and no others. This might come in handy if you’re building  
an annual report for a medical company and you don’t want  
to add “fluoxetine” to your general user dictionary.
4. Click the Add button to add the word to the user dictionary.
Once you add a word to your user dictionary you can remove it: Just 
choose Dictionary from the Spelling submenu of the Edit menu, 
select the word you want to remove, and click the Remove button. 
But you can also tell InDesign to remove a word from the regular 
dictionary by adding it to the Removed Words list.
1. Open the Dictionary panel and choose a target. (If you choose 
your user dictionary, the change will affect all your documents; 
if you choose just the open document from the Target pop-up 
menu, the word is only removed from this document.)
2. Select Removed Words from the Dictionary List pop-up menu.
3. Type the word in the Word field (if you’re in the middle of  
checking your document’s spelling, it should show up here  
automatically).
4. Click the Add button. This adds the word to the list of words 
that should be removed.
At this point, the word will appear as incorrect when you check its 
spelling. Later, if you want to take it off the “removed” list, you can 
open the Dictionary dialog box, select the word, and click Remove.
Dynamic Spelling. You can also check the spelling of text without 
going to the Check Spelling dialog box. To do this, turn on Dynamic 
Removing Words From 
the User Dictionary

 3. x 217
Spelling (using either the Enable Dynamic Spelling option in the 
Spelling Preferences dialog box or the corresponding option on the 
Spelling submenu of the Edit menu). After you do this, InDesign will 
mark suspect words in your document using the colors you assigned 
in the Preferences dialog box. If you’re working with a long docu-
ment, it can take some time for InDesign to apply the highlight.
You can use the Context menu to change suspect words to any of 
a list of likely replacements, add the word to the dictionary, or direct 
InDesign to ignore the word (see Figure 3-64).
Autocorrect. If you enter a lot of text using InDesign, and you habit-
ually type “hte,” for “the,” (or “pargraph,” for “paragraph,” as Ole 
does), you’ll love the autocorrect feature (see Figure 3-65). As you 
type, autocorrect will change the text you’ve typed to fix common 
typing errors. You can also use Autocorrect to change capitalization 
errors (“Indesign” to “InDesign,” for example). Autocorrect has no 
effect on text you have already entered.
To turn this feature on or off, use the Enable Autocorrect option in 
the Autocorrect Preferences dialog box, or choose Autocorrect from 
the Spelling submenu of the Edit menu. To have Autocorrect catch 
errors of capitalization, turn on Autocorrect Capitalization Errors.
As you can see in the Autocorrect Preferences dialog box, InDesign 
has a large list of common misspelled words and corrections. 
To add the error, click the Add button. InDesign displays the 
Add to Autocorrect List dialog box. Enter the typo in the Misspelled 
Word field, and enter the correct text in the Correction Field. Click 
the OK button, and InDesign adds the error to the Autocorrect list.
To remove a word from the list, select the word and click the 
Remove button. To edit a word in the list, click the Edit button.
Click the Hyphenate 
button or enter tildes (~) 
to indicate hyphenation 
points.
Click the Add button 
to add the word to the 
dictionary.
Select Case Sensitive 
for words like “iPhone,” 
“Utah,” and “Kvern.”
Figure 3-63
Adding a Word to the 
User Dictionary

218     6
Figure 3-64
Dynamic Spelling
When you have turned on the Dy-
namic Spelling option, InDesign will 
mark questionable words (i.e., words 
that are not found in the dictionary).
To deal with one of the 
marked words, click the Type 
tool inside the word and then 
display the Context menu.
Choose one of the actions from the Context 
menu. Select one of the suggestions to replace 
the highlighted word.
In this example, we’ve told InDesign that the 
word is spelled correctly, so InDesign removes 
the highlight from the word.
Figure 3-65
Autocorrect
When the Autocorrect   
feature is on, InDesign   
will correct misspelled   
words as you type.
Footnotes
InDesign CS2 introduced the ability to add footnotes to text, a ca-
pability requested by InDesign users 1 since version 1.0. InDesign’s 
footnotes don’t do everything that one could possibly want in such 
a feature, but they’re able to handle a broad range of footnote needs.
What are the limitations? One drawback is that you’re limited to 
one footnote numbering style in a document. If your publications 
feature one footnote numbering style for body text, and another 
style for sidebars, you’ll have to take care of one of the footnote styles 
manually (as you have in previous versions). 
The other significant (in our opinion) limitation is that the width 
of the footnote text is based on the width of the column containing 
the footnote reference marker.
1 Though we have never found a use for them, ourselves.

 3. x 219
In addition, footnote text is not affected by text wrap, and you 
cannot add footnotes to footnote text or text in a table.
Finally, footnotes go to the bottom of the column, which is not 
necessarily the bottom of the page. This means that if we want to 
add a graphic between the footnote reference and the footnote text, 
we’d have to resort to text wrap or an inline graphic just to fool the 
footnote into landing at the bottom of the page.
When we say “footnote reference marker,” we mean the number 
or symbol that appears in the body text. When we say “footnote text,” 
we’re referring to the text that appears at the bottom of the column. 
These two parts make up a “footnote.”
To create a footnote, follow these steps (see Figure 3-66).
1. Set the cursor at the point at which you want to add the footnote.
2. Choose Insert Footnote from the Context menu (or the Type 
menu). When you do this, InDesign inserts a footnote marker (a 
number or symbol) and positions the text cursor in the footnote 
text. The footnote text is usually at the bottom of the column 
containing the marker, but can appear elsewhere in some cases.
3. Enter the text for the footnote.
When you are done editing the footnote text, you can return to 
the footnote marker (in the body text) by choosing Go to Footnote 
Reference from the Context menu.
To select all of the text in a footnote, press Command-A/Ctrl-A 
Editing footnote text is something like editing text in a table cell.
If you happen to delete the footnote number in the footnote text, 
you can reinsert it by choosing Footnote Number from the Insert 
Special Character submenu of the Context menu.
To delete a footnote, delete the footnote marker.
To control the appearance and behavior of the footnotes in a docu-
ment, choose Document Footnote Options from the Type menu. The 
Footnote Options dialog box appears (see Figure 3-67).
Numbering Style. Choose the numbering style you want to use.
Start At. Use this option to set the starting number for the footnotes 
in each story in the document. If you’re continuing footnote num-
bering from another document, this option comes in handy.
Creating a Footnote
Footnote Options

220     6
Figure 3-66
Creating a Footnote
Position the cursor in text.
Choose Insert Footnote from   
the Context menu…
…and positions the cursor in the footnote text 
area (this example uses the default footnote 
formatting). Enter the text of the footnote.
InDesign adds a  
footnote reference…
Restart Numbering Every. You can choose to have footnote num-
bering restart every page, spread, or section.
Show Prefix/Suffix In. “Prefix” and “suffix,” in this case, refer to 
characters that can be placed before or after the figure number. These 
characters can appear in the footnote reference, the footnote text, or 
in both places (see Figure 3-68). You can also enter the character(s) 
you want to use, or choose a predefined character from a list.
Character Style. This option specifies the character style applied to 
the figure reference number.
Position. Sets the position of the figure number reference character. 
You can choose subscript, superscript, or normal position.
Paragraph Style. Choose the paragraph style you want to apply to 
the footnote text.
Separator. Defines the character between the figure number and the 
body of the footnote text.
Minimum Space Before First Footnote. Use this option to spec-
ify the minimum amount of space between the first footnote in a 
column and the bottom of the text in the column.

 3. x 221
Space Between Footnotes. How much vertical space do you want to 
insert between footnotes? Enter it here.
First Baseline Offset. This option is very similar to the corresponding 
option in the Text Frame Options dialog box—it controls the method 
used to calculate the position of the first baseline of text in a footnote 
(see the discussion of first baseline offsets earlier in the chapter).
Place End of Story Footnotes at Bottom of Text. Turn this option on, 
and InDesign will place the footnotes at the end of the story imme-
diately after the end of the text, rather than at the bottom of the last 
text column (see Figure 3-69).
Figure 3-67
Footnote Options
Figure 3-68
Footnote Prefix/Suffix
Select or enter the prefix or 
suffix characters.
Turn the Show   
Prefix/Suffix option on.
Set the location(s) at   
which the prefix/suffix 
should appear.
InDesign adds the prefix/suffix characters 
at the locations you specified.

222     6
Allow Split Footnotes. When this option is true, InDesign will split 
footnotes across columns and pages. When it’s false, InDesign will 
attempt to fit all footnotes into the column containing the footnote 
(see Figure 3-70). If it’s not possible to fit the footnote in that column, 
InDesign will push the footnote text to the last column in the frame. 
If that won’t work, InDesign will attempt to push the reference and 
the footnote to the next column capable of holding them both.
Rule Above. To add a dividing line above the footnote text, turn on 
the Rule Above option. Most of the controls in this section corre-
spond to paragraph rule options (see Chapter 4, “Type” for more on 
paragraph rules), but some of them are specific to footnotes.
Choose First Footnote in Column from the pop-up menu to con-
trol the settings for the rule above the top of the first footnote only; 
choose Continued Footnotes to specify the formatting of the rules 
above all subsequent footnote sections, including footnotes contin-
ued in other columns.
The width of a paragraph rule can be set by either the width of the 
text or the width of the column, but the width of a footnote rule is 
determined by the value in the Width field.
Figure 3-69
Placing Footnotes at  
the End of a Story
How should InDesign handle 
the last footnote or group of 
footnotes in a story? That’s 
the point of the Place End of 
Story Footnotes at Bottom of 
Text option.
Footnotes at the bottom of the last text frame (option off).
Footnotes at the bottom of the text at the end of the story (option on).

 3. x 223
Figure 3-70
Splitting Footnotes  
(or Not)
When you turn the Allow 
Split Footnotes option on, 
InDesign will split foot-
note text among columns 
(depending on the length   
of the footnote text and   
the location of the footnote 
reference marker).
Turn the Allow Split 
Footnotes option off, and 
InDesign will push the   
footnote (both the marker 
and the footnote text) to the 
next column capable   
of containing it. With this 
option off, long footnotes 
and short columns can easily 
result in overset text.
InDesign doesn’t have an Endnotes feature, but there’s a workaround 
solution that involves numbered lists and cross-references. Check 
out check out Peter Kahrel’s scripts:
http://www.kahrel.plus.com/indesign/footnotes.html
Conditional Text
If you publish multiple versions of a document—multiple languages, 
or any other time the text of the document changes from version to 
version—you should look at InDesign’s conditional text feature. 
Ole, for example, publishes a number of documents related to 
InDesign scripting. Most of the body copy is the same from version to 
version, but the script examples vary from AppleScript to JavaScript 
to VBScript. To keep from having to maintain the different versions 
as separate documents, Ole uses conditional text.
Conditional text has two components: the conditions themselves, 
and the text you’ve marked using the conditions. You work with con-
ditional text using the Conditional Text panel (see Figure 3-71). To 
display the panel, choose Conditional Text from the Text and Type 
submenu of the Window menu.
Endnotes

224     6
To create a condition, follow these steps (see Figure 3-72).
1. Display the Conditional Text panel, if it’s not already visible.
2. Click the New Condition button at the bottom of the panel, or 
choose New Condition from the panel menu. InDesign displays 
the New Condition dialog box.
3. Enter a name for the condition, then specify the format of the 
condition indicator using the Method, Appearance, and Color 
pop-up menus.
4. Click OK to close the dialog box.
The process of applying a condition is pretty much the same as apply-
ing any other formatting—select some text, then click the condition 
or conditions in the Conditional Text panel that you want to apply 
to the text (see Figure 3-73). To remove the condition, select the text 
and click the condition again (or apply the Unconditional condition).
A condition set is a group of conditions that can be shown or hidden 
at the same time. When you apply a condition set, InDesign changes 
the visibility of all conditions as specified in the set. It’s quicker than 
clicking them one by one. To create a condition set, follow these steps.
1. Display the Conditional Text panel, if it’s not already visible. 
Choose Show Options from the panel menu if the Set pop-up 
menu is not already visible.
2. Change the visibility of the conditions using the first (left-most) 
column in the panel list. Make the conditions you want to 
include in the set visible; hide the others.
3. Choose Create New Set from the Set pop-up menu. InDesign 
displays the New Condition dialog box.
4. Enter a name for the condition set and click the OK button. 
InDesign adds the condition set to the Set pop-up menu.
When you want to apply the condition set, choose it from the Set 
pop-up menu. InDesign will set the visibility of all conditions based 
on the stored settings in the condition set.
Creating Conditions
Applying Conditions
Creating   
Condition Sets

 3. x 225
Figure 3-71
Conditional Text Panel
A check in this column shows the condition(s) 
applied to the selected text.
You can load conditions 
and condition sets from 
other documents.
Choose Show/Hide Options to 
display or hide the Set pop-up 
menu.
Double-click a condition to 
edit its definition.
You can control the way   
that InDesign displays the 
condition indicators using 
the pop-up menu. 
Click to create a new condition.
Click to delete the selected condition(s).
Click this column to show or hide a condition (when 
you see the eye icon, the condition is visible).
Figure 3-72
Creating a Condition
Choose New Condition from  
the panel menu…
Define the appearance of the condition using 
the controls in the Indicator section.
Figure 3-73
Applying a Condition
Select some text.
InDesign applies the   
condition to the text.   
(We’ve deselected the text   
so that you can see the   
condition indicator.)
Click the 
condition 
you want to 
apply.

226     6
Find and Change
Economists and productivity experts keep telling us that personal 
computers have not lived up to their promise of increased productiv-
ity. Workers, they say, are no more productive than they were before 
the microcomputer revolution.
They are, of course, wrong—or maybe they’ve never worked as 
typists or typesetters. Since the advent of word processing and desk-
top publishing software, we “text workers” have been enjoying a pro-
ductivity increase that is nothing short of mind boggling. Although 
we’re not sure “enjoying” is quite the right word.
One of the key innovations of the text processing revolution is the 
ability to find text in a document and, if necessary, to change it to 
something else—and all in an automated fashion. It doesn’t matter 
what you call it—“find and change” or “search and replace,” it’s a 
kind of text-manipulation tool we didn’t have in the “good ol’ days.”
Find and change is all about pattern recognition. Most of what we 
do in InDesign (or in life, for that matter) is repetitive. We work our 
way through text, selecting each occurrence of “f f i” and changing 
it to “ffi” (the ligature). Or we select each bullet character and replace 
it with a character from Zapf Dingbats. In each case, we’re searching 
for one pattern in our text and replacing it with another.
Finding and changing text is all about working with strings. A 
string is any range of text—a single character, a word, or a phrase. 
Strings can also contain special, non-printing characters, such as tab 
characters, em spaces, or carriage returns.
InDesign has three different ways to find and change text, which 
we’ll call Text, GREP, and Glyph. These search methods correspond 
to the tabs you see in the Find/Change dialog box (see Figure 3-78). 
The Object tab in the Find/Change dialog box is for finding and 
changing formatting applied to page items (rectangles, ellipses, and 
text frames, for example), and is discussed in Chapter 5, “Drawing.”
▶Text. Find and change text strings and text formatting. Includes 
the ability to search for a limited set of “wildcard” characters.
▶GREP. Find and change text and formatting using regular 
expressions. Regular expressions give you a way to use much 
more sophisticated patterns in your searches.
▶Glyph. Find and change individual glyphs.
In addition to the different search methods, there are at least four 
different ways to perform a search-and-replace operation.

 3. x 227
Figure 3-74
Find/Change dialog box
Click the tabs to display 
the options for the 
different find/change 
types.
Specify Attributes to 
Find button
Clear Specified  
Attributes button
Find/change options.
Find/change range.
Find/change formatting options. If you do not see 
these controls, click the More Options button.
▶Search for text and replace it with different text.
▶Search for formatting and replace it with other formatting.
▶Search for text and apply formatting to it.
▶Search for formatting, and replace it with text.
Find/Change Options 
All three text search methods have a set of options in common. You 
can turn these options on or off using the little icon buttons in the 
Find/Change dialog box (see Figure 3-75).
Include Locked Layers (Find Only). InDesign will not change text 
on locked layers, but you can find it by turning this option on. To 
change text on a locked layer, unlock the layer or move the text to 
another layer.
Include Locked Stories (Find Only). A locked story is a story that 
has been checked out using InCopy. To find text in these stories, turn 
this option on.
Include Hidden Layers. Turn this option on to find and change text 
on hidden layers. InDesign will display a block highlight when it 
finds text on a hidden layer, but it won’t show the text itself.
Include Master Pages. To find and change text in text frames on 
master spreads, turn this option on.

228     6
Include Footnotes. To find and change text in footnotes, turn this 
option on.
Text Search   
Method Options
In addition to the above options, the Text search method provides 
two additional options: Whole Word and Case Sensitive. 
Whole Word. Turn on the Whole Word option when you want to 
find only exact matches for the text you entered in the Find What 
field (if you’ve entered “dog” and want to find only that word, and not 
“dogged” or “underdog”). 
Case Sensitive. Turn on the Case Sensitive option to find only text 
with the same capitalization as the word you entered (this way, you’ll 
find “dog,” but not “Dog”).
Find/Change Ranges 
All three text search methods give you a way to define the range of 
text you want to search. Choose one of the options on the Search 
pop-up menu to set the range of the search: Story, To End of Story, 
Document, or All Documents. Story always begins the search from 
the beginning of the story, while To End of Story only searches from 
the current text cursor position onward. All Documents means 
every currently open document; this is helpful when you need to find 
something that may appear in multiple chapters of a book
The options in the Text panel of Find/Change provide basic text 
search capabilities. This is where you want to go when you need to 
search for one word and replace it with another. Nothing fancy.
If you need to find some text, follow these steps (see Figure 3-76).
1. Open the Find/Change dialog box (press Command-F/Ctrl-F). 
Click the Text tab if you need to display the Text panel.
2. Enter the string you want to find in the Find What field.
3. Set the range of the search using the Search pop-up menu.
Finding Text
Figure 3-75
Find/Change Options
Include Locked Stories
Include Locked Layers
Include Hidden Layers
Include Master Pages
Include Footnotes
Option on
Option off
Whole Word
Case Sensitive

 3. x 229
4. Set find/change options (particularly the Case Sensitive and 
Whole Word options) as necessary.
5. Click the Find button. InDesign finds an occurrence of the 
string you entered in the Find What field and displays it in the 
publication window, turning pages and scrolling to display the 
text, if necessary. You can click the Find Next button to find the 
next occurrence of the text in the specified search range until, 
eventually, you’ll return to the first instance InDesign found.
About metacharacters. You can’t enter invisible characters—such 
as tab characters, line-end characters, or carriage returns—in 
the Find What or Change To fields. To get around this, you enter 
Enter the text you   
want to search for. Enter 
metacharacters (if necessary) 
using the pop-up menu (or 
simply type them into the 
Find What field).
Once you’ve entered a string 
in the Find What field, the 
string will appear on the 
pop-up menu associated 
with the field. This makes it 
easy to search again for the 
same string.
After you click the Find button, 
InDesign selects each instance 
of the text it finds, and scrolls to 
display the selection.
Use these controls to 
define the search range 
and search options.
If InDesign finds the text in overset 
text, the phrase “Overset Text” appears 
above the Find What field.
To find the text 
again, click the Find 
Next button.
Figure 3-76
Finding Text

230     6
codes—known as “metacharacters”—representing those characters. 
There’s no need for a cheat sheet for these characters—they appear on 
the pop-up menus attached to the Find What and Change To fields.
To enter a metacharacter in the Find What or Change To fields, 
you can either enter it directly (if you know the code) or choose it 
from the pop-up menus associated with the fields.
Suppose you need to find all of the part numbers in a document. The 
part numbers start with the string “IN” and are followed by four let-
ters, a hyphen, and four numbers. How can you find all of the strings? 
Use InDesign’s “wildcard” metacharacters—these give you a way 
to find patterns containing unspecified characters. Again, these char-
acters appear on the pop-up menu associated with the Find What 
field. To match any single character, type “^?” in the Find What field. 
Enter “^9” to find any single digit, or “^$” to find any single letter.
To find all of the part numbers in the example, you’d enter 
“IN^$^$^$-^9^9^9^9” in the Find What field. Note that using wild-
card metacharacters also helps you avoid finding the strings you 
don’t want to find—if, in our example, we’d used the wildcard-laden 
string “IN^?^?^?^?^?^?^?^?^?” we’d run the risk of finding the word 
“INdubitable,” which appears in our imaginary catalog many times, 
rather than the part numbers.
Be careful—entering these wildcard characters in the Change To 
field results in text being replaced by the metacharacter codes them-
selves, which is almost certainly not what you want. That’s why the 
wildcards don’t appear on the Change To field’s pop-up menu.
This is the kind of find/change operation that the GREP search 
method is good at. Take a look at “Using GREP,” later in this chapter.
To replace one text string with another, you enter text in both the 
Find What and Change To fields of the Find/Change dialog box (see 
Figure 3-77). Once you’ve done this, you have two choices:
▶You can choose to have InDesign replace all instances of the 
string in the Find What field with the string you entered in the 
Change To field throughout the search range by clicking the 
Change All button.
▶You can find each occurrence of the string in the specified 
search range and decide to replace it or not. To do this, click 
the Find button, view the found text, and then click the Find 
Next, Change, or Change/Find button. The Find Next button 
moves on to the next instance of the string without making any 
changes; the Change button replaces the selected text with the 
Wildcard   
Metacharacters
Replacing Text

 3. x 231
Enter the text you want to 
find in the Find What field.
Enter the replacement text   
in the Change To field.
Click the Find button   
to find the first   
instance of the text…
…then click the Change button to 
replace the found text with the text 
in the Change To field…
…or click the Change/Find button to 
change the text and then find the next 
occurrence. Or click the Change All 
button to change all occurrences.
Figure 3-77
Replacing Text
contents of the Change To field, and waits to see what you’ll do 
next. The Change/Find button replaces the string, then finds the 
next instance and waits.
The Case Sensitive option also determines the case of the replace-
ment characters. When this option is turned off, InDesign pays 
attention to the capitalization of the word: If the word it finds is capi-
talized, it will replace it with a capitalized word, even if the word you 
typed in the Change To field was in all lowercase.
If you’re a hardcore Find/Change fiend, you’re going to want use key-
board shortcuts whenever possible. When you use keyboard short-
cuts, you can find and change text without having to have the Find/
Change dialog box visible.
Here are a few shortcuts we find useful; you can, of course, change 
them (to do this, select Keyboard Shortcuts from the Edit menu and 
look in the Text and Tables Product Area).
▶You can load the Find What field by selecting one or more  
characters in a story and pressing Shift-F1.
▶You can load the Replace With field by selecting some text and 
pressing Command-F2/Ctrl-F2.
▶You can find the next occurrence of the most recent search by 
pressing either Shift-F2.
▶Once you’ve found some text, you can replace it (using the cur-
rent settings) by pressing Command-F3/Ctrl-F3. To replace the 
text and find the next occurrence of the find text, press Shift-F3.
Text Find/Change   
Keyboard Shortcuts

232     6
What do you do when you want to find all of the occurrences of the 
word “Zucchini” formatted as 10-point Helvetica bold? It’s easy—use 
the Find Format Settings and Change Format Settings controls at the 
bottom of the Find/Change dialog box (if you can’t see these settings, 
it’s because you need to expand your Find/Change dialog box—click 
the More Options button, and InDesign expands the panel to display 
these options).
To choose the formatting attributes you want to find, click the 
Specify Formatting to Find button. InDesign displays the Find 
Format Settings dialog box (see Figure 3-78). 
The eleven panels of the Find Format Settings dialog box give you 
the ability to specify almost any formatting that can be applied to 
text in InDesign. Navigate through the panels until you find the for-
matting options you want, then use them to specify the formatting 
you want to find. When you’re done, click the OK button to close the 
dialog box. InDesign displays a list of the options you’ve chosen in 
the field in the Find Format section of the Find/Change dialog box.
Note that when you first open the Find Format Settings dialog 
box, all the pop-up menus and fields are blank. Let’s say you select a 
format—such as 6-point text—and then change your mind; you can 
simply select the field and press Delete to make it blank again. This 
comes in handy when searching for fonts. If you select the font Pala-
tino, the styles field automatically changes to “Roman,” which means 
InDesign will only search for the characters that use the Roman font 
style and won’t find italic or bold text in that font. However, if you 
delete “Roman” from that field, the program searches for all cases of 
Palatino, no matter what the style.
To set up the formatting options you want to apply to any text 
you find, click the Specify Formatting to Change button. This dis-
plays the Change Format Settings dialog box, which is identical in 
all but name to the Find Format Settings dialog box. Use the Change 
Format Settings dialog box to specify the formatting you want to 
apply, then return to the Find/Change dialog box. InDesign displays 
the formatting you’ve chosen in the field in the Change Format Set-
tings section.
When you’ve specified formatting in the Find Format Settings sec-
tion, InDesign displays an icon above the Find What field. When you 
enter formatting in the Change Format Settings section, InDesign 
displays the icon above the Change To field.
To clear the formatting you’ve set in either the Find Format Set-
tings or the Change Format Settings dialog boxes, click the Clear 
button in the corresponding section of the Find/Change dialog box.
Finding and Changing 
Formatting Attributes

 3. x 233
If you can’t see the   
Find Format and Change 
Format areas in the panel, 
click the More Options   
button (which then becomes 
the Fewer Options button)   
to display Find/Change   
formatting options.
Click the Specify Attributes to Find button to 
display the Find Format Settings dialog box.
Use the panels of the Find 
Format Settings dialog box 
to specify the formatting you 
want to find. 
Click the Specify Attributes to Change button, 
then use the Change Format Settings dialog box 
to specify the formatting you want to apply.
When you’ve specified 
formatting, InDesign 
displays an alert icon.
The Find Format Settings 
and Change Format   
Settings dialog boxes   
contain the same set   
of panels and options.
Figure 3-78
Find and Change  
Formatting Attributes
In this example, we want to 
replace the Myriad Pro text 
with a different font.
When you’re ready to  
change text, click the Change All 
button, or click Find Next to step 
through the find/change process.
InDesign changes the formatting, 
finding and changing the font   
and style you specified.

234     6
Once you’ve specified the formatting you want to find and/or 
change, you can use the Find/Change dialog box in the same manner 
as you would when finding/changing text strings.
Note that when you have specified formatting in the Find Format 
Settings or Change Format Settings dialog boxes, you can:
▶Leave the contents of the Find What and Change To fields empty. 
When you do this, InDesign searches for any instances of the 
formatting you’ve specified in the Find Format Settings dialog 
box, and replaces it with the formatting you’ve entered in the 
Change Format Settings dialog box.
▶Enter text in both the Find What and Change To fields. In this 
case, InDesign searches for an instance of the string you entered 
in the Find What field that has the formatting specified in the 
Find Format Settings dialog box, and replaces the text it finds 
with the string you entered in the Change To field. InDesign 
applies the formatting from the Change Format Settings dialog 
box to the replacement text.
▶Enter text in only the Find What field and leave the Change To 
field blank. When you do this, InDesign searches for the string 
you entered in the Find What field (and any formatting you’ve 
specified in the Find Format Settings dialog box), and changes 
the formatting of the found text to the formatting specified in 
the Change Format Settings dialog box (but does not change the 
text string itself).
▶Enter text only in the Change To field and leave the Find What 
field blank. In this case, InDesign searches for the formatting 
you set in the Find Format Settings dialog box, and replaces any 
text it finds with the string you entered in the Change To field 
(including any formatting you’ve specified in the Change Format 
Settings dialog box). While you aren’t likely to use this method 
(it’s pretty strange), it’s nice to know it’s available.
Lurking near the bottom of the options on the Other submenu on the 
pop-up menu associated with the Change To field are a pair of menu 
items: Clipboard Contents, Formatted, and Clipboard Contents, 
Unformatted. They’re obscure, but they’re really useful. If you enter 
these metacharacters in the Change To field, you’re telling InDesign 
to paste the current contents of the Clipboard wherever it finds 
the text you’ve asked it to find. Anything you can copy—including 
objects—you can paste over the text you find (see Figure 3-79).
Replacing Text with 
the Clipboard

 3. x 235
You know what Unicode code point (or ID, or value) you want to 
search for, but you can’t figure out how to enter it in the Find What 
field? If you’re only looking for a single character, you can skip ahead 
to “Finding and Changing Glyphs,” later in this chapter. But if you 
need to combine your Unicode character with other text, InDesign 
has a shortcut that’s made for what you want to do.
In the Find What field, enter the Unicode value you want to find 
inside angle brackets, in the form <number>, where number is the 
Unicode code point. When you search, InDesign will treat this as the 
Unicode character you’re looking for.
Note, however, that some characters share Unicode values. For 
example, some fonts (such as Minion Pro) list a number of different 
characters as Unicode 2022, a bullet. If you want to find a specific 
character in characters defined in this fashion, you’ll have to use the 
Glyph find/change method.
Finding Text by Its 
Unicode Value
Figure 3-79
Replace with Clipboard
Select the text you want  
to copy (including inline 
graphics, as in this example) 
and copy it to the Clipboard.
Enter ^c in the Change To 
field of the Find/Change 
dialog box.
Click the Change All button, 
and InDesign will insert the 
contents of the Clipboard 
wherever it finds the text.
In this example we’re   
searching for a bullet   
character, which we enter in 
the Find What field as ^8.

236     6
We frequently work with word processing documents containing 
notes written to us by other people—you know, things like, “Ole, this 
section still needs work.” We don’t want to see that paragraph in the 
printed version of the piece (and we have, believe us!), so we tag these 
paragraphs with a paragraph style named “Comment.”
When we’re laying out the publication, we remove all of the para-
graphs tagged with this style name. Do we hunt through the text, 
laboriously selecting each paragraph and pressing the Delete key? 
No way—we use an unexpected and probably unintended feature 
of InDesign’s Find/Change dialog box. Here’s the easy way to delete 
paragraphs tagged with a particular style.
1. Press Command-F/Ctrl-F to display the Find/Change dialog box.
2. Leave the Find What and Change To fields empty. Choose a 
search range from the Search pop-up menu to define the scope 
of the find/change operation.
3. Click the Clear Specified Attributes buttons in both the Find 
Format and Change Format areas, if necessary. Then click the 
Specify Attributes to Find button to open the Find Format Set-
tings dialog box. 
4. Select the Style Options panel, if it’s not already visible. Choose 
the paragraph style you want to annihilate from the Paragraph 
Style pop-up menu, then close the Find Format Settings dialog 
box by pressing OK.
5. Click the Change All button. InDesign deletes every paragraph 
tagged with the paragraph style from the search range.
There are a variety of different opinions on what the term “GREP” 
means, where it came from, and how it should be capitalized. We’re 
not even going to try to unravel it all—but we can tell you that it’s a 
way of finding and changing text using regular expressions. Regular 
expressions are something like the wildcard metacharacters we dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter, but they’re far more powerful. 
Again, it’s all about patterns of text characters—and regular 
expressions, or GREP, give you a very deep and rich set of tools for 
constructing and transforming patterns. We’ll admit at the outset 
that we cannot cover GREP in depth. There are books longer than 
this one that do nothing more than explore regular expressions. But 
we’ll take a shot at providing a glimpse of what you can do with this 
great feature.
Goodbye, Paragraph!
Finding and Changing 
Text with GREP

 3. x 237
Table 3-7 shows the most common GREP metacharacters. GREP 
supports a number of metacharacters for those familiar with using 
GREP in a Posix environment, as shown in Table 3-9.
Because GREP uses a number of relatively common characters 
as part of its system for defining a regular expression, you need to 
have some way of entering those characters. You do this by “escaping” 
them, generally by adding a backslash character before the character, 
as shown in Table 3-8. You do not need to escape characters when 
they appear inside a character class ([...]).
To find and change text using GREP regular expressions, follow 
these steps (see Figure 3-80). We’ll explain what the regular expres-
sion does in Table 3-9. 
1. Open the Find/Change dialog box (press Command-F/Ctrl-F). 
Click the GREP tab to display the GREP panel.
2. Enter the GREP string you want to find in the Find What field. 
You can type the string, or you can use the pop-up menu associ-
ated with the field to build a regular expression.
3. Enter the replacement string in the Change To field. Again, 
you can use the pop-up menu associated with the field to enter 
metacharacters. Note that when you use GREP, you can use 
wildcard characters in the Change To field—something you 
can’t do in a normal text find/change operation.
4. Set the range of the search using the Search pop-up menu.
5. Set any find or change formatting attributes, if necessary.
6. Click the Find button. InDesign finds an occurrence of the regu-
lar expression you entered in the Find What field and displays 
the matching text in the publication window, turning pages and 
scrolling to display the text, if necessary. 
7. Click the Change button to change the text to the regular expres-
sion you entered in the Change To field.
8. At this point, you can continue finding and changing text by 
clicking the Find Next, Change, or Change and Find buttons, or 
click the Change All button to apply your changes to all of the 
matching text in the specified range.
One of the coolest things about finding and changing text using GREP 
is that you can use marking subexpressions—a way of slicing, dicing, 
and rearranging the text you’ve found. Marking subexpressions can 
Finding and Changing 
Text Using GREP
Marking   
Subexpressions

238     6
To match:
Enter:
Start of word
\<
End of word
\>
Word boundary
\b
Start of paragraph
^
End of paragraph
$
End of story
\Z
Zero or one time
?
Zero or more times
*
One or more times
+
Zero or one time (shortest match)
??
Zero or more times (shortest match)
*?
One or more times (shortest match)
+?
Marking subexpression
()
Non-marking subexpression
(?:)
Character set
[]
Or
|
Positive lookbehind
(?<=)
Negative lookbehind
(?<!)
Positive lookahead
(?=)
Negative lookahead
(?!)
Case insensitive on
(?i)
Case insensitive off
(?-i)
Multiline on
(?m)
Mulitline off
(?-m)
Single-line on
(?s)
Single-line off
(?-s)
Table 3-6
GREP Metacharacters
take a part of the text you’ve found and use it in the replacement 
text. The best way to show what this means is to present a couple of 
examples.
Re-ordering names. Imagine that you have to take a list of names that 
have been typed in “last name, first name” order and convert them to 
“first name last name” order. This kind of operation is impossible to 

 3. x 239
Posix Expression
Matches:
[[:alnum:]]
Same as Any Character
[[:alpha:]]
Same as Any Letter
[[:digit:]]
Same as Any Number
[[:lower:]]
Same as Any Lowercase Character
[[:punct:]]
Any punctuation
[[:space:]]
Same as White Space
[[:upper:]]
Same as Any Uppercase Character
[[:word:]]
Same as Any Word
[[:xdigit:]]
Matches any hexadecimal digit character 
(1234567890ABCDEF)
[[=a=]]
Matches any alternate of the character 
you enter between the equals signs. In this 
example you would find A, a, AÂ, â, and ä.
Character:
Character name:
Enter:
\
Backslash
\\
(
Open parenthesis
\(
)
Close parenthesis
\)
{
Open brace
\{
}
Close brace
\}
[
Open bracket
\[
]
Close bracket
\]
.
Period
\.
Table 3-7
Posix Metacharacters  
for GREP
Table 3-8
Escaping Special  
Characters
do using the Text search method, but it’s easy with GREP and mark-
ing subexpressions (see Figure 3-81).
Formatting text between tags. Imagine that you’re working with 
an author who consistently marks bold and italic text with simple 
HTML-style formatting tags: “<i>” for italic and “<b>” for bold. 
Luckily, they’re quite consistent about marking the end of the for-
matting using “</i>” and “</i>”. How can you find the text between 
the formatting tags, format it, and, at the same time, remove the tags?
In this example, we’ll use a marking subexpression to capture the 
text between the tags, and we’ll replace the text with the captured 
text, excluding the tags (see Figure 3-82). Using regular expressions 

240     6
Figure 3-80
Using the GREP  
Find/Change Method
In this example, we want  
to find and format all of  
the email addressses in  
a document.
You can build the GREP regular expression 
by either typing in the Find What field or 
by choosing options from the pop-up menu 
associated with the field.
Note that there are many, 
many different approaches 
to finding email addresses 
using GREP. This one works 
pretty well for us.
In this example, we’re just 
applying some formatting to 
the found text.
Click the Change All button, 
and InDesign finds and 
changes all text matching the 
specified regular expression.
In this example, the GREP regular  
expression we’re entering is:
(?i)[A-Z0-9._%-]+@[A-Z0-9._%-]+\.[A-Z]{2,4}$
to find text between some arbitrary beginning and ending text is one 
of the great things about the GREP find/change method.
By now, every desktop publisher is familiar with the drill: place a 
word processing file, then find and change all of the little annoyances 
that make a mess of text. Double spaces. Multiple tabs. Space before 
punctuation. For years, we’ve used the standard text find/change fea-
tures (what you see in the Text panel of the Find/Change dialog box) 
to do this—but this often means that we have to run through the 
search multiple times to get all of the instances of the offending text. 
Simple Searches Made 
Better with GREP

 3. x 241
Take double spaces as an example: we search, search, and then search 
again until InDesign tells us no more instances have been found.
GREP offers us a better way to deal with this type of search. Rather 
than finding and changing the text multiple times, we can take care 
of it all in a single pass. Table 3-10 shows a few of our favorite text 
cleanup operations. Note that we use $1 in some cases to avoid delet-
ing a return character and, potentially, paragraph formatting.
We don’t have the space here to cover GREP in all its glory. Peter 
Kahrel has written an excellent tutorial on using GREP in InDesign 
that is available as a downloadable PDF from O’Reilly—that would 
probably be the best place to start learning about GREP.
Another O’Reilly book, Mastering Regular Expressions, by Jeffrey 
E. F. Friedl, is a fairly complete tour of GREP. It does not specifically 
talk about GREP in InDesign, but it’s a great place to learn more 
about the inner details of how regular expressions do their work.
For more information on either or both of the above titles, you 
can go to www.indesignsecrets.com/grep/.
Ole likes a regular expression development and debugging tool 
called “RegexBuddy,” by JGSoft. It’s Windows-only, and a demo ver-
sion is available from www.regexbuddy.com.
Learning More   
about GREP
GREP Expression:
What it does:
(?i)
Makes the find/change case-insensitive
[A-Z0-9._%-]
Matches the specified character range: 
from A to Z, from 0 to 9, and the char-
acters “._%-”
+
Matches the character range one or 
more times
@
Matches a literal ampersand
[A-Z0-9._%-]
Matches the specified character range: 
from A to Z, from 0 to 9, and the the 
characters “._%-”
+
Matches the character range one or 
more times
/.
Matches a literal period character
[A-Z]
Matches the character range A-Z
{2,4}
Matches a two to four letter string 
(.com, .org, .edu)
$
Matches the end of the word
Table 3-9
What’s Going on in the 
GREP Example?

242     6
Figure 3-81
Re-Ordering  
Names with GREP
Parentheses mark parts 
of the found text. In this 
example, the GREP regular 
expression we’re entering in 
the Find What field is:
^(.+),\s(.+)$
When we enter:
$2 $1
In the Change To field, 
we’re telling InDesign 
to swap the order of the 
two marked parts of 
the found text.
$1
$2
We’ve talked about the wonder of Unicode and OpenType fonts, or, 
at least, we will talk about them in Chapter 4, “Type.” There are lots 
of good things to say about a system that makes publishing in just 
about any language or character set much easier than it used to be, 
and provides great typesetting features at the same time.
But you’ve probably noticed that there are some things that the 
combination of Unicode, OpenType, and InDesign don’t handle very 
well. By “noticed,” of course, we mean that you’ve spent time yelling 
at your screen when a specific character can’t be found, or can’t be 
entered, or displays the “dreaded pinkness” of glyph substitution.
Take, for example, the font we use for this book, Minion Pro. 
Minion Pro has a number of ornamental characters we’re very fond 
of—the only trouble is that they’re all considered bullet characters by 
InDesign. Which leads to a problem: There is simply no way to enter 
the replacement character in the Change To field of the Text panel of 
the Find/Change dialog box. If you try to copy the character into the 
field, you’ll get ^8 (or Unicode <2022>), a normal bullet. You can’t 
even use the Unicode value you can find from your operating system 
to refer to the correct character.
Instead of screaming in frustration, you can use the controls in 
the third panel of the Find/Change dialog box, Glyph. The Glyph 
find and change method can only find one character at a time, but it 
does this single job very well (see Figure 3-83).
1. Open the Find/Change dialog box (press Command-F/Ctrl-F). 
Click the Glyph tab to display the Glyph panel.
2. Choose the font, font style, and glyph you want to find. You can 
enter the Unicode/Glyph ID if you know it, but it’s usually better 
Finding and   
Changing Glyphs

 3. x 243
Task:
Find What:
Change To:
Replace runs of spaces  
with single space
\s+
<space>
Replace multiple returns 
with single return
(\r)+
$1
Remove empty  
paragraphs
^\r
Remove spaces before  
a return
\s+(\r)
$1
Remove spaces before  
specified punctuation
\s([.?!;:,])
$1
Remove spaces at end  
of story
\s+\Z
Table 3-10
Simple Searches Made 
Better with GREP
Figure 3-82
Formatting  
Tags with GREP
Parentheses mark parts 
of the found text. In this 
example, the GREP regular 
expression we’re entering in 
the Find What field is:
<i>(.+?)</i>
This captures the text 
between the tags as $1.
Replace the text between the tags and format 
it as italic. This deletes the tags themselves.
InDesign replaces applies the 
formatting and removes the 
tags themselves.
to choose a glyph from the Glyph pop-up menu (which is really 
something like a miniature version of the Glyphs panel).
3. Choose the font, font style, and glyph you want to change to.
4. Set the range of the search using the Search pop-up menu.

244     6
5. Click the Find button. InDesign finds an occurrence of the  
character you specified and displays the matching text in the 
document window, turning pages and scrolling to display the 
character, if necessary. 
6. Click the Change button to change the glyph.
7. At this point, you can continue finding and changing text by 
clicking the Find Next, Change, or Change and Find buttons, or 
click the Change All button to apply your changes to all of the 
matching text in the specified range.
If you have a find/change operation that you use often, you should 
save it. To do this, click the Save Query button in the Find/Change 
dialog box—it looks like a floppy disk—a computer storage medium 
some of us can still remember. 
Enter a name for the query in the Save Query dialog box, then 
click the OK button to save the query. Once you’ve done this, the 
name of the query will appear on the Query pop-up menu in the 
Find/Change dialog box, and you can recall all of the settings of that 
particular find/change operation by choosing the menu item.
Working with InDesign Tagged Text
One of the most useful features of InDesign is rarely mentioned in 
the marketing materials. It’s not the typesetting features, nor is it the 
ability to place native Photoshop and Illustrator files. We think those 
are great features, but they’re not it.
What is this mystery feature? It’s the ability to save and read 
tagged text. To explain why this is so important, we’ve got to explain 
a little bit about what tags are.
Tags have been around for a long time. Before desktop publishing 
appeared, the world of typesetting was ruled by dedicated typeset-
ting systems. As we set type on these machines, we didn’t see any-
thing that looked like the type we were setting. Instead, we saw the 
text of our newspapers, books, and magazines surrounded (and 
sometimes obscured) by cryptic symbols: typesetting tags and codes. 
To see what these symbols meant, we had to print the file. Only 
then would we see our type with its formatting applied.
Then came the Macintosh, PageMaker, the LaserWriter, and 
WYSIWYG (What you See Is What You Get) publishing. This 
Saving Queries
The Land That   
WYSIWYG Forgot

 3. x 245
In this example, 
we need to replace 
a Zapf Dingbats 
ornament with an 
ornament from 
Minion Pro.
Set the font family and font style in the Find 
Glyph section of the panel, then use the Glyph 
pop-up menu to specify the glyph   
you want to find.
Then do the same thing for the replacement 
glyph in the Change Glyph section of the panel.
InDesign replaces 
the glyph you’re 
looking for with 
the replacement 
glyph.
revolution made it easier for more people to set type—in part because 
it freed us from having to learn and use the obscure codes and tags 
of the dedicated typesetting systems. These days, modern desktop 
publishing programs are better typesetting systems than anything 
we had in the old days—and you can see what you’re doing.
Why should you mess with tags in this day and age? It turns out that 
they can make some jobs easier, and sometimes they can make it 
Why Bother   
with Tags?
Figure 3-83
Finding and  
Changing Glyphs

246     6
possible to do things that wouldn’t be practical to do using menus, 
dialog boxes, and the Character and Paragraph panels.
The tagged text export filter takes formatted InDesign text and 
turns it into tags in a text file. The tagged text import filter reads 
tags and turns them into formatted (“WYSIWYG”) text. InDesign’s 
tagged text export filter is the only text export filter that doesn’t 
change the appearance of the text you’re exporting.
Here are some of the reasons you might want to use tags:
▶If you work with people who use text editors (instead of full-
featured word processors), they cannot apply formatting such as 
bold or italic or paragraph styles.
▶Any application that can save files in text-only format can be 
used to create formatted text for use in InDesign. This means 
that your catalog clients can use FileMaker database to mark up 
their text—Visual Basic, Microsoft Excel, and Microsoft Access 
are other obvious choices. It might even help your old uncle who 
lives in a cave and uses nothing but EDLIN.
▶You can store frequently used formatted text as tagged text 
files. It’s far quicker to place a tagged text file than it is to open 
another InDesign publication and copy/paste the text you want.
To learn how tags work, the best thing to do is export some format-
ted text from InDesign (select the story, choose Export from the File 
menu, and change the Format pop-up menu to InDesign Tagged 
Text) and then use a text editor to look at the file. 
While it is possible to open these tagged text files in a word proces-
sor like Microsoft Word, those programs often assume that because 
there are tags in the file, it must be HTML (so you either get errors 
or things get really weird). That’s why text editors (such as Windows 
Notepad or BBEdit) are better—they just deal with plain text and 
never try to format anything.
The “official word” on tagged text is the Tagged Text.pdf file, 
which you’ll find on the web at http://bit.ly/bExJT3. This guide 
includes basic instructions and a list of most of the tags you can use.
One thing that’s implied by the tagged text documentation, but 
not explicitly stated, is that you can enter any character using its Uni-
code value. To do that, use the form “<0xnnnn>”, where nnnn is the 
hexadecimal form of the code (as seen in the Glyphs panel).
InDesign’s tags can specify basic character formatting (such as font, 
point size, color, or baseline shift), paragraph formatting (such as 
Getting Started with 
Tagged Text
What Tags   
Can Contain

 3. x 247
indents, tabs, and paragraph space before and after), and styles (both 
paragraph styles and character styles). Any formatting that can be 
applied to text can be applied using tags. Even tables can be exported 
or imported as tagged text. (That means you can program your data-
base to export fully formatted InDesign tables.) 
InDesign tags are always surrounded by open (<) and close (>) angle 
brackets (which most of us also know as “greater than” and “less 
than” symbols). The first characters in a tagged text file must state 
the character encoding (ASCII, ANSI, UNICODE, BIG5, or SJIS), 
followed by the platform (MAC or WIN). So the typical Windows 
tagged text file begins with <ASCII-WIN>, and the Macintosh ver-
sion begins with <ASCII-MAC>. If InDesign doesn’t see one of these 
tags at the start of the file, InDesign won’t interpret the tags, and all 
the tags show up as part of your text. Here are a few more details.
▶Any characters you enter outside a tag will appear as characters 
in the imported text.
▶Enter an empty tag to return the formatting affected by the tag 
to its default state. For example:
Baseline <cBaselineShift:3>Shift<cBaselineShift:> text following 
should be back to normal.
If you’re a long-time PageMaker user, you may have worked with 
PageMaker’s style tags to apply paragraph formatting to text files. 
InDesign’s tagged text format is different than PageMaker’s, but you 
can create a “minimalist” tagged text file that’s almost as easy to 
work with as PageMaker’s paragraph style tags. Here’s the header for 
an example tagged text file:
<ASCII-WIN>
<DefineParaStyle:heading><DefineParaStyle:subhead><DefineParaStyle:
para>
<ColorTable:=<Black:COLOR:CMYK:Process:0,0,0,1>>
Note that the paragraph style definitions in this tagged text file 
do not contain any formatting—our assumption is that you’ll set up 
corresponding paragraph styles in your publication. Then all you 
need to do is paste the appropriate header at the top of a text file, 
and then enter the paragraph style tags for each paragraph. If, when 
preparing a file for import into PageMaker, you entered “<heading>” 
then enter “<ParaStyle:heading>” for InDesign.
Here’s an example (very simple) text file marked up with Page-
Maker paragraph tags:
Tag Structure
Paragraph Style Tags

248     6
<heading 1>TimeTravelTickets
<subhead>Travel through time to experience the greatest artistic  
performances in history!
<para>We are pleased to announce our Summer, 2007 series.
Here’s the same text, marked up with InDesign tags:
<ASCII-WIN>
<DefineParaStyle:heading><DefineParaStyle:subhead><DefineParaStyle:
para>
<ParaStyle:heading>TimeTravelTickets
<ParaStyle:subhead>Travel through time to experience the greatest 
artistic performances in history!
<ParaStyle:para>We are pleased to announce our Summer, 2007 series.
A few things to note about converting PageMaker paragraph style 
tags to InDesign tagged text:
▶While you do not need to include the <DefineParagraphStyle> tags 
in the heading of the file, it’s a good idea to do so. If you don’t, 
and then import the tagged text file into a document that does 
not contain the styles referred to in the tagged text file, InDesign 
will not associate the paragraphs with the style.
▶While PageMaker paragraph style tags don’t require that you tag 
each paragraph, you should tag each paragraph in the InDesign 
version of the file.
After Words
In academic circles, debate continues on whether we’re born with 
the ability to understand language, or whether it’s something we’re 
taught. We don’t know the answer, and, most of the time, we don’t 
even know which side of the argument we want to be on. What we 
do know is that language is the most important technology humans 
have developed.
In this chapter, we’ve shown how to get words into InDesign, 
how to organize them in your publications, and how to get them out 
again. Next stop—typesetting with InDesign!

249
Ole’s tale: “Late night. The pale glow from the monochrome monitor 
of my Compugraphic phototypesetter. The smell of the office stan-
dard ‘French Vanilla’ coffee—warming, now, for several hours and 
resembling nothing so much as battery acid. The gentle snoring of 
one of the staff writers, who is curled up in the warmth of the unit 
that holds the filmstrips containing the fonts I’m using to set his story.
“These are the things I think of when I hear the word ‘typeset-
ting’—they’re memories from my job at Seattle’s free rock and roll 
newspaper The Rocket, circa 1982. Desktop publishing didn’t exist 
yet, and digital (as opposed to photo) typesetting systems—with 
their WYSIWYG displays—were rare. The codes and characters I 
saw on my screen wouldn’t look anything like type until they were 
printed, one character at a time, on a strip of photographic film and 
developed. I could set just about any kind of type using that machine, 
provided the characters would fit on a piece of film not more than 
seven inches wide, and provided I didn’t need to use characters from 
more than six fonts.”
When desktop publishing appeared, we found that it couldn’t do 
everything Ole could do with his Compugraphic—but that being 
able to see what our type would look like before we printed it more 
than made up for any deficiencies. These days, page layout programs 
are far more capable than Ole’s trusty EditWriter. Does that mean, 
however, that there’s no more room for improvement? For surprising 
new features? Is typesetting “done”?
Type

4

250     6
Not a chance—InDesign offers a number of improvements and 
surprises in the area of typesetting. It’s an evolutionary product—
not a revolutionary one, but, on its release, InDesign became the best 
desktop typesetting program, and raised the bar for its competition.
In this chapter, we’ll walk through InDesign’s typesetting fea-
tures. We’ll start with character formatting (font, point size, kern-
ing, and baseline shift are examples of character formatting), move 
on to paragraph formatting (indents, tabs, space above and below, 
and composition), and then dive into formatting using character and 
paragraph styles. Along the way, there may be a joke or two.
Generally, when you want to change the formatting of some text, you 
have to select it with the Type tool. However, there are two caveats 
to this statement. First, because paragraph formatting (which we’ll 
discuss later) always applies to an entire paragraph, you don’t have to 
select every character in the paragraph before applying it.
Second (and more interesting) is that you can apply text for-
matting to text frames you’ve selected using the Selection tool or 
the Direct Selection tool. When you do this, InDesign applies the 
formatting to all of the text in the text frame, including any overset 
text. InDesign won’t let you use this method to apply formatting to 
text frames that are linked to other text frames. Tired of using the 
Type tool to select and format every photo caption on a page? Use 
the Selection tool to select them all and apply your formatting—it’s 
easier, and it’s quicker (see Figure 4-1).
Selecting and   
Formatting Text
Use the Selection tool to 
select the text frames you 
want to format…
…and apply formatting. 
InDesign applies the 
formatting to all of the 
text in the text frames. 
That’s all there is to it.  
Figure 4-1
Formatting the  
Text in Text Frames
In this example, we changed character 
attributes (font, font style, and leading) 
and paragraph attributes (alignment).

 4. y 251
The ability to apply formatting with the Selection tools is very 
powerful, but it’s also slightly dangerous. Let’s say you set a single 
character to Zapf Dingbats somewhere in your text frame. If you 
select the text frame using the Selection tool and then apply a new 
font, every character—including that dingbat—gets changed.
The only warnings that InDesign gives you that some of the text 
in the selected text frame uses a different font are: the Font field in 
the Character panel is blank, and the Font submenu (under the Type 
menu) has hyphens next to each font.
Character Formatting
Character formatting controls the appearance of the individual let-
ters in your publication. Font, type size, color, and leading are all 
aspects of character formatting. (Longtime QuarkXPress users won’t 
think of leading as a character format, but we’ll cover that next.)
We refer to all formatting that can be applied to a selected range of 
text as “character” formatting, and refer to formatting that InDesign 
applies at the paragraph level as “paragraph” formatting. Tab settings, 
indents, paragraph rules, space above, and space after are examples 
of paragraph formatting. There are areas of overlap in these defini-
tions. Leading, for example, is really a property that applies to an 
entire line of text (InDesign uses only the largest leading value in a 
line), but we’ll call it “character” formatting, nonetheless, because 
you can apply it to individual characters.
In addition to these distinctions, InDesign’s paragraph styles can 
include character formatting, but apply to entire paragraphs. See 
“Styles,” later in this chapter.
InDesign’s character formatting controls are found in both the Char-
acter panel and the Control panel (see Figure 4-2). The controls in the 
panels are substantially the same, so we’ll discuss them once.
To display the Character panel and shift the focus to the panel’s 
Font field, press Command-T/Ctrl-T. If the panel is already visible, 
InDesign hides it; you may need to press it twice. 
To display the Control panel, press Command-Option-6/Ctrl-
Alt-6. If the panel is already open, but is displaying the paragraph 
controls, press Command-Option-7/Ctrl-Alt-7.
Selecting a font in InDesign is a little bit different than selecting a 
font in most other page layout programs. To InDesign, fonts are 
categorized as font “families,” and each family is made up of one or 
Character Formatting 
Controls
Font Family and Font

252     6
more type styles. A font family is a set of typefaces designed to have 
a common “look.” A “font,” then, is specified by its font family and 
type style. In this book, we’ve used the font family Minion Pro, and 
the type style Regular for the body text—so the font of the body text 
is “Minion Pro Regular.”
InDesign’s user interface for selecting fonts mirrors this approach. 
When you choose a font from the Font submenu of the Type menu, 
you must select both the font family and a specific type style.
Note that InDesign does not have “type styles” in the same way 
that other programs do—it makes no assumption that the selected 
font family has a “bold” or “italic” member, and will never generate
a fake bold or italic version. If you don’t have a font for a particular 
type style, you won’t see it on the Type Styles menu (see Figure 4-3).
To select a font family or type style, you can type into the appro-
priate field—you don’t have to use the menu. As you type the name 
of a font family or type style, InDesign will display the available font 
or fonts that match the characters you typed. For instance you can 
type “T” and it will guess “Tekton” (if you have that font installed); 
if you meant “Times” then you may have to type “Ti” or even “Tim”. 
Note that you can also press the up and down arrow keys, which is 
especially helpful in the Style field to move from Regular to Bold to 
Italic, and so on.
The most recently used fonts appear at the top of the Font submenu.
Figure 4-2
Character Formatting 
Controls
Choose Show Options to expand the  
Character panel to a more useful size.
Character panel in its “minimalist” state.
Many options can be 
found on the Character 
panel menu…
…and even more can be found 
on the OpenType submenu.
The same controls   
(including the menu choices) 
are also available on the 
Control panel—in slightly 
rearranged form.

 4. y 253
Font Style Keyboard Shortcuts. Although InDesign won’t generate 
a bold or italic weight, you can type Command-Shift-B/Ctrl-Shift-B 
to make your text bold and Command-Shift-I/Ctrl-Shift-I to make it 
italic. If a font doesn’t have a bold or italic version, InDesign will not 
change the text.
Symbols and Dingbats. Sometimes, when you change to a symbol 
font (such as Zapf Dingbats), you may encounter font substitution 
(the dreaded pink highlight). This can happen because InDesign is 
attempting to map the character from one font to another. To avoid 
this problem, hold down Shift as you apply the font.
Duplicate Font Names. Some folks have more than one font with the 
same name on their systems—such as a TrueType and a PostScript 
version of Times Roman. While most programs just pick one (and 
you never know which you’re getting), InDesign displays both fonts, 
including either T1 or TT in parentheses after the font name.
You can change the size of text by entering the point size you want 
in the Size field of the Character or Control panel, or choose a point 
size from the attached pop-up menu (see Figure 4-4). If you type the 
size, you can specify it in .001-point increments. After you’ve entered 
the size you want, apply the change by pressing Return/Enter or by 
pressing Tab to move to another field.
Size Adjustment Keyboard Shortcuts. You can increase the size of 
selected type by pressing Command-Shift->/Ctrl-Shift->, or decrease 
the size by pressing Command-Shift-</Ctrl-Shift-<. The amount that 
InDesign increases or decreases the point size when you use these 
shortcuts depends on the value in the Size/Leading field in the Units 
& Increments Preferences dialog box.
Size
Figure 4-3
Selecting a Font
Select a font family...
...and then select a 
type style. InDesign 
will not generate 
fake bold or italic 
type styles.
The number of type 
styles available varies 
from family to family.
On the Mac OS, you can 
choose the family and style 
from the Font pop-up menu 
in a single step.

254     6
Click the “nudge”   
buttons, or…
…enter a point 
size, or…
Figure 4-4
Point Size
To increase or decrease the size of the selected text by five times 
the value entered in the Size/Leading field, you can add the Option 
or Alt key: Command-Option-Shift->/Ctrl-Alt-Shift->, or Command-
Option-Shift-</Ctrl-Alt-Shift-<. 
Scaling Text by Scaling the Frame. You can scale text by scaling the 
frame itself. To do this, select the text frame with the Selection tool, 
then hold down the Command/Ctrl key and drag a corner or side 
handle. Hold down Command-Shift/Ctrl-Shift as you drag to scale 
proportionally (a good thing, as far as text is concerned).
Text characters—usually—sit on an imaginary line, the baseline. 
Leading (pronounced “ledding”) is the vertical distance from the 
baseline of one line of text to the next text baseline. When you hear 
“10 on 12” or see “10/12”, it means “10-point text on 12-point leading.” 
In InDesign, leading is measured from the baseline of a line of text 
to the baseline of the line of text above (see Figure 4-5). When you 
increase the leading in a line, you push that line farther from the line 
above it, and farther down from the top of the text frame.
In InDesign—as in PageMaker—leading is an attribute of indi-
vidual characters, but the largest leading value in a line predomi-
nates (see Figure 4-6). This differs from QuarkXPress, where leading 
is a paragraph attribute (although if you use QuarkXPress’s relative 
leading mode, the largest leading in a line predominates). 
For those of us who came to desktop publishing from typesetting, 
the idea of leading being a character attribute seems more natural 
than QuarkXPress’ method of setting it at the paragraph level. For-
tunately, InDesign lets you have it both ways: When you turn on the 
Apply Leading to Entire Paragraphs option in the Type pane of the 
Preferences dialog box, the program automatically sets the leading of 
every character in a paragraph to the same value. QuarkXPress users 
will probably want to turn this option on.
Leading
…choose a size from the 
pop-up menu.

 4. y 255
Leading is the distance from 
the baseline of one line to the 
baseline of the line above it.
You set the leading of selected 
characters using the Leading 
control—enter a value, click 
the arrows, or choose a value 
from the pop-up menu. You 
can also choose Auto from the 
pop-up menu to base the  
leading on the point size  
of the text.
Figure 4-5
Leading
This word has a larger   
leading value than the other   
characters in the line.
When the word moves to another 
line (due, in this example, to a 
change in the text), the larger  
leading is applied to that line.
Figure 4-6
The Largest Leading  
in a Line Wins
However, this preference only affects paragraphs that you change 
after you set it. For instance, you could have it on most of the time, 
then turn it off in order to vary the leading of lines within a para-
graph—something you sometimes have to do to optically balance 
display copy—and then turn the preference back on again.
How to Avoid Wacky Leading. The main disadvantage of making 
leading a character attribute (when the Apply Leading to Entire Para-
graphs option is turned off) is that it requires a bit more vigilance 
on your part than the “leading-as-a-paragraph-attribute” approach 
taken by QuarkXPress and most word processors. Most of the time, 
leading values should be the same for all of the characters in the 
paragraph. If, as you apply leading amounts, you fail to select all of 
the characters in a paragraph, you’ll get leading that varies from line 
to line—which, most of the time, is a typesetting mistake.
You can also get this effect if you leave your paragraph’s leading 
set to the default Auto leading, which always sets the leading to some 
percentage (usually 120%) of the text size—or, more specifically, 
some percentage of the largest character on a line. This is true even 
when Apply to Entire Paragraph is turned on. We strongly urge you 
not to use Auto leading (except for inline frames and graphics, as 
discussed in Chapter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics”).

256     6
If you’ve seen paragraphs where the leading of the last line of 
the paragraph is clearly different from that of the lines above it, you 
know exactly what we’re talking about (see Figure 4-7).
It’s simple—the carriage return, that sneaky invisible character, 
can have a different leading value than the other lines in the para-
graph. When the person formatting the text selected the paragraph, 
they failed to select the carriage return. To avoid this, make sure you 
select the entire paragraph before applying formatting. Better yet, 
apply a paragraph style. When you apply a paragraph style, InDesign 
applies the character formatting specified in the style—including 
leading—to every character in the paragraph.
Leading Shortcuts. You can decrease the leading of selected type 
by pressing Option-Up arrow/Alt-Up arrow, or increase the size by 
pressing Option-Down arrow/Alt-Down arrow. (Yes, this does seem 
counterintuitive; think of it as pushing the line up or down.) The 
amount that InDesign increases or decreases the leading depends on 
the value you entered in the Size/Leading field in the Units & Incre-
ments Preferences dialog box (for more on units and increments, see 
Chapter 1, “Workspace”).
To decrease the leading of the selected text by five times the value 
in the Size/Leading field, press Command-Option-Up arrow/Ctrl-
Alt-Up arrow. To increase the leading by the same amount, press 
Command-Option-Down arrow/Ctrl-Alt-Down arrow.
The large leading value applied 
to the carriage return distorts the 
leading of the last line of text.
To avoid this problem, 
select the entire paragraph 
before applying character 
formatting—this selects the 
carriage return character. 
In this example, the carriage 
return character carries an 
Auto leading value and point 
size left over from previous 
paragraph formatting (the 
leading of the rest of the text 
in the paragraph is   
13 points). 
Or, better yet, apply a paragraph style, 
which applies the same leading to all 
characters in the paragraph.
Figure 4-7
That Crazy  
Carriage Return

 4. y 257
Leading Techniques. Here are a few tips for adjusting leading.
▶Increase leading as you increase line length (the column width). 
Solid leading (such as 12 point text on 12 points leading) pro-
duces almost unreadable text for all but the narrowest of lines.
▶Use extra leading for sans serif or bold type.
▶Fonts with a small x-height (the height of the lowercase “x” in 
relation to the height of the capital letters) can often use a 
smaller leading value than those with a large x-height.
▶Decrease leading as point size increases. Large display or head-
line type needs less leading than body copy. You can often get by 
with solid leading or less—just make certain that the descenders 
of one line don’t bump into the ascenders of the line below.
The goal of kerning—the adjustment of the space between charac-
ters—is to achieve even spacing. InDesign offers both pair kerning 
(the adjustment of the space between adjacent characters) and track-
ing (or “range kerning”)—the adjustment of all of the inter-character 
spaces in a series of characters.
For each space between any pair of characters in a publication, 
InDesign applies the total of the pair kerning and tracking values 
(so if you set kerning to 50 and tracking to –50, you will not see any 
change in the composition of the text).
InDesign adjusts kerning using units equal to one-thousandth of 
an em. An em is equal in width to the size of the type—for instance, 
in 18 point text, an em is 18 points wide, and so each unit in the kern-
ing or tracking fields equals 18/1,000 point (about .00025 inch). You can 
enter values from –1000 (minus one em) to 10000 (plus 10 ems) in 
the Kerning and Tracking fields.
To adjust spacing between a pair of characters, move the text inser-
tion point between the characters and apply manual kerning (see 
Figure 4-8). Use any of the following techniques.
▶Enter a value in the Kerning field of the Character panel or 
Control panel. If the kerning field already contains a value 
entered by one of the automatic kerning methods (see below), 
you can replace the value by typing over it, or add to or sub-
tract from it (by typing a “+” or “-” between the value and the 
amount you want to add or subtract).
Kerning
Manual Kerning

258     6
▶Click the arrow buttons attached to the Kerning field. Click 
the up button to increase the kerning amount by the value 
you entered in the Kerning field in the Units & Increments 
Preferences dialog box, or click the down button to decrease 
kerning by the same amount.
▶Press a keyboard shortcut (see Table 4-1).
To remove all kerning and tracking from the selected text, press 
Command-Option-Q/Ctrl-Alt-Q (this sets tracking to zero and sets 
the kerning method to Metrics).
You can’t apply pair kerning when you have a range of text 
selected—if you try, InDesign displays an error message. When you 
want to apply a kerning value to a range of text, use Tracking.
InDesign offers two automatic kerning methods: pair kerning based 
on kerning pairs found in the font itself (choose Metrics from the 
Kerning pop-up menu), and kerning based on the outlines of the 
characters (choose Optical). To see the difference between the two 
methods take a look at Figure 4-9.
▶Metrics. When you turn on the Metrics automatic kerning 
method, InDesign reads the kerning pairs built into the font by 
the font’s designer (or publisher). These kerning pairs cover—or 
attempt to cover—the most common letter combinations (in 
English, anyway), and there are usually about 128 pairs defined 
in a typical font.
You’d think that using the kerning pairs defined in the font 
would be the perfect way to apply automatic kerning to your text. 
Who, after all, knows the spacing peculiarities of a given font 
Automatic Kerning
Click the Type tool 
between the characters 
you want to kern.
InDesign adjusts the spacing 
between the characters.
Enter a value in the Kerning 
field, or choose a value from 
the associated pop-up menu, 
or click the arrows, or press a 
kerning keyboard shortcut.
Figure 4-8
Kerning Text

 4. y 259
better than its designer? Would that this were true! In reality, 
very few fonts contain well-thought-out kerning pairs (often, 
pair kerning tables are simply copied from one font to another), 
and the number of kerning pairs defined per font is inadequate 
(a really well-kerned font might contain several thousand pairs, 
tweaked specifically for the characters in that typeface).
We really need a better method—a method that can adjust 
the spacing between every character pair, while taking into 
account the peculiarities of the character shapes for a particular 
font. We also need a kerning method that can automatically 
adjust the spacing between characters of different fonts. With 
InDesign’s Optical kerning method, we get both.
▶Optical. The Optical kerning method considers the composed 
shapes of the characters and applies kerning to even out spacing 
differences between characters.
To change kerning by:
Press:
+20/1,000 em*
Option-Right arrow/ 
Alt-Right arrow
-20/1,000 em*
Option-Left arrow/Alt-Left arrow
+100/1,000 em**
Command-Option-Right arrow/ 
Ctrl-Alt-Right arrow
-100/1,000 em**
Command-Option-Left arrow/ 
Ctrl-Alt-Left arrow
Reset Kerning
Command-Option-Q/ 
Ctrl-Alt-Q
* This is the default value in the Kerning field of the Units &  
Increments Preferences dialog box.
** Or five times the default kerning amount.
Table 4-1
Kerning Keyboard  
Shortcuts
Figure 4-9
Automatic  
Kerning Methods
Automatic kerning using the Metric method.
000
Automatic kerning using the Optical method.
000
---222333
000
-15
21
6
12
Choose Optical or   
Metrics from the   
Kerning pop-up menu.

260     6
InDesign displays  
automatic kerning  
amounts in parentheses.
In general, the kerning applied by InDesign when you use 
the Optical kerning method looks looser than that applied by 
the Metrics kerning method. That’s okay—once you’ve accom-
plished even spacing, you can always track the text to tighten or 
loosen its overall appearance. Because tracking applies the same 
kerning value to all of the text in the selection, in addition to any 
pair kerning, the even spacing applied by the Optical kerning 
method is maintained.
Viewing Automatic Kerning Amounts. As you move your cursor 
through the text, you’ll be able to see the kerning values applied to 
the text in the Kerning field of the Character panel or Control panel. 
Kerning values specified by Optical kerning or Metrics kerning are 
displayed surrounded by parentheses; manual kerning values you’ve 
entered are not (see Figure 4-10).
Figure 4-10
How You Can Tell It’s 
Automatic Kerning
Changing Word Spacing. It’s not entirely true that you can’t apply 
kerning when more than one character is selected. You can select a 
range of text and select Metrics, Optical, or 0 (zero) from the pop-up 
menu attached to the Kerning field. 
If you want to increase the spacing between words but don’t 
want to change the letterspacing of a range of text, press Command-
Option-\ or Ctrl-Alt-\ (backslash) to add the base kerning incre-
ment (as defined by the value in the Kerning field in the Units & 
Increments Preferences dialog box) after each space character in 
the range. Hold down Shift as you press this shortcut, and InDesign 
adds kerning by five times the base kerning amount. To decrease 
word spacing, press Command-Option-Delete/Ctrl-Alt-Backspace 
(add the Shift key to the shortcuts to multiply the effect by five). 
This keystroke works simply by changing the kerning after each 
space character. You can always go back and change the kerning, or 
use Find/Change to remove it.
Tracking, in InDesign, applies the same kerning value to every char-
acter in a selected range of text (see Figure 4-11). When you change 
the tracking of some text, InDesign applies the tracking in addition 
Tracking

 4. y 261
to any kerning values applied to the text (regardless of the method—
manual or automatic—used to enter the pair kerning). Note that this 
is the same as the definition of tracking used by QuarkXPress, and 
is different from the definition used by PageMaker. In PageMaker, 
tracking also applies kerning, but the amount varies depending on 
the point size of the selected text and the tracking table in use. In 
PageMaker, InDesign’s tracking would be called “range kerning.”
Just as you cannot apply kerning using the Kerning field when 
you have multiple characters selected, you can’t change the Track-
ing field when the text insertion point is between two characters—
you have to have one or more characters selected. (Actually, you can
change it, but it doesn’t do anything.)
Note that the default keyboard shortcuts for tracking are exactly 
the same as those for kerning; which one you get depends on whether 
or not you have a range of text selected.
Tracking Tips. The following are a few of our favorite tracking tips.
▶If you’re setting text in all capitals or the small caps style, add 
20 or 50 units of tracking to the text. Do not add tracking to the 
last character of the last word in the text, as that will affect the 
amount of space after the word, too.
▶Printing white text on a black background often requires a little 
extra tracking, too. That’s because the negative (black) space 
makes the white characters seem closer together.
▶ Larger type needs to be tracked more tightly (with negative 
tracking values). Often, the larger the tighter, though there are 
aesthetic limits to this rule. Advertising headline copy will often 
be tracked until the characters just “kiss.”
Figure 4-11
Tracking
Select a range of 
text.
Enter a new value in 
the Tracking field.
InDesign changes the spacing of the selected text.

262     6
Select some text.
Enter a scaling value in the 
Horizontal Scaling field (and/or 
Vertical Scaling field).
InDesign squashes or stretches 
the characters of the selected text.
Figure 4-12
Squashing and  
Stretching Type
▶A condensed typeface (such as Futura Condensed) can usually 
do with a little tighter tracking. Sometimes we’ll apply a setting 
as small as -10 to a text block to make it hold together better.
▶When you’re setting justified text and you get bad line breaks, or 
if you have an extra word by itself at the end of a paragraph, you 
can track the whole paragraph plus or minus one or two units 
without it being too apparent. Sometimes that’s just enough to 
fix these problems.
Enter a value in the Horizontal Scaling field or the Vertical Scaling 
field (or both) to change the size of the selected text (see Figure 4-12). 
When the values you enter in these fields are not equal, you’re cre-
ating fake “expanded” or “condensed” type. We say “fake” because 
true expanded or condensed characters must be drawn by a type 
designer—when you simply scale the type, the thick and thin strokes 
of the characters become distorted. Entering values in these fields 
does not affect the point size of the type.
Horizontal and   
Vertical Scaling
Sometimes, you need to raise the baseline of a character or char-
acters above the baseline of the surrounding text (or lower it below 
the baseline). In pre-DTP typesetting, we would accomplish this by 
decreasing or increasing the leading applied to the character. How-
ever, that won’t work in modern programs—remember, in InDesign 
the largest leading in the line predominates. Instead, use the Baseline 
Shift field in the Character panel or Control panel (see Figure 4-13).
Enter an amount in the Baseline Shift field to shift the baseline 
of the selected text by that amount. As you’d expect, positive values 
move the selected text up from the baseline; negative values move the 
selected text down from the baseline.
Baseline Shift

 4. y 263
While it’s tempting to use Baseline Shift to adjust numbers in for-
mulae, registered trademark symbols, and so on, it’s better to use the 
Superscript or Subscript features.
Baseline Shift Keyboard Shortcuts. To apply baseline shift using 
your keyboard, select some text and press Option-Shift-Up arrow/
Alt-Shift-Up arrow to move the baseline of the text up two points—or 
whatever value you’ve entered in the Baseline Shift field of the Units 
& Increments Preferences dialog box, or Option-Shift-Down arrow/
Alt-Shift-Down arrow to shift it down by the same distance.
To shift the baseline of the selected text up by a distance equal to 
five times the value you entered in the Units & Increments Prefer-
ences dialog box, press Command-Option-Shift-Up arrow/Ctrl-Alt-
Shift-Up arrow. To shift the baseline down by the same amount, press 
Command-Option-Shift-Down arrow/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-Down arrow.
When you apply skewing to a range of characters, InDesign slants 
the vertical axis of the type by the angle you enter here (see Figure 
4-14). You can enter from –85 degrees to 85 degrees. Positive skew 
values slant the type to the right; negative values slant it to the left.
This might be useful as a special text effect, but you shouldn’t 
count on it to provide an “italic” version of a font family that lacks a 
true italic type style. Why? Because there’s more to an italic font than 
simple slanting of the characters (see Figure 4-15).
The language you choose for a range of text determines the dictio-
nary InDesign uses to hyphenate and check the spelling of the text 
(see Figure 4-16). Because language is a character-level attribute, you 
Skewing
Language
Select the character or   
characters you want to 
shift…
…then enter a baseline shift 
distance in the Baseline Shift 
field (positive values move 
the baseline up; negative 
values move it down).
InDesign shifts the baseline of the 
selected character or characters.
Figure 4-13
Baseline Shift

264     6
AaBbCcDdEeFf
AaBbCcDdEeFf
Real: Minion Pro Italic
Fake: Minion Pro 
Regular with 10 degree 
skewing.
Note the differences in   
character shapes.
InDesign skews the characters  
of the selected text.
Enter a value   
in the Skew field.
Select some text.
Figure 4-14
Skewing Text
Figure 4-15
Real and Fake 
Italic Characters
Select a word or phrase, then 
select a language from the 
Language pop-up menu.
InDesign will use the language 
you selected when composing text 
or checking spelling.
Figure 4-16
Assigning a Language 
can apply a specific language to individual words—which means you 
can tell InDesign to stop flagging “frisson” or “gemütlichkeit” as 
misspelled words, if you want. The only languages that show up in 
the Language pop-up menu in the Character panel or Control panel 
are those for which you have a dictionary installed. If the language 
you’re looking for isn’t in this list, then you can use the InDesign 
installer to install that dictionary for you.
You can change the case of selected characters to All Caps or Small 
Caps by choosing All Caps or Small Caps from the Character panel 
menu (see Figure 4-17). InDesign does not replace the characters 
Case Options

 4. y 265
Figure 4-17
All Caps and  
Small Caps
Adobe Garamond Pro (OpenType)
these are true small caps
Adobe Garamond (PostScript Type 1)
If you’re using a PostScript 
Type 1 font, don’t use the 
Small Caps character 
formatting option; instead, 
change the font of the text to 
an “expert set.”
…then choose Small Caps from the   
Character panel or Control panel menu
If you’re using an OpenType 
font (as in this example), 
InDesign displays the small 
caps version of the selected 
characters (if the OpenType 
font contains small caps 
alternate characters).
These two options work the 
same way; we’ll demonstrate 
small caps.
If you’re using a PostScript 
Type 1 or TrueType font, 
InDesign displays scaled, 
capitalized versions of the 
selected characters.
Select some text…
themselves; it simply changes they way they look and print. To 
InDesign’s spelling checker or Find and Change features, the text is 
exactly as it was entered—not the way it appears on your screen.
When you choose Small Caps from the Character panel menu (or 
press Command-Shift-H/Ctrl-Shift-H), InDesign examines the font 
used to format the selected text. If the font is an OpenType font, and 
if the font contains a set of true small caps characters, InDesign uses 
true small caps. InDesign is also smart enough to do this if you have 
a non-OpenType font that has an “Expert” version. If the font is not 
an OpenType font, doesn’t have an Expert font available, or doesn’t 
contain small caps characters, InDesign scales regular uppercase 
characters down to 70 percent (or whatever value you entered in the 
Small Cap field of the Type pane of the Preferences dialog box, as 
described in Chapter 1, “Workspace”). 
In addition to being able to temporarily change the case of characters 
using the case options, you can have InDesign change the case of the 
characters by typing new characters for you using the Change Case 
submenu (which you’ll find on the Type menu and on the context 
menu when text is selected).
Changing Case

266     6
To change the case of selected characters, choose an option: 
Uppercase, Lowercase, Title Case, or Sentence Case. Uppercase and 
Lowercase are self-explanatory. Sentence Case capitalizes the first 
letter of each sentence. Title Case is very simpleminded: it capitalizes 
the first character of each word in the selection, even if the word is 
“the,” “and,” or another preposition or article (see Figure 4-18).
Figure 4-18
Changing Case
InDesign’s Title Case command  
capitalizes the first character of each 
word (you’ll have to fix articles and 
prepositions yourself).
Select some text.
Choose a case conversion 
option from the Change Case 
submenu (on the Type menu 
or the context menu).
InDesign converts the case of 
the selected text. This conver-
sion, unlike the All Caps 
and Small Caps format ting 
options, actually replaces the  
characters in the text.
When you choose Underline from the Character panel menu, click 
the Underline button in the Control panel, or press Command-Shift-
U/Ctrl-Shift-U, InDesign applies an underline to the selected text 
(see Figure 4-19).
To customize the underline, select Underline Options from the 
Character panel menu or the Control panel menu to display the 
Underline Options dialog box, where you’ll find controls for setting 
the thickness, offset, color, and stroke style of the underscore. You 
can’t save these settings as a style or preset, but you can build them 
into the definition of a character style.
Breaking at Spaces. InDesign’s underline also includes any spaces in 
the selection. Some designs require that underlines break at spaces 
in the text. You could laboriously select each space and turn off the 
underline attribute, by why not use Find/Change to do the work for 
you? Find a space in the selection with the Underline attribute, then 
replace it with a space with Underline turned off.
Underline

 4. y 267
Breaking Underlines at Descenders. We said that there was no way 
to break underlines at descenders—but there is an inelegant work-
around: apply a white stroke to the characters. The stroke will over-
lap the underline. You can use Find/Change to search for characters 
with descenders (such as the “j” or the “y”) and use the Format 
button in the Change To area to give them a stroke.
Highlighting Text. Want to make some text look as if it’s been high-
lighted with a felt “highlight” marker? You can simulate the effect 
using a custom underline (see Figure 4-20). Make your underline 
larger than the text it’s supposed to cover and apply a negative offset 
so that it moves up to cover the text. Be sure to change the color of 
the underscore to yellow or pink or something that will contrast with 
the text its highlighting. Note that the color actually falls behind the 
text, but the effect will be as though the highlight was drawn over it.
You can also create interesting highlight effects by mixing a 
custom underline with a custom strikethrough. For instance, you 
could make a line appear above and below some text, sort of like put-
ting the text in a stripe. 
Figure 4-19
Underline
AA
By default, stroke weights are 
based on the size of the text.
Select the text you want 
to underline.
Choose Underline from 
the Character panel 
menu.
InDesign applies an 
underline.
Use the Underline 
Options dialog box to 
specify the appearance 
of the underline.
Here’s a quick way to   
display the Underline 
Options dialog box: hold 
down Option/Alt as you 
click the Underline button 
on the Control panel.

268     6
When you choose Strikethrough from the Character panel menu 
(or click the Strikethrough button in the Control panel or press 
Command-Shift-?/Ctrl-Shift-?), InDesign applies the strikethrough 
text effect to the selected text (see Figure 4-21). To remove the Strike-
through text effect, select the feature or press the keystroke again.
The strikethrough style isn’t particularly consistent; it changes 
its thickness and distance from the baseline depending on the font. 
However, you can control the strikethrough style by selecting Strike-
through Options from the Character or Control panel menu. The 
options here are very similar to those in the Underline Options 
dialog box: You can adjust the thickness, color, offset (from the base-
line), and style of the line. If you’re applying a colored strikethrough 
Strikethrough
Figure 4-20
Creating a  
“Highlight” Effect
Positive offset values move the 
underscore rule down from the 
text baseline; negative offset 
values move it up.
Highlight effect (imagine 
that it’s bright yellow).
AA
By default, the stroke weight 
of the Strikethrough effect 
varies based on the size of 
the text.
…then choose Strikethrough from the   
Character panel menu or Option/Alt-click the   
Strikethrough button on the Control panel.
Figure 4-21
Strikethrough
You can use the Strikethrough Options 
dialog box to specify the appearance and 
position of the strikethrough rule.
Select some text…
To display the Strikethrough Options 
dialog box, hold down Option/Alt as 
you click the Strikethrough button in the 
Control panel, or choose Strikethrough 
Options from the Control panel menu.

 4. y 269
on top of black text, you may want to set it to overprint so that it 
won’t knock out a fine white line—which would be difficult to regis-
ter on press. If so, make sure you like the result by turning on Over-
print Preview (from the View menu).
Some character combinations are just trouble—from a typesetting 
standpoint, at least. In particular, when you combine the lowercase 
“f” character with “f,” “i,” or “l,” the tops of the characters run into 
each other. To compensate for this, type designers usually provide 
ligatures—special characters in the font that are “tied” (“ligature” 
means “tie”) together.
When you choose Ligatures from the Character panel’s menu, 
InDesign replaces some of the character combinations in the selected 
range of text with the corresponding ligatures (see Figure 4-22).
If the font you’ve selected is not an OpenType font, InDesign 
replaces only the “fl” and “fi” character combinations. In Windows, 
InDesign uses these ligature characters if they’re available in the font 
(and they are, for most PostScript Type 1 fonts), even though they 
are not part of the Windows character set—that is, there is usually 
no way to type them. If the font you’ve selected is an OpenType font, 
InDesign makes the ligature substitutions are suggested by the font.
OpenType fonts can also feature other sorts of ligatures—for 
more on this topic, see “OpenType Fonts,” later in this chapter.
While you can always create superscript or subscript characters (for 
use in fractions or exponential notation) by changing the point size 
and baseline shift of selected characters, InDesign provides a short-
cut: the Superscript and Subscript text effects (see Figure 4-23).
When you select Superscript or Subscript from the Character 
panel menu, InDesign scales the selected text and shifts its baseline. 
(You can also press Command-Shift-=/Ctrl-Shift-= for superscript or 
Ligatures
Superscript   
and Subscript
Figure 4-22
Ligatures
Ligatures off
Adobe Garamond Pro (OpenType)
Adobe Garamond (PostScript Type 1)
Ligatures on
Adobe Garamond Pro (OpenType)
Adobe Garamond (PostScript Type 1)
Select some text and then 
choose Ligatures from the 
Character panel menu.
If you’re using an OpenType 
font, InDesign uses additional 
ligatures defined in the font. In 
this example, InDesign applies 
the “ ffi” and “ ffl” ligatures.

270     6
Command-Option-Shift-=/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-= for subscript.) InDesign 
calculates the scaling and baseline shift by multiplying the current 
text size and leading by the values you’ve set in the Size fields in the 
Advanced Type pane of the Preferences dialog box (see “Text Prefer-
ences” in Chapter 1, “Workspace”).
If you are using an OpenType font that has true Superscript and 
Subscript characters, use Superscript/Superior and Subscript/Infe-
rior options in the OpenType submenu (see below).
This one is really easy to explain: To prevent a range of text from 
breaking across lines, select the text and turn on the No Break option 
in the Character or Control panel menu.
OpenType Fonts
We’ve mentioned OpenType fonts a few times in the chapter so far; 
however, we should probably take a moment to discuss them. The 
OpenType font specification was created jointly by Microsoft and 
Adobe as a way to represent a font with only a single file on both 
Macintosh and Windows (so you can move the font cross-platform). 
The characters are encoded using the international standard Uni-
code, so each font can have hundreds, or even thousands of different 
characters—even the very large character sets in non-Roman lan-
guages such as Japanese.
No Break
Select a character or series of 
characters…
…choose Superscript from the   
Character panel menu or click the 
Superscript button in the Control panel.
InDesign scales the 
text and shifts its 
baseline…
…according to the 
values you entered in 
the Advanced Type 
pane of the dialog box.
Figure 4-23
Superscript and  
Subscript
Tip: To display the Advanced 
Type pane of the Preferences 
dialog box, hold down 
Option/Alt and click the 
Superscript or Subscript 
button in the Control panel.

 4. y 271
InDesign can perform special tricks with OpenType fonts, such 
as replacing characters with swashes, or adding ligatures for charac-
ter pairs such as ct and ffi.
Most of the special OpenType typesetting features in InDesign 
are hidden in the OpenType submenu in the Character or Control 
panel’s menu (see Figure 4-24). If a font doesn’t support one of these 
features, it appears in the menu within square brackets (“[Swash]”).
Figure 4-24
OpenType Features
Arcana Manuscript is an 
interesting, if somewhat 
overwrought, OpenType font.
Features not available in the font 
are surrounded by square brackets.
The OpenType 
submenu lists 
the features 
available in the 
selected font.
In this example, we've 
applied Swash alternates 
to the selected text (look 
at the “d”).
Select some text…
…and apply 
an OpenType 
feature.
The OpenType features work by replacing one or more glyphs with 
another single glyph. “fi” and “fl” ligatures that we discussed earlier 
are a great example of this, but they’re only the beginning.
Discretionary Ligatures. Font designers love making ligatures, but 
they recognize that users won’t want to use more esoteric ligatures 
(such as “ct” or “st”) in everyday text. If you select some text and turn 
on the Discretionary Ligatures feature, InDesign uses these lesser-
known ligatures (if they’re available in the font). We usually turn this 
off except when we’re trying to make something look “old fashioned,” 
or when using a script typeface (such as Bickham Script Pro).
Fractions. Changing fake fractions (such as 1/2) to real fractions (1/2) 
has long been a thorn in the side of anyone laying out cookbooks 
Alternate Characters

272     6
or construction manuals. Fortunately, you can now just turn on the 
Fractions feature and anything that looks like a fraction will convert 
to the proper character automatically.
In some OpenType typefaces, only very basic fractions such as 
1/2 and 1/4 are converted. Other typefaces support those plus some 
extended fractions, such as 2/3 and 5/8. Some fonts support arbitrary 
fractions such as 355/113. It depends on the design of the font.
Don’t turn on the Fractions feature for all your text because 
InDesign often assumes that all your numbers and much of your 
punctuation are part of fractions and turns them into numerators.
Ordinal. “First,” “second,” and “third” are all examples of ordinal 
numbers. InDesign can automatically set the “st”, “nd”, and “rd” (or 
the “o” and “a” in Spanish) to superscript when you turn Ordinal on 
in the OpenType submenu. “3rd,” for example, becomes “3rd”.
Swash. When you need to give a character a little more flair, select 
it and turn on the Swash feature. Swashes are typically used at the 
beginning or ending of words or sentences. You can see if a particu-
lar OpenType font has any swash characters by opening the Glyph 
panel and looking for Swash in the Show pop-up menu; some fonts 
(such as Adobe Caslon Pro) have swashes in their italic styles only. 
Titling Alternates. Some OpenType fonts have special “titling” char-
acters that are designed for all-uppercase type set at large sizes.
Contextual Alternates. Some OpenType fonts—mostly the script 
faces—have contextual ligatures and connecting alternates, which 
are very similar to ligatures. When you turn on Contextual Alter-
nates, the result looks more like handwriting because the alternate 
characters connect to each other.
All Small Caps. When you turn on the Small Caps feature (which 
we described in “Case Options,” earlier), InDesign leaves uppercase 
characters alone. All Small Caps, however, forces uppercase charac-
ters to appear as lowercase small caps. This is useful when formatting 
acronyms such as DOS, NASA, or IBM. 
Slashed Zero. The problem with the number 0 is that it looks far too 
much like the letter O in some fonts. Some folks like to differentiate 
the two by using a slashed zero (0) in place of a zero. When you apply 
the Slashed Zero OpenType style, every zero appears with a slash 
automatically.

 4. y 273
Stylistic Sets. A few fonts go beyond offering a swash or contextual 
alternate here and there, and provide whole sets of alternates that 
each give a slightly different feel to the face as a whole. For example, 
you might like Thomas Phinney’s Hypatia Sans Pro, but realize that 
you don’t like the font’s double-loop “g”. No problem: Turn on stylis-
tic set number four and the character changes throughout the selec-
tion (see Figure 4-25). You can enable more than one stylistic set at a 
time; select it once to turn it on, select it again to turn it off.
Figure 4-25
Stylistic Sets
The characters change to 
the new stylistic set.
Select a stylistic set
Select some text.
Positional Forms. In some languages, characters change depend-
ing on their position in a word—for example, in Hebrew, the “mem” 
character changes from  to  when its at the end of a word.
InDesign uses the General positional form—which uses the 
normal glyph. If you choose Automatic Form, InDesign changes the 
character depending on its position in the word. You can override 
the form by choosing Initial, Medial, Final, or Isolated Form. It’s 
hard to find a font in which this feature does much of anything.
Typesetting a treatise on Einstein’s theory of relativity? If so, you’ll 
be mighty happy about InDesign’s ability to use true superscripts 
and subscripts instead of the faked scaled versions that you get with 
the Superscript and Subscript features in the Character panel’s menu. 
You have four choices in the OpenType submenu (each one is mutu-
ally exclusive of the others):
▶Superscript/Superior
▶Subscript/Inferior
Raised and Lowered 
Characters

274     6
▶Numerator
▶Denominator
However, note that most OpenType fonts only have a small set of 
characters designed to be superscript or subscript, so you can’t set 
any and all characters you want in these styles. For example, if you 
set the word “turkey” to Superscript/Superior style, only every other 
character changes. In some cases you’ll get the same result when you 
choose Denominator or Subscript/Inferior.
We like “old style” numerals (you know, the kind with descenders: 
1234567890) better than full-height “lining figures” (1234567890), 
and we’ve always gotten them by changing the font of the characters 
to an “expert” version of whatever font we were using (if one was 
available). So we were very happy to see that there are four different 
ways InDesign can format numerals: Proportional Oldstyle, Tabular 
Oldstyle, Proportional Lining, Tabular Lining (see Figure 4-26). 
Tabular Lining works well for financial tables (such as those 
found in an annual report), because numbers have equal widths and 
align from one line to the next. If you choose Tabular Oldstyle from 
the OpenType submenu, the numerals line up, but InDesign uses 
old style characters. Proportional Lining numerals are all the same 
height, but vary in width. David prefers this style for everything 
other than tables, especially when interspersing numbers and upper-
case characters. Ole would rather use Proportional Oldstyle, which 
uses old style figures of varying widths.
Formatting Numerals
InDesign formats any 
numerals in the selection.
Select a range  
of text.
Choose a number 
formatting style 
from the OpenType 
submenu.
Figure 4-26
Old Style
12345
67890
Tabular  
Lining
12345
67890
Proportional 
Oldstyle
12345
67890
Proportional 
Lining
12345
67890
Tabular  
Oldstyle

 4. y 275
The last OpenType numeral formatting option is Default Figure 
Style, which applies the figure style defined as the default by the type 
designer (so the effect varies from font to font).
Find Font
The Find Font dialog box (choose Find Font from the Type menu) 
displays a list of every font that appears somewhere on a document 
page—including on master pages and in linked PDF or EPS graph-
ics (see Figure 4-27). It does not list fonts that are defined in para-
graph or character styles that aren’t actually applied to text. If you 
click the More Info button, the dialog box displays more information 
about each font you select, including the pages where the font is used, 
which styles include this font, how many text characters appear in 
this font, and the version of the font. (There is often more than one 
version of the same font, each with its own number, just like other 
software.) Note that showing More Info can slow down the Find Font 
dialog box significantly, so we often leave this closed.
If you’re not sure where a font is living on your hard drive, the 
Find Font dialog comes to the rescue: Not only is the path to the font 
listed in More Info, but you can click Reveal in Finder (or Reveal in 
Explorer in Windows) to open the folder that contains the font.
Replacing Fonts. It’s a good idea to visit Find Font every now and 
again, and especially before finishing your job. We often find rogue 
fonts sneaking in to documents when we import or copy and paste 
text from Word or some other document. For example, as we type this, 
we checked and found that Times New Roman is in this document 
Missing font
OpenType font
TrueType font
PostScript font
You’ll see additional data 
when you click More Info. 
Click Less Info to hide this.
Font embedded 
in graphic
Figure 4-27
Find Font

276     6
for some reason. More Info tells us that it’s applied to 36 characters 
on two different pages. Fortunately, the rest of the Find Font dialog 
box acts like the Find/Change dialog box, so we can quickly rid our-
selves of this aberration.
To replace that incorrectly-styled text, select the font from the list 
and click Change, Change All, or Change/Find.
If you believe the errant font is actually inside a character or para-
graph style definition, then turn on the Redefine Style When Chang-
ing All option before you click Change All. Otherwise, you’ll change 
the font on your pages, but the font will still be lurking inside the 
style, just waiting to surprise you again when you least expect it.
By the way, sometimes you’ll find that Find Font lists a font as 
being used in your document but Find Next won’t find it, and More 
Info tells you that there are zero characters that have this font applied 
to it. This happens when the font is applied only to automatic bul-
lets or numbering (see “Bullets and Numbering,” later in this chap-
ter). Find Font will also tell you a font exists when it really doesn’t if 
you have an empty frame that used to contain text in that font—just 
another good reason not to leave empty frames lying around.
Filling and Stroking Characters
InDesign can fill or stroke text as it can any other path. Once you’ve 
selected text, you can set the fill color, stroke color, stroke weight, 
stroke type, and stroke alignment (see Figure 4-28). The Control 
panel includes Fill and Stroke boxes for easy color swatch selection.
You can apply gradients to the fill and stroke of the type without 
converting the type to outlines. However, while gradients are easy to 
apply, it’s not always easy to get the effect you’re looking for, because 
gradients are based on the bounds of the text frame. If you want to 
change the gradient, select the text and drag the Gradient Swatch 
tool over it. (See Chapter 5, “Drawing,” for more on gradients.)
Paragraph Formatting
What makes a paragraph a paragraph? InDesign’s definition is sim-
ple—a paragraph is any string of characters that ends with a car-
riage return. When you apply paragraph formatting, the formatting 
applies to all of the characters in the paragraph. Paragraph align-
ment, indents, tabs, spacing, and hyphenation settings are all exam-
ples of paragraph formatting.

 4. y 277
Figure 4-28
Character Fill  
and Stroke
You can also select 
characters using the 
Type tool, then apply 
a fill and/or stroke to 
the text using the same 
controls you use to  
apply a fill or stroke  
to any path.
R
Note that the fill retains the shape 
of the character as you increase 
stroke weight. This works because 
InDesign strokes the characters 
and then fills them.
You can control the stroke 
alignment of the stroke. This 
stroke is center aligned; the 
one to the right is aligned to 
the outside of the stroke.
Select an unlinked text frame 
using the Selection tool, then 
click the Formatting Affects 
Text button.
You can also click the   
Formatting Affects Text button   
in the Swatches panel.
Format the text using any of the fill and stroke 
formatting tools. In this example, we used the 
Swatches panel to apply a tint to the fill and 
stroke of the text, and then used the Stroke 
panel to set the stroke weight.
You don’t have to select all of the text in a paragraph to apply 
paragraph formatting—all you need to do is click the Type tool in 
the paragraph. To select more than one paragraph, drag the cursor 
through the paragraphs you want to format. The selection doesn’t 
have to include all of the text, it only has to touch each paragraph.
If what you’re trying to do, however, is apply character formatting 
(such as font or point size) to all of the characters in the paragraph, 
you should quadruple-click (or triple-click, if you’ve turned off the 
Triple Click to Select a Line option in the Type panel of the Prefer-
ences dialog box) the paragraph with the Type tool—that way, you’ll 
select all of the characters, including the carriage return character. 
(Note that you can force a line break without creating a new para-
graph—called a “soft return”—by typing Shift-Return/Shift-Enter.)
You can find all of InDesign’s paragraph formatting features in 
the Paragraph panel. To display the Paragraph panel, press Com-
mand-Option-T/Ctrl-Alt-T. These features are duplicated in the Con-
trol panel—if the Control panel is displaying character formatting, 
then click the panel’s Paragraph Formatting Controls button or press 
Command-Option-7/Ctrl-Alt-7 to switch to paragraph formatting.

278     6
Left
Right
Centered
Justified (quad left)
Center Justified 
(quad center)
Right Justified 
(quad right)
Force Justified
Figure 4-29
Paragraph Alignment
Align Away from Spine
Align Towards Spine
Click the alignment buttons at the top of the Paragraph panel or in 
the Control panel to set the alignment of the selected paragraphs (see 
Figure 4-29).
InDesign supports the usual set of paragraph alignments—left 
aligned (also known as “rag right”), right aligned (also known as “rag 
left”), centered, and justified, but also adds a couple of variations on 
the justified alignment you might not be familiar with.
In addition to the standard “justified” alignment, which treats 
the last line of the paragraph as if it were left aligned, InDesign offers 
the force justified, right justified, and center justified alignments. 
These each tell InDesign to treat the last line of the paragraph differ-
ently. When you force justify the text, the last line is spread out all 
the way to the right margin, even if it’s only a single word. In some 
cases, when the Paragraph Composer is turned on (see “Multi-line 
Composition,” later in this chapter), turning on force justify actually 
reflows the paragraph significantly.
Right justified and center justified treat the last line as right 
aligned and center aligned, respectively. In the old days of typeset-
ting, these alignments were known as “quad right” and “quad center.”
Finally, the Align Towards Spine and Align Away from Spine 
options. The former aligns the text to the spine and leaves the outside 
of the text ragged; the latter does the opposite.
Alignment

 4. y 279
Paragraphs can be indented using the Left Indent and Right Indent 
fields in the Paragraph or Control panel (see Figure 4-30). You can 
enter values from zero (0) to 720 picas in these fields, but you can’t 
enter negative numbers to make the edges of the paragraph “hang” 
outside the edges of the column or text frame.
Note that the left and right indents are always added to the text 
inset, as specified in the Text Frame Options dialog box. If you have 
a left inset of 6 points and a left indent of 12 points, then the left edge 
of the paragraph will sit 18 points from the edge of the frame.
There are also two special indents, called First Line Left Indent 
and Last Line Right Indent. The first applies to the first line of the 
paragraph alone—the value you enter in the First Line Left Indent 
field sets the distance between the first line indent and the left indent. 
The First Line indent may be positive or negative, but cannot be a 
negative number greater than the left indent (see Figure 4-31). You 
should never create an indent by typing five spaces at the beginning 
of a paragraph to indent; instead, use First Line indent.
How large your First Line indent should be depends on your 
design and on the typeface you’re working with. Typically, the larger 
the x-height of the font, the larger first-line indent you should use. 
Book designers often use a one- or two-em indent, so in an 11-point 
type, the indent might be 11 or 22 points.
The Last Line Right Indent lets you set the position for the last 
line of text in a paragraph. The most common use for this is to apply 
a large Right Indent and then a negative Last Line Right Indent (so 
that the last line sticks out past the rest of the paragraph, as in many 
Indents
Left indent
Right indent
Figure 4-30
Paragraph Indents
Figure 4-31
First Line Indent
Don’t use tab characters to 
apply a first line indent…
…use the First Line Indent field.

280     6
First Line indent
Right indent
Left indent
Figure 4-33
Indents on the  
Tabs Panel
Figure 4-32
Setting an Indent
menu designs). Another use might be to set the position of the final 
line when using Justify All Lines (forced justification).
To change an indent value, select a paragraph and then do one of 
the following things:
▶Display the Paragraph or Control panel, then enter a value in the 
First Line Left Indent, Left Indent, Right Indent, and/or the Last 
Line Right Indent fields (see Figure 4-32).
▶Display the Tabs panel (press Command-Shift-T/Ctrl-Shift-T), 
and drag one of the indent icons (see Figure 4-33).
A hanging indent is one in which the first line of a paragraph “sticks 
out” to the left of the rest of the paragraph—often used in numbered 
or bulleted lists. Use hanging indents, rather than breaking and 
indenting each line using carriage returns and tabs—you’ll thank 
yourself for it later, when you need to edit the text or change the 
width of the text block.
There are two basic methods for creating a hanging indent. First, 
you can apply a positive Left Indent and a negative First Line Left 
Indent with either the Tabs panel (see Figure 4-34) or the Paragraph 
or Control panel. Either way, there’s no need to set a tab stop because 
InDesign assumes the left indent is the first tab stop.
Here’s another way to create a hanging indent: Type the text you 
want to “hang,” followed by a tab character. With the text cursor 
immediately after the tab character, press Command-\ or Ctrl-\ 
(backslash). This is the keyboard shortcut for the Indent to Here 
Creating a   
Hanging Indent
Click the Type tool in the 
paragraph you want to 
format.
Enter values in the Left,   
Right, First, or Last fields.
InDesign applies the 
indents you’ve specified.

 4. y 281
character (you can also get this character from the Other submenu 
in the Insert Special Character submenu, in either the Type menu or 
the context menu). This invisible character causes the rest of the lines 
in a paragraph to indent to this place. If you want to delete it, you 
can place the cursor after it (since it’s invisible and has no width, you 
might have to use the arrow keys to position it) and then press Delete.
While the Indent to Here character is easy to type, we like using 
the negative First Line indent trick more because we can use it in a 
paragraph style.
Tabs come to desktop typesetting from typewriters, by way of word 
processing (with a stopover along the way at the Linotype machine). 
They solve a problem that didn’t exist in hand-set metal type—
namely, how do you position characters at precise locations in a line 
of type when you can’t simply slide them into place with your finger?
There are two methods of controlling the horizontal position of 
text in a line. First, you can use space characters—word spaces, thin 
spaces, en spaces, and em spaces. This method places characters at 
relative positions in the line—where they appear depends on the 
width of the spaces and of the other characters in the line. Tabs, by 
contrast, provide absolute position on the line—a tab stop set at 6 
picas will remain at that position, regardless of the content of the line.
Before we go any further, we’d better make sure we’re using the 
same terminology. Tab stops are formatting attributes of paragraphs. 
Tab characters are what InDesign enters in a line of text when you 
press the Tab key. Tab characters push text around in a line; tab 
stops determine the effect of the tab characters. Each tab stop has 
Tabs
Figure 4-34
Setting a  
Hanging Indent
As you drag, InDesign displays a vertical guide that  
follows the location of the Left indent icon.
Click the Type tool in a   
paragraph, then press   
Command-Shift-T/ 
Ctrl-Shift-T to display   
the Tabs panel.
Stop dragging, and InDesign 
applies a hanging indent to 
the selected paragraph.
Hold down Shift and drag the Left indent icon to the 
right of the First Line indent marker.

282     6
a position (relative to the left edge of the text frame), an alignment 
(which specifies the composition of the text following a tab charac-
ter), and, potentially, a leader (a tab leader is a series of repeated char-
acters spanning the distance from beginning of the tab character to 
the beginning of the following text). Put tab stops and tab characters 
together, and you get tabs, the feature.
A Little Tab Dogma. Look. We try to be reasonable. We try not to 
insist that everyone work the way that we do, or that our way of doing 
things is necessarily the best way (in fact, we sometimes know it’s 
not). But tabs are different—if you don’t do it our way, you’ll be caus-
ing yourself needless pain. Let’s review the rules:
▶Use tabs, not spaces, to move text to a specific position in a line.
▶Use a First Line indent, not a tab, when you want to indent the 
first line of a paragraph.
▶Do not force lines to break by entering tab characters (or mul-
tiple tab characters) at the end of a line! If you do, you’ll find tab 
characters creeping back into the text as editing changes force 
text recomposition. To break a line without entering a carriage 
return, use the “soft return” (press Shift-Return/Shift-Enter).
▶Don’t use multiple tab characters when you can use a single tab 
character and an appropriately positioned tab stop. While there 
are some cases where you’ll have to break this rule, putting two 
or more tab characters in a row should be the exception.
InDesign features four types of tab stops (see Figure 4-35).
Left, Right, and Centered Tab Stops. InDesign’s left, right, and cen-
tered tab stops are the same as the basic tab stops you’ll find in any 
word processor.
▶Left tab stops push text following a tab character to a specific 
horizontal location in a column, and then align the text to the 
left of the tab stop position.
▶Right tab stops push text to a location and then align the text to 
the right of the tab stop position.
▶Centered tab stops center a line of text at the point at which 
you’ve set the tab stop.
Types of Tab Stops

 4. y 283
Left tab stop
Centered tab stop
Right tab stop
Decimal tab stop
Align to character  
tab stop
Figure 4-35
Tab Stop Alignment
Decimal Tab Stops. Decimal tab stops push text following a tab 
character so that any decimal point you’ve entered in the text aligns 
with the point at which you set the tab stop. 
Actually, the Decimal tab stop is an “align to any character you 
want” tab stop. Type the character you’re trying to align in the Align 
On field of the Tabs panel. For example, lets say you have a column of 
item numbers, some with asterisks. You can make the asterisks hang 
out to the right by typing an asterisk character in the Align On field. 
If the Align On character doesn’t appear in the paragraph, InDesign 
treats the decimal tab stop as a right tab stop.
To set a tab stop, follow these steps (see Figure 4-36).
1. If you haven’t already entered tab characters in the text,  
enter them.
2. Select the paragraph(s) you want to format.
3. Display the Tabs panel (press Command-Shift-T/Ctrl-Shift-T), 
then click the Magnet button to snap the Tabs panel into posi-
tion at the top of the text frame (if possible). 
Setting Tab Stops

284     6
4. Click in the tab ruler and drag. As you drag, the X field shows 
you the position of the tab icon (relative to the left edge of the 
text frame). Then click one of the tab stop alignment buttons to 
determine the type of the tab stop.
You can also add a tab stop at a specific location on the tab ruler. 
To do this, enter the position you want in the X field in the Tabs panel 
and then press Enter. InDesign adds the tab stop.
Removing Tab Stops. To remove a tab stop, drag the tab stop icon 
off the tab ruler. Note that this doesn’t remove any tab characters 
you’ve typed in your text, though it does make them behave differ-
ently (because you’ve taken away their tab stop).
Editing Tab Stops. To change a tab stop’s position, drag the tab stop 
on the tab ruler. Alternatively, you can select the tab stop (click on it), 
then enter a new value in the X field or give it a leader. Don’t forget 
that if you want to move the tab stop by a specific amount, you can 
add a + or – character after the value that appears in the X field and 
then type the amount you want to move it (“+14mm”).
To change a tab stop’s alignment (from left to decimal, for instance), 
select the tab stop on the tab ruler and then click the tab stop button 
corresponding to the alignment you want. Or you can Option/Alt-
click on the tab stop to cycle through the alignment types.
Repeating Tab Stops. To create a series of tab stops spaced an equal   
distance apart, select a tab stop on the tab ruler and choose Repeat 
Tab from the Tabs panel menu (see Figure 4-37). InDesign repeats 
the tab across the width of the current column. The distance between 
Figure 4-36
Setting a Tab Stop
Click a tab stop button.
Drag the tab stop into position on the tab ruler.
When the tab stop icon is in 
position, stop dragging.
As you drag, InDesign displays a vertical 
guide that follows the location of the tab 
stop icon.

 4. y 285
the new tab stops is equal to the distance between the tab stop you 
selected and the previous tab stop (or indent) in the column. InDesign 
also deletes all the tab stops that were already to the right of the tab 
stop you clicked (which can be frustrating if you’ve placed tab stops 
there and weren’t expecting them to disappear). 
Working with Tab Leaders. A tab leader is a series of repeated char-
acters that fill the area taken up by the tab character (see Figure 4-38). 
The most common tab leader character is a period—think of all of 
the “dot” leaders you’ve seen in tables of contents.
Characters in a tab leader are not spaced in the same fashion as 
other characters—if they were, the characters in tab leaders on suc-
cessive lines would not align with each other. That would be ugly. 
Instead, characters in a tab leader are monospaced—positioned as if 
on an invisible grid. This means you’ll see different amounts of space 
between the last character of text preceding a tab leader and the first 
tab leader. It’s a small price to pay.
Select the tab stop icon you 
want to repeat…
…and choose 
Repeat Tab from 
the Tabs panel 
menu.
InDesign repeats 
the tab stop 
across the width 
of the tab ruler.
Figure 4-37
Repeating a Tab Stop
Figure 4-38
Applying a Tab Leader
Select some text.
Select a tab stop and enter the character or characters 
you want to use for the tab leader in the Leader field. 
Press Return/Enter…
…and InDesign applies   
a tab leader to the   
selected tab stop.

286     6
In InDesign, you can format the characters in a tab leader by 
selecting the tab character and applying formatting, just as you 
would any other character. For instance, dotted tab leaders typically 
look like a bunch of periods. To make them look more like tradi-
tional dot leaders, add a space after the period (in the Leader field), 
then select the tab character and reduce its size slightly.
Right-aligned Tabs. Setting a tab stop precisely at the right margin 
can be a bother; it’s an even bigger bother when your art director says, 
“make that column narrower.” Instead of using tab stops, try using a 
right-aligned tab character, which you can enter by pressing Shift-
Tab (or add with the Insert Special Character submenu in the Type 
menu). The text that follows the right-aligned tab character always 
aligns with the right margin, even when you change the right indent 
or the width of the text frame.
The right aligned tab picks up the tab leader settings from the last 
tab stop in the line.
When you want to add extra space between paragraphs, don’t use 
carriage returns (not even one). If you do, you’re certain to end up 
with unwanted carriage returns at the tops of text frames when text 
recomposes due to editing or formatting changes. Instead of typing 
carriage returns, use the Space Before and Space After fields in the 
Paragraph or Control panel. When you add space using these con-
trols, InDesign removes the space when the paragraph falls at the 
top of a text frame (see Figure 4-39). If you need to add space before 
a paragraph at the top of a text frame, use First Baseline offset (see 
Chapter 3, “Text”).
In addition, adding an exact amount of space is easier when you 
use the Paragraph or Control panel. Want to add four picas of ver-
tical space above the paragraph? Enter it in the Space Before field. 
There’s no need to guess how many carriage returns it would take to 
make up that vertical distance.
When you have more than one column of text on a page, it’s impor-
tant that the baselines of the text line up across the columns. The 
leading should be consistent with an underlying “leading grid”—an 
invisible set of rules for where the baselines of text should lay. Many 
designers even work with leading grids on pages with a single column. 
Unfortunately, in most page designs, you’ll find elements that 
have to have leading values that differ from the leading applied to 
the body text. Inline graphics, paragraph rules, and headings are all 
examples of the sort of elements we’re talking about. When one of 
Adding Space Before 
and After Paragraphs
Align to Grid

 4. y 287
these elements appears in a column of text, the leading of the lines in 
that column gets thrown off. 
You need to compensate for leading variations inside a column of 
text. “Leading creep,” the misalignment of baselines in adjacent text 
columns, is one of the hallmarks of amateur typesetting.
While you could adjust the space above and below such intru-
sions, there’s an easier way: use InDesign’s Align to Baseline Grid. 
Select a paragraph and click the Align to Baseline Grid button in the 
Paragraph panel, and InDesign forces the baselines of the lines in the 
paragraph onto the baseline grid (see Figure 4-40). You can change 
the leading and position of the document baseline grid in the Grids 
pane of the Preferences dialog box. To see this grid, select Show Base-
line Grid from the Grids & Guides submenu, under the View menu. 
Frame-based Baseline Grids. The baseline grid can also be calcu-
lated for individual text frames. To activate a custom baseline grid, 
select the text frame and press Command-B/Ctrl-B to display the 
Text Frame Options dialog box. Click the Baseline Options tab, and 
then turn on the Use Custom Baseline Grid option. Use the controls 
to set up your custom baseline grid (see Figure 4-41). When you 
specify a custom grid, the Align to Grid option aligns the text base-
lines with the baseline grid applied to the text frame, rather than to 
the document baseline grid.
Figure 4-39
Space Before  
and Space After
If you try to use   
carriage returns to   
add vertical space…
…you’ll often 
end up with 
carriage 
returns at the 
top of a text 
column.
To avoid this problem,  
use paragraph space  
before (or after).
Select some paragraphs, then 
enter a value in the Space 
Above (or Space Below) field.
If a paragraph 
falls at the top 
of a text frame, 
InDesign does 
not apply the 
paragraph 
space above.

288     6
Figure 4-40
Align to Grid
Figure 4-41
Custom Baseline Grid
Why We Rarely Use Align to Baseline. While there’s no doubt that 
a careful study and practice of baseline grids can make your docu-
ments better looking, we rarely use the Align to Baseline Grid feature. 
The reason: you can get the same result by making sure your leading, 
Space Before, and Space After always add up to an even multiple of 
the leading value.
This is all very pretty…
…but it throws the leading of 
the following paragraph off 
of the leading grid.
To fix this problem, select the 
paragraph and click the Align 
Baseline to Grid button.
InDesign snaps the baselines 
of the text in the paragraph 
to the baseline grid.
To set up a custom baseline 
grid for a text frame, select 
the frame, then open the 
Text Frame Options dialog 
box . Click the Baseline 
Options tab, then turn on 
the Use Custom Baseline 
Grid option.
Custom baseline grid.
Set up your custom grid 
using these controls.
Document baseline grid.
Align to Baseline Grid aligns 
text baselines with the text 
frame’s custom grid.

 4. y 289
For example, if your body text has 15-point leading, then make 
sure your headings also have 15- or 30-point leading. If you use 
Space Before or Space After, make sure those values are set to a mul-
tiple of 15, such as: 15, 30, or 45 points. Finally, snap the tops of your 
frame to the baseline grid and set the First Baseline setting to Lead-
ing, and you can’t go wrong.
Only Align First Line to Grid. Often, sidebars in magazines or news-
letters are set in a different font and leading than the main body text, 
and they’re placed in their own text frame. You can make the first 
baseline of that sidebar align with the leading grid by using the Only 
Align First Line to Grid feature. This forces the first line of a selected 
paragraph to snap to the baseline grid, but then leaves the rest of 
the paragraph alone. To align the first baseline of a paragraph to the 
baseline grid, first align the whole paragraph to the baseline grid and 
then choose Only Align First Line to Grid from the Paragraph or 
Control panel menu.
Drop caps are a paragraph-level attribute in InDesign (as they are 
in QuarkXPress). To apply a drop cap to a paragraph, enter a value 
in the Number of Lines field of the Paragraph or Control panel (this 
sets both the baseline shift and the point size of the drop cap). To 
apply the drop cap formatting to more than one character, enter a 
number in the Number of Characters field. InDesign enlarges the 
characters you specified and shifts their baseline down according to 
the value you entered in the Number of Lines field (see Figure 4-42).
Drop Caps
Select a paragraph.
Figure 4-42
Drop Caps
Enter the number of lines you want to 
“drop” the initial character(s).
Enter the number of characters you want to 
apply the drop cap format to, if necessary.

290     6
You can also make an initial cap that drops down and raises up 
by selecting the drop cap character (or characters) and increasing 
the point size. To add or remove space between the drop cap and 
the characters that follow it, place the cursor after the drop cap and 
adjust the Kerning value (see “Kerning,” earlier in this chapter). The 
only good way to get your text to follow the shape of a drop cap is to 
convert the character to an outline and either place that outline as 
frame outside the text frame or as an anchored frame with text wrap.
If you find yourself often applying character formatting to your 
drop caps—changing size, font, color, etc.—then you should create a 
new character style that reflects that formatting, choose Drop Caps 
and Nested Styles from the Control panel menu (or press Command-
Option-R/Ctrl-Alt-R), and choose your character style from the 
Character Style pop-up menu. Of course, you can also define this as 
part of your paragraph style (see “Styles,” later in this chapter).
The Drop Caps and Nested Styles dialog box also offers two other 
drop cap options: Align Left Edge and Scale Descenders. The former 
moves the drop cap so that its left edge is placed exactly at the left 
edge of the left indent—this tends to be more important with very 
large drop caps. The latter only takes effect when the drop cap has a 
descender (for example, the letter “Q” or a lower-case “p”); the whole 
drop cap is cleverly scaled so that the descender avoids the line below.
Type in the Margin. In InDesign, the edges of text frames are usu-
ally inviolable (apart from the adjustments applied by optical margin 
alignment). There’s no margin release (anybody still remember type-
writers?), no handy command for moving one line a bit over the edge. 
Or is there? Instead of a single-character drop cap, specify a two-
character drop cap. Add a space to the left of the first character in the 
paragraph—if your paragraph is justified, this should be a space that 
doesn’t get wider, such as an en space (Command-Shift-N/Ctrl-Shift-
N). Place the cursor between the space and the drop cap and apply 
negative kerning until the left edge of the character moves outside of 
the text frame. Note, also, that using optical margin alignment may 
provide the effect you’re looking for without all of the extra work.
When we look at the formatting in our documents, we see patterns. 
In this book, for example, a paragraph containing a run-in heading 
starts with our “run-in heading” character style and then reverts to 
the formatting of our body text. A period separates the heading from 
the body text. To apply this formatting, we have to select the first sen-
tence and apply the character style. Wouldn’t it be nice if we could 
tell our page-layout application to apply that pattern for us?
Nested Styles

 4. y 291
With InDesign’s nested styles, we can do just that. Nested styles 
give you a way to automatically apply character formatting to por-
tions of a paragraph—the first character, the first sentence, or just the 
third word. Nested styles rely on you first creating a character style; 
we discuss how to do this later in this chapter. You might want to 
skip forward, read that section, and then return to this explanation.
Nested styles are perfect for automatically applying a style to a 
drop cap, a run-in heading (where the first sentence is styled differ-
ently from the rest of the paragraph), or any structured paragraph. 
Catalogs, for example, often have structured paragraphs—such as a 
paragraph that contains an item number followed by a title, followed 
by a description, followed by a price. With nested styles, you can tell 
InDesign to apply a different character style to each element.
You can apply a nested style as local formatting, but it’s generally 
better to define a nested style as part of a paragraph style. To apply 
a nested style to one or more selected paragraphs in a story, choose 
Drop Caps and Nested Styles from the Paragraph or Control panel 
menu (or press Command-Option-R/Ctrl-Alt-R). We’ll discuss how 
to define a paragraph style later in this chapter.
The Drop Caps and Nested Styles dialog box contains two sec-
tions: formatting for drop caps and formatting for paragraphs.
Drop Caps. Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the process of apply-
ing a drop cap to paragraph—the Drop Caps section of this dialog 
box is an alternate way to do the same thing.
Many designs specify that the first line of text following a drop 
cap be formatted a particular way—small caps are quite commonly 
used. With nested styles, you can accomplish this easily by adding a 
forced line break, as shown in Figure 4-43.
Figure 4-43
Drop Caps and  
Nested Styles
By including the drop cap 
as part of the paragraph’s 
nested style definition, we 
can automatically apply a 
character style to the drop 
cap (which is a good thing   
to do, in any case).

292     6
Nested Styles. The Nested Styles section is where you build a set of 
rules for InDesign to follow while formatting a paragraph. Here’s 
how you make a nested style (see Figure 4-44).
1. Display the Drop Cap and Nested Style dialog box (choose Drop 
Caps and Nested Styles from the Paragraph panel menu or the 
Control panel menu). Click the New Nested Style button.
2. Select the character style you want to apply from the first pop-up 
menu. Of course, you have to have defined at least one character 
style for this to work.
3. To activate the second option, click the word “through.” Select 
either “up to” or “through” from this pop-up menu. Choose 
“through” if you want to apply the style up to and including a 
given character, or “up to” to apply the style to the text but not to 
the delimiting character.
4. Click the setting in the third column to change it from “1” to 
some other number, if necessary. If you want to apply your 
character style “up to the third word,” for example, you would 
change this number to “3.”
5. Click the last column to activate the pop-up menu, then enter 
a delimiter character (or choose one from the pop-up menu). 
To apply the style up to the first en space in the paragraph, for 
example, choose En Spaces from the pop-up menu. You can  
enter any character you want into this field—including many  
of the find/change metacharacters.
6. If you want another style to follow the one you just made, start at 
Step 1 again. You can also repeat one or more rules by choosing 
Repeat from the first pop-up menu, creating a loop.
End Nested Style Here. What if you want to apply a character style 
to some portion of your paragraph, but there’s no obvious “stopping 
point” you can target? For example, each paragraph may require the 
style up to a different point. No problem: Just choose End Nested 
Style Character from the last pop-up menu in Step 5, above. Then 
place the text cursor at that point in the paragraph and choose End 
Nested Style Here from the Other submenu in the Insert Special 
Character submenu (under the Type or context menu). This is an 
invisible character, so it won’t reflow your text. If a paragraph doesn’t 
contain one of these special characters, InDesign applies the charac-
ter style you specify to the entire paragraph.

 4. y 293
Figure 4-44
Nested Styles
This text needs to be 
formatted.
We’ve created character 
styles to assist us in 
formatting the text.
Rather than work our way through the text and apply char-
acter styles manually, we choose Drop Caps and Nested Styles 
(from the Paragraph panel or the Control panel menu). 
InDesign displays the   
Drop Cap and Nested   
Styles dialog box.
Click the New Nested Style 
button. InDesign creates a new 
nested style. Choose a charac-
ter style from the first pop-up 
menu (you can also create a new 
character style, if necessary).
We want to format the text according to the following rules:
1. Apply the “title” style to the text up to the comma.
2. Leave the comma and “or” in the paragraph’s default style.
3. Format the subtitle (the text up to the open parenthesis).
5. Format the date (the text up to the semicolon).
4. Format the open parenthesis character 
using the paragraph’s default style.
6. Format the semicolon character   
using the paragraph’s default style.
7. Apply the “location” character 
style to the theater name.
8. Format the close parenthesis character 
using the paragraph’s default style.
We apologize, in advance, 
for the complexity of this 
illustration (which continues 
on the next page). We can’t 
help it—this stuff is nothing 
short of magical.
Example line

294     6
The following pop-up menus 
set the length of the text   
style range. 
Choose “up to” or “through” 
from this pop-up menu. 
Enter a delimiter character (or 
choose one of the preset delimiters 
from the pop-up menu).
Enter the number of   
delimiter characters.
Figure 4-44
Applying Nested Styles 
(continued)
Following the title, we want 
to leave the comma and 
the word “or” in the default 
character formatting for the 
paragraph. Click New Nested 
Style and leave the Style 
pop-up menu set to “[None]”.
We entered a 
space here.
At this point, we’re ready to 
set up the formatting for the 
subtitle. The character at the 
end of the subtitle text is an 
open parenthesis, so we enter 
that character and set the 
range to “up to.” 
We create a further six 
character styles to cover all 
of the rules we’ve defined. 
When we’re done, we have 
formatted all of the text. No 
selecting, no clicking, and 
no keyboard shortcuts. This 
process takes far longer to 
explain than it does to do. 
It’s even better when you 
make the nested styles 
part of a paragraph style, 
as we’ll demonstrate 
later in this chapter.

 4. y 295
Nested styles have a special setting, which appears on the Character 
Style pop-up menu in the Drop Caps and Nested Styles dialog box: 
the Repeat option. You can use this option to repeat some or all of 
the sequence of nested styles you’ve entered, as shown in Figure 4-45. 
Nested styles appearing below the Repeat nested style are ignored.
Repeating   
Nested Styles
…then choose [Repeat] from 
the first pop-up menu. 
Nested styles appear-
ing below [Repeat] 
will not be applied.
Click the OK button, and 
InDesign applies the repeating 
nested styles.
Set up the sequence of nested 
styles you want to repeat…
This text has a repeating  
pattern; we want to apply 
repeating formatting.
Figure 4-45
Repeating a  
Nested Style
Specify the number of nested styles you want 
to repeat. Note that you do not have to repeat 
all of the nested styles you’ve entered.
Nested line styles are a special case of a nested style. In a nested line 
style, the end of a line defines the end of the style. Nested line styles 
are particularly useful when you want to apply special formatting to 
the first line of a paragraph, or repeat sequences of line formatting 
through a paragraph.
To create a nested line style, follow these steps (see Figure 4-46).
1. Select some text, then choose Drop Caps and Nested Styles from 
the Paragraph panel menu (or from the Control panel menu). 
InDesign displays the Drop Caps and Nested Styles dialog box.
2. Use the controls in the Nested Line Styles section of the dialog 
box to specify the character style and number of lines for the 
nested line style. Like nested styles, nested line styles can repeat.
3. Click the OK button to close the dialog and apply the nested line 
style(s).
Nested Line Styles

296     6
While nested styles make use of ordered sequences of special char-
acters and other text, GREP styles can apply a character style to any 
text that matches a GREP expression—in any location, repetition, 
or order in a paragraph. This feature is brilliant, and we think that 
your basic set of paragraph styles will probably acquire a number of 
nested GREP styles as soon as you fully understand what it does.
To create a GREP style, follow the steps below (see Figure 4-47).
1. Select some text, then choose GREP Styles from the Paragraph 
panel menu (or from the Control panel menu). InDesign dis-
plays the GREP Styles dialog box. It’s a good idea to turn on the 
Preview option—that way, you can see the effect of your GREP 
style as you construct it.
2. Click the New Grep Style button. InDesign adds a new GREP 
style.
3. Select a character style from the Apply Style pop-up menu.
4. Enter the GREP expression in the To Text field. As in the GREP 
panel of the Find/Change dialog box, you can build the GREP 
expression using the associated pop-up menu. Even if you have 
Preview turned on, however, InDesign will not apply the GREP 
expression until you press Return.
5. Click the OK button to close the dialog box and apply the  
GREP style.
To delete a GREP style, select the style and click the Delete button.
Nested GREP Styles
Use the controls in the Nested 
Line Styles section of the dialog 
box to specify the character style 
and number of lines for the nested 
line style
In this example, we applied 
a drop cap and then used a 
nested line style to format 
the first four lines.
Figure 4-46
Nested Line Styles

 4. y 297
Composition—the method our desktop publishing program uses to 
fit text into a line—isn’t glamorous. It’s not going to be the focus of 
any glossy magazine advertisement. In fact, most people never con-
sciously notice good or bad composition. We are convinced, however, 
that readers perceive the difference between well spaced and poorly 
spaced text. Good spacing not only improves readability, it also con-
veys an aura of quality to the publication or organization. In short, 
it’s worth caring about. 
There are four basic ways to fit text onto a line:
▶Controlling the spacing between the letters.
▶Controlling the spacing between the words.
Multi-Line   
Composition
Before GREP styles.
A paragraph can contain an 
apparently limitless number 
of GREP styles.
Click the New GREP Style button, select 
a character style from the Apply Style 
pop-up menu, and then enter a GREP 
Expression in the To Text field.
In this example, our GREP 
styles have formatted 
words typed in all caps as 
Open Type All Small Caps, 
and applied a character 
style with an underline to 
the email addresses in the 
text. No manual format-
ting was used.
Figure 4-47
GREP Styles

298     6
▶Adjusting the size of the characters themselves.
▶Breaking the words at line endings by hyphenating.
If you’re serious about type, you already know that a large part of 
your typesetting time is spent fixing bad line breaks and lines with 
poor word and letter spacing. In our experience, fully one third of 
our typesetting and production time in QuarkXPress or other pro-
grams is spent “walking the lines”—fixing spacing problems. 
Other desktop publishing programs use a “single line composer” 
to compose lines of text. As the program arranges the characters on 
each line, it only considers the spacing of that line, which means that 
adjacent lines may have dramatically different spacing. The greater 
the variation of letter and word spacing among lines in a paragraph, 
the harder it is to read (and the less appealing it is to look at).
InDesign, however, has both a single-line composer and a multi-
line composer, which can examine an entire paragraph at a time.
How does it work? The multi-line composer (called Adobe Para-
graph Composer) creates a list of possible line break points in the 
lines it examines. It then ranks the different sets of possible break 
points, considering the effect of each break point on spacing and 
hyphenation. Finally, it chooses the best of the alternatives. You’d 
think that this would take a lot of time—but it doesn’t. When you 
use the default settings, you get composition speed that’s equal to 
that of a single-line composition system, and you get better-looking 
text (see Figure 4-48).
Multi-line composition takes some getting used to because char-
acters preceding the cursor will sometimes move as you enter or edit 
text—something you won’t see in most other programs. You really 
can’t be certain of the position of the line breaks in a paragraph until 
you’ve entered the last word in the paragraph.
In some rare cases you might want turn the Adobe Paragraph 
Composer off and exercise manual control over the line breaks in a 
paragraph—when lines absolutely must break a particular way. 
Multi-line composition is on by default; to use the single-line 
composition method, select a paragraph and choose Adobe Single-
line Composer from the Paragraph or Control panel menu (or in the 
Justification dialog box). To turn multi-line composition back on 
again for the paragraph, choose Adobe Paragraph Composer.
With InDesign CS6, you can also select both single-line and 
multi-line World Ready composers, which were previously available 
only in the special InDesign ME version. These options are especially 
useful for composing text in right-to-left languages.

 4. y 299
Single-line Composer.
Paragraph Composer
Note the extreme variation 
in word and letter spacing 
from line to line in the text 
composed using the Single-
line composer.
Figure 4-48
Multi-Line 
Composition
If you’re tired of having your favorite page layout program hyphenate 
the word “image” after the “m,” you’ll like InDesign’s hyphenation 
controls. To set the hyphenation options for a paragraph, choose 
Hyphenation from the Paragraph or Control panel’s menu. InDesign 
displays the Hyphenation dialog box (see Figure 4-49). QuarkXPress 
users are used to having both hyphenation and justification settings 
in one dialog box; in InDesign they’re broken into two. Also, in 
QuarkXPress, you have to make and save an H&J setting first, and 
then apply it to a paragraph. In InDesign, you select a paragraph and 
change its hyphenation and justification settings.
The first checkbox in the Hyphenation Settings dialog box, simply 
labeled Hyphenate, controls whether the selected paragraph or para-
graphs will be hyphenated. This is identical to turning on and off the 
Hyphenate checkbox in the Paragraph panel. Then there are seven 
other controls that determine the hyphenation rules.
Words with at Least. You can direct InDesign’s hyphenation system 
to leave short words alone using the Words with at Least option. If 
you don’t want short words to break, you can set this to 5 or higher.
After First. The value you enter here sets the minimum size, in char-
acters, of the word fragment preceding a hyphen. Many typesetters 
dislike two-letter fragments, so they increase this value to three.
Hyphenation Controls
Figure 4-49
Hyphenation Settings 
Dialog Box

300     6
Before Last. The value you enter here sets the minimum size, in char-
acters, of the word fragment following a hyphen. Some people don’t 
mind if the “ly” in “truly” sits all by itself on a line. You care about 
type, so you set this to at least three.
Hyphen Limit. You can limit the number of consecutive hyphens 
you’ll allow to appear at the left edge of a column of text using the 
Hyphen Limit field. Enter a value greater than one to allow consecu-
tive hyphens.
Hyphenation Zone. Another way to limit the number of hyphens 
in a paragraph is the Hyphenation Zone setting. The idea is that 
there is an invisible zone along the right margin of each paragraph. 
If InDesign is trying to break a word at the end of a line, it looks to 
see where the hyphenation zone is. If the word before the potentially 
hyphenated word falls inside the zone, then InDesign just gives up 
and pushes the word onto the next line (without hyphenating it). If 
the previous word does not fall into the zone, then InDesign will 
hyphenate the word.
That’s the concept, at least. As it turns out, InDesign’s composi-
tion algorithms are complex enough that the hyphenation zone is 
often overridden by other factors, especially when using the Para-
graph Composer. In addition, the Hyphenation Zone setting doesn’t 
have any effect at all on justified text. In general, for non-justified 
text, larger amounts mean fewer hyphens but more variation in line 
lengths (“rag”).
Hyphenation Slider. Someone, somewhere must have complained 
that InDesign’s hyphenation controls weren’t flexible enough, 
because those wacky engineers at Adobe have added the Hyphen-
ation Slider to the Hyphenation Settings dialog box. We’re sure 
there’s a lot of math behind what this slider is doing, but all you really 
need to know is that you can move the slider back and forth between 
Better Spacing and Fewer Hyphens to get a more pleasing appear-
ance (turn on preview to see the effect of the slider).
This control is called “Nigel” because it goes all the way to eleven.
Hyphenate Capitalized Words. To prevent capitalized words (i.e., 
proper names) from hyphenating, turn off this option.
Hyphenate Last Words. We pride ourselves on having open minds 
and strong stomachs, but there are few things more nauseating than 
the last word of a paragraph being hyphenated, leaving a little runt 

 4. y 301
on the last line. We won’t say that it’s impossible to avoid it entirely, 
but you should at least turn off the Hyphenate Last Words checkbox, 
so that it won’t happen automatically.
Hyphenate Across Columns. Our generous, kind, and patient pub-
lisher asks little from us (besides the best book we can muster), but 
they do ask one thing: Please don’t allow words to hyphenate from 
one page to another. In older editions, we had to proof each page 
manually. Now we simply turn off the Hyphenate Across Columns 
checkbox in our body text paragraph style. Note that this stops 
hyphenation across all columns, even from one column in a multi-
column text frame to the next. By the way, we have seen this control 
fail, so it appears that InDesign considers it a request rather than a 
rule; it tries not to hyphenate across a column, but it will if it thinks 
it needs to.
Discretionary Hyphens. There’s another way to control hyphenation: 
Use a discretionary hyphen character. When you type a discretion-
ary hyphen (Command-Shift-hyphen/Ctrl-Shift-hyphen) in a word, 
you’re telling InDesign that you wouldn’t mind if the word hyphen-
ates here. This doesn’t force the program to hyphenate the word at 
that point; it just gives it the option. This is much better than typing 
a regular hyphen because if (or when) your text reflows, you won’t be 
stuck with hyphens littered in the middles of your paragraphs—the 
discretionary hyphen “disappears” when it’s not needed. Another 
way to get a discretionary hyphen is to use the Insert Special Charac-
ter submenu (in the Type menu or the context-sensitive menu).
By the way, longtime QuarkXPress users know that in that pro-
gram you can place a discretionary hyphen before a word to make it 
not break. That’s also true in InDesign, but, if you want a word (or 
phrase) not to hyphenate, select the text and turn on the No Break 
option in the Character panel’s menu. If it’s a word that you think 
should never be hyphenated, or should always be hyphenated differ-
ently than InDesign thinks, you can add it to your user dictionary 
(see “Adding Words to the User Dictionary” in Chapter 3, “Text”).
When InDesign composes the text in your publications, it does so 
by following the spacing rules you’ve laid down using the controls in 
the Justification dialog box (choose Justification from the Paragraph 
panel menu or press Command-Option-Shift-J/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-J to 
display the dialog box; see Figure 4-50). Contrary to popular opinion, 
this dialog box controls all text composition, not only that of justi-
fied text.
Controlling Word and 
Letter Spacing

302     6
This dialog box offers six controls: Word Spacing, Letter Spacing, 
Glyph Scaling, Auto Leading, Single Word Justification, and Com-
poser. The important thing to remember is that you will never find a 
set of spacing values that will work for all fonts, point sizes, and line 
lengths. The text itself plays a role: spacing settings that work for one 
author may not work for another, even when the typesetting specifi-
cations are the same. You have to experiment to discover the settings 
that work best for you and your publications. 
InDesign’s default settings give you a reasonable starting point. 
The spacing values encourage wide word spacing over narrow word 
spacing, and attempt to discourage letter spacing.
Word Spacing. You can adjust the amount of space InDesign places 
between words by changing the Minimum, Desired, and Maximum 
percentages. In non-justified text, only the Desired value matters. In 
InDesign, the values in the word spacing fields are percentages of the 
standard word space (the width of the space is defined by the font’s 
designer, and is stored in the font). The defaults tend to encourage 
wide word spacing over narrow word spacing in justified text.
Letter Spacing. You can adjust the amount of space the program 
places between each character in your paragraphs by changing the 
Minimum, Desired, and Maximum percentages. Again, in text that 
isn’t justified, only the Desired value makes a difference. Note that 
these percentages represent the amount of variation from a standard 
spacing unit—the “spaceband” defined in the font. By default, the 
percentages are all set to zero, which discourages letter spacing.
Glyph Scaling. When you enter anything other than 100% in any of 
the Glyph Scaling fields, you give InDesign permission to scale the 
characters in the paragraph to make them fit. Ole and David disagree 
on usefulness of this feature. Ole is not a type purist, but he does 
not see the point in distorting character shapes when other, better 
options are available. Why take the risk? David, on the other hand 
insists that no one can see the difference when you allow InDesign 
Figure 4-50
Justification Dialog Box

 4. y 303
to scale glyphs by plus or minus one percent (and sometimes even 
two). Ole thinks that this is something like thinking that it’s not 
committing a crime if no one catches you.
Both authors agree that glyph scaling might come in handy if you 
have exhausted every other available option to get a line to fit. What 
you do is, of course, up to you and your conscience.
Auto Leading. The Auto Leading feature is easy: This controls how 
InDesign calculates the leading of characters that have a leading of 
Auto (see “Leading,” earlier in this chapter, for why we almost never 
use Auto leading). This control is here, rather than in one of the Pref-
erences dialog boxes, because the base autoleading percentage is a 
property of individual paragraphs (unlike QuarkXPress, where the 
autoleading percentage is set at the document level).
Single Word Justification. What do you want InDesign to do when a 
word in the middle of a paragraph is so long (or a column so narrow) 
that only that one word fits on the line? If the line isn’t justified, it’s 
no big deal. But if the line is justified, do you want InDesign to add 
letterspacing to spread the word out across the line? Or make it flush 
left, flush right, or centered? That’s what the Single Word Justifica-
tion pop-up menu controls.
Composer. Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the Paragraph Com-
poser and how it’s different from the Single Line composer. Here’s 
one more place you can specify which InDesign should use.
Sometimes headlines or headings are way out of balance—and we 
don’t just mean the political slant. We mean that the lines are of 
wildly varying length. The first line fills the column; the second line 
contains a single short word. This is, at best, unsightly; at worst, it 
makes the text hard to read.
InDesign’s Balance Ragged Lines feature can help you make the 
line widths in a paragraph more even. To do this, choose Balance 
Ragged Lines from the Paragraph panel or Control panel menu. 
(Note that this feature only works on non-justified paragraphs.) Take 
a look at Figure 4-51 to see the effect of Balance Ragged Lines.
If the last line of the paragraph is significantly narrower than the 
other lines, the program breaks the text so that the last line is wider. 
Balance Ragged Lines generally produces an inverted pyramid 
shape—that is, the first line is longer than the second line, the third 
line is shorter than the second line, and so on. This matches Ole’s 
expectations, but is the opposite of what David expects.
Balance Ragged Lines

304     6
InDesign can “flag” text composition problems—cases where the 
program has had to break your rules for composing text, or where 
substituted fonts appear in your publication. Open the Preferences 
dialog box, choose the Composition pane, then turn on the options 
in the Highlight section of the Composition Preferences dialog box. 
Lines in which InDesign has had to violate composition rules you’ve 
established (using the Justification and Keep Options dialog boxes) 
are highlighted in yellow; substituted fonts are highlighted in pink 
(see Figure 4-52). We usually work with these turned on so we can 
quickly identify “problem” lines.
A widow is the last line of a paragraph that winds up all by itself at 
the top of a column or page. An orphan is the first line of a paragraph 
that lands all by itself at the bottom of a column or page. Widows and 
orphans are the bane of a typesetter’s existence. 
Designers sometimes also refer to the single-word last line of a 
paragraph as either a widow or an orphan. To avoid the confusion, 
we often just use the word runt.
All typographic widows and orphans are bad, but certain kinds 
are really bad—for example, a widow line that consists of only one 
word, or even the last part of a hyphenated word. Another related 
typographic horror is the heading that stands alone with its follow-
ing paragraph on the next page.
Fortunately, InDesign has a set of controls that can easily prevent 
widows and orphans from sneaking into your document. These con-
trols—along with a setting that lets you force a paragraph to begin at 
a particular place—live in the Keep Options dialog box, which you 
Highlighting 
Typographic 
 Problems
Paragraph   
Keep Options
Figure 4-51
Balancing Ragged Lines
Select a paragraph and choose 
Balance Ragged Lines from the 
Paragraph panel menu or  
Control panel menu.
InDesign changes the line 
breaks to make the width of the 
lines more even.
Since Balance Ragged 
Lines is a paragraph-level 
attribute, it can be made 
part of a paragraph style.
The lines of this heading are 
of very different widths.

 4. y 305
can find by selecting Keep Options from the Paragraph panel’s menu, 
or by pressing Command-Option-K/Ctrl-Alt-K (see Figure 4-53). 
There are four parts to this dialog box: Keep with Previous, Keep 
with Next, Keep Lines Together, and Start Paragraph.
When you turn on the   
H&J Violations option…
…InDesign highlights lines 
that break the spacing ranges 
you set in the Justification 
dialog box.
InDesign uses three shades 
of yellow to highlight loose 
or tight lines—darker 
shades indicate more 
severe spacing problems.
Figure 4-52
Highlighting Loose  
and Tight Lines
This heading has come   
“unstuck” from the   
paragraph following it.
To prevent this, select the 
heading paragraph and 
display the Keep Options 
dialog box.
Enter a value in the Keep 
with Next field. This way, 
when the paragraph follow-
ing the heading moves to 
a new page or column, the 
heading follows along.
In addition to the Keep with 
Next control demonstrated in 
this example, the Keep Options 
dialog box contains other options 
that you can use to control the 
way that paragraphs break (or 
don’t break) across columns and 
pages.
Figure 4-53
Keep Options

306     6
Keep with Previous. The Keep with Previous option keeps the top 
line of the paragraph with the previous paragraph, such as when 
you’re adding notes below only some entries in a list.
Keep with Next. The Keep with Next Lines feature helps you ensure 
that headings and the paragraphs that follow them are kept together. 
If the paragraph is pushed onto a new column, a new page, or below 
an obstructing object, the heading follows. It’s rare that we need to 
type more than 1 in the Lines field.
Keep Lines Together. The Keep Lines Together feature is the primary 
control over widows and orphans. When you turn on the Keep Lines 
Together checkbox and choose All Lines in Paragraph, InDesign 
won’t break the paragraph across column or pages.
You can control the number of lines that should be kept together 
at the beginning and end of the paragraph by choosing At Start/End 
of Paragraph. The value you type in the Start field determines the 
minimum number of lines that InDesign allows at the beginning of 
a paragraph. For example, a Start value of 2 means that if at least two 
lines of that paragraph cannot be placed on the page, then the entire 
paragraph is pushed over to the next page. The value specified in the 
End field determines the minimum number of lines that InDesign 
lets fall alone at the top of a column or after an obstruction. Setting 
both Start and End to 2 means you’ll never get a widow or orphan.
Start Paragraph. Use the options on the Start Paragraph pop-up 
menu to force a column or page break before your selected para-
graph. For example, if you always want a particular paragraph to sit 
at the top of a page, select the paragraph and choose On Next Page 
from the Start Paragraph pop-up menu.
Note that you can also get a similar effect by choosing an item 
from the Insert Break Character submenu in the Type menu. The 
Start Paragraph feature is better, however, because you can use it in 
a definition of a paragraph style (see “Styles,” later in this chapter). 
Bullets and Numbering
As the human attention span has grown shorter under the stresses 
of modern life, lists of one sort or another have come to dominate 
our texts. Abraham Lincoln could spend several days delivering a 
single perfect paragraph to an informed audience; we must convey 
the same information in an executive summary that takes no more 

 4. y 307
than nanoseconds to parse. InDesign aids and abets this diminution 
of the human intellect by providing the Bullets and Numbering fea-
ture, which provides:
▶Bullets.
▶Numbering.
Bullets and Numbering is a paragraph level attribute that applies 
a bullet character or a numeral to the start of the paragraph. Apply-
ing a bullet is straightforward; numbering is a bit more complicated. 
The simplest way to apply bullets to a selection of paragraphs is to 
click the Bulleted List button in the Paragraph view of the Control 
panel (or choose Apply Bullets from the Bulleted & Numbered Lists 
submenu of the Type menu). Follow the steps below, and you can 
control the formatting and position of the bullets (see Figure 4-54):
1. Select a range of text.
2. Choose Bullets and Numbering from the Paragraph panel or 
Control panel menu. You can also Option/Alt-click the Bulleted 
List button in the Paragraph view of the Control panel. InDesign 
displays the Bullets and Numbering dialog box.
3. Choose Bullets from the List Type pop-up menu.
4. Pick from among the choices in the Bullet Character section, 
which works very much like the Glyphs panel described earlier 
in this chapter—the dialog contains a short list of characters, but 
you can click the Add button to choose characters from any of 
the available fonts and add them then to the list.
5. If you want the bullet to be followed by a tab, leave the Text After 
field set to ^t. If you’d prefer the bullet followed by something 
else (such as an en space), you can type it in that field or pick 
from the flyout menu to the right of the field.
6. You can apply formatting to the bullet character in the Character 
Style pop-up menu (assuming you have defined a style).
7. Adjust the position of the bullet in the Bullet or Number Position 
section. The Left Indent and First Line Indent fields control the 
indents for the entire paragraph (overriding any other indents 
you’ve set). To hang the bullet in the margin, you’d want a posi-
tive Left Indent and a negative First Line Indent.
Applying Bullets 

308     6
Figure 4-54
Applying Bullets
Select a range of text.
Hold down Option/Alt 
and click the Bulleted 
List button in the Control 
panel.
Select a list type (Bullets, 
in this example).
InDesign applies the 
bullets or numbering to 
the selected text.
If you don’t see the  
character you want to  
use, click the Add button. 
InDesign will display the 
Add Bullets panel.
Select a bullet character. 
Specify paragraph   
formatting, if necessary.
If the First Line Indent is set to zero and your Text After is 
set to a tab character, the position of the text after the bullet is 
defined by the first tab stop. If you’ve assigned tab stops already, 
you can ignore this.
The Alignment pop-up menu lets you control the position 
of the bullet at the beginning of the paragraph—Left, Right, 
or Centered—but it only works when your Left Indent is large 
enough to allow the character to move (InDesign won’t allow 
the bullet to fall outside the text frame).
8. Once you’ve got the inserted characters to look the way you want 
them to (turn on the Preview option), click the OK button to 
apply the list formatting to the selected paragraphs.
Default Bullets. If you choose a custom bullet character with the 
Add button in the Bullets and Numbering dialog box, InDesign 
remembers that bullet in the currently-open document. If you need 

 4. y 309
that same bullet character in other documents, you can add it to the 
list of default bullets:
1. Close all documents in InDesign.
2. Open the Bullets and Numbering dialog box.
3. Set the Type pop-up menu to Bullets.
4. Use the Add button to add your desired bullet character.
5. If you want this character to be the default bullet (the one 
InDesign gives you if you don’t specify any other), select it.
6. Set the Type pop-up menu back to None and then click OK.
When Adobe first implemented the automatic numbering feature, 
we complained that it was anemic and useless. They responded in 
the next version by adding so many features that its now not only ex-
tremely useful but also somewhat overwhelming to use. Fortunately, 
it’s all logical if you take it step by step and understand which parts 
of the Bullets and Numbering dialog box you can ignore.
The simplest way to apply numbering to one or more selected 
paragraphs is to click the Numbered List button in the Control panel 
(when it’s in paragraph mode), or choose Apply Numbers from the 
Bulleted & Numbered Lists submenu, under the Type menu. This 
gives you a basic numbered list, starting at 1.
Continuing Numbering. Let’s say you have five paragraphs, but the 
third paragraph shouldn’t be numbered (that is, the section num-
bered “2” has two paragraphs). The fastest way to accomplish this is 
to select all five paragraphs, turn on numbering, then select just the 
third paragraph and turn numbering off.
Alternately, you could assign numbering to the first two para-
graphs and then number the last two paragraphs (which will start 
at “1” again). Then place the cursor in the fourth paragraph (which 
is currently numbered “1”) and choose Continue Numbering from 
either the Context menu or the Bulleted & Numbered Lists submenu, 
under the Type menu.
Formatting Numbers. The default formatting applied to automatic 
numbers is dull as rocks: the number—set in the same font, size, color, 
and styling as the first character of the paragraph—followed by a tab. 
In order to spice up your numbering, select Bullets and Numbering 
from the Control panel menu (or Option/Alt-click the Numbered 
Applying Numbering

310     6
Figure 4-55
Applying Numbering
Select a range of text.
Hold down Option/Alt and 
click the Numbered List button 
in the Control panel.
You can ignore List 
and Level at first.
InDesign displays the Bullets 
and Numbering dialog box.
Choose a number format.
Enter the characters you 
want to appear around 
the number.
Select a character style for 
the numbers, if necessary.
Here we’ve set up   
a hanging indent.
The list, numbered.
Turning off numbering for a few 
paragraphs renumbers the list.
List button in the Control panel). When the List Type pop-up menu 
is set to Numbers, you can adjust the following settings in the Num-
bering Style section of the dialog box (see Figure 4-55).
▶Format. You can choose from among normal numerals (such as 
1, 2, 3, etc.), Roman numerals (I, II, III, etc.), or alphabet charac-
ters (a, b, c, etc.) from the Format pop-up menu. Choose None to 
omit the number entirely, though it’s rare that you’d want to.
▶Number. You can control how the number appears by typing 
codes into the Number field. The default value, ^#.^t, means 
type the current number for this list, followed by a period, then 
followed by a tab. You don’t have to remember the codes—you 
can use the pop-up menu associated with the field. If you do use 
a tab character, it has to be the last code in this field.

 4. y 311
You can type pretty much anything in the Number field. For 
example, you could type Item No. ^#^_ which means type “Item 
No.” followed by a space, then the number, then an en dash.
▶Character Style. InDesign applies the character style you choose 
from this pop-up menu to everything in the Number field.
▶Mode. Use this pop-up menu to specify whether the list should 
Continue from Previous Number or Start At a specific number.
Positioning Numbers. You can adjust the position of your number 
in the same ways we discussed positioning bullets. You can make the 
right edge of the numbers align by choosing Right from the Align-
ment pop-up menu and setting the Left Indent to a positive number.
Multi-Level Numbering. What if you need a sub-list? For example, 
after number 4, you might have 4a, 4b, 4c, and so on. Or in a long 
technical document, you might have sections numbered 1.1.1, then 
1.1.2, then 1.1.3, then 1.2.1, and so on. To pull off this kind of num-
bering, you need to assign levels in the Bullets and Numbering dialog 
box, then—optionally—adjust the Number field’s codes (see Figure 
4-56).
This can get confusing, so let’s focus on that 4a, 4b, 4c example. 
After you select the paragraphs you want to affect (in this case, the 
three paragraphs after paragraph 4), open the dialog box and change 
the Level field to 2. This defines a sub-list inside the main numbered 
list. Now choose the lower-case alphabet from the Format pop-up 
menu and change the Number field to ^1^#.^t (which means “type 
the most recent level 1 number, then the current number in this sub-
list, then a period and a tab”). You may also want to adjust the Left 
Indent in the Position section so that the sub-list is further indented.
Creating Named Lists. Numbering isn’t just for a few paragraphs in 
a single story. You can create far more complex kinds of numbered 
lists that continue across multiple text frames, or even across mul-
tiple documents in a book. You can also have multiple numbered 
lists in parallel, for example, figure numbering and table numbering. 
The key to all these tricks is to define named lists. (InDesign just calls 
these “lists,” but we call them “named lists” to avoid confusion with 
the generic “lists” that we’ve been discussing.)
You can define a named list by choosing Define Lists from the 
Bulleted & Numbered Lists submenu (under the Type menu) and 
then clicking the New button in the Define Lists dialog box. Or, if 
you already have the Bullets and Numbering dialog box open, you 

312     6
Figure 4-56
Multi-Level Numbering
This list has been formatted, but  
now we want to add numbers.
The headings are numbered 
as usual (Level 1).
We set the level of the 
nested list to 2.
We entered codes in the 
Number field to include both 
the first and current level 
numbering.
We changed the numbering 
format to lowercase Roman.
can choose New List from the List pop-up menu. In either case, you 
get the New List dialog box, in which you can type the list’s name 
and choose whether you want this numbered list to continue across 
multiple stories (that is, across more than one unthreaded text frame) 
and/or across more than one document in a book (see Figure 4-57).
Once you have a named list defined, you can assign it to a para-
graph by choosing it from the List pop-up menu in the Bullets and 
Numbering dialog box.
However, the order in which paragraphs are numbered may be 
confusing to you. Here are the rules:
▶In general, numbering follows page order. For example, if you 
have an unthreaded text frame on page 1 and another on page 2, 
InDesign will number paragraphs on page 1 first—just as you’d 
expect.
▶If you have more than one frame on a page (and those frames 
aren’t threaded), numbering in the frames is based on the order 
in which the frames were created—not the order on which they 
appear on the page.

 4. y 313
To number these captions, 
we select the three text 
frames…
Choose New List from the 
List pop-up menu. 
InDesign displays the   
New List dialog box.
Enter a name for the list, 
and turn on Continue 
Numbers Across Stories.
…and apply numbering.   
Because the text frames 
are not threaded together, 
we need to create a new 
named list to keep our 
figure numbering straight.
Back in the Bullets and  
Numbering dialog box, we 
changed the Format and set 
Mode to Continue from  
Previous Number.
Each caption is 
automatically numbered… 
or, um, “lettered.”
Remember that each frame 
on a page is numbered in the 
order it was created—not its 
position on the page!
Figure 4-57
Named Lists
▶All the numbers in a single story (including multiple threaded 
text frames) are numbered at the same time—starting with the 
first frame in the thread—even if they’re on different pages. For 
example, if you have a story that jumps from page 1 to page 5, 
and you have an unthreaded text frame on page 2, the numbered 
paragraphs on page 5 would be smaller than those on page 2 
because InDesign is numbering the threaded story first.
Even stranger, if for some reason that story was instead 
threaded from page 5 to page 1, the numbering would start on 
page 2, then continue on page 5, then end on page 1.
▶Paragraphs inside anchored text frames are numbered along 
with the story they’re in. Let’s say you’re numbering your figures 
and some of your figure numbers are anchored inside a text 
story that spans from page 1 to 100—but one figure number 
is sitting in an unthreaded, unanchored text frame on page 2. 

314     6
InDesign will number all 100 pages, including anchored frames, 
before it gets around to numbering page 2.
This means that you should either keep all your text frames 
anchored or keep them unanchored—mixing and matching will 
cause you heartache.
If you want a numbered list to continue from one document to 
the next in a book panel, your named list has to be present in all the 
documents—fortunately, the book panel’s Synchronize feature can 
copy named lists for you (see Chapter 8, “Long Documents”).
To remove bullets or numbering, select the paragraphs in question 
and then click once on the Bulleted List or Numbered List button in 
the Control panel (whichever is currently highlighted). Alternately, 
you could choose Remove Bullets or Remove Numbering from the 
Bulleted & Numbered Lists submenu, under the Type menu. Or you 
could display the Bullets and Numbering dialog box and choose 
None from the List Type pop-up menu. Whichever you choose, the 
bullets and numbers are gone, baby, gone.
To change the characters inserted by the Bullets and Numbering 
feature to normal text (i.e., text you can select with the Type tool 
and format using InDesign’s typesetting features), select the para-
graphs and choose Convert Numbering to Text or Convert Bullets to 
Text from the Context menu. You can also find this command in the 
Paragraph panel menu, the Control panel menu, and the Bulleted 
& Numbered Lists submenu, under the Type menu. If you select a 
range of text that contains both bulleted and numbered paragraphs, 
choose Convert Bullets and Numbering to Text.
We’ve been talking about applying numbering or bullets directly to 
paragraphs as local formatting, but in the real world we’d virtually 
never do this. Instead, we’d first create a paragraph style that in-
cludes the bullet or numbering, and then apply that paragraph style 
to the paragraphs in question. We talk about styles below, but suffice 
it to say that we often work with two or three paragraph styles for 
each type of list. For example, in this book, we use a “numbered list” 
style that includes both numbering and a little Space After; and we 
use a “numbered list first” (which we apply to the first item in the 
list) that is based on “numbered list” but also includes a little Space 
Before. Plus, we use a “numbered list last” (which we apply to the last 
item in the list), which includes a little Space After.
Removing Bullets   
and Numbering
Converting Bullets   
and Numbers   
to Normal Text
Bullets and Numbering 
in Paragraph Styles
π

 4. y 315
The selected text contains 
local formatting…
…so InDesign displays a 
“+” next to the style name.
Figure 4-58
Styles and  
Local Overrides
Styles
When you think about the text in your publication, chances are 
good you’re thinking of each paragraph as being a representative of 
a particular kind of text. You’re thinking, “That’s a headline, that’s 
a subhead, and that’s a photo caption.” Chances are also good that 
you’re thinking of those paragraphs as having certain formatting 
attributes: font, size, leading, and indents.
That’s what text styles do—they bundle all those attributes 
together so you can apply them to text with a single click. But there’s 
more—if you then change your mind about the formatting, you can 
edit the style, and all the text with that style applied to it (that is, 
“tagged” with the style) is reformatted automatically.
Once you’ve created a text style for a specific kind of text, you’ll 
never have to claw your way through the Character panel or Para-
graph panel again. Unless, of course, you want to apply a local for-
matting override to your styled text, which you’re always free to do.
Global versus Local Formatting. We’ve been using the term “local 
formatting.” What are we talking about? The key to understanding 
text styles is understanding the difference between style-based for-
matting and local formatting. 
Local formatting is what you get when you select text and apply 
formatting directly, using the Character panel or the choices on the 
Type menu. When you apply formatting using text styles, on the 
other hand, you’re applying “global” formatting (that is, formatting 
specified by the selected style). 
If local formatting has been applied to text that has had a para-
graph style applied to it, you’ll see a “+” after the style name in the 
Paragraph Styles panel when the text is selected (see Figure 4-58).
Plus What? When you see that the text you’ve selected in a styled 
paragraph contains a local override, how can you tell what that 
local override is? If you have tool tips turned on, you can move the 
cursor over the style name, and InDesign will display a list of the 

316     6
local overrides. Alternatively, you can choose New Paragraph Style 
from the Paragraph Styles panel menu. Look at the list of attributes 
in the Style Settings list at the bottom of the panel—it’ll say “<stylen-
ame> + next: Same Style +” (where “<stylename>” is the name of the 
style applied to the paragraph) and a list of formatting. The items in 
the list are the local formatting. Click Cancel (or press Command-
period/Esc) to close this dialog box without creating a new style.
Incorrect Style Order. Paragraph and character styles should appear 
in alphabetical order in their respective panels. Sometimes, though, 
the panels get confused and list them in a near-random order (prob-
ably the order in which you created the styles, which is silly). If that 
happens, just choose Sort by Name from the panel menu.
Styles Are More than Formatting. When you apply a style to a 
paragraph (which we call “tagging” a paragraph with a style), you’re 
doing more than just applying the formatting defined by the style. 
You’re telling InDesign what the paragraph is—not just what it looks 
like, but what role it has to play in your publication. Is the paragraph 
important? Is it an insignificant legal notice in type that’s intention-
ally too small to read? The style says it all.
The most important thing to remember when you’re creating 
and applying styles is that tagging a paragraph with a style creates 
a link between the paragraph and all other paragraphs tagged with 
that style, and between the paragraph and the definition of the style. 
Change the style’s definition, and watch the formatting and behavior 
of the paragraphs tagged with that style change to match. 
By now, most of us are used to the idea of paragraph styles, which 
give us a way to apply multiple paragraph formatting attributes to 
an entire paragraph with a single action. (If you’re not familiar with 
paragraph styles, we discuss them in the next section.) Character 
styles are just like paragraph styles, except that they can be applied to 
ranges of text smaller than an entire paragraph (and, obviously, they 
lack paragraph formatting features, such as alignment). Applying a 
character style to a text selection establishes a link between that text 
and the definition of the style—edit the style, and the formatting of 
the text changes.
Use character styles for any character formatting you apply over 
and over again. Run-in headings, drop caps, and special ornamen-
tal characters are all good candidates for character styles. Each time 
you use a character style, you’re saving yourself several seconds you 
would have spent fiddling with settings in the Character panel or the 
Character Styles

 4. y 317
Type menu. It might not seem like much, but saving a few seconds 
several hundred times a day can add up.
Creating Character Styles. The easiest way to create a character style 
is to build it “by example” (see Figure 4-59).
1. Select some text that has the formatting you want.
2. Hold down Option/Alt and click the Create New Style button at 
the bottom of the Character Styles panel (or select New Char-
acter Style from the Character Styles panel menu). InDesign 
displays the New Character Style dialog box.
3. At this point, if you want to create a relationship between this 
style and another character style, you can choose that style from 
the Based On pop-up menu (see “Creating Parent-Child Style 
Relationships,” later in this chapter).
Figure 4-59
Creating a  
Character Style
To create a new   
character style, select a   
range of text that has the   
formatting you want…
…then choose New Character Style 
from the Character Styles panel 
menu (or press Option/Alt and click 
the New Style button).
InDesign defines a new 
character style based 
on the formatting of 
the selected text.
Note that InDesign does not 
define character formatting 
attributes that are the same 
as the default formatting of 
the surrounding text.
InDesign adds the new 
character style to the list 
of character styles, but it 
won’t necessarily apply it 
to the selected text for you.
Enter a 
name for 
the style.

318     6
4. Now give your style a name. You can also assign a keyboard 
shortcut to the character style—the key used must use a modi-
fier key (Command, Ctrl, or Shift and a number key from the 
numeric keypad; NumLock must be on to define the shortcut).
When you create a character style, InDesign won’t automatically 
apply the style to the text you selected in Step 1 unless you turn on 
the Apply Style to Selection checkbox in the General pane of the 
New Character Style dialog box. If you neglect to turn on this helpful 
checkbox, you’ll have to apply the style to the selected text manually.
QuarkXPress Users Beware: In QuarkXPress, a character style 
always defines all the character formatting of the text—font, color, 
size, and other attributes. InDesign’s character styles, however, 
are defined by differences between the character formatting of the 
selected text and the default character formatting of the surround-
ing text. In InDesign you can create a character style which, when 
applied to text, changes only its size and color, but retains all other 
underlying formatting.
This is actually a good thing—it means you can create character 
styles that affect some, but not all, of the attributes of a selection. It’s 
different from the way that almost every other application defines 
character styles, and it takes some getting used to. 
Character Style Tips. Here are a few things to keep in mind when 
defining character styles in InDesign.
▶If you’re building a character style based on example text (as 
we suggested earlier), InDesign only picks up the formatting 
differences between the text you’ve selected and the paragraph 
style applied to the paragraph. For example, if the underlying 
paragraph style uses the font Minion Pro Italic, and the text 
you’ve selected uses the same font, the Font attribute of the char-
acter style will not be defined automatically. If you want the font 
to be part of the character style definition, you can add it once 
you have the New Character Style dialog box open (select the 
font from the Font Family pop-up menu in the Basic Character 
Formats pane).
▶
If you want your character style to be defined by every attribute 
of your text selection, you can use the CreateCharacterStyle 
script (see Chapter 12, “Scripting,” for more on the example 
scripts that come with InDesign). Or you can create the 

 4. y 319
character style from scratch (not from example text), specifying 
the font, size, color, leading, and all other formatting.
▶Clicking the New Style button in the Character Styles panel cre-
ates a new character style based on whatever style was selected in 
the panel. It doesn’t open a dialog box. 
▶If you want to “undefine” an attribute in a character style, select 
and delete the current value (see Figure 4-60).
To prevent a character 
style from affecting a 
formatting attribute, select 
the attribute…
…and press Delete. 
When you apply the style, 
InDesign will leave this 
attribute unchanged.
Figure 4-60
Undefining Attributes
Applying Character Styles. To apply a character style, select some 
text and do any one of the following things (see Figure 4-61).
▶Click the character style name in the Character Styles panel.
▶Press the keyboard shortcut you assigned to the character style.
▶Point at the style name in the Character Styles panel and choose 
Apply from the context menu.
▶Press Command-Enter/Ctrl Enter to display the Quick Apply 
panel, type the name of the style, and then press Enter.
Again, applying a character style changes only those attributes 
that are defined in the style. This can cause grave confusion and hair-
pulling if you’re used to the way QuarkXPress does it. If you apply 
a character style that applies only the underline type style and color, 
for example—InDesign leaves all other character formatting as is. 
To remove a character style from a text selection, click None in 
the Character Styles panel—this reverts the text back to the under-
lying formatting of the paragraph style. If you want to remove the 
character style and leave the formatting alone (convert it to local for-
matting), choose Break Link to Style from the panel menu. This is 

320     6
sometimes useful when you want some text to be formatted using 
the formatting of a given character style, but you don’t want it linked 
to that style (because you know the style definition might change). 
Editing Character Styles. The great thing about styles is that you can 
always change them later, and those changes ripple throughout your 
document. To edit a character style, you can use any or all of the fol-
lowing approaches—all of them display the Character Style Options 
dialog box, which you can use to change the attributes of the style.
▶Hold down Command-Option-Shift/Ctrl-Alt-Shift and double-
click the style name in the Character Styles panel.
▶Point at the style you want to edit in the Character Styles panel 
and choose Edit from the context menu.
▶Select the style and choose Style Options from the Character 
Styles panel menu.
▶Double-click the style name in the Character Styles panel.
The first two approaches above do not apply the style; the latter 
two apply the style to the selected text, or to the document default 
formatting when no text is selected. Be aware of this difference as 
you go to edit a style—otherwise, you run the risk of accidentally ap-
plying the character style.
Redefining Character Styles. Editing a character style through the 
Character Style Options dialog box works fine, but is kind of boring. 
For quick changes, try this: Find some text tagged with the character 
style you want to redefine, then apply local formatting to it (change it 
Select the text you   
want to format.
Click the character 
style name in the 
Character Styles 
panel.
InDesign applies the   
character style to the text.
Figure 4-61
Applying a  
Character Style

 4. y 321
to the way you want the style to be defined). A “+” will appear next to 
the character style name in the Character Styles panel. Next, without 
deselecting the text, press Command-Option-Shift-C/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-
C. InDesign automatically redefines the character style based on the 
selected text (see Figure 4-62).
Alternatively, you can select the text and choose Redefine Style 
from the Character Styles panel menu. Or you could point at the 
style name in the panel and choose Redefine from the context menu. 
But the keyboard shortcut is more fun.
Apply local formatting to 
an instance of the character 
style you want to redefine…
…then choose Redefine 
Style from the Character 
Styles panel context menu.
InDesign updates the   
character style’s definition 
based on the formatting   
of the selected text.
Figure 4-62
Redefining a  
Character Style
Deleting character styles. To remove a character style, press Com-
mand-Shift-A/Ctrl-Shift-A to deselect everything (do this so that you 
don’t accidentally apply the character style to text), then select the 
character style and choose Delete Style from the Character Styles 
panel menu (or click the Delete Style button in the panel).
InDesign displays the Delete Character Style dialog box, where 
you can select a replacement style (including no style). If you choose 
another character style, InDesign applies that character style to the 
text that had been formatted with the deleted style. If you choose 
no style, the text formatted with the style using the character style 
doesn’t change appearance—it becomes local formatting.
Paragraph styles encapsulate all text formatting—both paragraph 
formatting and character formatting.
Basic Style. If you look at the Paragraph Styles panel, you’ll always 
see a “Basic Paragraph” style. This is something like Word’s (infa-
mous) “Normal” style, and provides a kind of default style for all text. 
Paragraph Styles

322     6
We tend not to use this style, or base any other style on it, because 
we’ve found it can cause problems as we move text from document 
to document. In a nutshell: If you have defined Basic Paragraph Style 
one way, then you copy a paragraph tagged with that style to a new 
document, the text formatting changes because InDesign applies the 
new document’s Basic Paragraph Style definition. That’s usually not 
what you were hoping for.
Creating Paragraph Styles. The easiest way (in our opinion) to create 
a text style is to format an example paragraph using local formatting, 
then create a new style based on that paragraph (see Figure 4-63).
1. Select a formatted paragraph.
2. Display the Paragraph Styles panel, if it’s not already visible 
(press Command/Ctrl-F11).
3. Choose New Paragraph Style from the Paragraph Style pop-up 
menu in the Control panel, or from the Paragraph Styles panel 
menu (or Option/Alt-click the New Style button) to open the 
New Paragraph Style dialog box. 
4. Enter a name for the style in the Style Name field. You could 
leave the name set to the default, but we think it’s better to enter 
a descriptive name—“heading 1” is quite a bit easier to remem-
ber than “Paragraph Style 6.”
5. You can also assign a Next Style (see “Next Styles” later in this 
chapter) and a keyboard shortcut to the style—the shortcut must 
use a modifier key (Shift, Command/Ctrl, Option/Alt, or some 
combination of the above) and a number key from the numeric 
keypad (NumLock must be on to define the shortcut).
6. Turn on the Apply Style to Selection checkbox in the General 
pane of the New Paragraph Style dialog box. (Otherwise, the 
style won’t be applied to the paragraph your text cursor is in.)
7. Click the OK button.
The style definition includes all the character and paragraph for-
matting applied to the first character in the selected “example” text. 
If you work by the hour, you can also define a paragraph style 
from scratch, rather than basing your style on an example:
1. Choose “New Style” from the Paragraph Styles panel menu. 
InDesign displays the New Style dialog box.

 4. y 323
Figure 4-63
Defining a  
Paragraph Style
Select a paragraph that has the  
formatting attributes you want.
Click the New Style button (or choose New Paragraph 
Style from the Paragraph Styles panel menu).
InDesign creates a new style 
and adds it to the list of 
styles in the Paragraph Styles 
panel.
At this point, you can enter 
a name for the style, or edit 
the style definition.
2. Work your way through the dialog box, setting the options as 
you want them for your new style. When everything looks the 
way you want it to, press Return/Enter to close the dialog box.
Creating a style this way is a little bit more awkward than simply 
basing a style on an example paragraph, but some people prefer it. 
We’ve met at least one person who likes setting tabs “without all that 
pesky text in the way.”
Applying Paragraph Styles. To apply a paragraph style, select a para-
graph or series of paragraphs (remember, you don’t have to select 
the entire paragraph to apply paragraph formatting) and click a style 
name in the Paragraph Styles panel (see Figure 4-64). Alternatively, 
if you’ve defined a keyboard shortcut for the paragraph style, you can 
press the shortcut.
When you simply click a paragraph style to apply it, InDesign 
retains all the local formatting, so italic text remains italic. The one 
exception to this rule is when every character in the paragraph has 
local formatting—that stuff always gets removed.
To remove all local formatting as you apply a paragraph style, 
hold down Option/Alt as you click the paragraph style name. Any 
formatting applied using character styles is retained.
To remove all local formatting and remove formatting applied by 
character styles, hold down Option-Shift/Alt-Shift as you click the 
paragraph style name. 

324     6
Select the paragraphs you 
want to format (remember, 
you don’t need to select 
the entire paragraph).
Click a style name in the 
Paragraph Styles panel, 
or use the Context menu. 
InDesign applies the 
paragraph style to the 
selected paragraphs.
Figure 4-64
Applying a  
Paragraph Style
Alternatively, you can use the Context menu in the Paragraph 
Styles panel to control which local formatting overrides you want to 
clear and/or keep.
To remove all local formatting (not including character styles) 
after you’ve applied a style, click the Clear Override button at the 
bottom of the Paragraph Styles panel. To remove all local charac-
ter formatting, hold down Command/Ctrl as you click the button; 
to remove paragraph formatting, hold down Command-Shift/Ctrl-
Shift as you click.
To remove a paragraph style from a text selection, choose Break 
Link to Style from the Paragraph Styles panel menu. Note that this 
does not change the formatting or the look of the selected para-
graphs—it simply applies the formatting applied by the paragraph 
style as local formatting. As we said in the “Character Styles” section, 
you can think of this as breaking the link between the paragraph and 
the style definition.
Editing Paragraph Styles. To edit a paragraph style, you can use any 
or all of the following approaches—all of them display the Paragraph 
Style Options dialog box, which you can use to change the attributes 
of the paragraph style.
▶Hold down Command-Option-Shift/Ctrl-Alt-Shift and double-
click the paragraph style name in the Paragraph Styles panel.
▶Point at the style you want to edit in the Paragraph Styles panel 
and choose Edit from the context menu.

 4. y 325
Figure 4-65
Redefining a  
Paragraph Style
Change the formatting of an 
example paragraph tagged 
with the paragraph style   
you want to change. A   
“+” appears next to   
the style name in the   
Paragraph Styles panel.
Choose Redefine Style from the 
Paragraph Styles panel menu.
InDesign updates all in-
stances of the style   
with the formatting of   
the selected paragraph.
▶Select the style and choose Style Options from the Paragraph 
Styles panel menu.
▶Double-click the style name in the Paragraph Styles panel.
The first two approaches above do not apply the style; the latter 
two apply the style to the selected text, or to the document default 
formatting when no text is selected. Be aware of this difference as 
you go to edit a style—accidentally setting the default font for a docu-
ment to a style featuring hot pink dingbats can be a frustrating and 
embarrassing experience.
Redefining Paragraph Styles. The easiest way to create a paragraph 
style is to base the style on the formatting of an example paragraph. 
The easiest way to update the style definition? Do the same!
First, pick any paragraph tagged with the style you want to change, 
and apply local formatting to it (a “+” will appear next to the style 
name in the Paragraph Styles panel). Then choose Redefine Style 
from the Paragraph Styles panel menu (or press Command-Option-
Shift-R/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-R, or use the Context menu). InDesign will 
redefine the style based on the selected text (see Figure 4-65).
Next Style. If you’re typing in InDesign, and the paragraph you’re 
in is tagged with the “Heading” style, you probably don’t want the 

326     6
In this example, we have 
set the Next Style option for 
each paragraph style to auto-
matically apply the para-
graph style we want when we 
press Return/Enter.
The “title” paragraph 
style has the “ornament” 
paragraph style as its Next 
Style…
…which means that, 
when we press Return/
Enter, InDesign 
switches to that style.
The “ornament” style, in 
turn, has the paragraph 
style named “author” 
as its next style, so 
pressing Return/Enter 
as we type text switches 
to the “author” style.
When we enter text following 
the “author” paragraph 
style, InDesign applies the 
“para1” style, which includes 
drop cap formatting.
All of these paragraph style 
assignments take place as 
we type, so we don’t have to 
reach for the Paragraph Styles 
panel.
Figure 4-66
Next Style
next paragraph to be tagged with “Heading” too, right? You can 
force InDesign to automatically change the subsequent paragraph 
style with the Next Style pop-up menu in the New Paragraph Style or 
Paragraph Style Options dialog box (see Figure 4-66). For example, 
if you want the subsequent paragraph to be “BodyText,” then choose 
“BodyText” from the Next Style pop-up menu.
Note that this only works if the insertion point is at the end of 
a paragraph when you press Return/Enter. If the insertion point is 
anywhere else, you’ll simply break that paragraph in two, and both 
new paragraphs will have the same style as the original one.
Using Next Style on Existing Text. What if you want to apply a   
sequence of paragraph styles to text you’ve already entered or 
imported? Select the range of text you want to format, then point at 
the first paragraph style you want to apply. Choose Apply style name 

 4. y 327
Figure 4-67
Applying  
Sequential Styles
Select the text you want to 
format. The first paragraph 
selected should be the start 
of the “chain” of styles you 
want to apply.
Choose Apply style name
Then Next Style from the 
Context menu (where style 
name is the name of the 
style).
InDesign applies the styles, 
formatting each paragraph 
as specified by the Next Style 
setting of each style.
Note: You can also apply 
sequential styles by select-
ing a text frame with the 
Selection tool. When you 
do this, InDesign applies 
“next style” formatting to 
all of the text in the story, 
beginning with the first 
paragraph in the story.
Then Next Style from the context menu (where style name is the 
name of the style you want to apply). InDesign applies the sequence 
of paragraph styles (see Figure 4-67).
Selecting Unused Paragraph Styles. Choose Select All Unused from 
the Paragraph Styles panel menu to select all paragraph styles that 
are not applied to any text in the publication. Typically, the only 
reason you’d want to do this is to delete them all.
Deleting Paragraph Styles. To remove a paragraph style from your 
document, first deselect everything (press Command-Shift-A/Ctrl-
Shift-A), then select the style name in the Paragraph Styles panel and 
choose Delete Styles from the panel’s menu (or click the Delete Style 
button at the bottom of the panel). InDesign deletes the style.
InDesign gives you a choice of how to handle paragraphs already 
tagged with that style. You can choose No Paragraph Style to convert 
the formatting applied by the style to local formatting, or you can 
choose to apply another style. If you want to replace one style with 
another without deleting the original style, use the Find/Change 
dialog box (see Chapter 3, “Text”).

328     6
As we mentioned in the discussion earlier in this chapter, nested 
styles really come into their own when combined with paragraph 
styles. Remember all of the work we did to set up the nested styles 
in our example? Now imagine putting all of that formatting power 
into a paragraph style. Imagine applying it with a single mouse click. 
Again, we think this stuff is very cool (see Figure 4-68).
Paragraph Styles 
and Nested Styles
Figure 4-68
Adding Nested Styles 
to a Paragraph Style
This raw text has been 
dumped into the document 
from a spreadsheet or 
database. Formatting a 
catalog full of this text 
would be very tedious, 
even if you used nested 
styles as local formatting.
If you add the nested 
style definitions to a 
paragraph style, however, 
you can apply massive 
amounts of formatting 
with a single mouse click, 
as we’ve done here.
One powerful feature of InDesign’s character and paragraph styles 
is the ability to base one style on another, also called parent-child 
relationships (see Figure 4-69). You can base a style on another one 
by choosing a style from the Based On pop-up menu in either the 
New Paragraph Style or the Paragraph Style Options dialog box (this 
works for either character or paragraph styles).
In this book, there are body text styles for paragraphs that 
follow headings, paragraphs that are in lists, and so on—but they’re 
all based on one “parent” paragraph style. If we need to make the 
text size a half-point smaller, we could edit the parent style and the 
change would ripple throughout the book.
Creating Parent-Child 
Style Relationships

 4. y 329
When one style is based on another, InDesign keeps track of the 
differences between the base style (the “parent”) and the style based 
on it (the “child”). When you change the definition of the parent 
style, the changes will affect all of the attributes in the child style 
that are the same as the same attributes in the parent style.
Reset to Base. By the way, if your text cursor is in a paragraph when 
you create a new style, that paragraph’s style becomes the “based on” 
style and any local formatting applied to the paragraph appears as 
the differences in the new style. If you don’t want the local format-
ting, click the Reset to Base button. If you don’t want your new style 
to be based on anything, make sure the Based On pop-up menu is set 
to No Paragraph Style.
Style Groups are a way to organize your paragraph and character 
styles. (They work with object styles and table styles, too, but that’s 
not what we’re talking about in this chapter.) Each style group is a 
folder into which you can put one or more styles. You can even nest 
one style group into another to create style hierarchies.
To create a style group, click the New Style Group button at the 
bottom of the Paragraph Styles or Character Styles panel (or choose 
the feature of the same name from the panel’s menu). If you already 
Style Groups
Figure 4-69
Using Based On
The paragraph style “heading 2” 
is based on “heading 1.”
heading 1
heading 2
This means that when 
you change the format-
ting (the font, in this 
example) used in the 
parent style…
…the change affects 
all of the child styles.

330     6
Figure 4-70
Creating Style Groups
To make a new style group with 
already-created styles, select the  
styles you want to include and  
choose New Group from Styles.
InDesign displays 
the New Style Group 
dialog box. Enter a 
name for the group.
InDesign moves the styles 
into the style group.
You can duplicate styles 
from one group to another 
by holding down Option/Alt 
as you drag them from in   
the panel.
Quick Apply shows you both 
style name and style group.
know which of your styles you want in your group, you can add them 
while creating the group by first selecting them first (see Figure 4-70).
Once you’ve created a style group, you can move any style into 
it by dragging the style name in the panel into the group. It’s very 
similar to working with folders in your operating system.
One of the coolest things about style groups is that you can have 
the same-named styles in more than one group. For example, you 
might make a “bodytext” paragraph style in a group called “Business 
Section” and another, differently-styled “bodytext” style in a group 
called “Entertainment Section”. We’re not saying you have to create 
templates like this, but it can be useful in certain situations.
To copy one or more selected styles to another group, choose 
Copy to Group from the panel menu, or Option/Alt-drag them over 
another folder.
What’s Wrong with Style Groups? At first, style groups sound great, 
especially if you have dozens of styles in your document. But you 
need to be careful with them. First, if do have same-named styles 

 4. y 331
with different definitions, it can be confusing which bodytext or 
which heading you’re applying. This calls for eternal vigilance. It 
helps if you apply styles with Quick Apply, because the Quick Apply 
window displays both the style name and what style group its in.
The big problems appear if you need to export your documents as 
RTF (rich text format) for someone who is editing in Microsoft Word. 
Style groups will cause huge headaches because on export InDesign 
changes the style names (it adds the style group name). This isn’t 
so bad except that when you reimport the RTF file, it’s not smart 
enough to remap the style names back to the document’s styles, so 
you end up with all your styles duplicated. It’s horrible. We hope that 
Adobe will release a patch to fix this problem by the time you read 
this, but we’re not holding our breath. Of course, in the meantime, 
it’s a good excuse to get your editors to use InCopy instead.
Copying Styles from Other Publications
One of the great things about character and paragraph styles is that 
you can use them to unify standard formatting across a range of pub-
lications—the chapters of this book, for example. While you can’t 
define a “master” style sheet and have all publications get their style 
definitions from it (as you can in FrameMaker), you can easily copy 
styles from one InDesign publication to another.
▶To copy character styles from another publication, choose 
Load Character Styles from the Character Styles panel menu. 
InDesign displays the Open a File dialog box. Locate and select 
the InDesign publication file containing the styles you want and 
click the Open button. InDesign copies the character styles from 
that publication into the current document.
▶To copy paragraph styles from one publication to another 
choose Load Paragraph Styles from the Paragraph Styles panel 
menu. 
▶To import both character and paragraph styles from another 
publication, choose Load All Text Styles from the panel menu  
of the Character Styles panel or the Paragraph Styles panel.
When you import styles that have the same name as styles that 
already exist in the publication, InDesign overrides the attributes of 
the existing styles with the attributes of the incoming styles.
You can also move styles by copying text tagged with the styles 
you want from one publication and pasting it into another document 

332     6
(or dragging a text frame from one document into another). If 
the styles do not exist in the document you’ve pasted the text into, 
InDesign adds them. If the styles already exist, InDesign overrides 
the style definitions in the incoming text with the style definitions of 
the existing styles.
You can also synchronize style sheets among all the documents in 
a book when you use the Book panel, which we talk about in Chapter 
8, “Long Documents.”
Styles from imported text files. When you import a Microsoft Word 
or RTF file that includes paragraph or character styles that don’t exist 
in the InDesign publication, those styles get added to the Character 
Styles and Paragraph Styles panels. You can always tell one of these 
styles from those created in InDesign because the panels display a 
little gray floppy disk icon next to the style name.
Libraries of Styles. One of our favorite uses for libraries (see “Library 
panel” in Chapter 1, “Workspace”) is to save paragraph and charac-
ter styles that we use in multiple documents. In a small text frame, 
we type a few words (usually the name of the style) and then apply 
one or more styles to them. Then we drag the text frame into a library 
(select Library from the New submenu, under the File menu, if you 
haven’t already made one) and double-click on the library thumbnail 
to give it a name and description. Later, when we need that style in 
some other document, we can open the library file, drag that text 
frame into our document, and then delete the text frame—the styles 
remain. Of course, this works with libraries of color swatches, too.
Styles from alternate layouts. When you create an alternate layout, 
you can select the “Copy Text Styles to New Styles Group” option. 
This creates all the text styles in a new styles group so that you can 
easily change the styles to conform to the different layout. In fact, 
you even go back and base the styles in the child layout on the styles 
in the parent layout to establish a connection (see “Alternate Layouts” 
in Chapter 2, “Page Layout”).
Mapped styles from Content Placer tool. When you use the Content 
Collector/Content Placer tools to copy objects from one publication 
to another, you can specify style mapping options for text and table 
styles (see “Copying and Linking Objects” in Chapter 7, “Importing 
and Exporting”).

 4. y 333
Optical Margin Alignment
Ever since Gutenberg set out to print his Bible, typesetters have 
looked for ways to “balance” the edges of columns of text—particu-
larly lines ending or beginning with punctuation. Because the eye 
doesn’t “see” punctuation, it can sometimes appear that the left or 
right edges of some columns of type (especially justified type) are 
misaligned. Some other programs compensate for this problem 
by using a “hanging punctuation” feature, which pushes certain 
punctuation characters outside the text column. But there’s more 
to making the edges of a column look even than just punctuation. 
Some characters can create a “ragged” look all by themselves—think 
of a “W,” at the beginning of a line, for example.
When you select an InDesign story (with either the Selection or 
the Type tool) and turn on the Optical Margin Alignment option 
in the Story panel (choose Story from the Type menu to display the 
Story panel), the program balances the edges of the columns based 
on the appearance of all of the characters at the beginning or end of 
the lines in the column. This adjustment makes the columns appear 
more even—even though it sometimes means that characters are 
extending beyond the edges of the column (see Figure 4-71).
The amount that InDesign “hangs” a character outside the text 
column depends on the setting you enter in the Base Size field of 
Optical Margin Alignment off
Optical Margin Alignment on
In this close-up view, you can clearly 
see the way that InDesign adjusts 
the characters at the edge of the text 
column.
Punctuation is 
positioned outside 
the column.
Some characters 
hang outside the 
column...
...others are 
moved farther 
inside the column.
Figure 4-71
Optical Margin  
Alignment

334     6
the Story panel (that’s the field with the icon that looks like it would 
make a drop cap). In general, you should enter the point size of your 
body text in this field.
Unfortunately, it turns out that many designers don’t like the look 
of Optical Margin Alignment. It’s not that the feature is flawed; it’s 
that designers (especially younger folks) have become so accustomed 
to their type lining up with a particular guide or ruler that they 
think it’s wrong to have type inside or outside that (non-printing) 
line. Nevertheless, we encourage you to try turning it on and seeing 
how your readers like it—we think they’ll find the text easier to read.
Ignore Optical Margin. Even if you do like Optical Margin Align-
ment, there’s a good chance that you’ll occasionally find a paragraph 
or two that you wish it wouldn’t apply to. For example, monospaced 
code listings should not be optically aligned—that defeats the pur-
pose of using a monospaced font. Fortunately, you have the option 
to turn off Optical Margin Alignment on a paragraph by paragraph 
basis or in a paragraph style.
To turn it off for one or more selected paragraphs, choose Ignore 
Optical Margin from the Control panel or Paragraph panel menu. 
To disable it in a paragraph style, turn on the Ignore Optical Margin 
checkbox in the Indents and Spacing pane of the Paragraph Style 
Options dialog box.
An Old Typesetter Never…
Late night. The sound of the espresso machine in the kitchen about 
to reach critical mass and melt down, destroying the office and civi-
lization as we know it. The office is different, the equipment and the 
coffee are better, but we still seem to be up late at night setting type.
And, to tell you the truth, we’re not sure we would have it any 
other way.

335
You can use InDesign’s drawing tools to draw almost anything—
from straight lines and boxes to incredibly complex freeform shapes.
The drawing tools can be divided into three types: the Rectan-
gle, Polygon, Oval, and Line tools are for drawing basic shapes; the 
Pencil, Smooth, Eraser, Pen, Add Point, Delete Point, and Convert 
Point tools draw or edit more complex paths (see Figure 5-1). The 
Scissors tool gives you a way of cutting paths.
Some of the path drawing tools (the Rectangle, Oval, and Polygon 
tools) have counterparts that draw frames (the Rectangular Frame, 
Oval Frame, and Polygonal Frame tools). The only thing different 
about these tools is that the “frame” versions draw paths whose con-
tent type has been set to “Graphic.” That’s it. 
In this book, we’ll use the default variant of the tool to refer to 
both tools—when we say “the Rectangle tool,” we’re referring to both 
the Rectangle tool and the Rectangular Frame tool.
Which path drawing tools should you use? Don’t worry too much 
about it—the basic shapes can be converted into freeform paths, and 
the freeform drawing tools can be used to draw basic shapes.
The paths you draw in InDesign are made up of points, and the 
points are joined to each other by line segments (see Figure 5-2). 
A path is just like a connect-the-dots puzzle. Connect all the dots 
together in the right order, and you’ve made a picture. Because points 
along a path have an order, or winding, you can think of each point 
as a milepost along the path. Or as a sign saying, “Now go this way.”
Drawing

5

336     6
Freeform path drawing tools
Pen tool
Pencil tool
Path editing tools
Add Point tool
Delete Point tool
Convert Point tool
Scissors tool
Smooth tool
Erase tool
Basic shape tools
Rectangle tool
Ellipse tool
Polygon tool
Rectangle Frame tool
Ellipse Frame tool
Polygon Frame tool
Line tool
First point in the path
Last point in the path
Point
Line segment
Control handle
Control handle
Line segment
Figure 5-2
Parts of a Path
Figure 5-1
Drawing Tools
Drawing Basic Shapes
Using the basic shapes tools (the Rectangle, Polygon, Ellipse, and 
Line tools, and their frame-drawing counterparts) is straightfor-
ward: drag the tool and get a path of the corresponding shape. If you 
want to draw a frame, you can either use the frame-drawing variant 
of the tool, or draw the path and then convert it to a frame.
To draw a rectangle, oval, polygon, or line, follow the steps below.
1. Select the appropriate tool from the Tools panel. 
To specify the type of polygon you’ll be drawing, double-click 
the Polygon tool and choose the shape you want in the Polygon 
Settings dialog box before you start drawing.
2. Position the cursor where you want one corner of the shape, 
then drag. InDesign draws a path, starting where you first held 
down the mouse button. 
To draw squares or circles, hold down Shift as you drag the 
Rectangle tool or Ellipse tool. When you hold down Shift as you 
drag, the Polygon tool produces equilateral polygons. Holding 
down Shift as you drag the Line tool constrains the angle of the 

 5.  337
line to 45-degree tangents from the point at which you started 
dragging.
Hold down Option to draw a basic shape from its center.
Press the arrow keys while dragging to create a grid of shapes. 
For details, see “Grid Mode” in Chapter 9, “Transforming.”
3. When the basic shape is the size and shape you want it to be, 
stop dragging and release the mouse button.
You can also create rectangles, ellipses, and polygons by specifying 
their width and height (see Figure 5-3).
1. Select the Rectangle, Ellipse, or Polygon tool. 
2. Position the cursor where you want to place one corner of the 
basic shape, or hold down Option/Alt and position the cursor 
where you want to place the center point of the shape, or select a 
point on the proxy in the Control panel or Transform panel.
3. Click. InDesign displays a dialog box.
4. Enter values in the Width and Height fields, then click  
the OK button.
You can control the origin of 
the basic shape by selecting a 
point on the Control panel’s 
Proxy before you click.
Select a basic shape 
tool, then click on the 
page or pasteboard.
InDesign displays a dialog 
box (Rectangle, Polygon,  
or Ellipse). Enter the 
dimensions you want and 
click the OK button.
InDesign creates a 
basic shape using 
the dimensions you 
entered.
Figure 5-3
Adding a Basic Shape  
“by the Numbers”
Points and Paths
Why is it that the most important things in life are often the most dif-
ficult to learn? Drawing by manipulating Bezier paths—the geomet-
ric construct used to represent path shapes in most of today’s vector 
drawing programs—is one of those difficult things. When we first 
encountered Bezier curves, the process of drawing by placing points 
and manipulating control handles struck us as alien, as nothing like 
drawing at all. Then we started to catch on.
In many ways, we had been drawing lines from the point of view 
of everything but the line; in a Bezier-path-drawing program such as 
InDesign, we draw lines from the point of view of the line itself. This 

338     6
is neither better nor worse; it’s just different and takes time to get 
used to. If you’ve just glanced at the Pen tool and are feeling confused, 
we urge you to stick with it. Start thinking like a line.
Imagine that, through the action of some mysterious potion or 
errant cosmic ray, you’ve been reduced in size so that you’re a little 
smaller than one of the dots in a connect-the-dots puzzle. For added 
detail and color, imagine that the puzzle appears in a Highlights for 
Children magazine in a dentist’s office.
The only way out is to complete the puzzle. As you walk, a line 
extends behind you. As you reach each dot in the puzzle, a sign tells 
you where you are in the puzzle and the route you must take to get to 
the next dot in the path.
Get the idea? The dots in the puzzle are points. The route you walk 
from one point to another, as instructed by the signs at each point, is 
a line segment. Each series of connected dots is a path. As you walk 
from one dot to another, you’re thinking like a line.
Each point—from the first point in the path to the last—carries 
with it some information about the line segments that attach it to the 
previous and next points along the path. 
Paths and their formatting (fill and stroke) attributes are different 
things. Even if the fill and stroke applied to the path is “None” or the 
stroke weight is 0 there’s still a path there. 
When you select a point, the point “fills in,” becoming a solid 
square. Unselected points on the path are shown as hollow squares.
Paths have a direction, also known as “winding” (as in “winding a 
clock”). Path direction generally corresponds to the order in which 
you placed the points on the path (see Figure 5-4). In our connect-
the-dots puzzle, path direction tells us the order in which we should 
connect the dots.
To reverse the direction of a path, select the path and choose 
Reverse Path from the Paths submenu of the Object menu. InDesign 
reverses the direction of the path. You can also reverse the direction 
of a selected path using the Reverse Path path operation, as discussed 
in “Path Operations,” later in this chapter.
Thinking Like a Line
Winding
1
2
3
4
5
The order in which 
you create points 
determines the 
direction (or “wind-
ing”) of the path.
Figure 5-4
Path Direction,  
or “Winding”

 5.  339
Points on an InDesign path are either corner points or curve points. 
Each type of point has its own special properties.
▶A curve point adds a curved line segment between the current 
point and the preceding and following points. Curve points 
have two control handles extended from them, and moving one 
control handle affects the position of the other control handle. 
One control handle affects the curve of the line segment follow-
ing the curve point on the path; the other affects the curve of the 
line segment preceding the curve point. Curve points are typi-
cally used to add smooth curves to a path (see Figure 5-5).
▶A corner point adds a straight line segment between the cur-
rent point and the preceding point on the path (see Figure 5-6). 
Corner points are typically used to create paths containing 
straight line segments.
Which point type should you use? Any type of point can be 
turned into any other type of point, and anything you can do with 
one kind of point can be done with the other kind of point. Given 
these two points (so to speak), you can use the kinds of points and 
drawing tools you’re happiest with and achieve exactly the results 
you want. There is no “best way” to draw with InDesign’s Pen tool, 
but it helps to understand how the method you choose works.
Point Types
Curve points curve the line segments 
attached to the point. All of the points in 
this example are curve points.
Corner points, by default, apply no curve 
to the line segments attached to the point. 
All of the points in this example are 
corner points.
Figure 5-6
Corner Points
Figure 5-5
Curve Points
You control the curvature of the line segments before and after each 
point using the point’s control handles. Points can have up to two 
control handles attached to them. By default, new corner points have 
none and curve points have two. Note that each line segment has 
up to two control handles defining its curve—the “outgoing” control 
Control Handles

340     6
handle attached to the point defining the start of the line segment 
and the “incoming” control handle attached to the next point. 
If you retract the control handle (by dragging it inside the point), 
the control handle has no effect on the curvature of the path. This 
doesn’t necessarily mean that the line segment is a straight line, 
however—a control handle on the point at the other end of the line 
segment might also have an effect on the curve of the line segment.
The control handles attached to a corner point can be adjusted 
independently, while changing the angle of one control handle of a 
curve point changes the angle of the other control handle (see Figure 
5-7). This difference, in our opinion, makes corner points more 
useful than curve points—you can do anything with a corner point 
you could do with a curve point.
When you adjust one 
control handle on a 
curve point, InDesign 
adjusts the other 
handle, as well.
To adjust the curvature 
of a line segment without 
changing the curve of the 
following line segment, 
use a corner point.
Figure 5-7
Curve Points vs.  
Corner Points
To convert a point from one point type to another, click the point 
using the Convert Point tool. If you click a curve point, this retracts 
both control handles. To convert a curve point to a corner point 
while leaving one of its control handles in place, drag the other con-
trol handle using the Convert Point tool (see Figure 5-8). 
Drawing Paths with the Pencil Tool
The quickest way to create a freeform path on an InDesign page is 
to use the Pencil tool. Click the Pencil tool in the Tools panel (or   
press N), then drag the Pencil tool on the page. As you drag, InDesign 
creates a path that follows the cursor, automatically placing corner 
and curve points as it does so (see Figure 5-9).
Drawing Paths with the Pen Tool
You use the Pen tool and its variants (the Remove Point, Add Point, 
and Convert Point tools)—to create and edit paths. 

 5.  341
Position the Convert 
Point tool over a 
curve point…
…and click. InDesign 
converts the curve  
point to a corner point.
To convert a corner point 
to a curve point, drag the 
Convert Point tool over 
the point.
To convert a curve  
point to a corner point, 
drag one of the control 
handles using the  
Convert Point tool.
InDesign converts the 
curve point to a corner 
point. As you drag the 
control handle…
…InDesign adjusts the 
curve of the correspond-
ing line segment, but 
leaves the other line  
segment unchanged.
Figure 5-8
Converting from One 
Point Type to Another
Drag the Pencil tool on the  
page or pasteboard.
As you drag the Pencil tool, InDesign 
positions curve and corner points. 
the path looks the way you want it 
to, stop dragging.
Figure 5-9
Drawing with  
the Pencil Tool
When you click the Pen tool on a page, InDesign places a corner 
point. Drag the Pen tool, and InDesign places a curve point where 
you started dragging—you determine the length of the control han-
dles (and, therefore, the shape of the curve) by dragging as you place 
the curve point (see Figure 5-10).
To curve the line segment following a corner point, place the 
corner point, position the Pen tool above the point (this switches 
to the Convert Point tool), and then drag. As you drag, InDesign 
extends a control handle from the point (see Figure 5-11).
The odd thing about using the Pen tool this way is that you don’t 
see the effect of the curve manipulation until you’ve placed the next 
point. This makes sense in that you don’t need a control handle for a 
line segment that doesn’t yet exist, but it can be quite a brain-twister.

342     6
Position the Pen tool 
above a point (it will 
change into the Convert 
Point tool).
Drag a control handle  
out of the point.
Click the Pen tool to add 
a point. InDesign curves 
the line segment connect-
ing the points.
Drag the Pen tool…
…and InDesign creates a curve point.
Click the Pen tool…
…and InDesign creates a corner point.
Figure 5-11
Dragging a Control 
Handle Out of  
a Corner Point
Figure 5-10
Placing Curve  
and Corner Points 
To convert a curve point you’ve just placed to a corner point, posi-
tion the Pen tool above the point (to switch to the Convert Point tool) 
and then click the point. InDesign converts the point to a corner 
point and retracts the point’s control handles.
You can change the position of points: select the point with the 
Direct Selection tool, then drag the point to a new location.
Drawing Techniques
Now that you know all about the elements that make up paths, let’s 
talk about how you actually use them.
When you’re drawing paths, don’t forget that you can change the 
path after you’ve drawn it. We’ve often seen people delete entire 
paths and start over because they misplaced the last point on the 
path. Go ahead and place points in the wrong places; you can always 
change the position of any point. Also, keep these facts in mind:
▶You can always add points to or subtract points from the path.
Path Drawing Tips

 5.  343
▶You can change tools while drawing a path.
▶ You can split the path using the Scissors tool.
It’s also best to create paths using as few points as you can—but 
it’s not required. We’ve noticed that people who have just started 
working with Bezier drawing tools often use more points than are 
needed to create their paths. Over time, they learn one of the basic 
rules of vector drawing: Any curve can be described by two points 
and their associated control handles. No more, no less.
The aspect of drawing in InDesign that’s toughest to understand 
and master is the care, feeding, and manipulation of control handles. 
These handles are fundamental to drawing curved lines, so you’d 
better learn how to work with them.
To adjust the curve of a line segment, use the Direct Selection 
tool to select a point attached to the line segment. The control han-
dles attached to that point—and to the points that come before and 
after the selected point on the path—appear. If you don’t see control 
handles attached to the point you selected, the curvature of the line 
segment is controlled by the points at the other end of the line seg-
ments. Position the cursor over one of the control handles and drag. 
The curve of the line segment changes as you drag. When the curve 
looks the way you want it to, stop dragging (see Figure 5-12).
To retract (delete) a control handle, drag the handle inside the 
point it’s attached to.
You can also adjust the curve of a curved line segment by dragging 
the segment itself. To do this, select the line segment (click the line 
segment with the Direct Selection tool, or drag a selection rectangle 
over part of the line segment) and then drag. As you drag, InDesign 
adjusts the curve of the line segment (see Figure 5-13).
To add a point to an existing line segment, select the path, switch 
to the Pen tool, and then click the Pen tool on the line segment. 
InDesign adds a point to the path. You don’t need to select the Add 
Manipulating   
Control Handles
Adding Points   
to a Path
Select a point 
using the Direct 
Selection tool.
Drag the control handle attached to 
the point to a new location.
InDesign curves 
the line segment.
Figure 5-12
Adjusting Curve Points

344     6
Point tool—InDesign will switch to it when you move the Pen tool 
above a line segment.
To remove a point from a path, select the path, switch to the Pen tool, 
and then click the Pen tool on the point. InDesign removes the point. 
If you’ve gotten this far, you probably know how to select points, but 
here are a few rules to keep in mind.
▶To select a point, click it with the Direct Selection tool, or drag a 
selection rectangle around it (using the same tool). 
▶You can select more than one point at a time. To do this, hold 
down Shift as you click the Direct Selection tool on each point, 
or use the Direct Selection tool to drag a selection rectangle 
around the points you want to select. 
▶To select all of the points on a path, hold down Option/Alt as 
you click the Direct Selection tool on the path.
▶You can select points on paths inside groups or compound paths 
by using the Direct Selection tool.
▶When you move a point, the control handles associated with 
that point also move, maintaining their positions relative to the 
point. This means that the curves of the line segments attached 
to the point change, unless you’re also moving the points on the 
other end of the incoming and outgoing line segments.
▶To move a straight line segment and its associated points, select 
the line segment with the Direct Selection tool and drag.
Paths can be open or closed (see Figure 5-14). An open path has no 
line segment between the beginning and ending points on the path. 
You don’t have to close a path to add contents (text or a graphic) or 
apply a fill to the path.
Removing Points   
from a Path
Selecting and   
Moving Points
Opening and   
Closing Paths
Select a line segment using the Direct 
Selection tool (drag a selection rect-
angle over the line segment).
Drag the line segment. As you 
drag, InDesign adjusts the 
curve of the line segment.
Figure 5-13
Another Way to  
Adjust the Curve of  
a Line Segment

 5.  345
Figure 5-14
Open and Closed Paths
To close an open path, select the path, select the Pen tool, and 
then click the Pen tool on the first or last point on the path (it doesn’t 
matter which). Click the Pen tool again on the other end point. 
InDesign closes the path (see Figure 5-15).
Closed path.
Open path.
A path does not have to 
be closed to have a fill.
Move the Pen tool over  
an end point of an open 
path.
Click the Pen tool, then 
move it over the other 
end point on the path.
Click on the end point. 
InDesign closes the path.
Figure 5-15
Closing an Open Path
Another way to close an open path is to use the Close Path path 
operation, as discussed in “Path Operations,” later in this chapter. 
To open a closed path, select the Direct Selection tool and click 
the line segment between two points on the path (you can also 
drag a selection rectangle over the line segment). Press Delete, and 
InDesign removes the line segment, opening the path between the 
points on either side of the line segment (see Figure 5-16).
Select the Direct Selection tool, then drag a  
selection rectangle over a line segment.
Press the Delete key to 
delete the line segment.
Figure 5-16
Opening a Closed Path 
by Deleting a  
Line Segment

346     6
To open a path without removing a line segment, select the Scis-
sors tool and click the path. Click on a point to split the path at that 
point, or click a line segment to split the path (see Figure 5-17).
The point closest to the start of the path (following the path’s 
winding) becomes the point farther to the back, and the point far-
thest from the start of the path is on top of it.
Another way to open a closed path is to use the Close Path path 
operation, as discussed in “Path Operations,” later in this chapter. 
Click the Pen tool on the 
end point of one open 
path, then click an end 
point on the other path.
To close the path, click 
one of the remaining  
end points.
Click the other end point 
to close the path.
Figure 5-18
Joining Two Open Paths
Click a line segment or 
point with the Scissors 
tool.
InDesign opens the path. You can drag the path’s 
end points apart, if necessary.
Figure 5-17
Opening a Closed Path
To join two open paths, follow these steps (see Figure 5-18).
1. Position the Pen tool above the start or end point of one of the 
open paths (you don’t need to select a path). InDesign changes 
the cursor to show that it’s ready to add a point to the path.
2. Click the Pen tool, then position the cursor over the start or end 
point of the second path. InDesign changes the cursor to show 
that it’s ready to connect the current path to the point.
3. Click the Pen tool. InDesign joins the two paths.
4. Repeat this process for the other two end points to close the path.
Alternatively, you can select two paths and choose Join from the 
Paths submenu of the Object menu. InDesign will join the nearest 
points of the two paths (with straight line segments).
Joining Open Paths

 5.  347
Compound Paths
In the old days, not only did Ole have to walk miles to school in 
freezing cold weather, but he also had to work his way through an 
impossibly difficult series of steps to create holes inside closed paths. 
This did nothing to improve his already gloomy outlook on life.
These days, creating holes in paths is easier—just make them 
into compound paths. Compound paths are made of two or more 
paths (which must be unlocked, ungrouped, and closed) that have 
been joined using the Make Compound Paths option on the Paths 
submenu of the Object menu. Areas between the two paths, or areas 
where the paths overlap, are transparent. The following steps show 
you how to make a torus, or “doughnut” shape (see Figure 5-19).
1. Select the Ellipse tool from the Tools panel.
2. Draw two ovals, one on top of the other.
3. Fill the ovals with a basic fill.
4. Select both ovals.
5. Press Command-8/Ctrl-8 to join the two ovals.
If you decide you don’t want the paths to be compound paths, you 
can change them back into individual paths. To do this, select the 
compound path and then choose Release Compound Path from the 
Paths submenu of the Object menu.
When you join paths with different lines and fills, the compound 
path takes on the stroke and fill attributes of the path that’s the far-
thest to the back.
Select the paths you 
want to turn into a 
compound path.
Choose Make Compound Path from the  
Paths submenu of the Object menu.
InDesign creates a   
compound path from   
the selected objects   
(this makes a hole where   
the shapes overlap).
This example shows   
a compound path   
that we’ve used as a   
container for an image.
Figure 5-19
Creating a 
 Compound Path

348     6
You can subselect the individual points that make up a compound 
path in the same way that you subselect objects inside a group—
select the Direct Selection tool and click on the point. Once a point is 
selected, you can alter its position (see Figure 5-20).
Editing   
Compound   
Paths
Use the Direct Selection 
tool to select some  
points.
Transform (move, scale, shear, or rotate) the 
points. In this example, we’ve dragged the  
points to a new location.
Figure 5-20
Editing a  
Compound Path
To convert a compound path back into two or more normal paths, 
select the compound path and choose Release Compound Path 
from the Paths submenu of the Object menu (or press Command-
Option-8/Ctrl-Alt-8). InDesign converts the compound path into its 
component paths. Note that the paths do not return to their original 
formatting when you do this.
If you’re familiar with Illustrator or other drawing programs, you’re 
probably used to having two options for filling paths. These options 
go by different names in different applications, but they’re usually 
known as the “Even Odd Fill Rule” and the “Zero Winding Fill Rule.” 
These rules control the way the application fills a path that intersects 
itself, or the way the interior areas of a compound path are filled.
If you’ve pasted paths from these applications into InDesign, or 
if you’ve drawn a self-intersecting path in InDesign, you’ve probably 
discovered that InDesign supports the Zero Winding Fill Rule, but 
not the Even Odd Fill Rule.
What the heck are we talking about? It’s much easier to show than 
it is to describe (see Figure 5-21).
What can you do when you want the even/odd fill? Do you have 
to leave InDesign, create the path in a drawing program, and then 
import the path as a graphic?
This question drove Ole to the brink of madness before he dis-
covered that you can simulate the effect of the Even Odd Fill Rule 
using compound paths and the Add path operation (we’ll discuss 
path operations later in this chapter). See Figure 5-22.
1. Select the self-intersecting path.
Splitting   
Compound   
Paths
Compound Paths and 
Even-Odd Fill

 5.  349
Figure 5-21
Fill Rules
Self-intersecting path filled 
using the Zero Winding Fill 
Rule (InDesign).
Self-intersecting path filled 
using the Even Odd Fill Rule 
(Illustrator).
Figure 5-22
Simulating the Effect of 
the Even Odd Fill Rule
Select the path, then copy 
the path and paste the copy 
on top of the original using 
Paste In Place.
Click the Add button in the 
PathFinder panel.
InDesign creates a composite 
path that is filled using the 
Even Odd Fill Rule.
2. Copy the path, then use Paste In Place (Command-Option-Shift-
V/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-V) to create a duplicate of the object.
3. Select both items and click the Add button on the Pathfinder 
panel (Intersect will also work). InDesign creates a compound 
path and fills it exactly as the original path would look if it had 
been filled using the Even Odd Fill Rule.
Smoothing Paths
You like using the Pencil tool. But your mouse hand isn’t perfectly 
steady. Or your “friends” can’t resist the urge to bump your arm 
while you’re drawing. Either way, you need a way to smooth the path 
you’ve drawn in InDesign. Are you doomed to an after-hours work-
out with the Pen tool? Not with the Smooth tool—a handy gadget 
that can smooth out the rough patches in your InDesign paths.
To use the Smooth tool, select the tool from the Tools panel (it’s 
usually hiding under the Pencil tool). Or select the Pencil tool and 
hold down Option/Alt to change the Pencil tool to the Smooth tool. 
Drag the tool along the path you want to smooth (see Figure 5-23). 
As you drag, InDesign adjusts the control handles and point posi-
tions on the path (sometimes deleting points as you drag).

350     6
Select the Smooth tool   
from the Tools panel.
Select a path.
Drag the Smooth   
tool over the path.
InDesign smooths the path by adjusting control handles,   
moving points on the path, and deleting points.
Figure 5-24
Smooth Tool  
Preferences
Figure 5-23
Smoothing a Path
To control the operation of the Smooth tool, double-click the 
Smooth tool in the Tools panel. InDesign displays the Smooth Tool 
Preferences dialog box (see Figure 5-24). The Fidelity slider controls 
the distance, in screen pixels, that the “smoothed” path can vary 
from the path of the Smooth tool (higher values equal more adjust-
ment and greater variation from the existing path). The Smoothness 
slider controls the amount of change applied to the path (higher 
values equal greater smoothing).
Erasing Paths
Imagine that you want to remove an arbitrary section of a path, and 
that the beginning and end of the section do not correspond to exist-
ing points on the path. To do this, select the Erase tool from the Tools 
panel, then drag the tool over the area of the path you want to delete 
(see Figure 5-25).
Path Operations
Path operations—which is what we call the commands represented 
by buttons on the Pathfinder panel—create paths from other paths, 
or change the shape of paths in some predefined way. The first row 

 5.  351
Select the Erase tool from   
the Tools panel, then select 
a path.
Drag the Erase tool over the 
parts of the path you want 
to erase.
When you drag the Erase tool over a 
closed path, InDesign opens the path. 
Open paths get split into two paths.
Figure 5-25
Erasing Part of a Path
of buttons in the Pathfinder panel make it easy to create complex 
shapes by combining simple geometric shapes, and to create shapes 
that would be very difficult to draw using the Pen tool. 
The Convert Shape operations provide a number of “utility” func-
tions for working with paths. Why did they end up in the same panel 
with the Pathfinder path operations they have little or nothing in 
common with? Think carefully before you answer. Do you really
want another panel?
The Pathfinder path operations work with the area(s) of intersec-
tion between objects. Path operations can merge objects, or create 
new objects, or remove the area of one object from another object.
Many people have gotten the impression that the path operations 
are “advanced” drawing techniques. “I can’t draw,” they say, “so I 
have no use for them. It’s hard enough just using the Pen tool.”
Nothing could be farther from the truth—if you can draw, the 
path operations are a nice addition to your toolbox, but if you can’t 
draw, or can’t draw with the Pen tool, InDesign’s path operations 
can quickly become your best friend. Think about it—even David 
can draw just about anything using rectangles, ellipses, and the 
occasional polygon. By using path operations, you can do the same, 
without ending up with stacks of overlapping shapes on your pages.
To apply any of the Pathfinder path operations, select two or more 
paths, display the Pathfinder panel, and click the button correspond-
ing to the path operation you want to apply (see Figure 5-26).
We’ll cover what each of the path operations does, but first, a few 
ground rules:
▶Original shapes are deleted. Path operations often consume 
the selected shapes and create a new shape. This shape is often 
a compound path. To retain the original shapes, you’ll need to 
duplicate them before applying the path effect.
Applying Pathfinder 
Path Operations

352     6
▶Stacking order matters. Most of the path operations affect either 
the foreground or background object in some predefined way. 
If you try a path operation and don’t get the result you expect, 
undo, then shuffle the order of the objects (using Bring to Front, 
Send to Back, Bring Forward, and Send Backward from the 
Arrange submenu of the Object menu) and try again.
▶Formatting changes. In general, the fill, stroke, and other 
attributes of the foreground object define the formatting of the 
resulting object. The exception is the Subtract path operation, 
where the background object defines the formatting of the result.
▶Path operations and text frames. When you apply a path opera-
tion to a text frame, the shape of the frame is affected—not the 
text in the frame.
▶Alternatives to clipping paths. You can sometimes use path 
operations to avoid clipping paths and nested objects, which  
can result in faster printing.
▶Watch out for path contents. Performing path operations  
on objects that contain other objects—such as imported  
graphics—sometimes deletes the path content.
The Add path operation creates a new path that has the outline of the 
selected objects, removing the area of intersection and any interior 
paths from the new object. If the original paths are composite paths, 
any interior paths will be retained unless they intersect each other or 
fall within the area of intersection of the shapes.
When you want to use one path to cut a hole in another, use the Sub-
tract path operation. It’s like a cookie cutter—the foreground object 
cuts a hole in the background object. The resulting object takes on 
the fill and stroke of the background object.
The Intersect path operation creates a new object that is the shape of 
the area of intersection of the objects in the selection. Intersect will 
display an error message if the objects do not share a common area 
of intersection.
As we’ve noted, path operations consume the selected objects. 
There are various ways to retain the original objects, but the quickest 
by far is to apply the path effect, copy the resulting path, undo (which 
restores the original paths), and then press Command-Option-Shift-
V/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-V to paste in place. This trick is particularly useful 
when used with Intersect.
Add
Subtract
Intersect

 5.  353
The Exclude Overlap path operation creates a compound path from 
the selected objects, leaving any areas of intersection unfilled.
The Minus Back path operation is the opposite of the Subtract path 
operation. When you click the Minus Back button in the Pathfinder 
panel, InDesign uses the background object to cut a hole in the fore-
ground object. The resulting object takes on the formatting attri-
butes of the foreground object.
To apply any of the Convert Shape operations, select an object and 
click one of the buttons in the Pathfinder panel.
▶Convert to Rectangle. Converts the object to a rectangle.
▶Convert to Rounded-Corner Rectangle. Converts the object to 
a rectangle and applies the Rounded corner option.
▶Convert to Beveled-Corner Rectangle. Converts the object to a 
rectangle and applies the Bevel corner option.
Exclude Overlap
Minus Back
Applying Convert 
Shape Operations
Select two or more objects…
Figure 5-26
Applying a  
Path Operation
Click one of the buttons   
in the Pathfinder panel   
(Add, in this example).
Subtract
Exclude Overlap
Intersect
Add
Minus Back
InDesign applies 
the path operation 
to the selected 
objects.
We used filled shapes for the 
two examples to the right 
because it’s hard to see what 
the path operations do with 
unfilled shapes.
The star is the  
foreground object.

354     6
▶Convert to Inverse-Rounded-Corner Rectangle. Converts the 
object to a rectangle and applies the Inverse Rounded corner 
option (using the current corner radius setting).
▶Convert to Ellipse. Converts the object to an ellipse. If you have 
a square selected, the resulting ellipse will be a circle.
▶Convert to Triangle. Converts the object to a triangle.
▶Convert to Polygon. Converts the object to a polygon, using the 
current settings in the Polygon Settings dialog box. This means 
that you can easily change one polygon into another.
▶Convert to Line. Converts the object to a line.
▶Convert to Vertical or Horizontal Line. Converts the object to a 
vertical or horizontal line.
▶Open Path. Opens a closed path. Note that this operation simply 
opens the path at the first/last point in the path.
▶Close Path. Closes an open path.
▶Reverse Path. Reverses the selected path.
To apply any of the Convert Path operations, direct-select one or 
more points, and click one of the buttons in the Pathfinder panel.
▶Plain. Removes direction lines from the selected points and 
makes a V shape.
▶Corner. Changes points to have direction lines that can move 
independently of each other.
▶Smooth. Changes the selected points to a continuous curve that 
can have direction lines of unequal lengths.
▶Symmetrical. Changes the selected points to a continuous curve 
with direction lines of equal length.
Corner Options
Corner options can change that way corner points are drawn. Use 
this feature to add rounded corners to rectangles and squares.
You can curve one or more corners of a frame just by dragging 
the corner itself. Select a rectangular frame and click the yellow box. 
Four yellow diamonds appear on the selected frame, indicating Live 
Corners mode (see Figure 5-27).
Applying Convert 
Point Operations

 5.  355
Figure 5-27
Live Corners
To add corner effects manually, click 
the yellow box...
...and drag the handles.
Drag any diamond to adjust all four corners together.
Shift-drag a diamond to adjust a single corner. Option/Alt-click 
a diamond to cycle through the various corner effects. Drag a dia-
mond towards the middle of the frame to change the effect’s radius. 
To stop editing corners, click anywhere outside the selected frame.
If you don’t want the yellow box to appear when you select a 
frame, choose Hide Live Corners from the Extras submenu on the 
View menu.
You can also apply corner effects by choosing a shape and size 
from the Corner Options widgets in the Control panel or using the 
Corner Options dialog box, which lets you apply different effects to 
each corner (see Figure 5-28).
To apply a corner option using a dialog box, select the page item 
and choose Corner Options from the Object menu. InDesign dis-
plays the Corner Options dialog box. To apply a different corner to 
each corner of a rectangle, click the chain icon in the middle of the 
dialog box so that it becomes a broken link icon. Choose the size and 
effect you want for each corner. InDesign changes the corners of the 
path based on the corner options you selected.
To remove corner effects, select the object and choose None from 
the Corner Options pop-up menu in the Control panel.
Strokes
Once you’ve created a path, you’ll probably want to give the path 
some specific stroke weight, color, or other property. The process of 
applying formatting to a path is often called “stroking a path,” and 
we refer to a path’s appearance as its “stroke.” Strokes specify what 
the outline of the path looks like.

356     6
Shapes created by   
overlapping corner options
Or, choose Corner Options from the Object menu, and  
choose different corner settings for different corners.
...and choose a corner size and effect from 
pop-up menu in the Control panel.
InDesign’s corner options 
can be applied to any corner 
point. Try them with  
polygons for interesting 
geometric shapes.
InDesign’s  
corner options
Fancy
Inset
Inverse Rounded
Rounded
Bevel
Figure 5-28
Corner Options
To define a stroke for a path, select the path, then display the 
Stroke panel by pressing Command-F10/F10 (see Figure 5-29). Use 
the Type pop-up menu to choose the type of stroke you want to use—
solid, dashed, or any of the “scotch” (i.e., multi-stroke) types.
You can define custom dashed, striped, or dotted stroke styles. 
We’ll talk more about stroke styles later in the chapter.
You can enter a line weight for the stroke of the selected path using 
the Weight field, or you can choose a predefined line weight from the 
pop-up menu associated with the field. To remove a stroke from a 
path, enter zero in the Weight field.
Weight
Select a path...

 5.  357
Historical Note: In the old days of desktop publishing, some pro-
grams created hairlines using the PostScript statement “0 setline-
width,” which generates a one-pixel wide stroke on a 300-dpi laser 
printer. This worked pretty well—you’d get a stroke that was approx-
imately the width of a hairline (between .2 and .25 points). When 
imagesetters appeared, however, this approach led to strokes that 
were 1/1200th of an inch wide or even smaller—stroke weights too fine 
to be printed on most presses. So, we grizzled graybeards advised 
all of our younger cohorts to avoid entering zero for the weight of a 
stroke. In InDesign, at least, it doesn’t matter—entering zero won’t 
result in a “0 setline width” stroke.
The three buttons in the Align Stroke section of the Stroke panel 
control the way that the stroke is positioned relative to the path. The 
options are Align Stroke to Center, Align Stroke to Inside, and Align 
Stroke to Outside, and they do just what they say (see Figure 5-30).
 If you’re using the Align Stroke to Inside option and increase the 
stroke weight of the border of an ad in a magazine layout, InDesign 
keeps the stroke inside the area the advertiser is actually paying for.
Stroke Alignment
Default stroke types
Solid
Thick-Thick
Thick-Thin
Thick-Thin-Thick
Thin-Thick
Thin-Thick-Thin
Thin-Thin
Dashed (3 and 2)
Dashed (4 and 4)
Left Slant Hash
Right Slant Hash
Straight Hash
Dotted
Wavy
White Diamond
Japanese Dots
To display the Stroke panel, 
press Command-F10/F10.
To expand the “minimalist” Stroke 
panel, choose Show Options from 
the Stroke panel menu (or double-
click the panel tab).
Expanded view of the Stroke panel.
Choose a stroke 
type from the Type 
pop-up menu.
If you want, you can 
choose a line end type 
from the Start and/or 
End pop-up menu.
Figure 5-29
Stroke Panel

358     6
Figure 5-30
Stroke Alignment 
Options
Align Stroke to Center 
distributes the stroke evenly 
around the path.
Align Stroke to Inside adds the 
stroke to the inside of the path.
Align Stroke to Outside adds the stroke 
to the outside of the path.
Path
Miter join
Round join
Beveled join
Butt cap
Round cap
Projecting cap
Figure 5-31
Cap Options 
Figure 5-32
Join Options
When you use Align Stroke to Outside, InDesign will add the 
stroke to the outside of the path; Align Stroke to Center adds the 
stroke evenly around the path.
Select one of the Cap options to determine the shape of the end of the 
stroke (see Figure 5-31). The Cap option you choose has no visible 
effect on a closed path.
Cap
The Join option sets the appearance of corners—the place where two 
line segments in a path meet in a corner point (see Figure 5-32).
Join
When paths go around corners, weird things can happen. Asked 
to corner too sharply, the stroke skids out of control, creating spiky 
elbows that increase the effective stroke weight of a path’s corners. 
The value you enter in the Miter Limit field sets the distance, as a 
multiple of the stroke weight, that you’ll allow the corner to extend 
before InDesign applies a beveled join to the corner (see Figure 5-33). 
If, for example, you enter “2” in the Miter Limit field, InDesign will 
Miter Limit

 5.  359
flatten corners when the stroke weight of the corner is equal to or 
greater than two times the weight of the stroke.
The Miter Limit field is only available when you’re using the Miter 
Join option, and applies only to corner points.
For a dashed line, choose Dashed from the Type pop-up menu, and 
use the Dash and Gap fields that appear at the bottom of the Stroke 
panel to set the appearance of the dashed stroke (see Figure 5-34).
Dash
When angles get small, corners go 
out of control. Here, a Miter Join 
creates a projecting “elbow.”
Increase the value in the Miter Limit 
field to render corners with tight 
angles using a Beveled miter join.
Figure 5-33
Miter Limit
To apply a dashed   
stroke, choose Dashed from 
the Type pop-up menu.
InDesign applies the 
default dashed stroke 
pattern.
To edit the dashed 
stroke pattern, enter 
new values in the Dash 
and Gap fields (these 
fields use the current 
measurement units).
Figure 5-34
Applying a  
Dashed Stroke
We’ve heard a number of people complain that InDesign doesn’t 
include their favorite “fancy” rules—if you can’t find what you’re 
looking for on the Type menu in the Stroke panel, and you can’t 
create the stroke you want using stroke styles (discussed later in this 
chapter), you can make your own. To create a simple multi-stroke 
effect, follow these steps (see Figure 5-35).
1. Select a path.
Creating Layered 
Strokes

360     6
2. Clone the path (press Command-C/Ctrl-C to copy the path, then 
press Command-Option-Shift-V/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-V. InDesign cre-
ates a copy of the selected path on top of the original path).
3. Change the attributes of the clone of the path.
4. Select the original path and the clone and group them.
You can add arrowheads or tailfeathers to any open path you want 
by choosing an arrowhead from the Start and End pop-up menus at 
the bottom of the Stroke panel. The Start pop-up menu applies to the 
first point in the path (according to the direction of the path); the 
End pop-up menu applies to the last point in the path. You don’t have 
to make choices from both of the pop-up menus (see Figure 5-36).
To swap the arrowheads on the beginning and end of a path, 
select the path using the Direct Selection tool and choose Reverse 
Path from the Paths submenu of the Object menu (see Figure 5-37).
You won’t find this basic stroke option in the Stroke panel, so stop 
looking. Instead, it’s in the Attributes panel (choose Attributes from 
the Window menu). Checking the Overprint Stroke option makes 
the stroke overprint (rather than knock out of) whatever’s behind it. 
If you’re creating color publications, you’ll find it’s one of the most 
important features in InDesign (see Chapter 10, “Color”).
When you choose a dotted, dashed, or striped stroke, InDesign dis-
plays the Gap Color and the Gap Tint pop-up menus at the bottom 
of the Stroke panel (see Figure 5-38). Use these controls to specify the 
color and tint of the “blank” areas in the stroke. 
When you apply a dotted or dashed stroke to a page item, InDesign 
displays the Corners pop-up menu at the bottom of the Stroke panel. 
The options on this menu control the way that InDesign draws the 
stroke as it crosses points on the path (see Figure 5-39). 
Arrowheads
Overprint
Gap Color and   
Gap Tint
Corner Adjustment
This complicated-look-
ing stroke is made up of 
three separate strokes 
applied to three paths.
Figure 5-35
Creating a  
Complex Stroke by 
Stacking Paths

 5.  361
Select a path.
Figure 5-36
Applying an Arrowhead
Add another arrow-
head to the other end 
of the line, if you want.
InDesign applies the 
arrowhead to the 
selected path.
Choose an arrowhead type 
from the Start or End pop-up 
menus in the Stroke panel.
Note that arrowheads do not 
extend the length of a path.
When you choose Adjust Dashes, InDesign will change the length 
of the dashes in the path so that a dash appears centered on each 
point in the path. Choose Adjust Gaps, and InDesign will change 
Figure 5-38
Setting the Gap  
Color of a Stroke
Dotted stroke 
with gap color 
set to “None”
Dotted stroke with 
gap color set to a 50% 
tint of Black.
Select a path using the 
Direct Selection tool.
Choose Reverse Path from 
the Paths submenu of the 
Object menu.
InDesign reverses the 
direction of the path.
Figure 5-37
Reversing the  
Direction of a Path
Figure 5-39
Corner Adjustment for 
Dashed Strokes
If you don’t adjust the 
dashed stroke pattern, you 
run the risk of unsightly gaps 
at the corners of the shape.
Adjust the dashes and/or gaps to make InDesign 
draw the dash centered on each corner of the path.

362     6
the length of the dashes in the path to accomplish the same effect. As 
you’d expect, choosing Adjust Dashes and Gaps changes the length 
of both dashes and gaps in the dash pattern, and choosing None does 
not adjust the position of dashes in the pattern at all.
Why adjust the dashes and/or gaps in a dash pattern? If you don’t, 
you can easily end up with gaps at the corners of paths. It’s particu-
larly noticeable when you apply dashed strokes to rectangles.
Once you’ve applied a stroke to a particular path, you can change the 
stroke using any of the following methods. Again, there’s no “right” 
way to edit a stroke—which method is best and quickest depends on 
how you work and which panels you have open at the time you want 
to change the stroke.
▶Display the Stroke panel, then make changes in the panel.
▶Click the Stroke selector in the Color panel, then click a color in 
the panel (see Chapter 10, “Color,” for more on applying colors 
using the Color panel).
▶Use the Stroke button at the bottom of the Toolbox to apply or 
remove colors and gradients from the path.
▶Select the path, then choose a new stroke weight from the Stroke 
Weight submenu of the Context menu.
▶Use the Eyedropper tool to pick up the stroke of a path and apply 
that formatting to another path.
To quickly remove a stroke from a path, do one of the following.
▶Select the path, click the Stroke selector, then click None.
▶Select the path, display the Swatches panel, click the Stroke 
selector at the top of the panel, and then click the None swatch.
▶Enter 0 in the Weight field of the Stroke panel.
Stroke Styles
If you’ve looked through the default strokes and haven’t seen the 
stroke pattern you’re looking for, you can probably create it using 
InDesign’s stroke styles. This is provided that the stroke you’re look-
ing for is dashed, dotted, or striped—InDesign does not yet support 
strokes made up of arbitrary shapes. If you need a special skull and 
Editing Strokes
Removing Strokes

 5.  363
crossbones stroke for your pirate/goth/metal newsletter, you’ll have 
to create it from scratch (using text paths, as shown in Chapter 6, 
“Where Text Meets Graphics”).
 To create a stroke style, follow these steps (see Figure 5-40).
1. Choose Stroke Styles from the Stroke panel menu. InDesign 
displays the Stroke Styles dialog box.
2. Click the New button to create a new stroke style. If you want 
to base your new stroke style on an existing style, select the 
style from the list of stroke styles before you click the button. 
InDesign displays the New Stroke Style dialog box.
3. Enter a name for the stroke style. Choose a stroke style type 
(Dash, Dotted, or Stripe) from the Type pop-up menu.
4. Set the options for the stroke style. The available options vary 
depending on the type of stroke style you selected. 
InDesign displays a preview of the stroke style with an asso-
ciated Preview Weight field. As you would expect, changing the 
stroke weight using this field affects only the preview image of 
the stroke—the stroke style does not include the stroke weight.
In each of the stroke style types, the Pattern Length field 
controls the length of the pattern in the stroke style.
Dash. Drag the cursor in the area below the ruler to set the 
length of the dashes in the stroke style, or enter values in the 
Start or Length fields. To add a dash, drag in the white area. To 
remove a dash, point at the dash and drag it away from the ruler.
You can also set the line cap and the way that InDesign 
handles the dash pattern around corners. These options work in 
exactly the same way as their counterparts in the Stroke panel, 
as discussed previously in this chapter.
Dotted. When you choose Dotted from the Type pop-up menu, 
you can add dots to the pattern by clicking below the ruler, or by 
entering a value in the Center field. Either way, you’re control-
ling the location of the center of the dot relative to the pattern 
length. You cannot scale the width or height of the dot—it’s 
always a circle whose width is determined by the stroke weight. 
(If you’re looking for an oval dot, use a dashed stroke with a 
rounded line cap.)
The options on the Corners pop-up menu control the way 
that dots are adjusted around corners in paths you’ve applied 
the dotted stroke style to. Choose None for no adjustment, or 
choose Adjust Gaps to have InDesign increase or decrease the 

364     6
Figure 5-40
Defining a Stroke Style
Choose Stroke Styles 
from the Stroke panel.
InDesign displays the 
Stroke Styles dialog box.
Click the New button.
InDesign displays the New 
Stroke Style dialog box.
Choose a stroke type from 
the Type pop-up menu.
Click the ruler and then drag 
to set the location of the dots, 
dashes, or stripes…
…or enter values in the   
corresponding fields.
If you chose Dash or Stripe, the 
controls are a little different, but 
the idea is the same—drag in the 
ruler window or enter values to 
define the stroke’s appearance.
InDesign adds the stroke 
style to the list of stroke 
styles. Click OK to close the 
Stroke Styles dialog box.
Click OK when you’ve 
finished defining the  
stroke style.
InDesign adds the stroke style to 
the list of stroke styles in the Stroke 
panel. To apply the stroke style, 
choose it from the pop-up menu as 
you would any of the default strokes.
To base your stroke style on 
an existing stroke style, select 
the stroke style before you 
click the New button.

 5.  365
gap between dots to make dots appear at each point on the path. 
Note that adjusting the gaps results in uneven spacing between 
dots on a path, but is probably less distracting than having dots 
“miss” the corners of a path (particularly on a rectangle).
To remove a dot, drag the dot out of the ruler window.
Stripe. Specify the way that the stripes fill the width of the path 
by dragging the cursor to the right of the ruler or by entering 
values in the Start and Width fields. To add a new stripe, drag 
the cursor in a white area. To remove a stripe, drag the stripe out 
of the ruler window.
Stroke styles exist inside a document; creating a stroke style in a 
specific document does not add that stroke style to any other docu-
ments. You can copy stroke styles from one document to another. 
You can save and load stroke styles, and you can add stroke styles 
to all new documents. To add a stroke style to all new documents, 
create or load the stroke style when no documents are open.
You apply stroke styles just as you would apply any of the default 
stroke types: select an object, then choose the stroke style from the 
Type pop-up menu in the Stroke panel.
To edit a stroke style, choose Stroke Styles from the Stroke panel 
pop-up menu, select the style from the list of styles in the Stroke 
Styles dialog box, and click the Edit button. InDesign displays the 
Edit Stroke Style dialog box. 
Make changes to the stroke style definition and close the dialog 
box, and InDesign will change the appearance of all of the objects 
you’ve applied the stroke style to.
To delete a stroke style, choose Stroke Styles from the Stroke panel 
pop-up menu, select the style from the list of styles in the Stroke 
Styles dialog box, and click the Delete button.
When you delete a stroke style, InDesign will display a dialog box 
asking which stroke style you want to use to replace the stroke style 
you’re deleting. Choose a stroke style from the pop-up menu and 
click the OK button, and InDesign will replace all occurrences of the 
deleted style with the stroke style you’ve selected.
To save the stroke styles in your document to a stroke styles file, 
choose Stroke Styles from the Stroke panel pop-up menu, select the 
styles you want to save from the list of styles in the Stroke Styles 
dialog box, and click the Save button. InDesign displays a standard 
Applying Stroke Styles
Editing Stroke Styles
Deleting Stroke Styles
Saving Stroke Styles

366     6
file dialog box where you can choose a location and enter a file name 
for the saved stroke styles file. Saved InDesign stroke style docu-
ments have the file extension “.inst”.
To load stroke styles, choose Stroke Styles from the Stroke panel 
menu to display the Stroke Styles dialog box, then click the Load 
button. InDesign displays a standard file dialog box. Locate and 
select the file you want to load stroke styles from and click OK.
To copy a single stroke style from one document to another, select 
an object formatted with the stroke style, copy it, and then paste it 
into another document. InDesign will bring the stroke style along 
with the object, and you can then delete the object.
Fills
Just as strokes determine what the outside of a path looks like, fills 
specify the appearance of the inside of a path. Fills can make the 
inside of a path a solid color, or a linear or radial gradient. Any path 
you create can be filled, including open paths.
To apply a fill, select a path and do one of the following:
▶Click the Fill button on the Control panel, and then click the 
color swatch.
▶Click the Fill selector at the top of the Swatches panel, then click 
a color swatch (see Figure 5-41).
▶Click the Fill selector at the bottom of the Tools panel, then click 
the Apply Color button (or press comma). This applies the most 
recently selected color or swatch (see Figure 5-42).
▶Drag a swatch out of the Swatches panel or Color panel and drop 
it on a path, either selected or unselected. 
▶Click the Fill selector in the Color panel, then define a color.
▶Select the Eyedropper tool. Click an object formatted with the  
fill you want, then click object to apply the fill.
To quickly remove a fill from a path, do one of the following:
▶Click the None swatch in the Fill pop-up menu on the  
Control panel.
▶Click the Fill selector in the Tools panel, then click the None 
button (or, better yet, press /).
Loading Stroke Styles
Removing Fills

 5.  367
▶Click the Fill button in the Color panel and then click the None 
swatch.
▶Click the Fill button at the bottom of the Toolbox, then click the 
None swatch in the Swatches panel.
Gradients
A “gradient” is a type of fill or stroke that creates a graduation from 
one color to another—an effect also known as a “fountain,” “blend,” 
or “vignette.” InDesign offers two types of gradients: “Linear” and 
“Radial.” For either type of gradient fill, you can set the colors used 
in the gradient, the rate at which one color blends into another, and 
the colors used in the gradient (gradients can contain two or more 
colors). For Linear gradients, you can set the angle that the gradua-
tion is to follow.
Figure 5-42
Applying a Fill 
(Tools Panel Method)
Click the Fill selector (if   
it’s not already active)…
Click the 
Apply Color 
button.
InDesign applies the most recently selected 
swatch to the fill of the selected object.
Click the Fill selector (if  
it’s not already active)…
Select an object.
…and click a   
color swatch.
InDesign applies the swatch to the fill 
of the selected object.
Figure 5-41
Applying a Fill 
(Swatches Panel 
Method)

368     6
Linear gradients create a color transition (or series of transitions) 
from one end of a path to another; Radial gradients create a gradua-
tion from the center of a path to its edges. Gradients applied to paths 
are calculated relative to the geometric bounds of the path; gradients 
applied to text characters use the bounding box of the text frame 
containing the text (not the characters themselves).
To apply a gradient to a path, follow these steps (see Figure 5-43).
1. Select the path using the Selection tool or the Direct Selection 
tool, or select text using the Text tool or Path Text tool.
2. Do one of the following.
▶Click the Fill or Stroke selector in the Tools panel (to specify 
which part of the path you want to apply the gradient to). 
Click the Apply Gradient button at the bottom of the Tools 
panel.
Applying Gradients
Click the Fill or   
Stroke selector… 
…then click the Apply 
Gradient button…
InDesign applies the  
current default gradient.
…or select an object, 
then click a gradient 
swatch in the Swatches 
panel…
…or display the  
Gradient panel and 
click the gradient 
ramp…
Figure 5-43
Applying a Gradient

 5.  369
▶Display the Gradient panel (choose Gradient from the 
Window menu), and then click the gradient ramp.
▶Click an existing gradient swatch in the Swatches panel 
(press F5 to display the Swatches panel). You can also drag 
the gradient swatch out of the Swatches panel and drop it on 
a path (the path doesn’t have to be selected).
▶Select the Eyedropper tool and click an object formatted with 
a gradient, then click the tool again on the selected path.
▶Select the Gradient tool and drag the tool inside the path.
When you create or edit a gradient, you work with InDesign’s gradi-
ent controls: the gradient ramp, gradient stop icons, and center point 
icons. What the heck are we talking about? See Figure 5-44.
Gradient Controls
Gradient ramp
Center point
Gradient stop
Gradient stop
Selected gradient stop
Unselected gradient stop
To change the position of a 
center point, select it…
…and then drag it to a new 
location on the gradient ramp.
To change the position of a  
gradient stop, select it…
…and then drag it to a new 
location on the gradient ramp.
To add a new gradient stop, 
position the cursor below the 
gradient ramp…
…and click.
Figure 5-44
Gradient Controls
…and then drag it away from 
the gradient ramp.
To remove a gradient stop, 
select it…

370     6
In our opinion, the best way to apply gradients is to use the Swatches 
panel. Just as applying a color from the Swatches panel establishes a 
link between the color swatch and the object you’ve applied it to, so 
applying a gradient swatch links the swatch and the objects you’ve 
formatted with it. This means that you can edit the definition of the 
gradient swatch and update the formatting of all of the objects you’ve 
applied the swatch to.
To create a gradient swatch, follow these steps (see Figure 5-45).
1. Select an object that has the gradient you want (optional).
2. Display the Swatches panel, if it’s not already visible, then choose 
New Gradient Swatch from the Swatches panel menu. If you 
selected an object in Step 1, InDesign picks up the attributes 
of the gradient applied to the object and displays them in this 
dialog box. If you did not select an object, the controls in the 
dialog box reflect the document’s current default gradient.
3. Specify the colors and gradient stop positions for the gradient, if 
necessary.
4. Enter a name for the gradient swatch. 
5. Click the OK button to save the gradient swatch. InDesign adds 
the gradient swatch to the list of swatches in the Swatches panel.
Creating a   
Gradient Swatch
Choose New Gradient 
Swatch from the Swatches 
panel menu (or click the 
New Swatch button).
InDesign displays the New 
Gradient Swatch dialog box.
Enter a name for the   
gradient (optional,   
but a good idea).
Set up the gradient. If   
you selected an object   
formatted using a   
gradient, that gradient’s 
properties will appear here.
Click the OK 
button…
Figure 5-45
Creating a  
Gradient Swatch
…and InDesign adds the gradient to 
the list of available swatches.

 5.  371
You can also apply and edit gradients using the Gradient panel (see 
Figure 5-46). Like the New Gradient Swatch and Gradient Options 
dialog boxes, the Gradient panel contains a gradient ramp, with 
center points above the ramp and gradient stops below. 
To apply a gradient, select a path, display the Gradient panel, then 
click the gradient ramp. InDesign applies the gradient object. 
To edit a gradient applied to a path, select the path, then display 
the Gradient panel (if it’s not already visible). InDesign loads the gra-
dient applied to the path into the Gradient panel. Adjust the gradient 
stop positions, add gradient stops, or change the position of center 
points or colors, and InDesign applies the changes to the path.
Using the   
Gradient Panel
To edit the color, gradient type, or angle of a gradient you’ve applied 
to an object, select the object and then display the Gradient panel. 
You can use any of the following techniques to change the gradient.
▶Drag a gradient stop to a new position on the gradient ramp.
▶Select the stop and enter a new value in the Location field.
▶Add a new gradient stop by clicking below the gradient ramp.
▶Change the position of the center point by dragging it above the 
gradient ramp. Or you can select the center point and enter a 
new value in the Location field.
▶Remove a stop by dragging it away from the gradient ramp.
▶Reverse the gradient ramp by clicking the Reverse button.
▶Change the angle of a linear gradient by entering a new value in 
the Angle field.
Editing Gradients
You use the Gradient panel 
to edit the gradient applied 
to an object. You could, 
as shown in this example, 
change the location of the 
center point between two 
gradient stops.
Click the Reverse button to reverse   
the direction of the gradient.
Figure 5-46
Using the  
Gradient Panel

372     6
▶Change the color of a gradient stop using the Swatches panel. To 
do this, select the stop, hold down Option/Alt, and click a color 
swatch in the Swatches panel (see Figure 5-47). Alternatively, 
you can drag a swatch from the panel and drop it on the stop.
▶Change the color of a gradient stop to an unnamed color. To 
do this, select the gradient stop, then display the Color panel. 
Specify a color. As you change color values in the Color panel, 
InDesign changes the color applied to the gradient stop.
▶Change the gradient type using the Type pop-up menu.
It’s something every 
InDesign user has done at 
least once—you select a 
gradient stop, then click a 
color swatch in the Swatches 
panel, expecting to apply the 
color to the gradient stop. 
Instead, InDesign fills (or 
strokes) the path with the 
color. How the heck do you 
get a swatch color into a 
gradient stop?
Select a gradient stop.
Hold down Option/
Alt and click the 
color swatch in the 
Swatches panel. 
InDesign assigns the 
color to the gradient 
stop.
Figure 5-47
Getting a Swatch Color 
into a Gradient Stop
To apply a gradient to more than one path, select the paths (which 
need not already have gradients applied to their fills or strokes), then 
drag the Gradient tool. The point at which you start dragging defines 
the starting point of the gradient (see Figure 5-48).
Transparency
Hands down, InDesign’s sexiest feature is its transparency effects. 
These include drop shadows, feathering, support for transparency 
inside Photoshop and Illustrator graphics, changing an object’s 
opacity or blending mode… the list goes on. But before we go any 
further with this wild transparency talk, we just need to be clear 
Applying a Gradient   
to Multiple Paths

 5.  373
Select a series of paths. In this exam-
ple, each path has been formatted 
using a radial gradient fill. Position 
the Gradient tool over the point at 
which you want to place the center 
point (for a radial gradient) or start 
(for a linear gradient), and then drag 
the tool.
InDesign applies a single   
gradient to the selected paths.
Figure 5-48
Applying a Gradient to 
Multiple Objects
about something: PostScript’s basic drawing model does not allow 
for transparency. Period. 
So how does InDesign print transparent objects to a PostScript 
printer? Simple: it cheats. When the time comes to print, InDesign 
uses clipping paths to create the illusion of transparency and/or 
rasterizes the transparent objects and sends the printer separated 
image data. All of this takes place in the background—InDesign 
does not change the objects in your document. Instead, it changes 
the way that the objects are sent to the printer.
The way that InDesign sends the transparent objects to the printer 
is defined by the Transparency Flattener settings for the spread con-
taining the objects. Flattener settings are described in Chapter 11, 
“Printing.” As a rule of thumb, however, transparent objects make 
documents somewhat harder to print.
This brings us to our patented “With Power Comes Responsibil-
ity” speech. It’s very easy to come up with combinations of trans-
parent objects and flattener settings that create a document that can 
slow a printer to a crawl, or to produce files that take up enormous 
amounts of space on your hard drive.
This doesn’t mean that you should avoid using transparency. That 
would be silly, given that there’s sometimes no other way to create a 
specific creative effect. It’s just that you must bear in mind that using 
the feature comes at a cost, and that you need to weigh the potential 
risks (slower printing, no printing) against the benefit (a cool layout).

374     6
If you’re familiar with Photoshop’s approach to transparency, 
you’ll find InDesign’s a bit different: In Photoshop, transparency is 
an attribute of layers; in InDesign, transparency is an attribute of 
individual page items—or elements of a page item. For example, you 
can set the opacity of the fill separately from its stroke, or give the 
text inside a frame an effect separate from the frame itself.
Adobe PDF Print Engine. PDF (since Acrobat 5) supports transpar-
ency. So if you’re printing to a device that can understand transpar-
ency in a PDF file, then you don’t have to worry about transparency 
flattening. For example, RIPs based on Adobe’s PDF Print Engine 
can print native PDF files with transparency without first converting 
them to PostScript. No PostScript, no problem!
However, if you export an EPS or Acrobat 4 PDF file, or print or 
create a PDF file from the Print dialog box, then flattening kicks in.
To apply transparency to a page item, work your way through the 
following steps (see Figure 5-49).
1. Select a page item with the Selection or Direct Selection tool.
2. Display the Effects panel, if it’s not already visible (choose Effects 
from the Window menu).
3. Click on the aspect of the page item you want to affect: Stroke, 
Fill, Text (which applies to the text inside a text frame), or Object 
(which affects all these facets at once).
4. Choose an option from the Blending Mode pop-up menu,  
if necessary.
5. Enter a value in the Opacity field (or drag the associated slider).
The transparency blending modes define the way that the colors in 
the transparent objects interact with objects that fall behind them. 
When you apply transparency, InDesign calculates the resulting 
color based on each color component of the foreground and back-
ground colors. For two overlapping process colors, for example, the 
effect of the blending mode will almost certainly differ for each of 
the four inks. When we say that a blending mode behaves in a par-
ticular way for a specific gray percentage value, we mean the percent-
age of a color component.
The effect of a blending mode is dependent on the current color 
management settings and the Transparency Blend Space (in the Edit 
menu). The ink values of the colors in a stack of transparent objects, 
Applying Transparency
Blending Modes

 5.  375
for example, will never exceed the maximum ink coverage for the 
current color management profile. (For the sake of your press opera-
tor’s sanity, don’t try to prove us wrong.)
The following notes provide a quick description of the most 
useful of the blending modes. In these descriptions, the term “fore-
ground color” refers to the color applied to the front-most object; 
“background color” refers to the color of the background object, and 
“resulting color” is the color you see where the two objects intersect.
Normal. The Normal blending mode adds the foreground color to 
the background color. If the foreground color is black, and the opac-
ity percentage is 10%, then 10% black is added to the background 
color to produce the resulting color. The Normal blending mode at 
100% opacity turns transparency off.
Multiply. The Multiply blending mode always results in a darker 
color. The one exception is when the foreground color is white or 
Paper color, in which case this blending mode has no effect at all. 
Multiply is very similar to overprinting one object over another (see 
Chapter 10, “Color,” for more on overprinting), or overlapping lines 
when drawing with felt pens. We think the Multiply blend mode is 
the best choice for drop shadows (see below).
Screen. This blending mode almost always produces a resulting color 
that is lighter than the background color (unless the foreground 
Figure 5-49
Applying Transparency 
to an Object
Select an object.
Display the Effects panel, if 
it’s not already visible (press 
Command/Ctrl-Shift-F10).
Choose a blending 
mode.
You can also adjust opacity (but not   
blending mode) using the Control panel.
Enter an opacity 
percentage.
InDesign makes the 
selected object transparent. 
Is that cool, or what?

376     6
color is black, which has no effect in this mode). The best real-world 
definition of this blending mode comes from Adobe’s Russell Brown: 
Screen is like projecting two slides on the same screen. The result is 
always lighter than either of the two sources. If the background color 
is black or white, the background color remains unchanged.
Overlay. The Overlay blending mode compares the foreground and 
background colors, accentuating highlights and shadows in each by 
lightening light colors and darkening dark colors. If either the fore-
ground or background color is 50-percent gray, then this mode has 
no effect. Overlay increases color contrast and can get out of hand 
quickly; we usually reduce the Opacity slider to temper the effect.
Soft Light. While most people see the Soft Light blending mode as 
shining a soft spotlight on the background color, we like to think 
of this mode in terms of playing with semi-translucent acetate. Soft 
Light has no effect if the background color is black or white, but it 
subtly enhances any other color, making darker colors (in the fore-
ground or background) a little darker and lighter colors a little lighter.
Hard Light. The Hard Light mode is something like two blending 
modes in one: If the foreground color is lighter than 50-percent gray, 
the Hard Light mode lightens the background color similar to the 
Screen mode; if the foreground color is darker than 50-percent gray, 
it darkens it using a method similar to the Multiply mode.
Color Dodge and Color Burn. Color Dodge both lightens and 
slightly colorizes with the foreground color. Color Burn colorizes 
while darkening the background. We find it’s hard to predict the 
result with either of these, especially because you’ll see radically dif-
ferent effects depending on whether your Transparency Blend Space 
is set to RGB or CMYK.
Darken. The resulting color is equal to the darker of the foreground 
and background colors.
Lighten. The resulting color is equal to the lighter of the foreground 
and background colors.
Hue. The Hue blending mode creates a new color by blending the 
color of the foreground object with the luminance (brightness) and 
saturation of the background. Putting a black object set to Hue over 
a colored object simply desaturates the background colors.

 5.  377
Saturation. The Saturation mode creates a new color by blending the 
foreground color’s saturation and the hue (color) with luminance 
values of the background color.
Color. The Color mode is slightly different from the Hue mode; it 
combines the color and the saturation of the foreground color with 
the luminance of the background color. Placing a solid color set to 
Color over an image colorizes the image, like a fake duotone.
Luminosity. Luminosity creates a new color by blending the bright-
ness of the foreground color with the hue and saturation of the back-
ground color.
So what about those options at the bottom of the Effects panel? The 
meaning of the terms “Isolate Blending” and “Knockout Group” is 
hardly self evident. Both options apply only to groups.
Isolate Blending. When you turn on the Isolate Blending option, and 
objects in the group you’ve selected use blending modes other than 
the Normal blending mode, InDesign changes the way that the object 
in the group interacts with objects behind the group. Regardless of 
the blending mode you’ve assigned to the group objects, InDesign 
treats them as if the Normal blending mode were assigned. Inside
the group, blending modes behave as you specified (see Figure 5-50).
Transparency Options
Figure 5-50
Isolate Blending
The selected group contains 
three circles. Each circle is 
filled with Black, set to 50%   
transparency, and uses the   
Multiply blending mode.
The triangle is outside and 
behind the group.
With Isolate Blending turned off,  
the foreground colors blend with  
the background colors according  
to their blending modes.
Turn Isolate Blending on, and 
InDesign changes the way that the 
foreground colors interact with the 
background colors.
Knockout Group. When you select a group containing transparent 
objects and turn on the Knockout Group option, InDesign makes 
the objects in the group opaque to each other (see Figure 5-51). In 
other words, the option should really be named “Knockout Objects 
Inside the Group,” but there’s not room in the panel. Objects outside 

378     6
With Knockout Group 
turned off, the objects inside 
the group affect each other.
After we group the objects together, we 
turn on Knockout Group. The objects 
in the group become opaque to each 
other, but are still transparent to any 
background objects.
The selected group contains 
three circles. Each circle is 
filled with Black, set to 50%   
transparency, and uses the   
Multiply blending mode.
The triangle is outside   
and behind the group.
Figure 5-51
Knockout Group
Figure 5-52
Applying Transparency 
to a Group
Here the three circles have no 
transparency. Instead, they’ve been 
grouped and the 50% transparency 
has been applied to the group.
Three ungrouped circles, each filled 
with a different tint of Black and 
set to 50% transparency (with the 
Normal blend mode).
the group are treated according to the state of the Isolate Blending 
option (see above). And yes, it is possible to have both Isolate Blend-
ing and Knockout Group turned on.
There’s a difference between applying transparency to a group and 
applying transparency to the objects inside a group (see Figure 5-52). 
When you apply transparency to a group, InDesign will override the 
transparency settings for any objects in the group that have no trans-
parency applied to them, but leaves transparent objects unchanged.
Unfortunately, any transparency settings applied to a group are 
lost if or when you ungroup the objects.
Groups and   
Transparency
Transparency Effects
What is it about drop shadows, bevels, and glows? Does everyone 
want their page items to appear as if they are the highly mobile space 
battleship Nadesico, floating defiantly above the page? We’re not sure, 

 5.  379
but we do know that these ubiquitous two-dimensional imperson-
ations of three-dimensional space are something no graphic designer 
will leave home without—at least until clients stop asking for them.
Fortunately, InDesign lets you apply all of these effects to page 
items (text, frames, imported images, and so on), plus a half-dozen 
more, including Satin, Inner Shadow, and three different kinds of 
feathering. You can find them hiding in the Effects panel, the Effects 
submenu (under the Context menu or the Object menu), or the 
Effects pop-up menu in the Control panel.
Moreover, you can apply each of InDesign’s effects to an entire 
object or just its stroke, fill, or—in the case of a text frame—text. For 
example, you could apply a Bevel and Emboss effect to a frame’s fill 
color and a drop shadow to the text inside that frame.
Once again, we find ourselves wanting to shout out, “with power 
comes responsibility.” Just because you can apply effects to every-
thing in sight doesn’t mean you should. Remember that overuse of 
effects can cause blindness and itchy palms.
Here’s how to apply an effect to an object (see Figure 5-53):
1. Select an object with the Selection or Direct Selection tool. (To 
apply an effect to an image separate from its frame, click on the 
image itself with the Direct Selection tool.)
2. In either the Effects panel or the Control panel, choose what 
aspect of the object you want to affect: Stroke, Fill, Text, or 
Object (to apply the effect to the whole enchilada).
3. Choose the effect you want from either the Effects (“fx”) pop-up 
menu in the Effects panel or Control panel, or from the Effects 
submenu (in the Object or Context menu). Alternately, you can 
simply double-click on the Object, Stroke, Fill, or Text section of 
the Effect panel that you chose in Step 2.
4. You can adjust the settings for that effect in the Effects dialog 
box. You can also add more than one effect to the object’s stroke, 
fill, or text by clicking on the checkboxes and panes along the 
left edge of the dialog box, and by choosing from the “Settings 
for” pop-up menu.
5. Turn on the Preview checkbox to see the effect while the dialog 
box is still open, or click OK to accept the changes.
Note that if you apply an effect to the whole object, and it’s a text 
frame with a fill of None, InDesign applies the effect to the text inside 
the frame. Give the frame an opaque fill to affect the frame itself.

380     6
The most popular (by far) transparency effect in InDesign’s arse-
nal is the drop shadow. It’s so common that Adobe even added a 
Drop Shadow button in the Control panel. Just select an object and 
click the button and a default drop shadow is applied (see “Setting 
Defaults,” later in this section).
Alternately, you can use the Effects dialog box to control the shad-
ow’s position, color, transparency, noise, and size (see Figure 5-54). 
Most of the controls are self-explanatory, but here are some things 
to keep in mind.
▶The Mode pop-up menu sets the transparency blending mode 
for the drop shadow. We’ve described all of the useful blend-
ing modes in the section on Transparency, above. The Multiply 
blending mode works well with drop shadows.
Drop Shadows
Figure 5-53
Transparency Effects
You can choose to apply the 
effect to the stroke (choose 
Stroke), to the fill (choose 
Fill), to the text (choose 
Text), or to all of the above 
(choose Object).
Select a page item.
Choose a transparency 
effect from the Effects panel 
menu, or from the “ fx” 
pop-up menu.
Clicking a checkbox turns 
an effect on (or off); click 
the name of the effect to see 
effect options.
The “ fx” icon indicates that 
one or more effects have 
been applied to the object.

 5.  381
Figure 5-54
Applying a Drop 
Shadow
Typical Display
High Quality Display
Display performance settings 
have a big effect on the way 
that InDesign displays drop 
shadows, but not on how 
they print; that’s up to the 
transparency flattener.
Select an object
Choose Drop Shadow from the “ fx” pop-up menu 
(or from Effects submenu of the Context menu or 
Object menu, or from the Effects panel menu).
Enter a value 
to set the 
transparency 
of the shadow.
Click the OK button, 
and InDesign applies 
the drop shadow.
▶You can define the color of the drop shadow by clicking on the 
small color swatch to the right of the Mode pop-up menu. The 
Opacity field defines the darkest part of the shadow.
▶You can control the position of the shadow in two ways: Either 
by adjusting the Angle and Distance fields or by changing the 
X Offset and Y Offset fields. If you want all your drop shadows 
to have the same angle, turn on the Use Global Light checkbox. 
Later, to change the global light setting, just change it anywhere 
in the Effects dialog box, or choose Global Light from the Effect 
panel menu.
▶A hard-edged shadow is probably not what you were looking 
for—what you need is a way to soften the edges of the shadow so 
that it looks more realistic. That’s exactly what the Size field does 
(see Figure 5-55). 

382     6
Figure 5-55
Size and Spread
Enter a value in the Size field to 
control the diffusion of the drop 
shadow. Entering zero produces a 
hard-edged (but still bitmapped)
shadow.
Entering a large Size value  
would make the shadow disappear 
altogether for this 24-point example 
text.
Increasing the 
Spread value 
makes the 
shadow more 
dense.
▶The Spread field controls the intensity of the shadow. Technically, 
it controls how far out from the center of the shadow the darkest 
portion of the shadow will sit. Choosing 50 percent means the 
darkest area of the shadow takes up half the size of the shadow.
▶If you want a more realistic shadow (instead of a mathematically 
pure one), bump up the Noise field a little bit—just 4 or 5 percent 
noise makes a huge difference (see Figure 5-56). Noise values 
above 30 or 40 percent are mostly good for special grunge effects.
▶If your object is partially transparent, you’ll be able to see your 
drop shadow underneath it. If that doesn’t appeal to you, turn on 
the Object Knocks Out Shadow checkbox—this ensures that the 
drop shadow is removed from behind the object itself.
Figure 5-56
Shadow Noise

 5.  383
▶If you’ve used other effects on your object—such as a Directional 
Feather that blurs out one side of the shape—you can control 
whether or not the drop shadow will apply to the object itself (as 
though there were no other effects applied) or the object plus the 
effect. If you want the latter, turn on the Shadow Honors Other 
Effects checkbox.
The Inner Shadow effect is identical to the Drop Shadow effect except 
that the shadow is drawn inside the object rather than outside of it. 
The result looks like the object is set behind the rest of the page. Note 
that the Effects dialog box settings contains a field labeled Choke; it 
does essentially the same thing as Spread: It controls the position of 
the darkest part of the shadow (see Figure 5-57).
Inner Shadow
Figure 5-57
Inner Shadow paprika
paprika
paprika
Original text frame
Inner Shadow
In early versions of InDesign, we used to make glows around objects 
by making a drop shadow with the horizontal and vertical offset set 
to zero. It’s easier to just use the Outer Glow feature (see Figure 5-58). 
InDesign also offers an Inner Glow effect which sets the glow inside 
the object rather than around it, while retaining a sharp vector edge.
Outer and Inner Glow
Figure 5-58
Outer and Inner Glow paprika
paprika
paprika
Outer Glow (blending mode: Screen) 
applied to the text
Inner Glow (blending mode: 
Multiply) applied to text and fill
InDesign offers four types of effect in the Style pop-up menu: Inner 
Bevel, Outer Bevel, Emboss, and Pillow Emboss (see Figure 5-59). 
The last three in this list affect the area around the object, and in fact 
look pretty dumb unless your object is sitting on top of some other 
object or image. Inner Bevel can stand on its own if need be.
The Satin effect is supposed to make your objects look as though 
wrapped in satin. While the equivalent feature in Photoshop can 
result in a cool look, the implementation in InDesign leaves much to 
Bevel and Emboss
Satin

384     6
Figure 5-59
Bevel and Emboss paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
paprika
Outer Bevel (Direction: Up)
Emboss (Direction: Up)
Inner Bevel (Direction: Up)
Here the effect is applied to 
both the Text and the Fill.
Pillow Emboss (Direction: Up)
Outer Bevel (Direction: Down)
Emboss (Direction: Down)
Inner Bevel (Direction: Down)
Pillow Emboss (Direction: Down)
be desired. The one time it creates interesting effects is when applied 
to colored text.
The usual definition of feathering goes something like this: “feather-
ing softens the edges of page items.” This isn’t really quite true. A 
better description is that feathering blends an object to transparency. 
Since you cannot currently include transparency in a normal gradi-
ent swatch, feathering is extremely useful.
InDesign has three types of feathering: Basic Feather, Directional 
Feather, and Gradient Feather.
Basic Feather. The Basic Feather effect is identical to the feature 
called “Feathering” in earlier versions of InDesign. It applies the 
same feather (fade to transparency) on all sides of an object. Basic 
Feather offers four basic settings:
▶Width sets the distance from the edges of the object at which the 
feathering will take effect (see Figure 5-60).
▶Choke controls how far in the fully transparent portion of the 
feather area will sit. Choosing 50 percent means the transparent 
area takes up half the size of the feather (based on Width).
Feathering

 5.  385
▶The options on the Corners pop-up menu control the appear-
ance of the feathering effect as it approaches sharp corners at the 
edges of the object (see Figure 5-61). When you choose Sharp, 
the feathering effect follows the outline of the path as closely 
as possible. When you choose Rounded, InDesign rounds the 
edges of the feather effect as it nears sharp corners. The Dif-
fused option provides a general fade from opaque to transpar-
ent, based on the geometric center of the object, rather than on 
the shape of the path (as is the case for the Sharp and Rounded 
options). This is similar to the feathering effect in Illustrator.
▶Adding a little Noise to your feather (such as four or five percent) 
makes the effect significantly more realistic, especially if you’re 
blending an object into a photographic background.
Directional Feather. What if you want a feather to appear on one 
side of a shape—such as an image that fades out to transparency 
along its bottom edge? That’s when the Directional Feather effect 
comes in handy, letting you adjust how much feathering you want on 
Figure 5-60
Basic Feather
Choose Basic Feather  
from the Effects menu.
Use these controls to set up 
the basic feather effect.
Basic Feather blurs all edges 
of the content (or fill) of the 
selected object.
In this example, we’ve 
selected an imported image, 
but you can apply feathering 
to any page item.
(Or from the Effects 
submenu of the 
Context menu, or 
in the Object menu 
or the Effects panel 
menu.)

386     6
each side of your object. It offers some of the same settings as Basic 
Feather—such as Noise and Choke—but has three of its own options:
▶Feather widths. To adjust the size of the feathering along the 
Top, Bottom, Left, and Right edges of your object independently, 
make sure you turn off the little chain button.
▶Shape. The Shape pop-up menu lets you control what portion 
of your object gets feathered: First Edge Only, Leading Edges, or 
All Edges (see Figure 5-62). 
▶Angle. The Angle determines what InDesign considers to be 
“top,” “right,” and so on. Set this to 45 degrees and the feather 
is rotated so that the Top Feather width is actually referring to 
the object’s upper-left corner. Rotate it 180 degrees and “top” 
becomes “bottom,” and so on.
Gradient Feather. The Gradient Feather effect is like using a linear 
or radial gradient as a transparency mask—you can set a start point, 
end point, and transparency “stop points” anywhere else along the 
gradient. To set the opacity at a point along the gradient, click the 
stop point and choose an Opacity value (see Figure 5-63). 
You can create a new stop point by clicking under the gradient 
bar; you can adjust the midpoint between two stops by dragging 
Figure 5-61
Feather Corner Options
The edges of the Diffused 
corner option fade from 
opaque to transparent.

 5.  387
Figure 5-62
Directional Feather
Directional Feather is a 
great way to fade an image 
or object to transparency.
These three objects have 9 
points of Directional Feather 
applied to their Right side.
First Edge Only
Leading Edges
All Edges
Figure 5-63
Gradient Feather
To apply an effect 
to an image inside 
a frame (but not to 
the frame or stroke 
itself), first select the 
image with the Direct 
Selection tool.
the diamond shaped icon along the top of the bar. You can specify 
a Linear or Radial gradient from the Type pop-up menu. And of 
course if it’s a Linear gradient, you can rotate it in the Angle field.
Curiously, Adobe forgot to add a Noise field in this type of feather, 
so these blends are often too squeaky clean.
If you try applying a feather to some text or any other object on your 
page in order to make it “ghostly” or “blurry” you’ll be sorely disap-
pointed. Instead, try this trick that our friend Matt Phillips taught us: 
Fill your object (or text) with the Paper color, set the blending mode 
to Multiply (which makes the Paper color disappear), and apply a 
drop shadow effect. Make sure that you turn off the Object Knocks 
Out Shadow checkbox (see Figure 5-64).
Making Blurry Text

388     6
Figure 5-64
Blurry Objects
The original text frame 
on top of a gray frame
The text colored Paper, 
set to Multiply, and given 
a drop shadow that isn’t 
knocked out by the object.
You’ve spent 20 minutes getting your effects to look just right, but 
now you need to apply the same effects to another object. Here’s 
a cool way to copy effects from one object to another on the same 
spread: Select the object that has the effects you want, then drag the 
little “fx” icon from the Effects panel and drop it on another object.
You can also drag the “fx” icon from one item in the Effects panel 
to another. If you applied a drop shadow to Object but intended to 
only apply it to Text, you can drag the icon down to Text.
If you’re going to be using the same effects throughout your docu-
ment, use object styles (see Chapter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics”).
To remove an effect, open the Effects dialog box and turn off the 
checkbox next to the effect. To remove all the effects quickly, choose 
Clear Effects from the Effects panel menu. To remove all the effects 
and any opacity or blending modes applied to your selected object, 
choose Clear Transparency from the same menu.
Drawing Conclusions
Earlier in this chapter, we noted that we found the process of creating 
a path using Bezier drawing tools confusing, at first. After extensive 
research involving a tabloid newspaper and far too much coffee, we 
discovered that drawing itself is nothing less than an extraterrestrial 
plot, forced on us in classical antiquity by evil space gods, to some 
cosmic purpose which we cannot—as yet—reveal.
Copying Effects
Editing or   
Removing Effects

389
Ole laments, “I haven’t looked at the PageMaker 3.0 documentation 
recently. I don’t have to—it is forever burned into my memory.
“A feature of that manual’s design was a rule drawn below a par-
ticular, and very common, heading. I know this, because I was one 
of the four people who put those rules there. For every one of those 
headings, one of us had to zoom in, measure from the baseline of 
the text in the heading, position a ruler guide, and then draw a rule. 
When the position of the heading changed, as it often did, we had to 
zoom in again, measure again, and move or redraw the rules.
“I still dream about it.”
The solution to Ole’s nightmare lies in associating a graphic with 
text, which lies in the shadowy realm where text meets graphics—a 
Twilight Zone, something like a Bermuda Triangle of page layout—
where the boundary between text and graphics blurs, frays, or 
becomes thin. 
In this strange dimension, text characters can be bound to paths, 
or become paths, graphics can be embedded in text and behave as if 
they were text characters, and nothing, nothing is what it seems.
In spite of the repeated warnings of our scientific colleagues, we 
must, for the sake of humanity, tell what we have discovered in this 
alien landscape.
Where Text  
Meets Graphics

6

390     6
Paragraph Rules
Paragraph rules are the solution to the problem implicit in Ole’s 
above reminiscence. Paragraph rules (or “lines”) can be part of your 
paragraph’s formatting (or, better yet, part of a paragraph style defi-
nition), and follow your paragraph wherever it happens to go.
To apply a paragraph rule, follow these steps (see Figure 6-1):
1. Select the paragraph (remember, you don’t need to highlight 
the entire paragraph—all you need to do is click the Type tool 
somewhere inside the paragraph).
2. Choose Paragraph Rules from the Paragraph panel menu (or 
press Command-Option-J/Ctrl-Alt-J). InDesign displays the 
Paragraph Rules dialog box.
3. Choose the type of paragraph rule (Rule Above or Rule Below) 
from the Rule Type pop-up menu, then turn on the Rule On 
option.
4. Set the rule options you want using the controls in the panel. If 
you turn on the Preview option, you can watch InDesign apply 
the paragraph rule to the paragraph as you adjust the settings.
5. Click OK to apply the paragraph rule settings to the selected 
paragraph, or click Cancel to close the dialog box without  
applying the rule.
Paragraphs can have up to two rules attached to them. The position 
of one rule set relative to the baseline of the first line of text in a 
paragraph (InDesign calls this the “Rule Above”); the position of the 
other line is relative to the baseline of the last line of the paragraph 
(the “Rule Below”). Note that these rule positions specify only the 
starting point of the rule—by manipulating the rule width, it’s easy 
to create a rule below that extends far above the baseline, or a rule 
above that extends far below the baseline of the last line.
You can’t select or manipulate paragraph rules using the Selection 
tool or the Direct Selection tool. Everyone tries this at least once.
Weight and Style. Paragraph rules, like any other paths you can draw 
in InDesign, can be up to 1000 points wide, and the stroke width 
can be specified in .001-point increments. Like other paths you can 
use dotted, dashed, or multi-line (striped) strokes, including custom 
stroke styles you’ve created.
Applying   
Paragraph Rules
Ground Rules   
for Paragraph Rules

 6.  x m  391
Select a paragraph.
Choose Paragraph Rules 
from the Paragraph   
or Control panel menu.
Choose Column to make the rule the 
width of the column containing the 
paragraph.
Adjust the rule options (in 
this example, we’ve used 
the Offset field to move the 
rule above the text).
Choose Text to make the rule the 
width of the text in the first line of 
the paragraph.
The Width pop-up menu 
defines the method used to 
calculate the width of   
the paragraph rule.
Turn on the rule you want 
(in this case, a paragraph 
rule above).
InDesign displays the  
Paragraph Rules dialog box.
Figure 6-1
Applying a  
Paragraph Rule
Position. A Rule Above grows up (that is, toward the top of the 
text frame) from the position you specify in the Offset field in the 
Paragraph Rules dialog box. A Rule Below grows down (toward the 
bottom of the text frame) as you increase its stroke weight. InDesign 
draws paragraph rules behind the text in the text frame.
Ordinarily, the position of a rule has no effect on the vertical 
spacing of text. If you want to make room above a paragraph for a 
paragraph rule above, or below a paragraph for a rule below, you 
should probably use Space Before and Space After.
If a rule is above the first paragraph of a text frame or below the 
last frame, it normally just sticks out—that is, InDesign allows these 
rules to sit outside the frame. However, if you turn on the Keep in 
Frame checkbox, InDesign forces rules to stay inside the frame and 
moves the text inside the frame instead. (The one exception is when 
First Baseline Offset is set to Fixed; in that case, Keep in Frame 
appears to be ignored.)

392     6
Width. You can base the width of a paragraph rule on the width of 
the text column or on the width of the text in the first (for paragraph 
rules above) or last (for rules below) line of the paragraph. Paragraph 
rules can also be indented from either the width of the column or 
the width of the text—the value you enter in the Left Indent and 
Right Indent fields of the Paragraph Rules dialog box determines the 
indent distance. You can even make paragraph rules extend beyond 
the width of the text or column by entering negative numbers in the 
Left Indent and Right Indent fields.
When you want to put a tint behind a paragraph (which you might 
want to do for a sidebar, a line in a table, or for a note or warning 
paragraph in your text), consider creating the effect with paragraph 
rules—provided, of course, that your paragraph isn’t taller than 1000 
points or so (the maximum paragraph rule width) and the paragraph 
fits inside a single text frame or text column. (When you want to put 
a tint behind a character, word, or line, however, you’ll be better off 
using custom strikethrough rules and/or underlines.)
To use a paragraph rule to add a tint behind a paragraph, follow 
these steps (see Figure 6-2).
1. Calculate the height of the paragraph by adding up the leading 
of the lines in the paragraph.
Tinting Paragraphs
Select a paragraph.
Display the Paragraph Rules dialog box 
and add a rule below. 
Make the stroke weight of the rule at least equal to 
the sum of the leading of the lines in the paragraph.
Move the rule up or down by 
entering values in the Offset 
field (we usually start with 
the stroke weight, then add 
or subtract smaller values to 
fine-tune the rule position).
Figure 6-2
Placing a Tint Behind  
a Paragraph

 6.  x m  393
2. Select the paragraph, then use the Paragraph Rules dialog box 
to apply a paragraph rule below. Use the Weight field to set the 
stroke width of the rule to at least the height of the paragraph.
3. Use the Color pop-up menu to set the color of the rule.
4. Enter a value in the Offset field to move the paragraph rule up or 
down behind the paragraph (remember, a negative value in the 
Offset field moves a paragraph rule below toward the top of the 
paragraph).
5. When the paragraph rule looks the way you want it to, click the 
OK button to apply it to the selected paragraph.
There are all kinds of paragraph rule tricks. Figure 6-3 shows a 
method of adding a tint behind a hanging heading.
By the way, when you work with a paragraph rule that extends 
beyond the boundaries of a text frame, InDesign sometimes forgets 
to redraw the rule as you edit text in the frame. To see the rule or 
rules again, press Shift-F5 to redraw the screen.
Set the text color of   
the heading to “Paper.”
Set the value in the 
Right Indent field to 
the width of the body 
text column (plus a 
bit, if you want some 
space between the 
heading and the body 
copy).
Figure 6-3
Hanging Headings  
and Paragraph Rules
What can you do when your design calls for two rules above your 
paragraph? A common design specification calls for two rules above 
a heading: a thin rule the width of the column and a thick rule the 
width of the text in the heading. How can you accomplish this? It’s 
easy, as shown in the following steps (see Figure 6-4).
1. Select a paragraph.
2. For the rule below, choose Column from the Width pop-up 
menu, then enter a negative value in the Offset field to position 
the rule above the tops of the characters in the first line (this will 
be something like the sum of the leading in the paragraph). Set 
the line weight to a hairline (.25 points) or so.
Two Rules Above

394     6
3. For the rule above, choose Text from the Width pop-up menu, 
then set the stroke weight of the paragraph rule to something 
thicker than the stroke weight of the rule below (4 points, for 
example). Set the value in the Offset field so that the top edge  
of the rule above touches the bottom of the rule below.
When you need to attach more than two rules above or below a 
paragraph, enter extra carriage returns before or after the paragraph, 
then apply paragraph rules to the resulting “blank” paragraphs. 
For the paragraph   
Rule Above…
…enter a thick stroke weight…
…choose Text from 
the Width pop-up 
menu…
…and set the offset to the 
leading value minus the 
stroke weight.
For the paragraph Rule 
Below (which we’re going to 
place above the paragraph—
don’t get confused)…
…enter a thin stroke 
weight (such as a 
hairline)…
…choose Column from 
the Width pop-up 
menu…
…and set the offset to the 
leading value of all of the 
lines in the paragraph 
(there’s only one in this 
example).
When you change the text 
in the first line, InDesign 
changes the width of the 
thicker rule.
Figure 6-4
Thick/Thin Rule Above

 6.  x m  395
Tables
Tables are a great way to present information that falls naturally into 
a set sequence of categories. InDesign can create and edit tables, or 
import tables from Word, Excel, or XML. This feature isn’t perfect, 
but it’s more than good enough to alleviate most of the pain of work-
ing with tables in a layout.
Tables are a matrix; a grid made up of rows (horizontal subdivisions) 
and columns (vertical subdivisions). The area defined by the intersec-
tion of a given row and column is called a cell. InDesign has a com-
plete vocabulary of terms for the various parts of rows, columns, and 
cells, which we’ve attempted to explain in Figure 6-5.
Now that we’ve got the terminology out of the way, but before we dive 
into the details of working with tables in InDesign, there are a few 
conceptual points we’d like to make, as follows.
▶Tables exist inside text frames. There is no “Table tool”—you 
create a text frame and then add a table to it, or convert text in 
the text frame to a table.
▶A table acts like a single character (albeit a potentially very large
one). Another way to look at a table is to think of it as a special 
Table Anatomy
Understanding 
InDesign Tables
Heading row made up of merged cells
Rotated merged cells make 
up these side headings.
Cell
Row
Table border
These cells have been   
filled with a tint.
Column
The basics
A somewhat more   
complex example
Figure 6-5
What’s That Called?

396     6
type of inline frame. Like a character, a table changes position 
as you add or delete text preceding it in its parent story; like an 
inline frame, you can’t apply character formatting (point size, 
font, or leading) to the character containing the table.
▶Like text, tables can flow from column to column, text frame to 
text frame, and from page to page. Table header and footer rows 
can automatically repeat when the table breaks across multiple 
text objects. An individual table row cannot be broken from one 
text frame to another or from one column to another.
▶Table cells are something akin to text frames: they can contain 
text, which can contain inline graphics, text frames, or tables. 
Any and all of InDesign’s typesetting features can be used on 
the text in a table cell, including character and paragraph styles, 
indents, tab stops, and character formatting.
▶Tables are not only for formatting tabular data—they’re also 
useful for a number of other things. Want to put a box around a 
paragraph? Convert the paragraph to a single-cell table. Want to 
compose paragraphs “side by side”? Use a two-column table. 
Creating a Table
There are (at least) four ways to create a table.
▶“From scratch.” Click the Type tool inside a text frame, then 
choose Insert Table from the Table menu. In the Insert Table 
dialog box, enter the number of rows and columns you want and 
click OK. InDesign creates the table (see Figure 6-6).
Once you’ve created a table using this approach, you can add 
text or graphics to the table the same way you would add text to 
any text frame—click the Type tool inside a cell, then enter text, 
or paste text or graphics, or place text or graphics into the cell.
▶Converting Text to a Table. To turn a range of text into a table, 
select the text and choose Convert Text to Table from the Table 
menu. In the Convert Text to Table dialog box, select the delim-
iter characters you want to use, and specify the number of col-
umns, if necessary. InDesign will only display this field when it 
cannot determine the number of columns in the table, given the 
specified delimiter characters. Click OK, and InDesign converts 
the selected text to a table, using the delimiter characters to split 
the text into table rows and columns (see Figure 6-7). 

 6.  x m  397
▶Importing a Table. Another way to create a table is to import a 
table you’ve saved in a Word, Excel, or RTF document. There’s 
no trick to this—select a file containing a table in the Place 
Document dialog box and place it, just as you’d place any other 
type of file. If there is a table in the document, InDesign will 
convert it to an InDesign table as you flow the text onto a page.
▶Pasting a table. You can also copy and paste tables from Word 
and Excel—just select the table, then copy, return to InDesign, 
and paste. However, this only works if you first change the Paste 
option in the Clipboard Handling pane of the Preferences dialog 
box to All Information. The default setting (Text Only) tells 
InDesign to paste the data as text, with tabs between columns.
In theory, you can also copy tables from HTML pages dis-
played in a web browser. However, not all HTML tables seem to 
convert, nor are the results identical from browser to browser. It 
won’t work unless your browser copies the table to the system 
clipboard as RTF. (David cannot get this to work at all.)
When you create a table, InDesign sets the width of the table to 
the width of the text frame. But you’re not limited to that width—
InDesign tables can be narrower or wider than their containing text 
frame. As you’d expect, tables take on the alignment of the para-
graph containing them (though the text inside the table can be of any 
alignment). To change the position of the table in (or relative to) the 
text frame, change the paragraph alignment.
Figure 6-6
Creating a Table  
“From Scratch”
Click the Type tool in a text frame, 
then choose Insert Table from the Table 
menu (or press Command-Option-
Shift-T/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-T).
InDesign displays the Insert 
Table dialog box. Enter the 
number of rows and columns 
you want and click OK.
InDesign inserts 
the table into the 
text frame.

398     6
Sometimes, when you create or edit a table, you’ll see a red dot in 
one or more of the cells in the table (see Figure 6-8). This means that 
the content of the cell (the text or graphic inside the cell) has become 
overset—it’s exactly the same as having overset text in a text frame. 
What can you do? Either resize the cell or set the cell to automatically 
expand (as described later in this chapter).
To convert a table to text, follow these steps (see Figure 6-9).
1. Select the table, or a cell, row, or column in the table, or click the 
Type tool anywhere inside the table.
2. Choose Convert Table to Text from the Table menu. InDesign 
displays the Convert Table to Text dialog box. 
3. Enter the delimiter characters you want to use, if necessary, then 
click the OK button. InDesign converts the table to text.
Overset Cells
Converting   
Tables to Text
Figure 6-7
Converting Text  
to a Table
Select some text.
Choose Convert Text to 
Table from the Table menu. 
InDesign displays the   
Convert Text to Table   
dialog box. 
InDesign converts the 
text to a table.
Do not select the 
final carriage return 
character unless you 
want the table to end 
with an empty row.
Specify delimiter characters, and 
the number of columns in the 
table, if necessary, then click OK.
Figure 6-8
Overset Cell
The dot (you have to imagine it  
in red) indicates that the cell  
content is overset.

 6.  x m  399
Editing Tables
Once you’ve created a table, you can’t just sit and admire it (as tempt-
ing as that might be for longtime page layout users); you’ve got to do 
something with it.
Before we talk about that, though, we’d better lay down a few 
ground rules about cells, rows, and columns.
▶A column is always the width of the widest cell in the column. 
When you change the width of a cell, you’re really changing the 
width of the column containing the cell.
▶A row is always the height of the tallest cell in the row. Just as 
changing the width of a cell changes the width of a column, so 
altering the height of a cell changes the height of a row.
▶In spite of the above restrictions, you can create tables contain-
ing cells that are wider than their parent columns or taller than 
their parent rows. You do this by merging cells, which we’ll 
discuss later, in “Merging Cells.”
To select elements in a table, or to edit a table’s content (text, rows, 
or columns), click the Type tool in one of the cells of the table. This 
activates InDesign’s table tools. Once you’ve done this, you can enter 
Selecting and Editing 
Table Items
Figure 6-9
Converting a  
Table to Text
Select a table, row, column, 
or cell, or click the Type tool 
inside a cell in the table you 
want to convert.
Choose Convert Table to 
Text from the Table menu. 
InDesign displays the Con-
vert Table to Text dialog box.
InDesign converts the table 
to text, separating the rows 
and columns with the delim-
iter characters you specified.
Specify delimiter characters, 
if necessary, then click OK.

400     6
and edit text in the cell, paste or place text or graphics in the cell, or 
even create another table inside the cell. 
It’s easy to tell when you’re in this mode, because the cursor 
changes shape as you position it above cell, row, column, and table 
boundaries. What do these different cursors mean? What can you do 
with these tools? To find out, take a look at Table 6-1.
In addition, the Context menu changes to display options related 
to working with tables (see Figure 6-10).
To select a range of cells, drag the text cursor through them. You 
cannot select non-contiguous cells. Note that dragging the cursor 
through multiple cells selects all of the text in the cells, regardless of 
the starting or ending position of the cursor.
To select a row, position the cursor above the left edge of the first 
cell in the row, then click; for a column, move the cursor above the 
top of the first cell in the column, then click (see Figure 6-11).
You select text inside a table cell using the same methods you use 
to select text in a text frame: Use the Type tool.
How the heck can you enter a tab character in a table cell? When you 
press Tab, InDesign moves the cursor to the next cell in the table (see 
“Table Shortcuts,” later in this chapter). If the cursor is in the last cell 
of the table, pressing Tab creates a new table row. Either way, you 
don’t get the character you’re looking for. 
To enter a tab character, choose Tab from the Other submenu in 
the Insert Special Character submenu of the Context menu (or, if 
you’re using the Mac OS, press Option-Tab).
You can paste data into a table, but before you choose Paste from 
the Edit menu (or press Command-V/Ctrl-V) pay attention to what’s 
selected. If the text cursor is flashing inside a cell when you paste, 
InDesign pastes all the data into that one cell. If you select the cell 
itself (press Esc to toggle between selecting what’s inside the cell 
and the cell itself), and if the data you’re pasting has tabs or carriage 
returns in it, InDesign maps the clipboard data across more than 
one cell. If you need to update the data from an Excel document that 
you’ve turned into an InDesign table, you can copy the cells in Excel, 
switch to InDesign, select one or more cells in your table, and paste.
You place a graphic in a table cell in exactly the same fashion as you 
insert a graphic in text: click the Type tool in a cell, or select some 
text inside a cell, then place a file or paste a graphic you copied to the 
Clipboard earlier (see Figure 6-12). Note that you must select text or 
Entering Tab   
Characters
Pasting Data   
Into Tables
Placing a Graphic   
in a Table Cell

 6.  x m  401
Table 6-1
Table Editing Cursors
When you see:
Your cursor is:
And you can:
Above the top-left 
corner of the table
Click to select  
the table.
Above the left edge 
of a row
Click to select  
the row.
Above the top of a 
column
Click to select  
the column.
Above the right or 
left edge of a cell
Drag to resize the 
column containing 
the cell.
Above the top or 
bottom of a cell
Drag to resize the row 
containing the cell.
Figure 6-10
Context Menu Options 
for Working with Tables
When you select an item in a 
table (a cell, a row, a column, 
or the entire table), the Context 
menu changes to offer options for 
working with the selected item.
When you click the Type tool 
in a table cell, or select text 
in a table cell, InDesign adds 
options to the Context menu.
Figure 6-11
Selecting Rows  
and Columns
Position the cursor above the 
left edge of a row…
Position the cursor above the 
top of a column…
…then click to select the column.
…then click to select the row.

402     6
have an active text insertion point; selecting the cell itself will not get 
the graphic into the cell.
If you want the graphic to fill the entire cell, make sure the Cell 
Insets values are set to zero and the Clip Contents to Cell checkbox 
is turned on in the Cell Options dialog box (see “Formatting Tables,” 
later in this chapter).
Some of the controls in the Table panel can also be found in the 
Control panel. You won’t see these controls unless you select a table 
item—a cell, a row, a column, or a table—when you select text in a 
table, the Control panel displays text formatting options. 
In most of the table-related illustrations in this chapter, we’ll 
show the Table panel, rather than the Control panel, because the 
Control panel’s width makes it difficult to fit into our page layout. 
This doesn’t mean that we prefer the Table panel—in fact, we use the 
Control panel whenever the options we need are available there.
InDesign tables can include header and footer rows, which can 
repeat as the table breaks across text frames, text columns, or pages. 
You can add header and footer rows when you create the table, or you 
can add them to existing tables, or you can convert table body rows 
to header or footer rows.
▶If you’re using the Insert Table command to create a table, you 
can use the Header Rows and Footer Rows fields in the Insert 
Table dialog box to specify the number of header or footer rows 
as you create the table.
▶If you want to add header and/or footer rows to an existing table, 
select a cell in the table (or a row, or a column, or the table itself) 
and choose Headers and Footers from the Table Options sub-
Table Controls in the 
Control Panel
Adding Table Headers 
and Footers
Figure 6-12
Placing a Graphic  
in a Cell
Click the Type tool   
inside a table cell.
Place or paste a graphic 
into the cell.

 6.  x m  403
Figure 6-13
Adding a Header Row
Select a cell, then choose 
Headers and Footers from 
the Table Options submenu 
of the Context menu.
Enter the number of header 
rows you want, then define 
the rate at which the rows 
should repeat.
InDesign adds the header 
rows. Enter the header text.
Format the header rows.   
In this example, we’ve 
merged the cells of the   
first header row.
Click OK to apply the   
header rows.
menu of the Context menu. InDesign displays the Headers and 
Footers panel of the Table Options dialog box. Enter the number 
of header and/or footer rows you want, specify the repeat prop-
erties of the header/footer rows, and click OK (see Figure 6-13).
▶To convert an existing row to a header row, select the row (it 
must be the first row in the table) and choose Convert to Header 
Rows from the Context menu (see Figure 6-14). To convert mul-
tiple table body rows to header rows, select the rows—the first 
row in the table must be included in the selection (if it’s not, the 

404     6
Figure 6-14
Converting a  
Table Body Row into a 
Header Row
Select the first row in the 
table, then choose Convert 
to Header Rows from the 
Context menu.
option won’t appear on the Context menu). Converting a row to 
a footer row works the same way—select the last row in the table 
and choose Convert to Footer Rows from the Context menu.
The first header and footer rows can be edited just as you’d edit any 
other row—the only difference is that the changes that you make are 
applied to all instances of the header or footer throughout the table. 
Subsequent header/footer rows, however, will defy your efforts to get 
the cursor into them (InDesign coyly displays a lock icon when you 
move the cursor over the row). 
InDesign provides a pair of shortcuts, however, that will take you 
back to the first header or footer row—Edit Header and Edit Footer 
on the Context menu.
To resize a table by dragging, follow these steps (see Figure 6-15).
1. Click the Type tool inside the table.
2. Move the cursor over the left or right edge of the table (to change 
the table’s width), or over the top or bottom of the table (to 
change its height). Position the cursor above the lower-right 
corner of the table to resize the width and height of the table.
3. Drag the cursor to resize the table. Or—better—hold down Shift 
as you drag to resize all the rows or columns an equal amount.
When you resize the table by dragging the lower-right corner 
of the table, or when you hold down Shift as you drag, InDesign 
applies the changes in size equally to all of the cells in the table. If 
you drag the sides of the table without holding down Shift, InDesign 
Editing Header and 
Footer Rows
Changing the   
Size of a Table

 6.  x m  405
only changes the row or column nearest the edge you’re dragging. 
Resizing the table this way does not scale the text in the table.
What? You’ve resized the table and now want all of the columns 
to be the same width? Don’t start dragging columns around. Instead, 
select the table and choose Distribute Columns Evenly from the 
Table panel menu or Table menu (see Figure 6-16). If you’ve changed 
the height of the table and want to make all of the rows in the table 
the same height, select the table and choose Distribute Rows Evenly 
(again, from the Table menu or from the Table panel menu).
Figure 6-15
Resizing a Table
Position the cursor over one side of the table…
Note that this table 
is wider than its 
text frame.
…and drag. InDesign resizes 
the table. To resize the table   
proportionally, hold down 
Shift as you drag.
Figure 6-16
Distributing  
Columns Evenly
Select the columns you want 
to make equal in width. In 
this example, we’ve selected 
the entire table.
InDesign makes the 
selected columns 
equal in width.
Choose Distribute Columns Evenly 
from the Context menu or Table menu.

406     6
Figure 6-17
Changing Row  
Height by Dragging
Position the cursor 
above a cell border.
Drag the cursor up or 
down to resize the row.
To change the height of a row or the width of a column by dragging, 
follow these steps (see Figure 6-17).
1. Click the Type tool inside a cell.
2. Move the cursor over the top or bottom of the cell to change the 
height of the row containing the cell, or over the left or right of 
the cell to change the column width.
3. Drag the cursor up or down to resize a row, or right or left to 
resize a column.
To change the height of a row or the width of a column using the 
Table panel, click the Type tool inside a cell, and adjust the values in 
the Row Height and Column Width field (see Figure 6-18).
Changing the Size of 
Rows and Columns
Figure 6-18
Changing Column 
Width Using the  
Table Panel
Select a column (or   
any cell in a column)…
…then enter a new value 
in the Column Width field. 
Press Return/Enter to apply 
the new column width.

 6.  x m  407
To change the height of a row or the width of a column using the Cell 
Options dialog box follow these steps (see Figure 6-19).
1. Select a cell, a row, a column, or the entire table.
2. Choose Rows and Columns from the Cell Options submenu of 
the Context menu (or from the Table menu). 
3. Enter a value in the Row Height field or the Column Width field 
to change the width of a column. 
If you’re entering text in a table, and have reached the cell of the last 
row, you can add a row by simply pressing Tab—InDesign assumes 
that this means that you want to add a row to the table. If you need 
to add rows inside an existing table, it’s a little bit more complicated.
To add a row or a series of rows to a table, follow these steps (see 
Figure 6-20).
1. Click the Type tool in a cell in a row that is above or below the 
point at which you want to add the new rows. 
2. Choose Row from the Insert submenu of the Table or Context 
menu. InDesign displays the Insert Row(s) dialog box.
Adding Rows   
Or Columns
Figure 6-19
Changing Column 
Width Using the  
Cell Options Dialog Box
Select a column (or   
any cell in a column)…
…and choose Rows 
and Columns from 
the Cell Options sub-
menu of the Context 
menu.
Figure 6-20
Adding Rows
Click the Type tool in  
a cell, then choose  
Row from the Insert 
submenu of the  
Context menu.
InDesign displays 
the Insert Rows 
dialog box.
Enter the number of rows you want to 
add to the table, and specify whether 
you want them added above or below 
the selected row. Click the OK button to 
add the row or rows.

408     6
3. Enter the number of Rows you want to add in the Number field, 
and choose the Above or Below option to tell InDesign where to 
put the rows (relative to the selected row).
4. Click the OK button. InDesign adds the empty rows.
To add a column or a series of columns to a table, follow these 
steps (see Figure 6-21).
1. Click the Type tool in a cell in a column that is adjacent to the 
point at which you want to add the new columns.
2. Choose Column from the Insert submenu of the Context menu. 
InDesign displays the Insert Column(s) dialog box.
3. Enter the number of Columns you want to add in the Number 
field, then choose the Left or Right option to tell InDesign where 
to put the rows (relative to the selected row).
4. Click the OK button. InDesign adds the empty columns.
You can also add a row or column by dragging. To do so, follow 
these steps (see Figure 6-22).
1. Click the Type tool in a cell.
2. To add a column, position the cursor over the left or right side of 
the cell; to add a row, position it above the top or bottom.
3. Hold down the mouse button, then press Option/Alt and drag. 
InDesign adds a row or column to the table.
Figure 6-21
Adding a Column
Click the Type tool in a cell 
(or select text in a cell), then 
Choose Column from the   
Insert submenu of the   
Context menu.
InDesign displays the Insert 
Columns dialog box.
InDesign adds the   
columns to the table.
Enter the number of columns you want 
to add, and specify the location (to the 
right or left of the selected column) at 
which you want to add them.

 6.  x m  409
Figure 6-22
Adding a Column  
by Dragging
Position the cursor over a column edge. Hold down the 
mouse button, then press Option/Alt and drag.
Stop dragging, and InDesign 
adds a column to the table.
To add a row to a table using the Table panel, follow these steps 
(see Figure 6-23).
1. Click the Type tool in a cell.
2. Display the Table panel (press Shift-F91), then change the value 
displayed in the Rows field or the Columns field. 
When you add a row using this technique, the new row appears 
below the row you selected; when you add a column, the new column 
appears to the right of the selected column.
To delete a single row, click the Type tool in a cell in the row, then 
choose Row from the Delete submenu of the Context menu. There’s 
no need to select the row or cell. To delete more than one row, select 
at least one cell in each row you want to delete, then choose Row 
from the Delete submenu of the Context menu.
To delete a single column, click the Type tool in a cell in the 
column, then choose Column from the Delete submenu of the Table 
or Context menu. To delete more than one column, select a cell in 
each column you want to delete, then choose Column from the 
Delete submenu of the Context menu.
To delete a table, click the Type tool in any cell in the table, and 
then choose Table from the Delete submenu of the Table menu or the 
Context menu. InDesign deletes the entire table containing the cell,.
You can use the Type tool to select the character containing the 
table (though it can be a very large character, it’s still a single charac-
ter), or place the cursor after the table in the story, and press Delete.
1 In Mac OS X, you may need to open System Preferences, choose 
Keyboard & Mouse or Dashboard & Exposé to disable this shortcut 
before it will work properly in InDesign.
Deleting Rows,   
Columns, and Tables

410     6
To delete rows or columns using the Table panel, follow these 
steps (see Figure 6-24).
1. Click the Type tool in a cell.
2. Display the Table panel (press Shift-F9) if it isn’t already visible, 
then reduce the value in either the Rows field or the Columns 
field. InDesign asks if you’re certain you want to remove the 
row(s). You are certain, so click the OK button.
To merge a series of selected table cells into a single cell, select the 
cells and choose Merge Cells from the Context menu or Table menu 
(see Figure 6-25). The text and graphics in the selected cells are placed 
in the new merged cell. 
To unmerge a cell that has been created by merging cells, select 
the cell and choose Unmerge Cells from the Context menu or Table 
menu. Unmerging a merged cell is different from splitting the cell, 
which only divides the cell in half along its horizontal or vertical axis. 
Unmerging a cell actually returns the cells in the merged cell to their 
original geometry, though it does not restore their original content.
Merging and   
Unmerging   
Table Cells
Figure 6-23
Adding a Row Using  
the Table Panel
Click the Type tool in a cell (or 
select text in a cell).
Enter a new 
number of 
rows in the 
Rows field 
of the Table 
panel.
Figure 6-24
Deleting a Column 
Using the Table Panel
Click the Type tool in a cell 
(or select text in a cell, or 
select a cell, row, or table).
Decrease the value in the Columns 
field by one or more and press 
Return/Enter to apply the change.

 6.  x m  411
To split a cell, select the cell and choose Split Cell Horizontally or 
Split Cell Vertically from the Context menu (see Figure 6-26).
Cells in an InDesign table can be rotated in 90-degree increments 
(see Figure 6-27). To rotate a cell, select the cell and then choose one 
of the options (0, 90, 180, 270) on the Rotate submenu of the Context 
menu (or click the corresponding button in the Table panel).
Sometimes, you need to place a box around a paragraph—you often 
see this formatting used to set off notes and warnings in technical 
manuals. 
We know of other methods for accomplishing this (involving 
paragraph rules and inline frames)—but the best way to put a box 
around a paragraph is to convert the paragraph to a single-cell table. 
We do not know if single-cell tables can reproduce by fission, as other 
single-cell animals can, but they’re certainly useful nonetheless.
To convert a paragraph to a single-cell table, select all of the text 
in the paragraph up to, but not including, the return at the end of the 
paragraph. Then choose Convert Text to Table from the Table menu 
(see Figure 6-28). Apply whatever formatting you want to the fill and 
stroke of the table’s single cell.
Splitting Table Cells
Rotating Table Cells
Using a Table to   
Create a Box Around   
a Paragraph
Figure 6-25
Merging Cells
Select a range of cells.
Choose Merge Cells   
from the Context menu   
(or Table menu).
InDesign merges the 
cells. Any content in 
the merged cells is 
retained in the  
new cell.
Figure 6-26
Splitting a Cell
Select a cell (this can be 
any cell; it need not be a 
cell created by merging 
other cells).
Choose one of the Split Cell 
options from the Context 
menu (or Table menu).
InDesign splits the cell into two cells.

412     6
Table Shortcuts
As you might expect, InDesign has a number of keyboard shortcuts 
related to working with tables (see Table 6-2). 
By default, some cool shortcuts have no key assigned to them. Go 
to Row, in particular, is worth its weight in gold when working with 
long tables. You can find it and other very helpful table shortcuts 
by choosing Keyboard Shortcuts from the Edit menu, then choosing 
Tables Menu from the Product area pop-up menu.
Figure 6-27
Rotating a Cell
Select a cell.
Click one of the rotation options   
in the Table panel (or choose   
one from the Context menu).
InDesign rotates the 
content of the cell.
Figure 6-28
Placing a Box  
Around a Paragraph
Select the text of the paragraph, leaving 
the return character unselected, then 
choose Convert Text to Table from the 
Table menu. 
InDesign creates a table 
containing a single cell.
Apply formatting to the table.
InDesign displays the Convert 
Text to Table dialog box. Click 
the OK button.

 6.  x m  413
Table 6-2
Table Shortcuts in  
the Default set
Function
Shortcut
Text Options
Command-Option-B/Ctrl-Alt-B*
Delete Column
Shift-Backspace*
Delete Row
Command-Backspace/ 
Ctrl-Backspace*
Insert Table
Command-Shift-Option-T/ 
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-T
Insert Column
Command-Option-9/Ctrl-Alt-9*
Insert Row
Command-9/Ctrl-9*
Next Cell
Tab
Previous Cell
Shift-Tab
Select Cell
Command-/(slash)/ 
Ctrl-/ (slash) or Esc*
Select Column
Command-Option-3/Ctrl-Alt-3*
Select Row
Command-3/Ctrl-3*
Select Table
Command-Option-A/Ctrl-Alt-A
Table Setup
Command-Option-B/Ctrl-Alt-B*
*  This command is only active when you have an active text  
insertion point in a text frame or table cell.
Formatting Tables
Earlier, we mentioned that table cells are similar to InDesign text 
frames—and we now want to point out that that similarity extends 
to the realm of formatting, as well. Table cells can be filled using 
any fill you could apply to a frame, and can use all of the strokes in 
InDesign’s Stroke panel (including custom stroke styles).
To format table cells, however, you don’t (usually) use the same 
controls you use to format page items. Instead, you use a set of table 
formatting controls, most of which you’ll find in the Table Options 
dialog box (press Command-Option-Shift-B/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-B) and 
Cell Options dialog box (press Command-Option-B/Ctrl-Alt-B).
Before we start talking about table formatting, it’s important that you 
understand that applying a stroke to a column is exactly the same as 
applying a stroke to the left and right edges of all of the cells in that 
column. There are not separate stroke properties for rows and col-
umns. If you change the stroke property of a column, the strokes on 
Table Cell   
Strokes and Fills

414     6
the corresponding cell borders in the column also change. The same 
is true for table border strokes—these properties apply to the outside 
edges of the cells at the top, right, bottom, and left edges of the table.
Applying Strokes to Cells. InDesign offers a number of different 
ways to set the fill or stroke of a cell. You can set the stroke weight 
using the Stroke panel, or the Strokes and Fills panel of the Cell 
Options dialog box, or from the table controls in the Control panel. 
You can set the fill of a cell using the Swatches panel, the Color panel, 
or the Strokes and Fills panel of the Cell Options dialog box. This is 
not a complete listing of the different methods you can use to format 
cells, but we think you get the idea.
When you want to apply a stroke to all of the borders of a cell or 
cells, follow these steps (see Figure 6-29).
1. Select a range of cells.
2. Display the Stroke panel or display the Strokes and Fills panel 
of the Cell Options dialog box (choose Strokes and Fills from 
the Cell Options submenu of the Context menu), or display the 
Control panel.
Figure 6-29
Applying a Stroke 
to All Cell Borders
Click the Type tool in the 
table, then press Command-
Option-A/Ctrl-Alt-A (or 
choose Table from the Select 
submenu of the Context 
menu) to select the table.
Enter a stroke weight in the Weight field 
of the Control panel, or choose a stroke 
weight from the associated pop-up menu.
InDesign applies the   
stroke to the cell   
borders of the table.
You can apply any stroke style to 
the stroke of a table cell, including 
dashed and striped strokes you’ve 
defined.

 6.  x m  415
Figure 6-30
Cell Proxy
Cell Proxy in the 
Stroke panel.
Cell Proxy in the Cell   
Options dialog box
Click a cell border in the Cell 
Proxy to exclude the cell edges 
from formatting. Click again to 
activate the cell border.
Double-click to deactivate a 
group of cell borders, or triple-
click to deactivate all cell borders.
Actually, we don’t know 
what this control is supposed 
to be called—the official 
documentation refers to a 
“proxy preview” area, but 
not to the control itself. So 
we’re calling it the “Cell 
Proxy.” You got a problem 
with that?
Cell Proxy in the Control panel.
3. Enter a stroke weight in the Weight field and press Return/Enter 
(or otherwise apply the new value).
4. Apply a stroke color. If you’re applying the stroke using the 
Stroke panel or the Control panel, you can use the Swatches 
panel, the Color panel, the Gradient panel, or any of the other 
color controls. If you’re using the Strokes and Fills panel of the 
Cell Options dialog box, you can use the Color pop-up menu.
Each border of a cell in an InDesign table can have a different 
stroke. Note, however, that cells share borders with adjacent cells. 
Applying a stroke to the right border of a cell affects the left border of 
the next cell in the row.
The Cell Proxy (in the Strokes panel of the Cell Options dialog 
box, or in the Control panel or Stroke panel) is the way that you tell 
InDesign which border you want to work with (see Figure 6-30). Just 
as the Proxy in the Transform panel “stands in” for the current selec-
tion, the Cell Proxy represents the selected cell or cell range.
When the borders in the Cell Proxy are highlighted (in light blue), 
changes you make to the stroke color or stroke weight will affect the 
corresponding cell borders. To prevent formatting from affecting a 

416     6
cell border, click the corresponding active border in the Cell Proxy. 
To make an inactive border active again, click it again.
If you want to apply a stroke to some, but not all, of the borders of 
a cell, follow these steps (see Figure 6-31).
1. Select the cell or range of cells you want to format.
2. Display the Stroke panel or display the Strokes and Fills panel of 
the Cell Options dialog box (choose Strokes and Fills from the 
Cell Options submenu of the Context menu).
3. Use the Cell Proxy to select the cell borders you want to format.
4. Apply stroke formatting using the Strokes and Fills panel of the 
Cell Options dialog box, or the Stroke or Swatches panels.
Applying Fills to Cells. To apply a fill to a cell, follow these steps (see 
Figure 6-32).
1. Select a cell or a range of cells.
Figure 6-31
Applying a Stroke to 
Selected Cell Borders
In this example, we want to 
remove the strokes around 
the outside edges (top, left, 
and right) of the first row in 
the table, but we don’t want 
to remove the stroke at the 
bottom of the row. To do 
this, we use the Cell Proxy 
in the Stroke panel.
When you click a border in 
the Cell Proxy, it changes 
from blue to gray
Select the cell you   
want to format.
InDesign displays the Cell 
Proxy in the Stroke panel.
Click the cell border you want to protect   
from formatting, then apply a stroke.
In this example, we have turned off the bottom border.
The top, left, and right 
borders of the first row have 
been set to zero point strokes, 
but the bottom border of 
the row retains its original 
stroke weight.

 6.  x m  417
Figure 6-32
Applying a Fill to a Cell 
(Dialog Box Method)
Select a cell or 
series of cells.
Choose Strokes and Fills from the Cell 
Options submenu of the Context or Table 
menu. InDesign displays the Strokes and 
fills panel of the Cell Options dialog box.
Specify fill options 
in the Strokes and 
Fills panel of the Cell 
Options dialog box.
InDesign applies the fill to 
the selected cells.
Figure 6-33
Applying a Fill to a Cell 
(Panel Method)
Click the Fill selector at the top 
of the Swatches panel (if it’s 
not already active).
Select a cell or a range of cells.
Click a swatch.
InDesign applies the fill to the selected cells.

418     6
Figure 6-34
Applying a  
Gradient to a Cell
Select a cell.
Display the Gradient panel 
and click the Gradient Ramp 
to apply a gradient fill. 
InDesign positions the start 
and end of the gradient (in 
this example, the center 
point of a radial gradient) 
based on the width and 
height of the entire table—
not the width of the cell itself.
Center point of a radial gradient 
applied to the cell.
2. Display the Strokes and Fills panel of the Cell Options dialog 
box (to display this panel, choose Strokes and Fills from the Cell 
Options submenu of the Context or Table menu).
3. Choose a color swatch from the Color pop-up menu, and enter 
a tint value in the Tint field, if necessary. Note that you can also 
set the fill to overprint using the Overprint option.
4. Click the OK button to close the dialog box and apply the fill.
Alternatively, you can apply a fill to a cell using the Swatches panel or 
Color panel (see Figure 6-33).
1. Select a cell or range of cells.
2. Click the Fill selector at the top of the Swatches panel or Color 
panel to make it active (if it’s not already active).
3. Click the swatch (if you’re using the Swatches panel) or color (if 
you’re using the Color panel) to apply it to the cell.
Applying Gradients to Table Cells. You can apply a gradient to the 
fill and stroke of a cell, but the results might not be what you’d expect 
(see Figure 6-34). 
1. Select the cells.
2. Display the Gradient panel, if it’s not already visible.

 6.  x m  419
3. Click in the Gradient Ramp to apply a gradient to the selected 
cells. Adjust the gradient settings to define the type, color, and 
angle of the gradient (as discussed in Chapter 5, “Drawing”).
Note that the gradient is based on the width and height of the 
table, rather than on the selected cell or cells. This may or may not 
give you the effect you’re looking for. To gain more control over the 
start/end points of the gradient, create and fill a rectangle, then paste 
the rectangle into the cell.
Applying Diagonal Lines. To apply diagonal lines to a cell, use the 
options in the Diagonal Lines panel of the Cell Options dialog box 
(see Figure 6-35).
1. Select a cell, row, column, or table (table border strokes apply to 
the entire table, so you need only select part of the table).
Figure 6-35
Applying Diagonal  
Lines to a Cell
InDesign displays the 
Diagonal Lines panel of the 
Cell Options dialog box.
Select a cell, then choose 
Diagonal Lines from the 
Cell Options submenu of the 
Context or Table menu.
Use the controls to specify 
the formatting of the 
diagonal lines.
InDesign applies the   
diagonal lines to the cell.
In this example table, 
a diagonal line in a cell 
indicates that the seats in 
that section are no longer 
available. TimeTravel Tickets 
has run out of box seats 
for the November 25, 1882, 
premiere of “Iolanthe,” so we 
have to apply diagonal lines 
to the corresponding cell.

420     6
Figure 6-36
Applying Strokes to 
Table Borders
Select a cell, row, column, or the entire 
table (as we have in this example), then 
Press Command-Shift-Option-B/Ctrl-
Shift-Alt-B to display the Table Setup 
panel of the Table Options dialog box.
Specify the stroke weight, color, 
and tint you want to apply to 
the table borders. Click the OK 
button to apply your changes.
InDesign applies the stroke 
to the outside borders of 
the cells at the outside (left, 
right, top, or bottom)   
of the table.
Example table without   
a table border.
2. Display the Diagonal Lines panel of the Cell Options dialog box 
(choose Diagonal Lines from the Cell Options submenu of the 
Context menu).
3. Turn on one of the diagonal lines options. Choose a stroke 
weight, stroke type, color, and tint. If you want the diagonal 
lines to overprint, turn on the Overprint option. If you want the 
diagonal lines to appear in front of the table, turn on the Draw 
in Front option.
4. Click the OK button to apply the diagonal lines.

 6.  x m  421
Formatting Table Borders. To apply a stroke to the edges of a table, 
use the options in the Table Border section of the Table Setup panel 
of the Table Options dialog box (see Figure 6-36). Note that apply-
ing a border to a table is the same as applying borders to the outside 
edges of each of cells on each side of the table—but it’s a lot faster.
1. Select a cell, row, column, or table (table border strokes apply to 
the entire table, so you need only select part of the table).
2. Display the Table Setup panel of the Table Options dialog box 
(press Command-Option-Shift-B/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-B).
3. Choose a stroke weight, stroke type, color, and tint. If you want 
the stroke to overprint, turn on the Overprint option.
4. If you want to prevent the table border formatting from overrid-
ing formatting you’ve applied to the cells in the table (i.e., any 
formatting other than the default table formatting), turn on the 
Preserve Local Formatting option.
Applying Alternating Fills and Strokes. The options in the Row 
Strokes, Column Strokes, and Fills panels of the Table Options 
dialog box provide a way for you to vary the formatting of rows and 
columns in a table according to a predefined pattern. Shading table 
rows or columns is often a more visually pleasing way to format a 
table than using strokes (this depends on the design of the piece in 
which the table appears).
All of these panels work the same way—you select a pattern from 
the Alternating Pattern pop-up menu, and then you specify the for-
matting applied by that pattern. If the pattern you chose is None, 
InDesign doesn’t alternate the corresponding fill or stroke proper-
ties in the table. Otherwise, InDesign applies one of two formats to 
the rows and columns in the table. Formatting you apply using alter-
nating fills or strokes overrides any cell formatting you’ve already 
applied to the cells in the table (it has no effect on text formatting).
To apply an alternating fill or stroke pattern to a table, follow 
these steps (see Figure 6-37). 
1. Select a cell, row, column, or table (this formatting applies to the 
entire table, so do whatever is easiest for you).
2. Display the panel of the Table Options dialog box that corre-
sponds to the attribute you want to work with (i.e., Row Strokes, 
Column Strokes, or Fills). Turn on the Preview option—it can 
help you understand the effect of the formatting options.

422     6
3. Choose an option from the Alternating Pattern pop-up menu.
4. Choose a color for the alternating pattern (until you do this, you 
probably won’t see any changes to the table, even if you have 
turned on the Preview option).
5. If you want the alternating pattern to ignore rows at the begin-
ning or end of the table (for alternating row strokes) or at the left 
or right edges of the column (if you’re working with alternating 
column strokes), enter the number of cells in the Skip First and 
Skip Last fields.
It should be clear you can create quite complex alternating for-
matting using these options. The only real way to learn how the dif-
ferent alternating formatting features work is to experiment with the 
settings. Create an example table, open the Table Options dialog box, 
turn on the Preview option, and play!
Figure 6-37
Applying  
Alternating Fills
Select a cell, row, column,   
or table, then choose   
Alternating Fills from the 
Table Options submenu of 
the Context or Table menu.
Select a pattern from the 
Alternating Pattern pop-up 
menu, then specify the   
formatting you want to 
apply.
Note that we’ve directed our 
alternating pattern to skip 
the first two rows in the table 
(to avoid the table header 
row and title).
InDesign applies the 
alternating fill pattern to 
the rows in the table.

 6.  x m  423
Table and Cell Styles
The problem with formatting tables is that it just takes far too long, 
especially when you have a bunch of tables in a document. That’s 
where table styles come in handy! Table styles—like their cousins 
paragraph styles and object styles—are a way to collect a bunch of 
formatting together and give it a single name. InDesign offers both 
table styles (for table-wide formatting) and cell styles (for formatting 
that affects a single cell).
The Basic Table Style. Every new document comes with one table 
style called Basic. The problem is that if you redefine Basic and use it 
Figure 6-38
Defining Cell Styles
Hold down Option/Alt and 
click the New Cell Style button 
to force the New Cell Style 
dialog box to open.
Work your way through 
the panels in the Cell Style 
Options dialog box to define 
a new cell style.
To apply a cell style, place 
the cursor in the cell and 
click in the Cell Styles panel.
Click the OK button to close 
the dialog box, and InDesign 
adds a new cell style.
Just as in a 
Character style, 
blank fields are 
ignored when 
the cell style is 
applied.

424     6
in your document, and then later copy one of these tables and paste 
it into a different document, your table will change in appearance. 
Because of that, we recommend you create your own styles instead 
of using Basic.
While it’s tempting to jump in and discuss table styles, it’s typically 
better to define your cell styles first because you’ll use them in your 
table style definition. To define a new cell style, follow these steps (see 
Figure 6-38):
1. Choose New Cell Style from the Cell Style panel menu or 
Option/Alt-click on the New Cell Style button in the panel. 
2. In the General pane of the New Cell Style dialog box, give the 
style a name and—if you want—a keyboard shortcut. (Shortcuts 
have to be based on the keys on a numeric keypad.) If you’ve 
already created a cell style, you can base your new one on it so 
that it takes on all the same formatting.
The coolest feature in the General pane is the Paragraph Style 
pop-up menu. If you choose a paragraph style here, it will auto-
matically apply to any text inside the cell.
3. The next three panes—Text, Strokes and Fills, and Diagonal 
Lines—are virtually identical to same-named panes in the Cell 
Options dialog box, so there’s no reason to repeat ourselves. For 
more information, see those sections earlier in this chapter.
The important thing to note about these panes, however, is 
that—like character styles—all the controls are blank until you 
set them. A blank field or pop-up menu (or a dash in a checkbox) 
means “ignore this formatting” so it won’t be applied when the 
cell is styled. For example, if you leave the Cell Fill Color pop-up 
menu blank, then your cell style will not override the cell fill 
color already applied to the cell in the table.
If your cursor is currently inside a formatted cell when you create 
a new cell style, the current formatting appears in the New Cell Style 
dialog box automatically. That’s often the fastest way to define a cell 
style. However, InDesign won’t apply the cell style for you after you 
click OK—you still have to do that with a click in the Cell Styles panel.
Once you’ve defined the cell styles you need, it’s time to build your 
table style. To define a table style, follow these steps (see Figure 6-39):
1. Choose New Table Style from the Table Style panel menu or 
Option/Alt-click on the New Cell Style button in the panel.
Defining Cell Styles
Defining Table Styles

 6.  x m  425
Figure 6-39
Defining a Table Style
Hold down Option/Alt and click 
the New Table Style button in 
the Table Styles panel.
Apply cell styles here.
Here we’ve 
turned off the 
table border.
The original 
unformatted table.
After applying the table 
style, the paragraphs are 
formatted and the rows 
have alternating tints.
After we convert the first row 
to a header row, InDesign 
automatically applies the 
header cell style to it.
2. In the General pane of the New Table Style dialog box, give the 
style a name and—if you want—a keyboard shortcut based on 
the numeric keypad keys. If you want to base the table style on 
another table style, choose it from the Based On dialog box. We 
recommend not basing new styles on the Basic Table style, as it 
makes it too easy for tables to get messed up when copying them 
to a new document.

426     6
You can have InDesign automatically apply cell styles to areas 
of your table by choosing from the Cell Styles pop-up menus. 
For example, if you have created a cell style to describe the look 
of all the cells in your table (not including a header row), choose 
that style from the Body Rows pop-up menu. You can specify 
different cell styles for Body Rows, Header Rows, Footer Rows, 
and the cells in the Left Column and Right Column. 
Remember that each of these cell styles can apply its own 
paragraph style to the text inside those cells, too. That’s how you 
apply paragraph styles throughout a table by using a table style. 
3. The next four panes of the New Table Style dialog box—Table 
Setup, Row Strokes, Column Strokes, and Fills—are nearly iden-
tical to the similarly-named panes in the Table Options dialog 
box, so go read about those earlier in the chapter.
However, some features are conspicuously absent in the 
table style definition, notably anything that has to do with the 
structure of the table: Table Dimensions, Headers, and Footers. 
Table styles cannot control these aspects of a table. That can be 
quite frustrating at times. For example, if you import an Excel 
or Word table and apply a table style to it, there’s no way for the 
style to tell the table that the first row should be a header row. 
Instead, you have to manually use Convert Rows to Header. That 
can get tiresome with a lot of tables.
4. When you’re done specifying the look at feel of the table, click 
OK. InDesign won’t apply the style to a currently selected table; 
you have to click on the style name in the panel.
Applying Table and Cell Styles. As mentioned above, you can apply 
a table or cell style by—gasp!—placing the cursor in the table or cell 
(or selecting more than one cell) and clicking on the style name in 
the Table Styles or Cell Styles panel. Unfortunately, we don’t see any 
way to apply a table style when placing a Word or Excel document.
You can also apply a table style to a table when you first create it 
with the Insert Table or Convert Text to Table features (both dialogs 
sport a Table style pop-up menu from which to choose a style).
Redefining Styles. You can change the definition of your table or 
cell styles at any time by selecting the style in the panel and choos-
ing Style Options from the panel menu (or, better, from the Con-
text menu). You can also change the formatting on your document 
page, then select the table or cell and choose Redefine Style from 

 6.  x m  427
the Table Styles or Cell Styles panel menu. When you change a table 
or cell style definition, the new formatting is immediately reflected 
throughout your document.
Clearing Overrides. Just because you’ve applied a table or cell style 
doesn’t mean you can’t override that with further local formatting. 
When you do apply local formatting on top of a cell or table, you’ll 
see the familiar plus (+) sign next to the style name, indicating there’s 
additional formatting here. You can see what that formatting is by 
hovering the cursor over the style name.
To remove the local formatting, you can Option/Alt click on the 
style name in the Table Styles or Cell Styles panel. If you want to 
remove both local formatting applied to a table as well as any cell 
styles that were applied, Option-Shift/Alt-Shift-click on a table style.
Figure 6-40
Loading Table Styles
Another way to remove styles is to choose Clear Overrides from 
the Table Styles or Cell Styles panel menu (or click the Clear Over-
rides button at the bottom of the panel)—this is the same as Option/
Alt-clicking. When it comes to cell styles, you have a final option in 
the panel menu (and panel button): Clear Attributes Not Defined by 
Style. The difference is subtle: Clear Overrides only removes the local 
formatting that overrides the cell style definition. Clear Attributes 
Not Defined by Style will clear all local formatting, even if it had 
nothing to do with the cell style’s definition.
If you want to remove the cell style entirely, select the cell (or cells) 
and click [None] in the Cell Styles panel.
Sorting Styles. If you don’t like the order in which styles appear in 
the Table Styles or Cell Styles panel, you can rearrange them in two 
ways: You can choose Sort by Name from the panel menu or you can 
drag each style up or down to the position you want it.

428     6
Loading Styles. You can copy the cell styles or table styles from 
another InDesign document by choosing Load Table Styles or Load 
Table and Cell Styles from the Table Styles or Cell Styles panel menu. 
When you do this, InDesign asks which styles you want, and—if 
some of the incoming styles have the same names as styles in your 
current document, what you want to do about it (see Figure 6-40).
Style Groups. You can group your table and cell styles together into 
groups (or folders, or sets, or whatever you want to call them) using 
the same techniques as grouping in the Paragraph Styles panel or 
elsewhere. First, make a style group by clicking the New Style Group 
button at the bottom of the Table Styles or Cell Styles panel, then 
drag your styles into the group. Alternately, you can select one or 
more styles and choose New Group from Styles from the panel menu. 
If you want the same-named style in more than one group, select 
that style and choose Copy to Group from the panel menu.
Text Wrap
Any independent object in an InDesign publication can have a text 
wrap—a boundary that repels text—applied to it. Wrapping text 
around an object is something like the opposite of flowing text inside 
a text frame. When you flow text inside a frame, you want text to stay 
inside a path; when you apply a text wrap, you want to keep it out. To 
set the text wrap for an object, follow these steps (see Figure 6-41).
1. Select an object—any frame or group—on an InDesign page.
2. Display the Text Wrap panel, if it’s not already visible (press 
Command-Option-W/Ctrl-Alt-W).
3. Click one of the Text Wrap buttons in the Text Wrap panel. 
InDesign displays the text wrap boundary around the selected 
object, and pushes any text falling inside the text wrap boundary 
to the outside of the boundary. If you applied the text wrap to a 
text frame, the text in that frame is unaffected by the text wrap 
boundary. 
4. Set the text wrap offset distances using the Top, Left, Bottom, 
and Right fields in the Text Wrap panel. If you want the text 
wrap to be the same on all four sides, make sure the Link icon is 
enabled in the middle of the panel. However, if you’ve selected 
anything other than a rectangular frame, you’ll only be able to 
adjust a single field (the Left field) to set the offset distance. 

 6.  x m  429
To wrap text around an 
object, select the object and 
then click one of the text 
wrap options in the Text 
Wrap panel (we’ve listed  
the “official” name of the  
text wrap type below each 
example).
No Text Wrap
Wrap Around Object Shape
Wrap Around Bounding Box
Jump Object
Jump to Next Column
When you choose one of 
the rectangular text wrap 
options (Wrap Around 
Bounding Box, Jump Object, 
or Jump to Next Column), 
you can adjust the offset 
values for the top, right, left, 
and bottom independently. 
If you choose Wrap Around 
Object Shape, you can only 
enter a single offset value 
that applies to all sides of  
the text wrap.
…and InDesign changes the offset 
for the corresponding side.
Enter a value in one of the offset fields…
The Jump Object text wrap option 
causes text in any column touching 
the text wrap boundary to jump  
over the text wrap—it’s as if the wrap 
extends to the width of the column. 
The Jump to Next Column text wrap 
option pushes any text in the column 
below the top of the text wrap bound-
ary to the top of the next column.
Figure 6-41
Text Wrap

430     6
Figure 6-42
Contour Text  
Wrap Options
This image includes a path 
saved in Photoshop.
When you first apply a 
contour text wrap, InDesign 
bases the text wrap on the 
image bounding box.
If you don’t see the bottom 
half of the panel, choose 
More Options from the   
panel menu.
To base the text wrap 
contour on the saved path, 
choose Photoshop Path 
from the Type pop-up 
menu… 
…and then choose the path name 
from the Path pop-up menu. 
InDesign sets the text wrap contour 
to the shape of the path.
Note that when it comes to inline or anchored objects (objects 
that are anchored to a position in a text story), text wrap doesn’t 
always play by the same rules. We cover that in more detail in “Inline 
Frames and Anchored Objects,” later in this chapter.
When you choose the Wrap Around Object text wrap type, and 
have an imported graphic selected, InDesign adds a new section to 
the bottom of the Text Wrap panel (if you don’t see it, choose Show 
Contour Options
Regular Text Wrap
Inverted Text Wrap
Figure 6-43
Inverted Text Wrap

 6.  x m  431
The text wrap boundary 
appears in a tint (we think 
it’s 50 percent) of the selec-
tion color of the layer con-
taining the object—this can 
make it difficult to see.
Select points on the text 
wrap boundary just as 
you would select points 
on any path.
Drag the points to a  
new location.
InDesign wraps the text 
around the edited text 
wrap boundary.
You can also use the Pen 
tool to add points, delete 
points, or change the control 
handles of points of a text 
wrap boundary.
Figure 6-44
Editing a Text Wrap
Options from the Text wrap panel menu). You can create the text 
wrap contour from paths or an alpha channel stored in a graphic, 
or detect the edges of objects in an image (see Figure 6-42). It’s very 
similar to the clipping path options.
As we pointed out in the “Composition Preferences” section of Chap-
ter 1, “Workspace,” many people aren’t used to the fact that applying 
text wrap to an object affects the text below and above that object in 
the stacking order. Fortunately, you can make individual text frames 
immune to text wrap: Select the frame, choose Text Frame Options 
from the Object menu (or press Command/Ctrl-B) and turn on the 
Ignore Text Wrap checkbox.
Ignoring Text Wrap
Figure 6-45
Choose a Wrap  
To Option
The default Wrap To 
setting (Both Right 
& Left Sides) leaves 
something to be 
desired.
Choosing Right Side or 
Largest Area from the 
Wrap To pop-up menu 
forces the text to flow 
on only one side of the 
object.

432     6
InDesign can apply an inverted text wrap to an object, which causes 
text to wrap to the inside of the text wrap (see Figure 6-43). We find 
this very helpful when... well, actually, almost never. But it’s nice to 
have options.
The text wrap boundary is a path, and can be edited and adjusted just 
as you’d change the shape of any path in InDesign (see Figure 6-44). 
You can draw new line segments using the Pen tool, or change the 
location of path points using the Direct Selection tool.
In CS2 and earlier, items on the master page that had text wrap 
would not affect document page items unless they were overridden. 
Now there’s a choice: By default, a master page object does affect text 
wrap on document pages, but if you don’t want it to, you can select 
the object on the master page and choose Apply to Master Page Only 
from the Text Wrap panel menu.
When you apply text wrap to an object that is narrower than the 
column of text, the text will typically flow on both the left and the 
right sides of it—useful in a few instances, ugly in most. You can con-
trol where you want the text to flow by choosing from the Wrap To 
pop-up menu in the Text Wrap panel (see Figure 6-45). If you want it 
to work like QuarkXPress, choose Largest Area.
Converting Text to Outlines
When you work in graphic design, you frequently need to alter char-
acter shapes for logos or packaging designs. For years, we dreamed 
about the ability to turn type into paths (or “outlines”) we could 
edit. Finally, applications such as FreeHand and Illustrator added 
the feature. And, as you’d expect in a modern page layout program, 
InDesign has it.
You can convert characters from just about any font (including 
TrueType, PostScript Type 1, and OpenType fonts) for which you 
have the printer (outline) font.
Once you’ve converted the characters into outlines, you lose 
all text editing capabilities, but you gain the ability to paste things 
inside the character outline, to use the path as a frame, and to change 
the shapes of the characters themselves.
To convert characters of text into paths, follow these steps (see 
Figure 6-46).
Inverted Text Wrap
Editing a Text Wrap
Master Page 
Text Wrap
Wrap To Options

 6.  x m  433
Select a text frame  
with the Selection tool…
…and choose Create Outlines from 
the Type menu. InDesign converts 
the characters in the selected text 
frame into a compound path.
To see the individual paths and points, select the 
compound path using the Direct Selection tool.
Figure 6-46
Converting Text  
to Outlines
Select the compound path 
containing the character 
outlines and choose Release 
Compound Path from the 
Paths submenu.
InDesign converts the 
compound path into 
normal paths.
The same formatting (fill and 
stroke) is applied to all of the 
resulting paths—even the paths 
that create the hollow areas 
inside characters.
To put the characters back together again, 
use the Direct Selection tool to select the path 
representing the hollow area or areas of a 
character and choose Reverse Path from the 
Paths submenu of the Object menu.
Select the other path or paths in the character 
and choose Make Compound Paths from the 
Paths submenu of the Object menu.
InDesign joins the 
paths, restoring the 
interior space.
Figure 6-47
Working with  
Character Outlines
1. Select the text you want to convert. You can select text using the 
Type tool, or you can select the text frame.
2. Choose Create Outlines from the Type menu (or press  
Command-Shift-O/Ctrl-Shift-O). InDesign converts the  
characters into paths. If you selected the characters using the 
Type tool, InDesign positions the paths on the current line as an 
inline graphic; if you selected the text frame, InDesign joins the 
resulting outlines into a compound path.

434     6
When you convert individual characters containing interior 
space (such as “P” or “O”) into paths, InDesign turns them into com-
posite paths (see “Compound Paths” in Chapter 5, “Drawing”). This 
is handy. Not only are multiple-part characters (such as i, é, and ü) 
treated as single paths, but characters with interior paths (such as O, 
P, A, and D) are transparent where they should be, and fill properly.
You can always make the characters into normal (not composite) 
paths. To do this, select the character and choose Release Compound 
Path from the Paths submenu of the Object menu (see Figure 6-47).
If you weren’t able to convert the text into paths, make sure that you 
have the outline (printer) fonts and that they’re somewhere InDesign 
can find them. If you don’t have the outline fonts, InDesign won’t be 
able to convert your text into paths.
Also, note that some text elements don’t convert to paths at all. For 
example, paragraph rules (Rule Above or Rule Below) and automatic 
bullets or numbers.
Inline Frames and Anchored Objects
Embed graphics in lines of text whenever the graphics have a defined 
relationship to the text. You know what we we’re talking about—
illustrations that should appear immediately after a paragraph (think 
of the screen shots in a manual), or icons “hanging” to the left of a 
column of text, or graphic symbols in a line of text. If you anchor the 
graphics in the text, they’ll follow the text as it flows through the text 
blocks or text frames containing the story. 
Really early versions of InDesign offered only “inline frames,” but 
now you can create inline frames, above line frames, and anchored 
objects, too. Starting with InDesign CS5.5, you can anchor objects 
simply by dragging them into place.
▶An inline frame sits in the text position where it’s placed, though 
you can adjust its vertical offset (how far up or down it sits from 
the baseline of the text around it). For example, you might want 
to put graphic in the middle of a line of text, such as a tool icon.
▶An above line frame sits between the line you placed it on and 
the line above it. InDesign adds space between the lines to make 
room for the object, ignoring leading or other spacing you’ve set. 
We usually call these inline frames, even though they’re techni-
cally different.
If Your Characters 
Won’t Convert

 6.  x m  435
▶An anchored object can be placed anywhere on your page, even 
outside the text frame. Anchored objects don’t move along with 
text. Anchored objects are useful for formatting ebooks in which 
you specify locations for images relative to text.
Using inline frames does more than just “stick” a frame to a par-
ticular location in a story—it also makes it easier for you to control 
the space between the graphic and the text. Complicated spacing 
arrangements that would be difficult (and involve lots of measuring 
and moving) without inline frames become easy to implement using 
leading, tabs, indents, and paragraph space above and below.
What can you anchor? Even though we keep saying “frames,” you 
can actually anchor any kind of object into a text frame. You can 
use graphic frames, text frames, lines, and groups as well, opening 
up new ways to solve old problems and adding capabilities that are 
entirely new. You can even create inline frames or anchored objects 
using frames that contain other frames or other inline frames.
What can’t you do to anchored objects? Despite an impressive array 
of cool things you can do with inline frames and anchored objects, 
there are still a few things you can’t do. For example, you can’t link (or 
Figure 6-48
Creating  
Anchored and  
Inline Objects
You can also Option/Alt-
drag to display the Anchored 
Objects Options dialog box. 
Or, Shift+Option/Alt-drag to 
create an inline object and 
display the dialog box. 
Shift-drag to create an inline 
object.
An inline object behaves like a 
text character. 
The anchor badge indicates that 
the object is anchored to text.
Select the object, and then drag 
the anchor badge at the top of the 
object to the anchor location.

436     6
“thread”) an inline or anchored text frame to another text frame. You 
also cannot see what’s inside them when you’re in Story Editor mode 
(or Galley or Story mode in InCopy). The latter is especially annoy-
ing. In fact, we’re typing this in Story Editor right now and can’t see 
the heading in the next paragraph because it’s already anchored. Just 
another good reason to buy a another monitor so that you can have 
Story Editor and the document layout visible at the same time.
You can use any of the following methods to create an inline frame.
▶Paste a frame or group into text.
▶Select the object, and Shift-drag the anchor badge to the anchor 
location (see Figure 6-48). If you later decide you want to move 
the anchor to a new location, you can just Shift-drag the anchor 
badge to the new location.
▶Place a graphic when you have an active text insertion point.
▶Position the text cursor where you want the inline frame and 
choose Insert from the Anchored Object submenu (under the 
Object menu or the context menu). Then choose Inline or Above 
Line from the Position pop-up menu. We virtually never use the 
Insert Anchored Object feature, but it’s nice to know it’s there.
▶Use the Type tool to select a character or a range of characters 
and choose Convert to Outlines from the Type menu. InDesign 
creates a path for each character in the selection and embeds the 
paths, as a compound path, in the text.
InDesign treats each inline frame as a single character of text. 
When you view the text in Story Editor, you can see the “anchor 
marker” (a little anchor symbol) in the text. 
You can select an inline frame using the Type tool and adjust its 
leading and baseline shift using the Character panel. You can adjust 
the horizontal distance between the inline frame and the other char-
acters on the line using kerning or tracking—you can even kern text 
following the inline frame back into the frame (you can’t, however, 
kern the frame back into characters preceding it on a line).
You can select an inline frame using either selection tool, and you 
can edit the shape of the inline frame using the path drawing tools. 
You can also drag an inline frame up or down in the text frame using 
either of the selection tools (see Figure 6-49), or you can apply a base-
line shift to the character containing the inline frame. 
Another way to adjust the vertical offset of a selected inline 
object is to choose Options from the Anchored Objects submenu (or 
Creating an   
Inline Frame

 6.  x m  437
Option/Alt-click the anchor badge) and change the Y Offset value. 
This is a particularly good way to get the offset back to zero if you 
have accidentally nudged it up or down.
When you insert an inline frame into a text frame, InDesign gives 
it the leading value of the surrounding text. If you’re using “auto” 
leading, and if the inline frame is taller than the height of the text, 
InDesign pushes the line down to prevent the inline frame from 
overlapping the lines above it. If you’re using a fixed leading value, 
you’ll see the inline frame overlap the text. By default, InDesign posi-
tions the bottom of the inline frame at the baseline of text.
This works perfectly for us—when the inline frame shares a line 
with other text, we usually want the leading of the line to stay the 
same as the other lines in the paragraph—and we can get this effect 
using fixed leading values. When we place an inline frame in a para-
graph by itself, however, we usually want the height of the paragraph 
to equal the height of the inline frame—and we can get that effect by 
using “auto” leading for the paragraph.
The rules are a little different when an inline frame falls on the 
first line of text in a text frame. In that case, the position of the base-
line of the inline frame is controlled by the First Baseline option in 
the Text Frame Options dialog box.
If the height of the inline frame is greater than the height of the 
characters in the line (and it usually is), choosing “Ascent” positions 
Inline Frames   
and Leading
Figure 6-49
Adjusting the Position 
of an Inline Frame
InDesign limits this movement—you can’t drag 
the object from side to side, and you can’t shift 
the object’s top below the baseline or move the 
object’s bottom above the baseline. To do that, 
select the inline frame using the Type tool and 
apply baseline shift.
Drag the inline frame up or 
down (InDesign won’t let 
you drag it from side to side).
Select an inline frame with the 
Selection tool.

438     6
the top of the inline frame at the top of the text frame. This pushes 
the first line down to accommodate the height of the inline frame. 
If you adjust the vertical position of the inline frame, the position 
of the first line of text moves up or down. The same thing happens 
when you choose “Cap Height” (note that these two settings produce 
different results for text, but are the same for inline frames).
When you choose “Leading,” InDesign positions the baseline of 
the first line of text according to the largest leading value in the line. 
If you’re using a fixed leading value, and you’ve set the leading of the 
inline frame to the leading of the surrounding text, the position of 
the baseline of the first line of text won’t change, regardless of what 
you do with the inline frame.
We use the “Baseline” option for our first baseline position, and 
we set the leading of a graphic that shares a line with text characters 
to the leading of those characters. This way, we know where the first 
baseline of text will fall, and we don’t have to worry that changes to 
the inline frame will mess up the leading.
The only time we use “auto” leading is when we’re working with 
a paragraph that contains only an inline frame. The only trouble is 
that we want the vertical distance taken up by the paragraph to be 
exactly equal to the height of the inline frame—no more, no less. By 
In this example, the leading of the paragraph containing the inline frame is 
set to “Auto,” and the Auto Leading value is set to 120 percent, which means 
that the lines following the graphic do not align to the 14-point baseline grid.
Leading = 14
Height of inline graphic: 
56 points (4 × 14)
Set the Auto Leading value to 100 percent, and InDesign makes the vertical 
space occupied by the inline frame equal to the height of the frame.
Figure 6-50
Inline Frames and  
“Auto” Leading

 6.  x m  439
default, InDesign’s “auto” leading value is equal to 120% of the point 
size of the type (or, in this case, the height of the inline frame). How 
can we get the base “auto” leading percentage down to 100%?
The percentage used to calculate “auto” leading, as it turns out, is 
a paragraph-level attribute. To view or adjust this percentage, choose 
Justification from the Paragraph panel’s menu. InDesign displays the 
Justification dialog box. Enter 100 in the Auto Leading field and click 
OK to close the dialog box (see Figure 6-50). Once you’ve done this, 
the leading of the paragraph will equal the height of the inline frame. 
If you want, you can add this to a paragraph style definition.
If there’s one thing that inline frames make easier, it’s hanging side 
heads. You know—the headings that appear to the left of a column 
of text (like the one to the left of this paragraph). In InDesign, you 
can create a hanging side head that follows a paragraph of text as it 
flows through a publication—no more dragging the headings to a 
new position when text reflows. You use a hanging indent and an 
inline frame, as shown in the following steps (see Figure 6-51).
1. Create a hanging indent. To do this, set a left indent that’s the 
width of the “companion column” you want to the left of the 
paragraph, then set a negative first line indent equal to the width 
of the left indent. Place a tab stop at the left indent.
2. Enter a tab character before the first character of the paragraph. 
This pushes the text to the left indent.
3. Paste a text frame before the tab character you just entered.  
Adjust the position of the inline text frame, if necessary.
4. Enter the heading’s text in the inline text frame.
5. Format the heading.
That’s all there is to it—you now have a hanging side head that 
will follow the paragraph anywhere it goes. This same technique can 
be used to position graphics frames, and is handy when you need to 
“hang” an icon or a vertical rule to the left of a particular paragraph. 
Of course, you can accomplish the same thing with an anchored 
object—which can actually sit in the margin outside the text frame 
(see “Creating an Anchored Object,” later in this chapter). But some 
people find inline frames easier to work with.
As we mentioned earlier, you can select an inline or anchored object 
using the Type tool (the object behaves as if it were a single character 
in the story) or the Selection tool or Direct Selection tool. If you use 
Creating Hanging   
Side Heads
Removing Anchored 
Objects

440     6
Figure 6-51
Creating a  
Hanging Side Head
You’ve created a hang-
ing side head that will 
move with the para-
graph of body text as 
that paragraph moves 
in response to editing or 
layout changes.
Adjust the size and/or posi-
tion of the inline text frame 
until it looks the way you 
want it to.
Cut or copy the text frame to the   
Clipboard, then click the Type tool in the 
text (before the tab character) and paste 
the text frame from the Clipboard.   
(Or, Shift-drag the anchor badge.)
Adjust the size of the text 
frame, if necessary.
Cut or copy the heading 
to the Clipboard, then 
press Command-Shift-A/ 
Ctrl-Shift-A (to deselect 
all), and then paste. 
InDesign places the text 
from the Clipboard in a 
new text frame.
This paragraph has a 
negative first line indent to 
accommodate the heading, 
and I’ve already entered a 
tab character before the first 
line of the paragraph.
Use the Type tool to 
select the text you want 
to format as a hanging 
side head.

 6.  x m  441
the Type tool, you can select more than one inline or anchored object 
at a time (to control their position in the Anchored Object Options 
dialog box). Using either method, you can delete the object by press-
ing Delete.
To “unanchor” an inline frame or anchored object, select it using 
the Selection tool, then cut and paste. If it’s an anchored object, you 
can also select Release from the Anchored Object submenu (on the 
Object menu or context menu). Release doesn’t work for inline or 
above line objects.
Above line objects are much like paragraph rules, but you can use 
any object (or group of objects), to create a wider range of effects. For 
example, you might use an imported graphic as a rule above a para-
graph. You can make an above line object in one of two ways.
Creating Above   
Line Objects
Figure 6-52
Creating an Above  
Line Object
Select a graphic.
Shift-drag the anchor badge of the 
graphic into the first line of the 
paragraph, and it will appear as an 
inline object.
Option/Alt-click the anchor badge to display 
the Anchored Object Options dialog box.
Here’s the final anchored 
object, with space above 
and below added.
Turn on the Above Line option, then select 
an alignment and enter the space before 
and space after distances you want.

442     6
▶Choose Insert from the Anchored Object submenu (from the 
Object menu or the context menu), and then choose Above Line.
▶Create an inline frame as we described earlier in this section. 
Then select it using either the Selection tool or the Type tool (the 
latter is especially helpful when you want to convert a number 
of inline frames to above line objects at the same time) and 
choose Options from the Anchored Object submenu. When the 
Anchored Object Options dialog box appears, turn on the Above 
Line option.
Once you create an above line object, you can use the Anchored 
Object Options dialog box to control where the object will appear in 
the space between the current line and the line before it (see Figure 
6-52). The Alignment pop-up menu lets you choose Left, Center, 
Right, Toward Spine, Away from Spine, and Text Alignment. The last 
item simply means use the same alignment as the horizontal align-
ment of the paragraph the above line object is sitting in (left, center, 
or right).
You can also adjust the space before or after the object. Increasing 
these values adds vertical space around the above line object. You 
can also use negative values for Space Before and Space After (up to 
the height of the object itself), which will cause the object to overlap 
the preceding or following line. InDesign changes the Space Before 
and Space After values whenever you drag the object up or down. (As 
you’d expect, you won’t be able to drag the object if you have turned 
on the Prevent Manual Positioning option or if you have enabled 
Lock on the Object menu. Turning either of these features on enables 
the other.)
Unlike inline frames and above line objects, anchored objects can 
appear anywhere on the page or spread containing their text anchor. 
You can create an anchored object by selecting the frame and drag-
ging the anchor badge into the text frame (see Figure 6-48). You can 
also create an inline object by copying and pasting, and then convert 
it to an anchored object (see Figure 6-53).
1. Select the inline object by clicking on it with the Selection tool or 
by dragging over it with the Type tool.
2. Choose Options from the Anchored Object submenu (under the 
Object menu), or Option/Alt-click the anchor badge.
3. Choose Custom from the Position pop-up menu at the top of  
the Anchored Object Options dialog box. The dialog box now 
Creating   
Anchored   
Objects

 6.  x m  443
offers a dizzying array of options. Don’t panic. All will be 
explained below.
4. To manually position the object on the page, just click OK (to 
close the dialog box). You can then move the object with the 
Selection tool to wherever you want it. 
At this point, the anchored object acts as if it is tethered to the 
anchor marker. As the text reflows, the object moves, too. To be more 
precise, the horizontal location of the anchored object remains fixed 
relative to the text frame (it only moves when the text frame moves or 
when the anchor marker moves into a different frame), but its verti-
cal location moves with the line of text itself (the line containing the 
anchor marker). With these default settings, the anchored object will 
also stay within the top and bottom boundaries of the text frame—
you can’t drag it above or below the frame.
But the default settings are only the beginning. Let’s look at what 
else you can do in the Anchored Object Options dialog box.
Figure 6-53
Creating an  
Anchored Object
Paste the frame into a text frame, 
just as you would to create an 
inline frame.
Open the Anchored Object 
Options dialog box and turn 
on the Preview checkbox. 
The object will appear to 
the left of the text frame by 
default. Click OK.
Drag the object to a new 
location and turn on text 
wrap. The object will remain 
positioned in relation to 
the frame and the anchor 
marker in the story.

444     6
Relative to Spine. If you want to position an anchored object pre-
cisely (as opposed to just dragging it somewhere), the first decision 
you need to make is whether to turn on the Relative to Spine option. 
When this option is on, InDesign positions the object differently 
depending on whether it sits on a left hand (verso) or on a right hand 
(recto) page. This option is similar to the Align Toward Spine and 
Align Away from Spine paragraph alignment feature, and is useful 
when you want an object to appear in the outside or inside margin 
of a page.
Anchored Object. The next step is to tell InDesign what part of the 
anchored object you’re positioning. When Relative to Spine is off, 
you’ll see a single Reference Point proxy from which you can choose 
a corner, side, or center point. If you choose the lower-right corner of 
this proxy, you’re telling InDesign to position the lower-right corner 
of the anchored object at a particular place on the page. (We’ll get to 
where it’ll be positioned in a moment.)
If you’ve turned on the Relative to Spine checkbox, you’ll see two 
proxies in the Reference Point section. When you choose a point on 
one proxy, it’ll be mirrored on the other. What InDesign is trying 
to tell you is that you’re no longer choosing the left or right sides of 
the anchored object, but rather the inside (toward spine) or outside 
(away from spine) sides. Click the lower-right corner point of the left 
Reference Point proxy, and you’re telling InDesign that you want the 
lower-inside corner to be positioned at a particular place on the page.
Turn on the Preview checkbox! You will likely go insane if you try 
to figure out all these controls without it. With the Preview checkbox 
turned on, you can see the effect of each change you make.
Anchored Position. The final step to positioning an anchored object 
is in some ways the most complex: Telling InDesign where you want 
the object to appear on the page using the Anchored Position section 
of the Anchored Object Options dialog box. We find that it helps to 
learn to “read” the dialog box (see Figure 6-54).
The Reference Point control in this section (note to Adobe: Please 
don’t give two different settings the same label) makes no sense until 
you look at the X Relative To and Y Relative To sections, so skip it for 
a moment. The X Relative To pop-up menu sets the horizontal posi-
tion of the anchored object. You can choose Anchor Marker, Column 
Edge, Text Frame, Page Margin, or Page Edge.
If you click the left point in the Reference Point proxy (the one 
in the Anchored Position section) the default setting of Text Frame 
means, “position the anchored object relative to the left side of the 

 6.  x m  445
Figure 6-54
“Reading” the 
Anchored Options 
Dialog Box
The upper left corner of the anchored 
object is placed 72 points in from the 
upper left corner of the page.
The inside center edge of the object 
sits halfway down the page and 
against the inside margin.
The object is centered around the  
anchor marker and raised 9 points. 
As the marker moves, so does the 
object.
The object is always placed at the 
center of the page.
current text frame.” If you select the right point of the Reference 
Point proxy, it means “position the anchored object relative to the 
right side of the current text frame.” If you have turned on the Rela-
tive to Spine checkbox, these mean, “relative to the outside/inside of 
the text frame.”
The Y Relative To pop-up menu determines the vertical position 
of the anchored object. Your options are: Line (Baseline, Cap Height, 
or Top of Leading), Column Edge, Text Frame, Page Margin, or Page 
Edge. The default setting is “Line (Baseline),” which means, “position 
the anchored object on the page so that it aligns with the baseline 
of the line that includes the anchor marker.” As the line shifts up or 
down, so does the anchored object.

446     6
When you choose one of the Line options from the pop-up menu, 
the Reference Point proxy limits your choices to left, center, or right. 
The reason is obvious: There is no “upper left” corner of the anchor 
marker’s baseline. However, if you choose a Y Relative To setting 
having to do with the frame, column, or page, the Reference Point 
proxy changes to allow you to choose more points (upper left corner 
of the page, lower left corner of the page, and so on).
You can also specify X Offset or Y Offset values in order to pre-
cisely position the anchored object. If you select the right-center 
point of the Reference Point proxy and select Page Edge from the X 
Relative To pop-up menu, and then type 20 mm in the X Offset field, 
what you’re saying is, “Place the anchored object 20 mm from the 
right edge of the page.” You can enter negative numbers for all kinds 
of positioning tricks (such as putting an object on the page opposite
the page containing the anchor marker).
The last control in the Anchored Position section is the Keep 
within Top/Bottom Column Bounds. (It’ll be grayed out unless you 
have chosen one of the Line options from the Y Relative To pop-up 
menu.) The idea here is that if the line containing the anchor marker 
gets too close to the top or bottom of the text frame, the anchored 
object might extend past the frame’s top or bottom edge. If you don’t 
want this to happen, turn this option on.
Prevent Manual Positioning. As we noted earlier, turning on the 
Prevent Manual Positioning checkbox is exactly the same as choos-
ing Lock from the Object menu. It’s just a good way to ensure that 
your anchored objects don’t get accidentally moved.
Seeing Markers. Once you’ve set up an anchored object, you may 
not remember where, exactly, the anchor marker is located. Choose 
Show Hidden Characters from the Type menu, and you’ll see a little 
anchor marker symbol in the story—it’s a light blue yen character (¥). 
Similarly, if you open Story Editor, you can see a black anchor symbol 
at that location. But perhaps the most useful indicator appears when 
you choose Show Text Threads from the View menu—select the text 
frame or the anchored object with the Selection tool and you’ll see a 
dashed line connecting the two.
You can wrap text around inline or anchored objects. This feature 
comes with three big caveats. First, only the story in which the object 
is anchored is affected. Text in other frames ignores anchored objects. 
Second, if you anchor an object inside a table cell, text wrap is com-
pletely ignored. Finally, only the lines following the line containing 
Text Wrap and Inline 
and Anchored Objects

 6.  x m  447
an anchored object are affected by the object’s text wrap. The line 
containing the anchored object ignores the text wrap.
Drop Cap Wrap. One of the most frustrating aspects of drop caps 
is that there is no way to tell InDesign to wrap the subsequent text 
around them. You can fake it by putting the drop cap character in a 
separate text frame, or by converting the character to outlines, but 
then the drop cap wouldn’t travel with the text, right? 
Enter inline frames. As David first documented in his book with 
Anne-Marie Concepción, Adobe InDesign Breakthroughs, you can 
place a drop cap character in a separate frame, paste it at the end of 
the paragraph before the paragraph in which it’s supposed to appear 
(you can put the frame in a blank paragraph when the drop cap 
appears at the beginning of the story), and then adjust the text wrap 
boundaries with the Direct Selection tool to get the effect you want 
(see Figure 6-55).
Ole notes that this is a heck of a lot of work to go through to achieve 
a design effect that is both ugly and makes your text harder to read 
(as varying the starting position of successive text lines always does). 
Further, he notes in his irritating, pedantic fashion, there’s a reason 
that the drop caps in beautiful old books always place the ornamen-
tal drop cap in a rectangular frame—to avoid this very temptation.
Figure 6-55
Wrapping Around an 
Anchored Drop Cap
The original paragraph 
with a drop cap
Cut the drop cap, remove the drop cap 
formatting from the paragraph, and 
then paste the drop cap into a new text 
frame. Choose Fit Frame to Content, 
then use the Selection tool to cut the 
drop cap frame and paste it into the line 
before the paragraph.
Choose Wrap Around Bounding Box in 
the Text Wrap panel, increase the wrap 
a few points (so you can see them) and 
then use the Direct Selection tool to cre-
ate a custom wrap.

448     6
Figure 6-56
Hanging Side Heads as 
Anchored Objects
We allow manual positioning because we 
need to be able to adjust the height of the 
frame as we add or delete text.
The vertical location of the side head 
is 13 points above the baseline of the 
line of text containing the anchor.
The horizontal location of the top left 
corner of the side head is set to the left 
edge of the text frame (that’s what the 
zero in the X Offset field means).
Earlier, we mentioned that inline frames are the best way to create 
hanging side heads (such as the one loitering to the left of this para-
graph), but we were telling only half of the story. By experimenting 
on ourselves (as any good pair of mad scientists should), we’ve found 
that the best approach to hanging side heads is to create inline frames 
by copying, pasting, and then converting them to anchored objects.
We did this because we found that changes in InDesign between 
CS and CS2 made it much more difficult to control the vertical posi-
tion of inline frames—which, in turn, made managing our hang-
ing side heads a bit of a challenge. The good news is that anchored 
objects offer a level of precision that inline frames just can’t match. 
We found a set of anchored object settings that worked well with our 
hanging side heads, and then created a script to apply the changes to 
our chapters.
We set up the hanging side heads—most of which were already 
inline graphics—as shown in Figure 6-56. The horizontal location of 
the top left corner of the hanging side head is set to the left edge of the 
text frame, and the vertical location is 13 points above the baseline 
of the line of text containing the anchor (our leading grid is based on 
13 point increments).
We want the frame to remain within the vertical bounds of the 
text frame, and we allow manual positioning (because we need to be 
able to adjust the height of the frame as we add or delete text).
Anchored Object 
Recipe: Hanging   
Side Heads

 6.  x m  449
Object Styles
The sidebars in your magazine have a twenty percent cyan fill and a 
soft drop shadow. How many thousand times must you apply that 
same fill and shadow before you go mad and throw someone else’s 
computer out the window? (You wouldn’t throw your own out the 
window; your favorite games are there.) One solution would be to 
keep an example object in a library (see Chapter 1, “Workspace”) or 
a snippet (see Chapter 7, “Import and Export”). A more flexible and 
powerful solution is to create an object style.
Object styles are just like paragraph and character styles, except 
that they apply to objects instead of text. An object style is basically 
just a bunch of object formatting with a name. You can apply that 
style to a frame or path on your page and all the appropriate for-
matting is applied. If you later change the definition of the style, the 
change immediately ripples through to all the objects tagged with 
that style.
To create an object style, hold down Option/Alt and click the New 
Object Style button at the bottom of the Object Styles panel (press 
Command-F7/Ctrl-F7 to display the panel if it is not already visible). 
If you have an object selected, the new object style takes on the for-
matting attributes of the object. If you don’t have anything selected 
on the page, then the object style takes on the default formatting of 
the document, and you will have to define the style from scratch. We 
strongly urge you to use the “create style by example” approach, as 
shown in Figure 6-57.
The New Object Style dialog box consists of 10 panels (count ’em!), 
including Fill, Stroke, Transparency, and Anchored Object Options. 
You can turn the checkbox next to each panel on or off. On means 
“apply this formatting as part of the style.” Off means “ignore this 
formatting.” That is, if you turn off the Fill checkbox, it doesn’t mean 
that the fill should be set to None; it means that this object style has 
no effect on the fill of objects.
You can create one object style that applies only a specific text 
wrap to an object, and a different style that applies only a stroke and 
a drop shadow. If you draw a frame and apply the first style, only 
the text wrap would be applied. Then you can apply the second style, 
changing only the stroke and drop shadow. At this point, the object 
is tagged with the second style, not the first, which means that if you 
redefine the first object style, this object will not be updated.
Note that you can press Tab to jump to the list of panels, and 
then press the up and down arrow keys on your keyboard to move 
Creating   
Object Styles

450     6
Figure 6-57
Creating an  
Object Style
1. Select an object that has 
the formatting attributes 
you want to assign to the 
object style.
2. Hold down Option/Alt 
and click the New Object 
Style button.
3. Make any changes you 
want in the panels of the 
New Object Style dialog box. 
Turn off sections to prevent 
the style from affecting   
the corresponding object 
properties.
In this example, we 
associated a paragraph style 
and text frame baseline 
offset with the object style, so 
the text was affected, too.
You can also apply 
transparency effects to 
Object, Fill, Stroke, or Text 
inside an object style.
4. Click OK, and InDesign 
adds the new object style to 
the list of available styles.
5. Select an object or objects 
and apply the style, and 
you’ll see that the formatting 
attributes of the original 
object are applied to the 
selected objects.
among them. You can also Option/Alt-click on a checkbox to toggle 
the other categories: Option/Alt-click on an “on” checkbox to turn 
all the others off, and vice versa.

 6.  x m  451
Style Settings. At the bottom of the General panel of the New Object 
Style dialog box is a list of Style Settings. You can use this as a sum-
mary of settings the object style will apply. But to be honest, we never 
use this. It’s just easier to use the shortcuts to flip through each panel. 
If you do use it, you should Option/Alt-click on the little triangles so 
that they fully expand. (Otherwise, you have to click over and over 
again, which is annoying.)
Keyboard Shortcuts. You can assign a keyboard shortcut to an 
object style in the General panel. Like keyboard shortcuts for para-
graph styles and character styles, the shortcut must use the numeric 
keypad keys (make sure that Num Lock is on), not normal numbers, 
characters, or function keys.
Basing One Object Style on Another. You can also choose another 
object style from the Based On pop-up menu in the General panel 
to create a “parent/child” relationship between styles. If you change 
the definition of the based on (“parent”) style, that change is passed 
along to this style, too—provided that the child style didn’t already 
override the parent style’s formatting.
To clear the formatting in an object style that differs from its 
parent style, click the Reset to Base button. This makes the attributes 
of the style identical to those of the parent style.
Every new document you create contains three initial object styles: 
None, Basic Graphics Frame, and Basic Text Frame. (They’re listed 
in the panel with brackets so you know that they’re special and can’t 
be deleted.) When you create a path or an empty frame (one with 
an “X” through it), the None style is applied—that is, no style at all. 
When you make a text or graphics frame, the relevant style is applied. 
You can redefine these styles (see “Editing Object Styles,” later in 
The Default Styles
Figure 6-58
Setting a Default  
Object Style
Drag the default icon (for either the 
graphics frame or text frame) to a 
new object style.
The object style you drop the icon 
on becomes the default object style 
for the corresponding frame type.

452     6
this section), and once you create new object styles, you can even tell 
InDesign to use those as your defaults instead.
For example, you might need to create a bunch of similarly-for-
matted text frames. You could change the Default Text Frame Style 
to one with the appropriate formatting, draw the frames, and then 
restore the original settings to the default style. To change the default 
text frame style, choose a style from the Default Text Frame Style 
submenu in the Object Styles panel menu. (Or the Default Graphics 
Frame Style submenu to change that default.) 
Actually, it’s even easier than that: See the little icons to the right 
of the default styles in the panel? Just drag one of them to the style 
you want to set as the default (see Figure 6-58). Alternatively, you 
can deselect everything and then select a style. In general, this sets 
the default graphics frame style; but when you have the Type tool 
selected, this sets the default text frame style.
You can apply an object style in any of several ways.
▶Select an object or series of objects and click the object style 
name in the Object Styles panel (or choose it from the object 
style pop-up menu in the Control panel). 
▶Drag an object style name from the Object Styles panel and drop 
it on an object (the object need not be selected).
▶Select an object, then press Command-Return/Ctrl-Enter to 
invoke the Quick Apply feature, and then type a few characters 
of the style name (see “Quick Apply,” later in this chapter).
Note that if you have a lot of object styles, you can rearrange them 
in the panel by dragging them up or down. To reset them to alpha-
betical order, choose Sort by Name from the panel menu.
Clearing Local Formatting. Just as you can apply local text format-
ting to text over a paragraph or character style, you can apply local 
object formatting over an object style. You might apply an object 
style that fills a frame with cyan, and then manually override that to 
make the frame yellow. To remove all of the local overrides, click the 
Clear Overrides button in the Object Styles panel (or choosing the 
feature of the same name from the panel menu). Or you can Option/
Alt-click on the style name to reset it and remove all overrides.
There’s another “clear” button in the panel: Clear Attributes Not 
Defined by Style. Clicking this button (or choosing it from the panel 
menu) is the same as applying the None object style and then reap-
plying the style. InDesign sets all the object formatting that isn’t 
Applying Object Styles

 6.  x m  453
described in the style definition (all of the panels without check-
marks next to them) to equal what you’d get with the None style.
Breaking the Link. As we mentioned earlier, applying an object style 
creates a link between the object and the style. To convert the format-
ting applied by the object style to local formatting and break the link 
between the object and the style, choose Break Link to Style from 
the Object Styles panel menu. The object’s appearance won’t change, 
but future changes to the style definition have no effect on the object.
There are a whole mess o’ ways to edit an object style.
▶Double-click the style name in the Object Styles panel. If an 
object is selected on the page when you do this, the style will be 
applied to it.
▶Right-click (or Control-click until you come to your senses and 
buy a two-button mouse) the style name in the Object Styles 
panel and choose Edit. This has the advantage of not applying 
the style to any selected objects.
▶Select an object that has the style applied to it and then choose 
Style Options from the object style pop-up menu in the Control 
panel (this pop-up menu sits to the left of pop-up menu that lists 
the object styles).
▶Press Command-Return/Ctrl-Enter to bring up Quick Apply, 
type enough of the style name so that it is highlighted, and then 
press Command-Return/Ctrl-Enter again.
▶Change the formatting of an object that is already tagged with 
the style, and then choose Redefine Style from the Object Styles 
panel menu. This updates the style definition to match the cur-
rent formatting of the selected object.
To delete an object style, select the style in the Object Styles panel 
and click the Delete Style button, or drag the style name on top of 
the button. If the style is in use (if any objects are tagged with it), 
InDesign asks you which style it should apply in its place. If you 
choose None, you also have the option to Preserve Formatting. 
When this checkbox is on, objects that were tagged with the style 
will still appear the same, but all the formatting will be converted to 
local formatting. If you turn off Preserve Formatting, the objects will 
be completely cleared of formatting: no fill, stroke, and so on.
Editing Object Styles
Deleting Object Styles

454     6
How can you move your carefully-constructed object styles from one 
document to another? One easy way is to copy any object tagged with 
the style and then paste it into the target document—the style comes 
with it and you can then delete the object if you want. 
If you want to import a bunch of styles, it may be easier to choose 
Load Object Styles from the Object Style panel menu. InDesign asks 
you to select another InDesign document, and then asks you which 
object styles you want to import from it. If there are object styles 
that have the same name in the two documents, you have a choice 
whether to use the incoming definition or to rename the style.
Placing Text on a Path
InDesign can place text on a path, as well as place text inside a path 
(which is what a text frame is, after all). Once you’ve added text to a 
path, you can select the text just as you would select any other text—
select the Type tool and drag it through the characters you want to 
select, or click the Type tool in the text and use keyboard shortcuts. 
To select the path, use the Selection tool or Direct Selection tool.
To attach text to a path, follow these steps (see Figure 6-59).
1. Select the Path Type tool.
2. Move the tool over a path. The cursor changes to indicate that 
InDesign is ready to place text on the path.
3. Click the tool on the path. InDesign places the cursor on the 
path. The position of the cursor depends on the document’s 
default paragraph alignment (if the default alignment is left, for 
example, the cursor will appear at the start of the path). Instead 
of clicking, you can drag the tool along the path to define the 
area of the path you want to fill with text. 
If InDesign cannot fit all of the text onto the path, the extra 
text is stored as overset text.
4. Add text to the path just as you would add text to a text 
frame—by typing, pasting text from the Clipboard, or import-
ing text from a text file. This creates a new kind of object—not a 
text frame, not a path, but a blending of the two we’ll refer to as 
a “path text object” from here on out.
Once you’ve attached text to a path, you can change its position 
on the path by dragging the Start Indicator or the End Indicator (see 
Importing   
Object Styles

 6.  x m  455
Select the Type on a Path tool.
Position the tool above a path.
Enter, paste, or place some text.
Use the Type on a 
Path tool to select 
and format the text.
InDesign displays 
this cursor when the 
Type on a Path tool 
is ready to add text 
to a path.
Figure 6-59
Adding Text to a Path
Select the Selection tool and 
position the cursor above the 
Start indicator…
…and drag the 
indicator along 
the path.
InDesign repositions 
the text on the path.
…or the End  
indicator…
Figure 6-60
Changing the Position 
of Text on a Path 
Figure 6-60), or change its orientation relative to the path using the 
Center/Flip Direction Indicator (see Figure 6-61). 
Like text frames, path text objects feature an in port and an out 
port you can use to link the text to other text containers (text frames 
or other text path objects). You can even link text from a path text 
object to the interior of the path text object. InDesign does not apply 
paragraph rules to text in path text objects.

456     6
Select the object using the 
Selection tool…
…then choose Options from the Type on 
a Path submenu of the Type menu.
InDesign displays the   
Type on a Path Options 
dialog box.
Drag the dialog box out of 
the way (if necessary) and 
turn on the Preview option 
so that you can see the 
effect of the changes you 
make in the dialog box.
Figure 6-62
Path Type Options
Select the Selection tool and 
position the cursor above   
the Flip indicator…
…and drag   
the indicator to 
the other side of 
the path.
InDesign flips the 
text on the path.
Figure 6-61
Flipping Text on a Path
You can control both the baseline position of text on a path and the 
relationship of the text to the shape of the path. To do this, select 
a path text object (or some of the text on a path) and then choose 
Options from the Type on a Path submenu of the Type menu (or 
Context menu). InDesign displays the Type on a Path Options dialog 
box (see Figure 6-62).
Type on a Path Options

 6.  x m  457
Figure 6-63
Path Type Effects
Gravity is a combination 
of Rainbow and Skew—it 
rotates the characters 
around the path and skews 
the horizontal axis of each 
character.
Stair Step moves the  
characters along the path, 
but does not skew or rotate 
the characters to match 
the path.
3D Ribbon skews the vertical 
axis of each character to 
match the angle of the path, 
but leaves the character’s 
horizontal axis unchanged.
Skew skews the horizontal 
axis of each character to 
match the angle of the 
path, but leaves the  
vertical axis of the  
character unchanged.
Rainbow rotates the  
characters around the 
path.
Effect. Do the character shapes distort in some way, or do they 
remain unchanged? That’s the question you’re answering when you 
make a choice from the Effect pop-up menu (see Figure 6-63). What, 
exactly, do these oddly named options do? 
▶Rainbow rotates the center point of each baseline to match the 
angle of the path at the location of the character.
▶Skew skews the horizontal axis of the character to match the 
angle of the path at the location of the character, but leaves the 
vertical axis of the character unchanged.
▶3D Ribbon skews the vertical axis of each character to match the 
angle of the path at the location of the character, but leaves the 
character’s horizontal axis unchanged.

458     6
Figure 6-64
Another Way to Flip  
Text on a Path
Turn on the Flip option, 
and InDesign flips the text 
across the path.
Display the Type on a Path 
Options dialog box and turn 
on the Flip option.
Select a path text object.
Figure 6-65
Align Options
Baseline aligns the baseline 
of the characters to the 
path.
Center aligns the text to 
the path at a point that’s 
half of the height of the 
characters.
Descender positions the  
characters’ descenders 
on the path. 
Ascender aligns the top of  
the capital letters in the 
text to the path.
▶Stair Step aligns the center point of each character’s baseline to 
match the angle of the path at the location of the character, but 
does not rotate the character.
▶Gravity rotates the center of the baseline of each character to 
match the angle of the path at the character, skews the hori-
zontal axis of the character to match that angle, and skews the 

 6.  x m  459
Center aligns the text to the 
center of the path (using 
the Align option to deter-
mine which part of the text 
to align).
Bottom aligns the text to 
the bottom of the stroke.
Figure 6-66
To Path Options
Top aligns the text to the 
top of the stroke.
vertical axis of each character around the geometric center point 
of the path.
Flip. You’ve probably noticed that path text follows the direction of 
the path—the first character of the text typically appears at (or, if 
you’ve dragged the Path Type tool, nearest) the first point in the path. 
Given this, you’d think that you could select the path and choose 
Reverse Path from the Options menu to make the text read from the 
opposite end of the path. But you can’t (not without first removing 
the text from the path, anyway). To do what you’re trying to do, turn 
on the Flip option (see Figure 6-64).
Figure 6-67
Spacing
…and InDesign adjusts the 
spacing of text on curved   
line segments.
Enter a value in the   
Spacing field…

460     6
Align. These options control the way the text aligns to the path itself. 
Choose Ascender to align the top of the capital letters in the text 
(more or less) to the path, or choose Descender to position the bot-
toms of the characters on the path. Choose Center to align the text to 
the path at a point that’s half of the height of the capital characters in 
the font, or choose Baseline to align the baseline of the characters to 
the path (see Figure 6-65).
To Path. The options on the To Path pop-up menu control the way 
that the text aligns to the stroke of the path. Choose Top to place the 
alignment point (whatever it was you chose from the Align pop-up 
menu) of the text at the top of the stroke; or Bottom to place it at the 
bottom of the stroke; or Center to align the alignment point of the 
text with the center of the path (see Figure 6-66). For more precise 
control of the text position, use baseline shift.
Spacing. The Spacing field (and attached pop-up menu) control the 
spacing of text around curves in the path. Enter a value (in points) in 
this field to tighten or loosen character spacing around curves (see 
Figure 6-67). Note that this setting has no effect on the kerning or 
tracking of text on straight line segments.
To remove the text from a path type object and convert the object 
back into a “normal” path, you need to do more than simply delete 
the text characters. If you do this, the object remains a path type 
object. Instead, select the path (or some of the text on the path) and 
choose Delete Type on a Path from the Type on a Path submenu (of 
the Type menu or Context menu). 
Quick Apply
There are some InDesign features that make a huge difference in the 
way that we work, but seem, in some ways, very small. They don’t 
take long to describe, and, once you’re used to them, you barely have 
to think about them. Take unlimited undo, for example—it’s hard to 
imagine doing without it, but you hardly notice it. It just works. The 
same is true for the Quick Apply feature, which feels to us as if it’s 
become part of our autonomous nervous systems (see Figure 6-68).
Quick Apply gives you a way to apply character, paragraph, object, 
table, or cell styles. It also lets you select menu items, run scripts, and 
insert text variables. So what? You can already do all these things 
with panels, keyboard shortcuts, and the menus themselves. The 
Removing Type   
from a Path

 6.  x m  461
Figure 6-68
Quick Apply
1. Select an object and 
press Command-Return/ 
Ctrl-Enter.
2. InDesign displays 
the Quick Apply panel.
3. Start typing. As you type, 
InDesign matches the   
characters you type with 
style names. You can press 
the up or down arrow keys to 
select from the list.
4. When you see that InDesign has 
selected the style you want to apply, 
press Return/Enter.
5. InDesign hides Quick Apply 
and applies the style to the 
selection (in this case, we’ve 
applied a paragraph style to a 
text frame).
trouble is that these methods cost something. Panels use up precious 
screen real estate. Keyboard shortcuts are limited by available keys 
and by our overstressed memories. And using menus to do anything 
expends a precious commodity—human patience.
Quick Apply takes up no space on screen when it’s not in use, 
requires that you remember only one shortcut, and doesn’t require 
you to drag a cursor around. 
Press Command-Return/Ctrl-Enter to display the Quick Apply 
window. This window (which acts like a floating pane) normally 
appears in the center of your screen, but you can drag it anywhere 
you want and it’ll show up there the next time you open it. 
The Quick Apply window displays different information depend-
ing on what is selected; if you have an object selected, it will display 
things like menu items, object styles, and paragraph styles. If your 
cursor is in text, it won’t show you object styles.
Once the Quick Apply window is open, type a few letters of the 
style, variable, or feature name. InDesign displays a list of all near 
matches. For example, if you type “place”, InDesign displays “Edit 
menu > Paste in Place,” “File Menu > Place,” and any paragraph 

462     6
styles that might have the word “place” in them. You can use the 
up and down arrow keys to scroll through the list. Once the style or 
feature you want is selected, you can:
▶Press Return/Enter to apply the style to the selection. This closes 
the Quick Apply panel; to apply the style and leave the panel 
open, press Shift-Return/Shift-Enter.
▶Press Command-Return/Ctrl-Enter to edit a selected paragraph, 
character, table, cell, or object style.
▶Press Option-Return/Alt-Enter to apply the style and override 
any local formatting. (If you’re applying a paragraph style and 
want to override all formatting, including character styles, press 
Option-Shift-Return/Alt-Shift-Enter.)
▶Press Escape to close the panel without applying a style.
Quick Apply is very clever in how it matches what you type to the 
list of available style names. For example, if you have a style named 
“Heading 3” you can just type “h3” or even just “3” (if you have more 
than one style with the number three in it, they’ll all appear).
Customizing Quick Apply. The only problem with the Quick Apply 
window is that it often offers too many styles, variables, or menu 
items to choose from. Fortunately, you can add or remove items 
from its list by selecting from the panel menu (see Figure 6-69). For 
example, if you never want to see menu items in the Quick Apply 
list, then select Include Menu Items from the panel menu to turn off 
its checkmark. If you want Quick Apply to include all your scripts, 
select Include Scripts.
Figure 6-69
Customizing  
Quick Apply
You can also limit the items in the list by 
using codes. Here, the list is limited to 
scripts (s:) that are similar to “grid.” (Why 
does InDesign display all of the scripts 
that contain the character “G”? We have 
no idea.)
You can control which items are listed in 
the Quick Apply panel using the panel 
menu. By choosing Include Scripts, we can 
run scripts using Quick Apply.

 6.  x m  463
You can also filter the items by typing a code at the beginning of 
the Quick Apply text. For example, you can type “p:note” to limit 
the search to paragraph styles that have the word “note” in them. 
Similarly, typing “c:” at the beginning limits to character styles, “m:” 
limits to menu commands, and so on. The panel menu displays the 
codes next in case you can’t remember them.
Figure Captions
A caption is text that describes an image or a table, such as “Figure 
3-7: Cowboy Dance.” A live caption contains a text variable that 
displays the metadata associated with the image, such as the image 
name or description. If the image metadata changes, or if the text 
frame containing the live caption is associated with a different image, 
the live caption is updated accordingly. Like a live caption, a static 
caption can also be generated from image metadata, but a static cap-
tion is “dead”—it’s not updated automatically.
A key point about live captions is that the text frame containing 
the caption must touch (or be very close to) the graphic or be grouped 
with the graphic for the feature to work. If this isn’t the case, the cap-
tion won’t be updated if the graphic changes.
If you’ve already placed an image, you can generate a caption—live or 
static—for that image. Before creating the caption, specify settings in 
the Caption Setup dialog box. Choose Caption Setup from the Cap-
tions submenu on the Object menu (see Figure 6-70).
After you’ve changed the settings in the Caption Setup dialog 
box, select an image. Choose Captions from the Object menu, and 
then choose either Generate Static Caption or Generate Live Caption. 
You can also Command-click or right-click an image and choose an 
option from the Captions submenu (see Figure 6-71).
The text frame is created based on the settings in the Caption 
Setup dialog box, where you can set these options:
Text Before / Text After. Type text that you want to appear before 
or after the metadata. For example, if the metadata you specify is 
the author’s name, you could make the Text Before “Photograph by: ” 
If you want to use a running caption (such as Figure 1.1, Figure 1.2, 
etc.), don’t use Text Before. Instead, use the Paragraph Style option 
for running captions. For details on creating caption variables, see 
“Text Variables” in Chapter 3, “Text.”
Create a Caption from 
an Existing Image

464     6
Use the context menu to 
create a caption for an 
existing image.
Figure 6-71
Create a Live Caption
Caption based on image name.
Use the Caption Setup   
dialog box to determine   
what will appear in the 
captions you create.
Figure 6-70
Caption Setup
Metadata. Choose the metadata option from the list. Common 
options include Name, Author, Description, Copyright, and Cre-
ation Date.
You can add multiple metadata items to the caption. Click the 
plus icon to add more metadata items. Each metadata item is dis-
played on a different line in the caption text frame.
Many of the Metadata options are identical to the settings that 
appear when you choose File Info from the File menu. One exception 
is the Folder options, which let you display each level of the path-
name.
Alignment. Tell InDesign where to place the caption in relation to 
the image when you generate a caption based on a placed image. 

 6.  x m  465
Offset. Specify how far apart the caption text frame will be from the 
image. InDesign applies a text frame inset on the side where the cap-
tion text frame is placed.
Paragraph Style. Specify a paragraph style to apply to the caption 
text. If you want the caption to include automatic numbering, include 
the numbering in the paragraph style. See “Bullets and Numbering” 
in Chapter 4, “Type.”
Layer. Specify which layer the caption belongs to. This is especially 
useful if you want text to appear on one layer and images on another.
Group Caption With Image. Group the image frame and caption 
text frame. Grouping the caption and image is especially useful if 
you want to move the text frame further away from the image but 
still have it associated with the image.
When you’re placing images, notice the Create Static Captions option 
in the Place dialog box. Selecting this option lets you create caption 
text frame whenever you place an image. After you click or drag to 
place the image, the cursor is loaded, and then you click or drag to 
place the caption text frame (see Figure 6-72). The appearance of the 
caption is based on the Caption Setup dialog box settings.
If you place multiple files, a caption text frame is loaded for each 
image. For example, suppose you select three images in the Place 
dialog box. If Create Static Captions is selected, six objects are loaded 
in the place gun—three images and three text frames containing cap-
tions. You then place the first image, then the caption for that image, 
and so on. If you use the arrow keys to place a grid of images, the 
text captions are part of the grid, which usually isn’t what you want.
If you select multiple pages to place from a PDF or InDesign doc-
ument, all the pages are loaded first, and then all the captions for 
Create Static Captions 
When Placing Images
Select Create Static Captions 
in the Place dialog box...
...and then use the loaded cursor to place 
the caption after you place the image.
Figure 6-72
Create Static Caption 
While Placing Image

466     6
those pages are loaded last. Use this as a nifty trick to place multiple 
pages from a PDF or artboards from an Illustrator file.
You can define a text variable that specifies the metadata you want to 
capture. Metadata can include the image’s name, description, author, 
creation date, or any of the settings that appear when you choose File 
Info from the File menu in Photoshop.
The text frame containing a caption text variable may display the fol-
lowing messages:
<No intersecting link>. If the text frame containing the caption vari-
able says there is no intersecting link, it most likely means you need 
to move the text frame next to the image frame (or group it with the 
image). It could also mean the image was pasted into the document 
rather than placed. Live captions work only with placed images.
<Multiple intersecting links>. The text frame touches more than one 
text frame.
<No data from link>. The metadata field is blank for that image. 
Open the image in Photoshop or Illustrator, choose File Info from 
the File menu, and then fill in the metadata fields.
Alternate Reality
What wonders—or horrors—exist in this weird place, where the 
boundary between text and graphics breaks down? Where magic 
works, and previously immutable laws of physics no longer apply? 
We have been there, reader, and, as it turns out, we have discovered 
new and useful techniques that can be put to immediate use in the 
“normal” world.
Create a Caption   
Text Variable
Caption Messages

467
Someday you’ll need to do something that’s beyond the drawing 
and typesetting capabilities of InDesign. You’ll need to edit large 
amounts of text, adjust bitmap images, render 3-D objects, or create 
Web pages. Other applications do these things better than InDesign 
does. But you can add the files you create in other applications to 
your InDesign publication. And you can export InDesign pages for 
use in other page-layout and drawing programs. 
That’s what this chapter is all about: importing files from disk, 
controlling the way that they appear in your document, and export-
ing your document (or pieces of it). For the most part, our discussion 
of importing focuses on graphics because we cover importing text in 
Chapter 3, “Text.”
We don’t cover all the Export options in this chapter. The Inter-
active PDF, Flash (FLA), Flash Player (SWF), EPUB, and HTML 
options are covered in the “Digital Publishing” chapter.
Importing and 
Exporting

7

468     6
Importing
InDesign offers three ways to bring files from other applications into 
your publications. Here are your options:
▶Place the file. The Place feature (in the File menu) is the most 
common method for getting files onto your pages. When you 
place one or more files, InDesign creates a link to the file on disk. 
In the case of graphics, InDesign stores only a low-resolution, 
“proxy” (or “preview”) image in the publication. When you print, 
InDesign uses the high-resolution version of the graphic from 
the file on your disk. You can link to text files, or not, depend-
ing on the setting of the Create Links when Placing Text and 
Spreadsheet Files option in File Handling preferences.
▶Copy and paste. The most obvious, simplest, and least reliable 
method of getting information from another application is to 
copy it out of the application and paste it into InDesign. While 
this technique can work reasonably well for small amounts of 
text, it can spell disaster for graphics and images created in other 
programs. We don’t mean to imply that you should never use 
copy and paste, just that you should approach it with caution.
A good reason to use copy and paste, however, appears when 
you’re working with Illustrator: When you copy paths out of 
this program and paste them into InDesign, you get editable 
InDesign paths. Actually, this only works if you have turned on 
the AICB setting in Illustrator’s Preferences dialog box.
▶Drag and drop. As we mentioned in Chapter 2, “Page Layout,” 
you can drag objects out of one InDesign publication and drop 
them into another. You can drag files from your desktop and 
drop them into your InDesign publication window. This is 
essentially the same as importing the files using the Place com-
mand (except that you won’t be able to set import options for the 
files). Even better, dragging from the desktop is a great way to 
import more than one file at a time (you can even drag a whole 
folder full of images into your document, if you want).
You can also drag one or more images from Adobe Bridge or 
Mini Bridge into your InDesign page to import them.
Or you can drag objects from some other programs  
and drop them into InDesign. This, in general, is the same as 
copying and pasting, and comes with the same cautions. 
Note that you can also open QuarkXPress and PageMaker files—
that’s covered in Chapter 2, “Page Layout.”

 7. m  x 469
Placing Anything
To get a graphic file into an InDesign publication, follow these steps 
(see Figure 7-1).
1. Before you leap to the Place command on the File menu, take a 
second to think about where you want the graphic to appear. 
▶Do you want the graphic to fill an existing frame? If so, select 
the frame.
▶Do you want the graphic to appear as an inline frame in a 
text frame? If so, select the Text tool and click it inside the 
text frame.
▶Do you want to place the graphic in a new frame? If so, press 
Command-Shift-A/Ctrl-Shift-A to deselect everything before 
placing the graphic.
2. Press Command-D/Ctrl-D (or choose Place from the File menu). 
The Place dialog box appears.
3. Locate and select one or more files. You can control certain 
import options for some file formats. To view the available 
import options, turn on the Show Import Options checkbox.
4. If you have a frame selected, and want to place the file inside 
the frame, make sure you turn on the Replace Selected Item 
checkbox. If you don’t want to replace the selection (perhaps you 
forgot to deselect all before selecting Place), turn this option off. 
5. Click the Open button. If you turned on the Show Import 
Options checkbox, InDesign displays the Import Options 
dialog box, which looks slightly different depending on the file 
type you’ve selected. In many cases, the options are grayed out 
because they aren’t relevant (the clipping path option is grayed 
out when there is no clipping path embedded in the file, for 
example). Make any changes you want (or can) in this dialog box 
and then click the OK button (we discuss the import options for 
each file type in “Working with Images,” later in this chapter). 
What happens after you click OK depends on the choice you made 
in Step 1. If you had a frame selected, and turned on the Replace 
Selected Item option, the graphic appears inside that frame. If you 
had an active text insertion point in a text frame, and if you turned 
on the Replace Selected Item option, InDesign places the graphic into 
the text frame (at the location of the cursor) as an inline graphic.

470     6
When you position the 
place icon over an existing 
frame, InDesign changes 
the appearance of the icon 
to indicate that clicking the 
icon will place the file inside 
the frame.
When you position the place 
icon near a ruler guide or 
grid line, InDesign changes 
the appearance of the place 
icon to show that clicking or 
dragging the icon will “snap” 
the incoming graphic to the 
guide or grid.
Figure 7-1
Placing a Graphic  
Without First  
Making a Frame
If you deselected everything before placing, or if you turned off the 
Replace Selected Item option, InDesign displays the place icon (some 
folks call this the “place gun”). Click the place icon on a page or on 
the pasteboard, and InDesign imports the file you selected and posi-
tions the upper-left corner of the file at the point at which you clicked 
the place icon. 
Instead of clicking, you can drag the place icon. This produces a 
frame that’s the width and height you define by dragging. The frame 
is constrained to the height/width ratio of the image and the final 
The Place Icon
InDesign places the graphic on the page, creating 
a frame that is exactly the size of the graphic.
Click the graphic 
place icon on   
the page or   
pasteboard.
InDesign displays 
a graphic “place” 
cursor along with 
a thumbnail of the 
image.
Choose Place from the File 
menu (or press Command-D/
Ctrl-D). InDesign displays 
the Place dialog box. Locate 
and select a file, then click 
the Open button.
…to place the graphic 
inside the frame.
You can also click the place 
icon on an existing frame…
…InDesign places the graphic inside a frame that’s the width and height 
you define by dragging, scaling the image proportionally to fit the frame.
If you drag the place icon as you place a graphic…

 7. m  x 471
image fits the frame size exactly. If you don’t like the proportional 
constraint, hold the Shift key down while dragging.
To place the graphic inside an existing, empty frame, click the 
place icon in the frame. This frame doesn’t have to be a graphic frame, 
and it doesn’t have to be selected. 
To place the graphic inside a frame that already has an image in 
it, hold down Option/Alt while clicking with the place cursor. This 
is the same as first selecting that frame and turning on the Replace 
Selected Item in the Place dialog box, but is useful when you have for-
gotten to select the frame first, or when you need to replace multiple 
graphics (see “Placing Multiple Files,” below).
If you accidentally placed the graphic inside a frame, don’t panic. 
Remember that Command-Z/Ctrl-Z will “undo” the action and 
display the place icon again, ready to place the graphic somewhere 
else. At this point, you can cancel the Place operation by pressing 
Command-Z/Ctrl-Z again, or by clicking the place icon on any tool 
in the Tools panel.
If you need to import two or more images or text files at the same 
time, why bother opening the Place dialog box multiple times? 
Instead, the Place dialog box lets you select more than one item in 
a folder at a time and import them all at once. To select more than 
one item in the dialog box, Shift-click (to select contiguous items) or 
Command/Ctrl-click (to select discontiguous files). By the way, these 
techniques work when you’re placing copied objects as well.
Be careful about the state of the Show Import Options checkbox 
in the Place dialog box. If it’s turned on when you click Open, you’ll 
be rewarded with an Import Options dialog box for each file you’ve 
imported—kind of a pain if you’re importing 20 images.
After you click Open (or click OK in the Import Options dialog 
box), InDesign loads all the files into the place cursor, showing you a 
thumbnail of the first one along with a number that shows the total 
number of files loaded. You can rotate through the loaded files by 
pressing the left or right (or up and down) arrows on your keyboard. 
If you decide you want to “throw away” one of the files (remove it 
from the Place cursor), press Esc.
Of course, you can also import a bunch of images at the same 
time by dragging them all in from Adobe Bridge, Adobe Mini Bridge, 
the Mac OS Finder, or Windows Explorer. In that case, InDesign also 
loads all the files into a Place cursor.
Once the place cursor is loaded with multiple files, you can:
▶Click in an empty frame to place the current image there.
Placing Multiple Files

472     6
▶Click where there are no frames to create a frame and import the 
image.
▶Option/Alt click on a frame that contains an image to replace it.
Here’s one more option you have when you have more than one object 
loaded in the Place cursor: You can Command-Shift-click/Ctrl-Shift-
click to create a “contact sheet” grid the size of your page (you typi-
cally would want to click in the upper-left corner of the page). Or, 
after you begin dragging, press the arrow keys to change the size of 
the grid. Use the up and right arrow keys to increase the number of 
rows and columns, respectively.
To adjust the space between columns or rows, hold down Com-
mand-Shift/Ctrl-Shift while pressing the arrow keys (and still drag-
ging). The Page Up and Page Down keys also adjust the spacing.
If you select the Create Static Captions option in the Place dialog 
box when placing multiple files, captions are placed in the same grid 
as the images. 
About Graphic File Formats
InDesign can import a range of graphic file formats, including Adobe 
Illustrator (AI) and Adobe Photoshop (PSD) formats, TIFF images, 
JPEG images, PNG images, GIF images, and EPS files. It can even 
import other InDesign files themselves as graphics. From InDesign’s 
point of view, there are certain limitations and advantages to each.
There are three fundamental graphics file format types:
▶Bitmap (or “raster”) files store pictures as matrices (rows and 
columns) of squares known as pixels, with each pixel having a 
particular gray or color value (also known as a gray depth, color 
depth, or bit depth). Bitmap files are typically created by image 
editing programs such as Adobe Photoshop. TIFF, JPEG, PNG, 
BMP, and GIF are all bitmap graphic file formats. 
▶Vector files contain sets of instructions for drawing graphic 
objects—typically geometric shapes, such as lines, ellipses, 
polygons, rectangles, and arcs. The drawing instructions say, 
“Start this line at this point and draw to that point”; or, “This is a 
polygon made up of these line segments.”
▶Hybrids can contain both vector and bitmap graphics. Adobe 
Illustrator, PDF, EPS, and WMF (Windows metafile) formats 
Contact Sheets

 7. m  x 473
are all examples of metafiles. (Adobe Photoshop files look like 
hybrids, as they can also contain a combination of vector and 
raster graphics, but InDesign rasterizes any visible Photoshop 
vector data so we don’t count it as a true hybrid.) Metafiles don’t 
have to contain both vector and bitmap objects. Often these file 
contain only an image, or only vector artwork.
We could talk about the pros and cons of various graphic file formats 
all day, but deciding which file format to use comes down to two 
things: what works in your workflow and which features you need.
Before we launch into which formats you should use, let’s first talk 
about a few formats we think you should not use: PICT, WMF, BMP. 
The process of printing any of these on a PostScript printer isn’t per-
fect, which means that what you see on your screen may not be what 
you get from your printer.
We also discourage using EPS and DCS files, unless you have a 
very good reason to do so, which is rare. Most people who think they 
need to use these formats are surprised to learn that AI, PDF, or PSD 
are better formats (see below). 
Vector and Hybrid Artwork. Vector artwork is pretty straightfor-
ward. We usually import Adobe Illustrator files as native AI files, 
because they’re essentially PDF files. Note that you must enable the 
Create PDF Compatible File checkbox when saving an AI file, or else 
InDesign can’t read it—technically, InDesign is reading the PDF 
inside the AI file. We save vector graphics from other programs as 
PDF or EPS.
We tend to avoid EPS when we can for a couple of reasons. First, 
PDF files can be viewed and edited by a wider array of programs. It 
can also support transparency and works beautifully with InDesign. 
In general, while EPS will always be with us, it’s an old, crotchety 
format that we avoid at social gatherings.
Raster Artwork. When it comes to saving bitmapped images from 
Photoshop, you have to be careful, because Photoshop files can con-
tain so much more than simple image data. A Photoshop file can con-
tain images, layers, transparency, vector artwork, and text objects. 
The native Photoshop (PSD) format is the closest thing to a one-size-
fits-all solution, so we tend to save in that format and import the PSD 
directly into InDesign. However, PSD has its limitations.
InDesign can read spot colors, duotones, and transparency from 
PSD files, but it can’t read vector or text layers. Well, it can read them, 
Which File   
Format to Use?

474     6
but the vector or text layers become rasterized (turned into a bitmap). 
Instead, we recommend saving as PDF when you have vector or text 
layers. However, for technical reasons we barely understand, Photo-
shop won’t let you save a file that has both spot color channels and 
background transparency as a PDF file. Also, InDesign can’t handle 
PSD files when they’re in Photoshop’s Multichannel mode—you’ll 
have to use DCS files for that.
If all this has your head spinning, check out Table 7-1, which Matt 
Phillips (an Adobe software engineer extraordinaire) created.
Other options for raster images include TIFF and JPEG (some-
times shortened to JPG). TIFF has a long and venerable history, and 
we still use it quite often (virtually all the images in this book were 
saved in the TIFF format). It supports images with layers and even 
transparency, though—like PSD—it does not support vector objects. 
The cool thing about TIFF is that you can save a layered, transparent 
image as a TIFF and InDesign will honor the transparency, but you 
can also import it into a program like Microsoft Word and it appears 
as though you had flattened it.
Photoshop can save TIFF files using LZW, Zip, or JPEG compres-
sion. Few programs other than InDesign can read Zip or JPEG TIFFs, 
but if you’re just using Photoshop and InDesign, you should defi-
nitely give Zip-compressed TIFFs a try. Often, using Zip compression 
in a layered Photoshop file for both the image data and the layer data 
makes a file smaller than a flattened, non-compressed TIFF. And Zip 
is a lossless compression scheme, so no image data will be lost. 
We don’t use JPEG-compressed TIFF files, because it’s just plain 
weird. If we want more file size compression, we’ll save the file in 
the regular JPEG file format. The JPEG file format does not support 
layers or transparency, but it has the benefit of using a lossy compres-
sion scheme—your image degrades each time you save it, but it can 
compress far more than the Zip or LZW “lossless” schemes. Most 
images saved using Maximum quality JPEG compression are virtu-
ally indistinguishable from TIFF or PSD images, unless they have 
very high-contrast, sharp edges, such as solid colored text on top of a 
solid colored background.
Layered vs. Flattened. How do you want to deal with layered or 
16-bit Photoshop files? InDesign can read layered 8-bit and 16-bit 
images in the PSD and TIFF file formats, and 32-bit HDR images in 
the PSD file format. However, InDesign can turn on and off layers 
(make them visible or not) in layered PSD or PDF files, but not lay-
ered TIFF files (see “Object Layer Options,” later in this chapter).

 7. m  x 475
But just because you can import these files into InDesign doesn’t 
mean you should. Sometimes it’s better to flatten or downsample 
the image. The decision really comes down to file size. If you have 
a hundred images and each one is 100 MB when layered or 10 MB 
when flattened, then it’s probably better to flatten before saving—just 
for the sake of drive space or network speed. (Tip: If the file has a 
transparent background, then use Photoshop’s Merge Visible feature 
rather than Flatten Layers, because the latter always flattens to an 
opaque background.)
By the way, note that InDesign does not support layer blending 
modes inside images. For example, if you have applied the Multiply 
mode to a layer in Photoshop, and that layer is over a transparent 
area (the checkerboard background), InDesign can’t multiply it into 
the InDesign document page. It treats it as the Normal blend mode.
Image Resolution and Scaling
It’s natural to assume that a higher image resolution will provide a 
sharper image. However, for grayscale and color images, your image 
resolution should be no higher than twice the halftone screen fre-
quency you intend to use. All higher resolutions give you are larger 
file sizes, longer printing times, bigger headaches, and potentially 
lower quality.
In fact, you can almost always get away with resolutions only 1.5 
times your screen frequency. For instance, at 133 lpi your images 
need not be any greater than 200 pixels per inch(ppi); at 150 lpi 
you probably don’t need more than 225 ppi images. The difference 
Vectors
Spots
Transparency
PDF
PSD
DCS
EPS
No
No
No
•
•
•
•
No
No
Yes
•
•
•
•
No
Yes
No
•
•1
•
•
No
Yes
Yes
•
•1
•
•
Yes
No
No
•
•
•2
•
Yes
No
Yes
•
•
•
•
Yes
Yes
No
•
•
•2
•
Yes
Yes
Yes
•
•
•
•
1 Except in Multichannel mode
2 Works as long as you print separations from InDesign and the DCS file is not 
affected by transparency on the page.
Table 7-1
Matt’s Matrix

476     6
between a 300 ppi image and a 225 ppi image is more significant 
than you might think: A four-by-five-inch CMYK image is 6.9 Mb at 
300 ppi and only 3.8 Mb at 225 ppi—about half the size. That means 
it takes less time to transfer across the network (to a server or to a 
printer), less disk space to store, faster printing times, and so on.
We like to resize and downsample images in Adobe Photoshop, 
and then sharpen them using Photoshop’s Unsharp Masking filter 
(all scanned images need some sharpening if you intend to print 
them using halftone screens). David wrote about this process in 
greater detail in his books Real World Photoshop (co-authored with 
Bruce Fraser and Conrad Chavez) and Real World Scanning and 
Halftones, 3rd Edition (co-authored with Glenn Fleishman, Conrad 
Chavez, and Steve Roth).
Line art images (which have only black and white pixels, saved using 
Photoshop’s Bitmap mode) obey different rules than grayscale or 
color images. These monochrome (or bi-level) bitmapped images 
do not use halftone screening. This means that they’re exempt from 
the resolution balancing act mentioned above, but it also means that 
they require higher resolutions to avoid jaggy (pixelated) edges. 
If your final artwork will be printed on a desktop laser printer, 
you probably don’t need to use resolutions greater than 600 ppi. 
Imagesetter output rarely requires more than 1200 ppi (though for a 
sheetfed art book, we might bump this up to 1500 ppi). Printing on 
uncoated stock requires a lower resolution because of halftone spots 
spreading; you can easily get away with 800 ppi for newsprint.
Ideally, you should import your bitmapped images at the same size 
as you intend to print them. Resolution changes when you change 
the size of the image in InDesign. For instance, doubling the size of 
a 300 dpi picture on your page cuts the effective resolution in half, to 
150 dpi (because each pixel in the image has to be twice as wide and 
twice as tall as before, so fewer of them fit “per inch”). Conversely, 
making this graphic 25-percent smaller increases to 400 dpi. (If you 
really care why the resolution increases by a third instead of by 25 
percent, e-mail us and we’ll explain the unpleasant math.)
Graphic Display Properties
New designers frequently panic when they place a high-resolution 
graphic and it looks fuzzy. What went wrong? Once you import 
a graphic into InDesign, the quality of its onscreen appearance 
depends almost entirely on the Display Performance setting in the 
Line Art
Scaling in InDesign

 7. m  x 477
View menu. You can choose among three settings: Fast Display, 
Typical Display, and High Quality Display. By default, these reflect 
low-, medium-, and high-quality displays. However, if you hate these 
terms you can change each setting’s meaning (see “Display Perfor-
mance Preferences,” in Chapter 1, “Workspace”).
The default settings follow these basic rules:
▶When you choose Fast Display, InDesign grays out both vector 
and bitmapped images and turns off all transparency effects. 
The display of these gray boxes is fast but lacking in detail.
▶When you choose Typical Display, InDesign uses a proxy 
image—either one embedded in the image or one InDesign gen-
erated when you placed the file. (InDesign always creates a proxy 
preview when it imports TIFF and JPEG; it’s an import option 
for EPS files.) InDesign uses this proxy to display the graphic 
at all magnification levels—which means that images are going 
to get pretty ugly as you zoom in on them. The advantage? The 
screen display of proxy images is much faster than generating 
new previews for every magnification change. In this setting, 
transparency effects are visible, but only at a reasonable quality 
(drop shadows and feathering are displayed at low resolution, for 
instance).
▶When you choose High Quality display, InDesign gets image 
data from the original file on your hard drive to render the best 
possible preview for the current screen magnification. For an 
EPS, it means that InDesign reinterprets the file to create a new 
preview (this is where those beautiful EPS previews come from). 
As you’d expect, either process takes more time than simply 
slamming a fixed-resolution preview onto the screen (which is 
what the Proxy option does). The anti-aliasing of vector images 
(so they look smooth on screen) and high-quality transparency 
effects is also calculation-intensive.
Remember, all of these settings affect only the way that graphics 
appear on screen, not in print. 
You can also vary the display quality for individual graphics. This 
can come in handy when you need to see more detail in one graphic 
than in others, or when you want to speed up the redraw of a spe-
cific slow-drawing graphic. To control the display properties of a 
graphic, select the graphic, and then display the context menu (hold 
down Control before you press the mouse button on the Macintosh; 
press the right mouse button in Windows). Choose one of the display 
Local Display   
Overrides

478     6
options from the Display Performance submenu (see Figure 7-2). 
You can also choose from the Display Performance submenu in the 
Object menu if you have a bizarre aversion to context menus. 
Later, after applying local display overrides to various images 
throughout your document, you can turn all these local overrides on 
and off with the Allow Object-Level Display Settings from the Dis-
play Performance submenu. As with any other feature in InDesign, 
you can assign a keyboard shortcut to these local override features.
Image Import Options
When you place an image, you can turn on the Import Options 
checkbox and use the subsequent Image Import Options dialog box 
to specify a number of important things about the image. The set-
tings in this dialog box change depending on the file format of the 
graphic. Note that if you later drag and drop a graphic from the desk-
top into InDesign, the program remembers the import options from 
the last file you placed.
If you are importing a bitmap image, such as a TIFF, JPEG, GIF, or 
native Photoshop (PSD) document, InDesign displays four options 
in the Image Import Options dialog box: apply a clipping path, pick 
an alpha channel, enable color management, and choose layer vis-
ibility (see Figure 7-3).
Apply Photoshop Clipping Path. If the image you’re placing con-
tains a clipping path, InDesign makes the Apply Photoshop Clipping 
Path checkbox available. When you turn this option on as you place 
the image, InDesign applies the clipping path to the image. If this 
Bitmapped Images
Fast Display
Typical Display
High Quality Display
InDesign displays the 
graphic using the display 
setting you selected.
Figure 7-2
Setting the Display  
Resolution for a Graphic

 7. m  x 479
isn’t what you want, you can always change the clipping path (see 
“Working with Clipping Paths,” later in this chapter).
If the image does not contain a clipping path, this option won’t 
be available. You can always create a clipping path for the image in 
InDesign, or choose another path saved with the image as the clip-
ping path (again, we cover this later in this chapter).
Alpha Channel. InDesign can apply transparency to an image if you 
have one or more alpha channels saved within the file. (An alpha 
channel is just any additional channel beyond the standard red, 
green, blue, cyan, yellow, magenta, or black channels.) For example, 
you could make three extra channels in Photoshop—each with a dif-
ferent sort of blurry vignette around the image’s subject—and then 
choose which one you want to use in InDesign when you import 
the file. Unfortunately, InDesign doesn’t give you any sort of visual 
feedback inside the Import Options dialog box, so you’d better use 
descriptive names for the channels. Once you have imported the 
image, there’s no way to switch to a different transparency mask for 
the picture other than reimporting it and revisiting this dialog box.
Enable Color Management. When you’re importing a color image, 
InDesign activates the options in the Color tab of the Image Import 
Options dialog box. Color management is a very complicated topic, 
and the following control descriptions do not attempt to discuss the 
Figure 7-3
Import Options for  
Bitmap Images
The options in this dialog 
box only become active 
when the file you selected 
contains the correspond-
ing features.
Turn this option on to apply 
the first clipping path defined 
in the incoming file. If you 
want to use a different   
clipping path, you can   
choose Clipping Path   
from the Object menu   
after placing the file.
If the file has an embedded 
color management profile, 
you can choose whether to 
use that profile or to use 
some other profile.
If the file contains one or 
more alpha channels, you 
can choose to apply trans-
parency to the object using 
one of the alpha channels.

480     6
finer points of each topic. For more on color management, see Chap-
ter 10, “Color.”
▶Profile. If the image file you’ve selected contains a color manage-
ment profile, InDesign selects Use Embedded Profile from the 
Profile pop-up menu. If you know that the embedded profile is 
not the one you want, choose a different profile from the menu.
Note that if you have chosen the Preserve Numbers (Ignore 
Linked Profiles) option in the CMYK Policies section of the 
Color Settings dialog box, InDesign acts slightly differently. 
Instead of displaying an embedded profile name in the Image 
Import Options dialog box, it will show Use Document Default, 
pointing out that the embedded CMYK profile is being ignored 
and the document profile is being used instead.
▶Rendering Intent. Choose the gamut scaling method you want 
to use to render the colors in the image. For most photographic 
images, you’ll probably want to choose Perceptual (Images).
Layer Visibility. When you import a Photoshop document or PDF 
file that contains layers, InDesign offers a third tab in the Import 
Options dialog box: Layers. This tab lets you turn the visibility on 
or off for each layer, or choose a layer comp (if you used Photoshop’s 
Layer Comp panel to make comps). We discuss these options further 
in “Object Layer Options,” later in this chapter.
When you import an EPS graphic with Import Options turned on 
in the Place dialog box, InDesign displays the EPS Import Options 
dialog box (see Figure 7-4).
Read Embedded OPI Image Links. Open Prepress Interface (OPI) 
is a standard for maintaining image links between desktop page 
layout and illustration software using dedicated color prepress sys-
tems, such as some of the systems manufactured by Kodak and 
Creo. When you work with an OPI system, you typically work with 
low-resolution proxy images as you lay out a page, and then link to 
high-resolution images saved on the prepress server when you print 
EPS Files
Figure 7-4
Import Options  
for EPS Files

 7. m  x 481
(or otherwise hand the job off). OPI concerns imported images only, 
and has nothing to do with vector graphics or type.
Turn this option off if the prepress system will take care of replac-
ing any OPI images in the EPS; turn it on if you want InDesign to 
replace the images as you print. (In this case, InDesign itself is acting 
as an OPI server.) InDesign will store the OPI image information 
regardless of the setting of this option. 
Apply Photoshop Clipping Path. Turn on this option when you want 
to apply the first clipping path saved in the EPS graphic. This only 
affects Photoshop EPS images.
Proxy Generation. EPS graphics usually contain an embedded, low-
resolution preview image. However, because InDesign can interpret 
almost any PostScript file, you can ask it to create a new preview 
image for you by selecting Rasterize the PostScript in the EPS Import 
Options dialog box. If you want to use the file’s built-in preview, select 
Use TIFF or PICT Preview. We think these should have been labeled, 
“Use Cruddy Preview” and “Make It Look Good.” We almost always 
make it look good by selecting Rasterize the PostScript (even though 
it takes a little longer to import the file). On the other hand, if you 
need to import 250 EPS files and onscreen quality doesn’t matter, 
then save yourself some time and use the embedded previews.
When you import a PDF graphic or a native Illustrator (AI) file, and 
have turned on the Import Options checkbox in the Place dialog box, 
InDesign displays the Place PDF dialog box (see Figure 7-5).
Pages. PDF files can contain multiple pages (unlike EPS, which is, by 
definition, a single-page-per-file format), so you need some way to 
select the page you want to place. Similarly, if you have multiple art-
boards in an Illustrator document, you can choose which to import 
AI and PDF Files
The Place PDF dialog box 
can display a preview of 
the pages of the PDF you’ve 
selected.
Figure 7-5
Place PDF Dialog Box

482     6
because each artboard acts like its own page. You can scroll through 
the pages until you find the one you want. When you place a PDF or 
AI file without displaying the Place PDF dialog box, InDesign places 
the first page in the file.
If you want to import more than one page, choose All or type 
in the page numbers (using commas or hyphens to denote multiple 
pages) in the Range field. To import the page displayed in the pre-
view, select Previewed Page.
When you import more than one page from a PDF, InDesign 
loads them all in the Place cursor. It would be nice to have the option 
to place each page of the PDF on a different page of the InDesign 
document, but there isn’t. That’s why Ole wrote the PlaceMultipage-
PDF script (see Chapter 12, “Scripting,” for more on where to find 
scripts and how to use them).
Crop To. Do you have to import the whole page? No—you can use 
this pop-up menu to define the area of the page you want to place. 
Choose one of the following options (depending on the PDF, some 
options may be unavailable).
▶Choose Bounding Box to crop the incoming PDF graphic to an 
area defined by the objects on the PDF page.
▶Choose Art to place the area defined by an art box in the PDF 
graphic (if no art box has been defined, this option will not be 
available). For a PDF exported from InDesign, the art box is the 
same as the Trim area (see below).
▶Choose Crop to crop the area of the incoming PDF graphic to 
the crop area defined in Acrobat (using the Crop Pages dialog 
box). If the PDF has not had a crop area defined, this area will be 
the same as the Media setting (see below).
▶Choose Trim or Bleed to import the area defined by the trim or 
bleed settings in the PDF.
▶Choose Media to import the area defined by the original paper 
size of the PDF.
Transparent Background. Turn this option on when you want to be 
able to see objects behind the imported PDF or AI file, or turn it off 
to apply an opaque white background to the graphic. In general, we 
think you should leave this option turned on—if you want an opaque 
background, you can always apply a fill (of any color) to the frame 
containing the PDF graphic. If you turn this option off, on the other 

 7. m  x 483
Figure 7-6
PDF Layer Options
hand, the white background applied by InDesign cannot be changed 
by setting the fill of the frame.
Placed PDFs and Color Management. InDesign can’t apply color 
management profiles to PDF graphics, but profiles embedded in the 
PDF will be used when you color separate the publication. If your 
PDFs require precise color matching, apply and embed the appropri-
ate color profiles before saving the PDF for import into InDesign.
PDF Layer Options. If you’re placing a PDF that includes layers 
(such as from Illustrator or InDesign) or an AI or INDD file, you can 
choose to show or hide individual layers using the Layers tab of the 
Place PDF dialog box (see Figure 7-6). 
The options in this tab are self-explanatory except, perhaps for 
the When Updating Link pop-up menu. This controls what happens 
if, down the line, you update or relink the graphic to a newer version 
(see Object Layer Options,” later in this chapter). Choose Keep Layer 
Visibility Overrides if you want to make sure the changes you make 
here are respected if the image gets updated.
You can place an InDesign file as a graphic as easily as you can place 
a PDF file. In fact, in most ways, a placed InDesign (INDD) file acts 
like a PDF file—if you select Show Import Options in the Place dialog 
box, you’ll see virtually the same options, from which pages or layers 
you want, to whether to include the document’s bleed or not.
Importing an INDD file can be more efficient because you don’t 
have to first export a PDF file. This becomes even better if the source 
InDesign document later changes. When you place an INDD file, any 
images that were imported into it appear in the Links panel (which 
we discuss in the next section). When you use the Package feature 
(see Chapter 11, “Printing”), those linked images are packaged, too.
InDesign INDD Files

484     6
In case you were worrying: We’ve imported an InDesign file into 
an InDesign file in an InDesign file in an InDesign file—about 10 
documents “deep”—and it printed and exported with no trouble. 
And yes, you can place an INDD file from an earlier version into an 
InDesign document.
Note that the LayoutZone script from Automatication.com can 
convert a portion of a spread (or a whole spread) into an external 
InDesign document. Even more amazing, it can convert placed 
InDesign documents back into editable objects. Check it out.
Linking and Embedding
In InDesign, you can embed (that is, store) imported graphics in 
your publication, or you can store them externally and link to them. 
When you link to a graphic, InDesign doesn’t include the graphic 
file in your publication, but establishes a link between the publica-
tion and the imported file. InDesign creates a low-resolution screen 
preview of the graphic, and uses that preview to draw the image on 
your page. Linking means you don’t have to store two copies of the 
original file—one on disk, and one in your InDesign publication—
thereby saving disk space. 
When you print, InDesign includes data from linked graphics in 
the stream of PostScript sent to your printer or to disk. This means 
that you need to take any externally stored graphics with you when 
it’s time to print your publication at an imagesetting service bureau.
Which method should you use? It’s up to you. When you embed 
graphics, your publication size increases, but you don’t have to keep 
track of the original files. We generally recommend linking, partly 
because that is what the industry expects, and partly because we 
don’t like our InDesign files becoming so much larger.
If you import a bitmapped image smaller than 48K, InDesign 
embeds a copy of the graphic in your publication. This “automatic” 
embedding differs from “manual” embedding—you can maintain 
links to automatically embedded files, but not to manually embed-
ded graphics.
When you move a linked file or change its name, you break the link 
between the file and any InDesign publication you’ve placed it in.
When you open a publication, InDesign looks in the folder con-
taining the document for the linked file, and in a folder inside that 
folder named “Links.” If InDesign finds that one or more of the files 
have been modified, it displays an alert asking if you want to update 
Opening Documents 
with Links

 7. m  x 485
the links automatically. It will also tell you if one or more files on disk 
are missing; in that case, you must relink those files manually using 
the Links panel. We’ll discuss that in more detail later in this section.
Note that you can tell InDesign not to check for missing or modi-
fied links (see “Links Preferences,” later in this chapter).
The key to InDesign’s linking and embedding features is the Links 
panel (see Figure 7-7). To display the Links panel, press Command-
Shift-D/Ctrl-Shift-D, or choose Links from the Window menu. The 
Links panel can show you a wide array of details about each placed 
image. When you first launch InDesign, the default settings display 
a tiny thumbnail for each image, next to its name, its location in the 
document (by page number), and its current status:
▶If a graphic has been modified since its last update, you’ll see a 
Caution icon (a yellow triangle with an exclamation mark) both 
in the Link panel and in the linked object’s frame.
▶If a graphic is missing, you’ll see the Missing link icon—it’s a red 
circle with a question mark in it. This means that InDesign can’t 
find the file—it’s been moved or deleted (or maybe you’ve lost 
your connection to the server that holds the file).
▶If you have embedded a graphic (see “Embedding a Graphic,” 
later in this section), a square with two shapes in it (another 
square and a triangle) appears.
▶Objects you copy and link using either the Place and Link com-
mand or the Content Placer Tool are tracked in the Links panel.
You can change the width of each column in the Links panel by 
placing the cursor over the vertical bar next to the column heading 
and dragging. To rearrange the order of the columns, drag the header 
The Links Panel
Figure 7-7
Links Panel
Press Command-Shift-D 
or Ctrl-Shift-D to display   
the Links panel.
The link badge on an 
image frame shows the 
link status. Click the 
icon to update the link.
Relink button
Go To Link button
Update Link button
Edit Original button

486     6
icon before or after another column header. You can also change the 
order in which the linked files are displayed by clicking on a header. 
For example, to sort by status, click on the status icon. Click again to 
reverse the sort order.
The Links panel can expand to include more information. 
Choose Panel Options in the panel menu to adjust the size of each 
row, decide whether thumbnails are displayed, and specify what link 
information should appear in the Links panel. For example, if you 
turn on the Scale checkbox in the Show Column column of the Panel 
Options dialog box, the Links panel will show the scaling percentage 
for each image. If the Links panel is too narrow to show the informa-
tion, you can widen it by dragging the panel’s edge.
If you double-click on a file in the Links panel (or select the link 
and click the “twisty triangle” in the lower-left corner of the panel), 
InDesign opens the File Info section of the panel. We usually just 
leave this section open.
The meaning of most of the items in the Link Info area is fairly 
straightforward—the Size field shows the amount of disk space taken 
up by the graphic, for example. However, you can ask InDesign to 
display some additional information to the Link Info area in the 
Panel Options dialog box, and a few of those “extra” rows deserve 
further explanation.
▶Link Type. If you enable the Link Type checkbox, it will prob-
ably always display “import,” indicating that you imported a 
graphic. Or, if you have linked to an InCopy (or other text) story, 
it may display “Bi-directional,” pointing out that edits you make 
here will export as well as import. However, behind the scenes, 
InDesign was written so that it could link to all kinds of things—
even directly to a field in a database somewhere or some data on 
a Web page. Those features are currently those features are only 
available to third-party plug-in developers.
▶Folder Number. Folder 0 (zero), in InDesign parlance, means 
“the folder in which this linked file is saved.” Folder 1 is the folder 
that contains Folder 0, and so on.
▶Story Status and Information. There are a handful of features 
that relate to the status of a “story.” In this case, InDesign is talk-
ing about an InCopy story—one that you have exported using 
Edit > InCopy > Export.
InDesign checks the status of your graphics when you open a 
document or when you switch from another application back into 
Updating   
a Link

 7. m  x 487
InDesign. As soon as it notices a linked file is modified or missing, it 
displays an icon (called a “badge”) in both the image frame and the 
Links panel (see Figure 7-8).
To update the link of an imported graphic that has been modi-
fied since you last updated it or placed it, click the Modified icon on 
the graphic frame. You can also Option/Alt-click the Modified link 
to open the Links panel, and click the Update Link button at the 
bottom of the Links panel.
To update all the modified links in a publication, choose Update 
All Links from the Links panel menu, or select one of the modified 
images and Option/Alt-clicking the Update button.
If you’re not paying attention to links, or if you have a bunch of 
frames close to each other, the badges on frames can be annoying. 
Choose Hide Link Badge from the View > Extras submenu.
Modified files are easy to update; missing files are quite another 
matter. To link to another file, or relink to the original file in a new 
location, follow these steps (see Figure 7-9).
1. In the Links panel, select the graphic you want to update, or 
select the corresponding link in the Links panel.
2. Click the Relink button (or choose Relink from the Links panel 
menu). InDesign displays the Locate dialog box.
3. Locate and select a file, and click OK.
If a bunch of images are listed as missing and they all exist in the 
same folder on disk, you can relink to them all by selecting the Search 
Linking to   
Another File
Figure 7-8
Updating a Link
InDesign updates the link to 
the graphic.
To update the link, click the link badge or select the 
filename and click the Update Link button.
When the link to a graphic 
is out of date, InDesign 
displays an icon at the top 
of the frame and next to the 
filename in the Links panel.

488     6
for Missing Links in This Folder checkbox in the Locate dialog box 
(it’s on by default), or choose Relink to Folder from the panel menu.
By the way, each time you relink an image, the Locate dialog box 
normally displays the last folder you relinked to. If you don’t like that 
behavior, see “Links Preferences,” later in this chapter.
Multiple Instances. InDesign treats each instance of an image as a 
separate item in the Links panel, so if you have 20 copies of the same 
image, it will appear 20 times in the Links panel. However, at the top 
of the list of those 20 images, you’ll find a “master” link of the same 
name. If you want to relink all the instances of an image, select that 
master link and then click the Relink button.
Relink All. If you have multiple missing links spanning multiple 
folders, you can tell InDesign you want to relink all of them by select-
ing one of them in the Links panel and then Option/Alt-clicking on 
the Relink button. In this case, you will get a series of Locate dialog 
boxes that you’ll need to navigate.
Relinking to a Different File Type. When you manually relink an 
image to another image, InDesign doesn’t care if the new image is 
the same file type or a different file type. This is especially useful if 
you have imported a folder full of low-resolution JPEG images for 
position only (FPO) and you now want to relink them all to high-res 
PSD files.
Select an imported graphic.
InDesign replaces the 
original graphic with the 
graphic file you selected.
Figure 7-9
Linking to Another File
Choose Relink from 
the Links panel menu 
(or click the Relink 
button at the bottom 
of the panel).

 7. m  x 489
To do this, select the images you want to relink, then choose 
Relink File Extension from the Links panel menu. In the Relink File 
Extension dialog box, type the new file extension into the field (in 
this case, you’d type “psd”). For example, this would automatically 
relink a file called “myimage1.jpg” with “myimage1.psd”.
One of the most useful features in the Links panel is the Edit Original 
button (or choose it from the panel menu), which opens the selected 
graphic in an editing application. If you select a TIFF image (on the 
page or in the Links panel) and choose Edit Original, that image 
typically opens in Photoshop. We have to add the caveat “typically” 
because InDesign relies on the operating system to know which 
application to use. If the Mac OS or Windows is set to open TIFF files 
in Photoshop, then that’s where Edit Original will take you.
To specify exactly which application you want to open the file 
with, you can use Edit With instead. The Edit With submenu lives 
inside the Edit menu, in the Links panel menu, and in the context 
menu (when you right-click on an image). It will, by default, show 
you a list of applications that the operating system believes can open 
the particular file. Or, you can choose Other to open the file in any 
other program on your computer.
Some graphics don’t work well at all with Edit Original and Edit 
With—such as an EPS files from FreeHand or CorelDraw—because 
the original application isn’t designed to open the exported file. Nev-
ertheless, in most cases, Edit Original and Edit With are great ways 
to make quick changes. Also, if you use either of these features, when 
you return to InDesign, the graphic is automatically updated, so you 
don’t have to update the link manually.
There’s a faster way to invoke Edit Original: Option/Alt-double-
click on the graphic with the Selection or Direct Selection tool.
To store a graphic inside the publication, select the name of the 
graphic in the Links panel and choose Embed Link from the Links 
panel menu. When you embed a graphic, InDesign displays an 
embedded graphic icon next to the graphic’s filename. Embedding a 
graphic has the following effects.
▶It breaks the link to the external file, which means you won’t be 
able to update the embedded graphic when you make changes to 
the original file (except by replacing the embedded graphic using 
the Relink command). 
▶The size of your publication file increases by the size of the 
graphic file. Fortunately, if you duplicate the embedded graphic, 
Edit Original   
and Edit With
Embedding   
a Graphic

490     6
the publication does not grows again by the same amount—
InDesign is smart enough to only embed one copy of it.
▶You can’t use the Edit Original command to open and edit the 
graphic file.
Ultimately, you shouldn’t embed a graphic just because you want 
to take your publication to another system or to an output provider; 
instead, you should try using InDesign’s Package features (see Chap-
ter 11, “Printing”). However, embedding a relatively small graphic 
(such as a logo or a small graphic) can be very useful if you’re tired of 
tracking the file on disk.
Unembedding a Graphic. You can link an embedded graphic by 
selecting it in the Links panel and choosing Unembed File from the 
panel menu. The program gives you a choice of linking to the origi-
nal file on disk or saving the embedded file to disk and linking to it.
As we’ve shown, the Links panel menu doesn’t just show you infor-
mation about your linked files, but lets you manage them, too. Here 
are several other ways the Links panel lets you work with files.
XMP Data. If a linked image has embedded XMP data (such as data 
from a digital camera), you can find that information by choosing 
XMP File Info from the Utilities submenu in the Links panel menu 
(see “File Info and Metadata,” later in this chapter”).
Go to Link. To display any file that appears in the Links panel, select 
the file and click the Go To Link button. InDesign selects and dis-
plays the graphic, centered in the publication window (jumping to 
another spread, if necessary, to do so). This is helpful when trying to 
ascertain where in your document a particular image is hiding.
Reveal Linked Files on Disk. Someone hands you an InDesign file, 
and now you need to find one of the imported images on disk. The 
Link Info area shows you the path, but it’s much faster just to select 
the image on your page, then right-click on it (or Control-click with 
a one-button mouse) and choose Reveal in Finder (in Mac OS) or 
Reveal in Explorer (in Windows) from the Context menu. Or, you 
could choose Reveal in Bridge, if you want to launch Adobe Bridge 
and view the image there. You can also find the Reveal features in the 
Links panel menu.
Link Actions

 7. m  x 491
Gathering Linked Images. When it comes time to send your file to 
someone else (such as a print provider), you’re going to need to gather 
up all your linked graphics in one place. The easiest way to do that is 
with the Package feature, which we discuss in Chapter 11, “Printing.” 
However, you may find yourself with a need to gather only a hand-
ful of linked images—for example, to send to someone else in your 
workgroup. To do this, select the files in the Links panel and choose 
Copy Link(s) To from the Utilities submenu in the panel menu.
Copy File Path. While you can display the currently-selected image’s 
file path in the File Info area of the Links panel, you cannot extract 
the path as text that you can put into a text frame. While there are 
scripts that allow you to do this, the easiest method is to choose 
Copy Full Path or Copy Platform Style Path from the Copy Info sub-
menu in the Links panel menu. The former copies from the current 
user folder, using slashes; for example: “/Users/user_name/Pictures/
image1.jpg”. The latter uses the whole path—from the hard drive—
and uses backslashes on Windows and colons on Mac OS, such as: 
“HardDrive:Users:user_name:Pictures:image1.jpg”.
Search for Missing Links. Let’s say you have opened a file and gotten 
a message that 50 linked images are missing. You realize that those 
images are on a server that you’re not currently connected to, so you 
mount it. You can tell InDesign to “go check again” by choosing 
Search for Missing Links from the Utilities submenu in the Links 
panel menu. Note that this should also find missing links that are in 
any folder that you have already relinked to during the current run of 
InDesign (since the last time you launched the program).
Check In/Out and Versions. The Utilities submenu in the Links 
panel menu lists features relating to Check In, Check Out, and so on. 
These are related to InCopy, and are outside the scope of this book.
The File Handling pane of the Preferences dialog box lets you control 
several aspects of how InDesign handles linked files.
Check Links Before Opening Document. You can stop InDesign 
from checking the status of your linked images by turning off the 
Check Links Before Opening Document checkbox. This could be 
useful if you were working remotely on a file on a server with a 
slow network connection—InDesign would open the file far faster. 
InDesign will still check the status of the links, but it starts after 
opening the file, and it works in the background as you work.
Links Preferences

492     6
Find Missing Links Before Opening Document. If InDesign finds 
that one or more links are missing when you open your document, it 
will normally attempt to locate the files on disk. It searches the Links 
folder, the folder the document is in, other folders relative to the cur-
rent document, and in any other folders that you have pointed to 
with the Relink command since the last time you launched InDesign. 
This can be very helpful and save you a lot of time, but it can also 
potentially cause problems if you have several images with exactly 
the same name but in different folders, because InDesign might 
relink to an image that you did not intend. If this describes a situa-
tion you might find yourself in, then turn off the Find Missing Links 
Before Opening Document checkbox in Preferences. 
Create Links When Placing Text and Spreadsheet Files. You can 
link to text and spreadsheet files if you first turn on this checkbox in 
the Preferences dialog box. However, as we point out in “Text Files 
and File Linking” (in Chapter 3, “Text”), this can cause problems if 
you edit or format the text once it is placed in InDesign.
Preserving Dimensions. Ordinarily, when you relink to a new image, 
InDesign attempts to make the new image fit in the same space as 
the old one. This is great when you’re replacing a low-resolution 
image with a high-resolution version; the cropping and rotation are 
maintained, and the scaling is adjusted appropriately. However, if 
you want to make sure all the image transformations stay the same, 
including applying the same scaling percentage, then turn off the 
Preserve Image Dimensions When Relinking checkbox in the File 
Handling pane of the Preferences dialog box.
Default Relink Folder. As we noted earlier, when you click the Relink 
button in the Links panel, InDesign opens the Locate dialog box. But 
which folder do you want this dialog box to default to? 
If you choose Original Relink Folder from the Default Relink 
Folder pop-up menu, InDesign always points the Locate dialog box 
at the folder where the link currently points (that is, where the file is, 
or where InDesign thinks the file should be). That’s how it worked in 
InDesign CS2 and earlier. 
If, instead, you choose Most Recent Relink Folder, InDesign 
sends you to whichever folder you last relinked to.
Which you want depends on your workflow. Personally, we leave 
this set to Most Recent Relink Folder because when we’re relinking, 
we tend to link a bunch of files to new files in the same folder. 

 7. m  x 493
Copying and Linking Objects
Linking objects isn’t just for tracking external files. InDesign includes 
three features that establish parent/child links between copied 
objects: Place and Link, the Content Collector tools, and Alternate 
Layouts. We cover Alternate Layouts in the “Page Layout” chapter.
In some cases, you want to use the same text or image in multiple 
parts of a publication, layout or other publication. For example, you 
might need to add the same legal blurb on several pages, or you might 
want to use the same end-of-story indicators. You can create links 
that allow you to edit one object (the “parent”) and quickly update 
the linked “child” objects. 
Select any object—text, a shape, a text frame, or an imported 
graphic. Choose Copy from the Edit menu, and then choose Place 
and Link from the Edit menu. A loaded cursor to place the copied 
object appears, along with the Conveyor, which we’ll discuss soon. 
Hide the Conveyor by pressing Option/Alt+B. Move to the layout, 
page, or publication where you want the object to appear, and click or 
drag to place the object. The top of the child object’s frame includes 
a link icon (see Figure 7-10).
If you selected text, only the text thread is linked. If you selected 
the text frame, both the text and frame are linked.
Now that you’ve set up a link, editing the parent object by adding 
text in a text frame or changing the stroke color of a shape turns the 
link icon into a “modified” icon, indicating that the link is out of date. 
Placing and Linking 
Objects
When this image is 
copied and linked 
onto the next page, 
both the object and 
frame appear in the 
Links panel. 
When the parent object has a stroke applied 
to it, the child frame’s status is modified.
Figure 7-10
Linked Frames

494     6
To update a linked object, just click the link badge (icon) at the 
top of the child object’s frame. Or, Option/Alt-click the badge to 
open the Links panel. If you’ve made related edits to the child object, 
InDesign asks if you want to overwrite the changes be default.
If you delete the parent object, the child object displays a Miss-
ing icon. We think relinking is more trouble than it’s worth. Use the 
Links panel menu to unlink it, and then create a new link.
Here’s a tip. If a child object is selected, choose Go To Source from 
the Edit menu to view the parent object.
With some links, you might want the fill and stroke attributes to 
remain the same, but you don’t want the Modified icon to appear if 
the objects have different sizes. To control link behavior, choose Link 
Options from the Links panel menu (see Figure 7-11).
A tricky thing to understand about Link Options is which objects 
the settings affect. If a document is open and nothing is selected, the 
changes affect any new objects added to the document. If no docu-
ment is open, changes set the default for new documents. And if one 
or more child objects are selected, changes affect only those objects.
Suppose you set up a link, resize the parent object, and then 
decide you want to allow different sizes for the object, but keep the 
colors the same. Select the child object, open Link Options, and 
choose “Size and Shape” to preserve local resizing edits. Presto! The 
update icon goes away, and you can resize the parent object at will 
without affecting the child object’s status. The tooltips in the Link 
Options dialog box show which features are included in each group.
Here’s a tip that might save some hand wringing. If you don’t 
want scaling an image to trigger an update, select both the Size and 
Shape and the Frame Content options.
With the Link Options dialog box, you can also specify link 
behavior and remove line breaks, which strips out line breaks created 
by well-meaning people who are overly fond of Shift+Enter. You can 
also define style mapping for copied text, which we’ll get to shortly.
Link Options
Hover over the option 
to see a tooltip that de-
scribes each category.
If you don’t want cer-
tain attributes to be 
part of the link, select 
an option to preserve 
local edits. 
Figure 7-11
Link Options
Up to Date
Modified
Missing

 7. m  x 495
It took awhile here at the Real World InDesign Studio, but we’ve 
reached the opinion that the Content Collector is more than a glori-
fied copy/paste feature. Enough damning with faint praise.
The Content Collector tool does at least two things that make 
this feature worth the effort: (1) it lets you establish a parent/child 
link between two objects, and (2) it lets you map text and table styles 
when you copy objects to a different layout or publication.
It helps to think of three steps: (1) Content Collector tool, (2) Con-
veyor options, (3) Content Placer tool. Grab, adjust, drop.
1. Select the Content Collector tool. The Conveyor displays the 
clipboard objects and displays settings (see Figure 7-12). Click 
objects one at a time to add them individually, or drag-select 
objects to add them as a set of objects that can be placed in one 
fell swoop. (You can’t use the Content Collector tool to drill 
down into groups or nested objects.) 
2. Once you’ve added the objects to copy, press B to switch to the 
Content Placer tool. Press left and right arrow keys to browse 
through the queued objects. If a set of multiple objects is loaded, 
press the down arrow to expand the set; press the up arrow to 
move back a level. If a lot of objects are loaded, Shift-click arrow 
keys to move a tray of objects at a time. Press Esc to remove the 
current object without pasting it. Press Option/Alt+B to toggle 
between showing and hiding the Conveyor.
Content Collector Tool
Select the Content 
Collector tool, hover 
over the object you 
want to copy, and 
click to add it. 
Select the Content 
Place tool, specify 
options, and use 
the loaded cursor to 
place the leftmost 
item. 
Figure 7-12
Content Collector

496     6
3. Before you click the page to place the object, choose the appro-
priate settings in the Conveyor.
▶Create Link. Establish a parent/child relationship between the 
copied object to the placed object, as we just covered.
▶Map Styles. This option is especially useful if you’re copying text 
frames to a different publication that uses different styles. It’s an 
odd feature that we’ll need to cover in its own section. 
▶Place icons. Indicate whether you want to place and remove the 
loaded object; place and keep the loaded object; or place, keep, 
and load the next object. Option/Alt-dragging an object in 
another way to copy an object and keep it in the Conveyor. 
4. Browse to the page, layout, or publication where you want to 
add the objects. Click or drag the objects just as you would place 
graphics. In fact, you can use the same techniques to autoflow 
text or to place a grid of copied object sets. Speaking of sets...
Copying sets of objects. When you grab a set of objects, a badge 
appears next to the item in the Conveyor. When you drag the item 
into your document, all items are placed at once. You can also use 
the “gridify” techniques to place the set of objects in a grid, or you 
can hold down Option to apply Live Distribute. When the Content 
Placer tool is selected, click the badge to expand the items if you want 
to add the objects one at a time (see Figure 7-14). Click the little icon 
to return the objects to the set.
Conveyor behavior. Copied items remain in the Conveyor until you 
close the document or remove them, even if you switch tools or hide 
the Conveyor. Hold down Command/Ctrl to switch temporarily 
to the Selection tool. To hide the Conveyor, press Option/Alt+B, or 
choose Hide Conveyor from the View > Extras submenu.
Conveyor options for adding items. Two settings in the Conveyor 
can help with adding items.
▶Collect All Threaded Frames. If you select this option in the 
Conveyor, you load the entire thread. If not, you load the frame. 
▶Load Conveyor. To select a bunch of objects at once, click the 
Load Conveyor icon. Choose which items you want to load: 
everything in the selection, page, or document. This option is 
particularly useful if you have a bunch of overlapping items on a 

 7. m  x 497
Figure 7-13
Mapping Styles
Select the style type...
...and then map the source 
style to the target style by 
select or typing style names.
complex page and it’s too difficult to select them one by one. Just 
grab them all, and sort through which ones you want to drop. 
Master page items aren’t included unless first overridden, and 
pasteboard objects aren’t included unless selected. If you select 
Create a Single Set, all objects are collected in one placeable item.
When placing an object from the Conveyor, you can select the Edit 
Custom Mapping icon to map paragraph, character, table, and cell 
styles in the parent document to those in the child document—like 
mapping styles when importing a Word file. For example, you could 
map the Heading 1 paragraph style in the parent document to the 
Head1 style in the child document. Heading 1 text is then formatted 
as Head1 when copied. Here’s how to make it work.
1. Open both documents. In the parent document, use the Content 
Collector tool to select the text frame. 
2. Switch to the child document. Select the Content Placer tool. 
Select Map Styles, and then select the Edit Custom Style Map-
ping icon in the Conveyor (see Figure 7-13).
3. Click New Style Mapping for each style you want to map. On 
the left side, specify the source document, and select one of the 
Mapping Styles
Figure 7-14
Copying Sets
Click badge to expand set.
Click icon to go back to set.

498     6
Hold the cursor over the 
Content Grabber...
...and drag to move the 
image within the frame.
Figure 7-15
Frame and Its Content
Image being 
panned
Frame
Content Grabber
styles from the drop-down list. On the right side, specify the 
current document, and then select the style that will replace it. 
You can also type the style name if it doesn’t appear in the list.
What happens if you forget to map the styles and want to map them 
later? In theory, you can map the styles post facto, but it’s clunky. You 
need to open the Link Options dialog box and change the Define 
Custom Style Mapping settings. After you map the styles, you have to 
go back and edit the parent text frame to trigger an update. We think 
it’s easier just to start over and do it right. 
Working with Graphic Frames
Getting used to the way that InDesign works with graphics and 
graphics frames can take some time. 
You can modify the size, shape, and formatting of a graphic frame, or 
you can modify the frame’s contents, or you can change both at once. 
The key to making these adjustments lies in your selection method.
▶When you mouse over a graphics frame, the Content Grab-
ber appears in the middle of the frame. Clicking the Content 
Grabber selects the contents of the frame. Dragging the Content 
Grabber pans the image within the frame (see Figure 7-15). 
▶When you use the Selection tool to click the frame or frame 
contents outside the Content Grabber, you’re selecting both the 
frame and its contents. At this point, any changes you make 
using the Control panel or transformation tools affect both the 
frame and its contents (see Chapter 9, “Transforming”). How-
ever, resizing the frame does not resize the contents.
Selecting Frames   
and Graphics

 7. m  x 499
When you simply drag one 
of the selection handles of a 
frame containing a graphic, 
InDesign scales the frame, but 
does not scale the graphic.
Hold down Command/Ctrl (or better, both 
Command/Ctrl and Shift) as you drag a 
selection handle, and InDesign will scale the 
graphic as it scales the frame.
▶When you click the Content Grabber using the Selection tool, or 
when you click inside the frame using the Direct Selection tool, 
you select the contents—not the frame itself. Select the graphic 
when you want to move the graphic within the frame, transform 
(rotate, scale, move, or skew) the graphic alone, or apply color.
▶When you double-click the image with the Direct Selection 
tool, you’re selecting the frame only—not its contents. Select the 
frame when you want to edit the shape of the frame using the 
drawing tools, or transform (scale, rotate, skew, or move) the 
frame using the transformation tools or the Control panel with-
out transforming its contents. 
When you select a graphic frame with the Selection tool and 
drag the corner handle, InDesign resizes the frame but does not 
scale the graphic—unless Auto-Fit is selected, but we’ll get to that 
later. To scale the graphic inside the frame as you scale the frame, 
hold down Command/Ctrl as you drag the corner handle (see  
Figure 7-16). Hold down Command-Shift/Ctrl-Shift as you drag to 
proportionally resize the frame and graphic.
You can also resize both the frame and the graphic using the Scale 
tool or the Scale Horizontal and Scale Vertical fields in the Control 
panel, provided you’ve selected the frame using the Selection tool. 
Note that you can type measurements into these scaling fields. For 
example, if you want the frame and its image to be 10 cm across, 
Resizing Imported 
Graphics
Figure 7-16
Scaling a Graphic with 
the Selection Tool

500     6
replace the 100% in the Scale Horizontal field with 10 cm. For more 
information, see Chapter 9, “Transforming.”
After you scale an image with the Selection tool, the scale fields 
in the Control panel usually revert to 100%. To see the actual scaling 
percentage of the image, choose it with the Direct Selection tool.
When you “pan” a graphic, you move the graphic without moving 
the graphic’s frame. To do this, drag the Content Grabber using the 
Selection tool. Or, select the graphic with the Direct Selection tool, 
then drag. As you drag, InDesign repositions the graphic inside the 
frame. Of course, no matter what method you use, if you pan the 
contents too far, the graphic won’t even be visible in the frame, which 
makes it frustrating to select again later. Select the frame and choose 
Center Content from the Fitting submenu (in the Object menu, or 
the context menu) to recover the picture.
Panning   
a Graphic
Fit Content to Frame
Original image
Figure 7-17
Fitting Frames  
and Images
Fill Frame Proportionally
Fit Content Proportionally
Center Content
Fit Frame to 
Content expands or 
contracts the frame 
to fit the content.

 7. m  x 501
Note that it’s possible to move the graphic entirely outside the 
frame, off the page, and beyond the edge of the pasteboard. Don’t.
We want to point out one more scaling-related feature that involves 
graphic frames: Fitting. InDesign Fitting features let you automati-
cally adjust an image’s size within its frame, or the size of the frame 
to fit the image—either after you place an image, or upon placing it.
Fitting After Placing. You can choose each of the following from the 
Fitting submenu (under the Object menu or in the context menu). 
These commands also appear as somewhat cryptic buttons on the 
right side of the Control panel (see Figure 7-17).
▶Fit Content to Frame. The Fit Content to Frame feature resizes 
the graphic to fit into the current frame size. However, unless 
the graphic already has the same height/width proportions as 
the frame, it will be stretched non-proportionally.
▶Fit Content Proportionally. To ensure your image is resized 
with the same X and Y percentages, choose Fit Content Propor-
tionally. The image is sized so that the entire image fits inside the 
frame. This often results in an empty portion of the frame.
▶Fill Frame Proportionally. Choosing Fill Frame Proportionally 
will resize the image so that it completely fills the frame, crop-
ping out a portion of the graphic if necessary. The upper-left 
corner of the resized image is placed in the upper-left corner of 
the frame, and whatever doesn’t fit gets cropped out.
▶Fit Frame to Content. When you select Fit Frame to Content, 
InDesign resizes the frame to match the size of the graphic. The 
size or position of the graphic itself does not change.
Fitting Frames   
and Graphics
Figure 7-18
Frame Fitting Options

502     6
Note that the Fit Frame to Content feature also works for text 
frames (as long as they’re not linked to other frames). When 
there is only a single line of text in the frame, InDesign adjusts 
the height and width of the frame. When there is more than one 
line of text, only the height is adjusted.
You can fit a frame to its content by double-clicking a corner 
or side handle. If you double-click a corner handle, InDesign 
changes both the width and height of the frame. Double-clicking 
a side handle adjusts only the width or height of the frame.
▶Center Content. Choose Center Content to position the center 
point of the graphic at the geometric center of the frame. This is 
especially helpful if you accidentally position an image outside 
of the frame boundaries (so that you can no longer see it).
Auto-Fit. If you don’t like the fact that resizing a frame doesn’t resize 
its image, turn on Auto-Fit so that you don’t have to hold down the 
Command/Ctrl keys while resizing. If Auto-Fit is turned on when 
you resize the frame, the image scales automatically according to the 
frame’s Frame Fitting settings. You can turn on Auto-Fit in the Con-
trol panel and in the Frame Fitting Options dialog box.
To remove accidental fitting settings applied when Auto-Fit is 
turned on, choose Clear Frame Fitting Options from the Fitting sub-
menu on the Object menu.
Fitting Upon Placing. If you’re building a template, you may want to 
create empty graphic frames which will later be filled with images. 
If so, you can also assign fitting commands to those frames so that 
those images will be scaled accordingly automatically. To do this, 
select the frame and choose Frame Fitting Options from the Fitting 
submenu (under the Object menu or the Context menu). The Frame 
Fitting Options dialog box offers three options (see Figure 7-18).
▶Crop Amount. The Crop Amount controls the amount of the 
image that should be cropped out, based on the original size of 
the image. For example, let’s say you know the incoming pho-
tograph will have a 4 mm white border on all four sides. If you 
set the Crop Amount fields to this amount, that border will be 
“removed” before any of the other fitting features are applied.
▶Alignment. The Reference Point proxy determines how your 
image maps to the frame. If you choose the center point, your 
incoming image will be centered in the frame; if you choose the 

 7. m  x 503
lower-right corner, the lower-right corner of the image will be 
placed in the lower-right corner of the frame; and so on.
▶Fitting on Empty Frame. Here’s where you choose one of the 
options we discussed above: Fit Content to Frame, Fit Content 
Proportionally, or Fill Frame Proportionally.
While everything about this dialog box implies that it works 
only on empty graphic frames, it works equally as well with frames 
with images already in them. It does not, however, work with text 
frames—too bad, as it would be cool to create a frame that automati-
cally stretches to fit its text, or stretches the text to fit the frame.
Note that Frame Fitting Options can be applied as part of an 
object style definition (see Chapter 6, “Where Text Meets Graphics”).
File Info and Metadata
Metadata (which literally means “data about data”) isn’t a new thing. 
Photoshop’s File Info dialog box has allowed you to add metadata 
such as captions, copyright info, and routing or handling instruc-
tions for years. But the Adobe Creative Suite applications are begin-
ning to incorporate metadata features more seriously now (based on 
the open standard XMP structure, which is based on XML, if you 
care). Metadata can be almost any kind of information about your 
file, and it travels invisibly behind the scenes with the file as it moves 
Figure 7-19
Metadata in the  
File Info dialog box

504     6
from machine to machine. We think you’ll find that the more time 
you take to add metadata to your files now, the happier you’ll be in 
the long run.
You can add metadata to an InDesign file by selecting File Info from 
the File menu (see Figure 7-19). The File Info dialog box contains 
several panes of fields and pop-up menus, though you’ll likely just 
use the Description pane most of the time. Some panes—such as 
Camera Data 1 and 2—aren’t applicable to InDesign documents at 
all. See Real World Photoshop for more information on image-related 
metadata.
Another, less intuitive way to add metadata to InDesign docu-
ments is to use Adobe Bridge. Just select an InDesign document 
and choose File Info from Bridge’s File menu. To apply metadata to 
more than one InDesign file at a time, choose the documents and 
use Bridge’s Metadata and Keyword panels. (Beware, though—this 
action isn’t undoable.)
Metadata in an InDesign file travels not only with the file itself, 
but also with PDF files exported from the document. When you 
export a PDF file of your InDesign document, InDesign automati-
cally includes the metadata, too. (If you include any sort of personal 
or trade information in your metadata, you may need to strip it out 
manually with Acrobat or Bridge before sending a PDF file to some-
one else.)
Both Illustrator and Photoshop let you add metadata in the same way, 
which is especially useful when you’re creating live captions. Besides 
captions, what other ways can you retrieve metadata from imported 
images? There are two ways to see this hidden information: After 
selecting an imported graphic, you can select File Info from the Info 
panel menu, or you can select XMP File Info from the Utilities sub-
menu in the Links panel menu. You cannot use these methods to edit 
metadata. Do that in Bridge, Photoshop, or Illustrator.
You can also extract the metadata from the imported image. For 
example, if someone added a caption to an image from within Photo-
shop, you could copy that caption out and paste it into a text frame in 
InDesign—no more PostIt notes with captions passed from person 
to person! You should be able to copy this info to the Clipboard by 
selecting a field and pressing Command/Ctrl-C.
Besides generating captions, an important reason to add metadata 
to your images and documents is so that you can search for that 
data later. For example, you might want to find all the InDesign 
Adding Metadata to 
InDesign Files
Reading Metadata in 
Imported Images
Searching for Metadata

 7. m  x 505
documents on your hard drive that include the phrase “square the 
circle” in the Description field or the word “frogs” as a keyword. 
InDesign doesn’t have a built-in way of doing these kinds of searches, 
but several asset management utilities do. The most obvious one is 
Adobe Bridge: Choose a folder, Choose Find from Bridge’s Edit menu, 
and select from the Criteria pop-up menu.
When you find the InDesign file you’re looking for, you can select 
it in Bridge and then choose Open with InDesign from the context 
menu (right-click in Windows or Control-click on the Macintosh).
By the way, if you’re searching for a PDF file that contains 
metadata, you can also use Bridge, but Acrobat’s own Search feature 
may be even faster. It’s not obvious that the Search feature looks for 
file metadata, but it does. You just need to set it to look through docu-
ments on disk rather than the currently open file.
Object Layer Options
We’ve long loved InDesign’s ability to import native Photoshop (PSD) 
files, layers and all. Now, our favorite page-layout program goes one 
step beyond by letting us turn those layers on and off (making them 
visible or hidden). You can control layer visibility in PSD, AI, or PDF 
files that contain layers. Ironically and sadly, it won’t work for Photo-
shop’s PDF files, but Adobe Illustrator’s PDF files work great, as long 
as you turn on the Create Acrobat Layers option when making the 
PDF from Illustrator.
You can turn layers on or off when you first import a file into 
InDesign by turning on the Show Import Options checkbox in the 
Place dialog box (see “Image Import Options,” earlier in this chapter). 
Or, if you have already imported the image, select it on your page and 
choose Object Layer Options from the Object menu (or the context 
menu). In either case, you’re presented with the same three options 
(see Figure 7-20).
Show Layers. It’s unclear whether a feature could be any simpler 
than this: To make a layer visible or invisible, click in the column to 
the left of the layer’s name. If you’ve used layer sets in Photoshop, you 
can view the individual layers within those by clicking the triangle 
next to the layer set name. Also, you can Option/Alt-click on an eye 
icon to toggle all the other layers. That is, if all the other layers are 
visible when you do this, they’ll all become hidden, and vice versa.

506     6
Layer Comps. Photoshop’s Layer Comp panel lets you create “comps” 
of layer settings. For example, you might have one layer comp that 
shows layers A, B, and C; and another layer comp in which A, C, 
and D are visible. Or you might make a layer comp in which some 
of the layers have layer styles (like drop shadow or emboss) turned 
on, and another comp in which they’re turned off. Layer comps are 
great when you have a lot of ideas in Photoshop but you’re not sure 
what will look best when the image hits the page. The good news is 
that you can choose any of your layer comps from the Layer Comps 
pop-up menu. Of course, if a PSD file has no layer comps saved in it, 
this menu is unavailable.
Update Link Options. After you override the native layer visibility 
settings (what the file was saved with) with the Object Layer Options 
dialog box, InDesign displays a small eye icon in the Links panel 
next to that image’s name. This helps alert you that someone did 
something to those layers. But what if you go back, change the layer 
visibility in Photoshop or Illustrator, and then save the file again?
Figure 7-20
Changing  
Layer Visibility
Select an imported graphic 
that contains layers and choose 
Object Layer Options from the 
Context menu (or from the 
Object Menu).
Change layer visibility in the 
Show Layers section of the 
Object Layer Options dialog 
box…
…and InDesign displays or hides 
layers as you’ve specified.

 7. m  x 507
InDesign offers two options: If you choose Use Photoshop’s Layer 
Visibility (or Use PDF’s Layer Visibility, depending on the image type) 
from the When Updating Link pop-up menu, InDesign throws out 
layer visibility overrides as soon as you Relink or Update the image 
link. Or, if you choose Keep Layer Visibility Overrides, your over-
rides are maintained even after the image is modified and updated.
Working with Clipping Paths
Earlier in this chapter, we talked about InDesign’s ability to use a 
clipping path stored in a graphic as you place the graphic—but what 
about creating a clipping path for a graphic that doesn’t have one? 
First, there’s nothing magical about clipping paths. In fact, you could 
say that every graphic you place in InDesign is inside a clipping 
path—its graphic frame.
A clipping path is a PostScript path, much like other Bézier lines 
in InDesign or Illustrator. However, a clipping path acts like a pair 
of scissors, cutting out an image in any shape you want. Clipping 
Place a graphic contain-
ing a clipping path (in   
this example, we’ve used 
a Photoshop file).
Select the graphic, then press 
Command-Option-Shift-K/ 
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-K (or choose 
Options from the Clipping 
Path submenu, under the 
Object menu) to display the 
Clipping Path dialog box. 
Choose Photoshop Path from the Type pop-up menu.
Choose a path from the Path menu.
InDesign applies 
the first clipping 
path defined in the 
graphic. If that’s 
not the path you 
wanted, choose a 
different one.
Figure 7-21
Using an Existing  
Clipping Path

508     6
an image is actually the same as cropping it, but because InDesign 
makes a distinction, we will, too: The shape of a graphic frame crops 
the picture, but the clipping path (if there is one) clips it.
Remember that InDesign can read transparency in imported images. 
Even if you don’t want to use any of the transparency effects, you may 
want to take advantage of this feature because it means you might 
avoid using clipping paths altogether. Save yourself time and just 
make the background of the image transparent in Photoshop.
Nevertheless, some people will still want to use clipping paths. 
For example, clipping paths are always drawn at the resolution of the 
output device, so you can get very sharp edges. If you like this sharp-
edged effect, use a clipping path. Also, those folks who want to avoid 
the transparency flattener might still want to use clipping paths. As 
for us, we haven’t bothered with clipping paths for years.
If the selected graphic contains a clipping path—or, in the case of a 
Photoshop image, any path saved in Photoshop’s Paths panel—you 
can select the clipping path you want to apply. To do this, select 
Why Use   
Clipping Paths?
Selecting an Existing 
Clipping Path
Select a graphic, then press 
Command-Option-Shift-K/ 
Ctrl-Alt-Shift-K (or choose 
Options from the Clipping 
Path submenu, under the 
Object menu) to display the 
Clipping Path dialog box. 
Choose Detect Edges from the Type pop-up menu.
InDesign attempts to find 
the edges in the graphic. 
Of course, InDesign does a 
better job of this when the 
graphic has a simple outline 
and a simple background.
You can fine-tune the clipping path using the 
controls in the Clipping Path dialog box.
Here, we’ve adjusted the Threshold and Inset 
Frame values to remove some off-white areas.
Figure 7-22
Creating a  
Clipping Path

 7. m  x 509
the graphic or its frame, then display the Clipping Path dialog box 
(choose Options from the Clipping Path submenu, under the Object 
menu, or press Command-Option-Shift-K/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-K). Select 
Photoshop Path from the Type pop-up menu. If there are multiple 
paths, choose one from the Path pop-up menu (see Figure 7-21). 
You can ask InDesign to create an “automatic” clipping path using 
the following steps (see Figure 7-22). However, to be honest about it, 
we tend to shy away from this option unless we’re building a quick 
comp for a client or we’re planning on spending some time editing 
the resulting path. In general, you’ll just get better results making 
clipping paths by hand in Photoshop.
1. Select a graphic. You’ll have the best luck with a graphic against 
a white background. In addition, it’s a good idea to select the 
graphic using the Direct Selection tool (as opposed to selecting 
the frame). We know this seems odd, but bear with us.
2. Choose Options from the Clipping Path submenu, under the 
Object menu (or press Command-Option-Shift-K/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-
K). InDesign displays the Clipping Path dialog box.
3. Choose Detect Edges from the Type pop-up menu. Turn on the 
Preview option, if it’s not already on, and drag the Clipping Path 
dialog box out of the way so that you can see the selected image. 
Look at the clipping path that InDesign has built around the 
image. What? You can’t see the clipping path? That’s because you 
didn’t select the image using the Direct Selection tool, like we 
told you to in Step 1. If you had, you’d be able to see the clipping 
path as you adjust the settings in the Clipping Path dialog box.
4. Work with the controls in the dialog box.
▶Adjust the values in the Threshold and Tolerance fields (either 
enter values in the fields or drag the associated sliders) until 
the clipping path looks the way you want it to. 
▶Turn on Invert to turn the clipping path “inside out.”
▶Turn on the Include Inside Edges option to create “holes” 
inside the clipping path for any blank (as defined by the value 
you entered in the Threshold field) areas inside the graphic. 
▶Turn on Restrict to Frame to limit the clipping path to the 
boundaries of the graphic frame. (Since the image can’t 
extend past the edges of the graphic frame anyway, this is 
reasonable. However, if you change your frame cropping, 
Creating a   
Clipping Path

510     6
you’ll have to rebuild your clipping path, so we leave this 
turned off.)
▶Most of the time, you’ll probably want to turn on the Use 
High Resolution Image option—it uses data from the image 
file on disk (rather than simply using the screen preview 
image) to create a more accurate clipping path.
▶If necessary (and it usually will be), enter a value in the Inset 
Frame field to shrink (enter positive values) or expand (enter 
negative values) the clipping path. We often use a small inset 
value, like .5 points.
5. Once the clipping path looks the way you want it to, click OK.
Don’t worry about making a mistake; you can always open up 
this dialog box again and change the values, or change the clipping 
path using the Direct Selection tool or the various Pen tools. 
You can also create a clipping path based on an alpha channel if 
one has been saved in an imported image. To do this, select Alpha 
Channel from the Type pop-up menu. The problem is that alpha 
channels can have soft anti-aliased or feathered edges, and clipping 
paths cannot. So, InDesign has to convert soft edges into hard-edged 
Bézier paths using the features above. It’s hardly worth the trouble.
To remove a clipping path, select the image, display the Clipping Path 
dialog box, and choose None from the Type pop-up menu. InDesign 
removes the clipping path.
You can convert a clipping path into a frame of the same shape by 
selecting any image with a clipping path and choosing Convert Clip-
ping Path to Frame from the Context menu (right-click with a two-
button mouse or Control-click with a one-button mouse) or from the 
Clipping Path submenu. This works for all clipping paths, including 
clipping paths generated by the Detect Edges feature.
Applying Color to an Imported Graphic
You can’t apply color to just any imported graphic—but you can 
apply colors to bi-level (i.e., black-and-white) and grayscale images. 
To apply a color to an image, select the image using the Direct Selec-
tion tool, then apply a color as you normally would—probably by 
clicking a swatch in the Swatches panel (see Chapter 10, “Color”).
Removing a   
Clipping Path
Convert Clipping   
Path to Frame

 7. m  x 511
If you want the image to overprint any objects behind it, select the 
image using the Direct Selection tool, display the Attributes panel, 
and then turn on the Overprint Fill option— or simply set the image 
to Multiply mode in the Effects panel. You can use this technique to 
create duotones from grayscale images you’ve placed in a publication.
Exporting Documents
You can export InDesign content as EPS, Print PDF, Interactive PDF, 
JPEG, HTML, IDML, SWF, FLA, or XML (in addition to the text 
export options described in Chapter 3, “Text”). We explore each of 
these in depth in the following sections—except SWF, FLA, and Inter-
active PDF, which we cover in Chapter 13. We cover XML briefly in 
this chapter and provide more complete coverage on the web. In most 
cases, the first step is to select Export from the File menu (or press   
Command-E/Ctrl-E). 
Exporting JPEG or PNG
Every now and then, you need to create a simple image file from 
InDesign. For example, you might want to create a required splash 
screen for digital publishing or a cover for an eBook. JPEG and PNG 
are bitmapped image formats. JPEG files are usually smaller than 
PNG files. Unlike JPEG images, PNG files support transparency.
Figure 7-23
JPEG Export Options

512     6
InDesign can export a JPEG or PNG file of any page or object in 
your document—you can even export a series of image files for more 
than one page at a time. To export a JPEG or PNG file, choose Export 
from the File menu and pick either JPEG or PNG from the Format 
pop-up menu. 
The Export JPEG dialog box is pretty simple (see Figure 7-23). The 
Export PNG dialog box is similar to Export JPEG, with a couple of 
differences. You can control which page or pages you want to export 
(use commas and hyphens to type ranges of pages). To export one 
or more objects from a page or spread, select them before choosing 
Export and then turn on the Selection option in the dialog box. 
▶Quality. The Quality pop-up menu offers a handful of choices, 
from Low to Maximum—the lower the quality you choose, the 
smaller the file will be on disk. Unfortunately, there’s no way to 
preview the quality difference before saving the file. 
▶Format Method. Use the Format Method pop-up menu (JPEG 
only) to choose Baseline or Progressive—we recommend Base-
line unless you need people to see the image progressively appear 
(low resolution, then higher resolution) when they view it.
▶Resolution. Early versions of InDesign could only export 72 ppi 
JPEG images. Now you can specify any resolution you want (up 
to 2400 ppi). 
▶Color Space. Export as CMYK, RGB, or Gray.
▶Transparent Background. Preserve the transparent background 
in the PNG image (PNG only).
▶Embed Color Profile. Turn on this option (JPEG only) to embed 
the document’s color profile in the JPEG file. Look to the right of 
the option to see the current profile. If you want a different pro-
file, choose Assign Profiles from the Edit menu, and then export.
▶Anti-Alias. Turn this option on to smooth out the jagged edges 
of text and bitmap images.
▶Use Document Bleed Settings. If you turn on this option, the 
bleed area specified in Document Setup appears in the JPEG.
▶Simulate Overprint. If you turn on this option, the JPEG file 
simulates the effects of overprinting spot inks with different 
neutral density values by converting spot colors to process colors.

 7. m  x 513
Exporting EPS
Although we tend to eschew EPS when we can, there are times when it 
can come in handy. For example, if you have designed an ad that will 
be placed in a magazine produced with any version of QuarkXPress 
earlier than version 7. Those versions didn’t handle PDF particularly 
well, so EPS is probably the better bet.
To export an InDesign page (or series of pages) as an EPS graphic 
(or series of graphics, as EPS is, by definition, a single-page-at-a-time 
format), choose EPS from the pop-up menu in the Export dialog box, 
pick a location for the file, and then click Save. The Export EPS dialog 
box has two tabs: General and Advanced. Here’s a quick description 
of the options in each tab.
General. The controls in the General tab define the way that InDesign 
exports objects to the EPS file.
▶Pages. Which pages do you want to export? Bear in mind, as 
you work with the controls in this tab, that each page in the page 
range you specify will be exported as a separate EPS file. See 
“Page Ranges” in Chapter 11, “Printing,” for more information. 
When you turn on the Spreads checkbox, InDesign exports the 
pages in readers spreads, just as they appear in your document 
window—pages 2 and 3 are combined into one wide EPS file.
▶PostScript. Choose the PostScript version of the printer you 
expect to use to print the EPS. If you’re sure you’re printing on a 
PostScript 3 printer, choose Level 3. InDesign no longer supports 
PostScript Level 1 printers; a Level 2 EPS file may or may not 
print on one of these old beasts.
▶Color. Do you want to convert RGB images in your publication 
to CMYK as you create the EPS? If so, choose CMYK from the 
Color pop-up menu. The method InDesign uses for this conver-
sion depends on the settings in the Color Settings dialog box 
(see Chapter 10, “Color,” for more on color management). While 
it’s rare that you’d need to choose Gray or RGB, these options 
will convert all colors to their grayscale or RGB equivalents. 
If you’re using some other software to handle the EPS’s color 
separation, choose Leave Unchanged so that InDesign leaves 
RGB and CMYK images alone during the export process.
▶Preview. EPS files usually have low-resolution, built-in previews, 
which applications use to display the EPS on screen; Macintosh 
EPS files typically have PICT previews, Windows EPS files must 

514     6
use TIFF previews. If you’re re-importing the EPS file back into 
an InDesign document, you can leave the Preview pop-up menu 
set to None, because InDesign actually creates a preview on the 
fly when you import the file. Similarly, if you’re going to open 
the EPS file in Photoshop (rasterizing it into a bitmapped image), 
Illustrator (converting it into paths), or process the EPS file with 
some software that doesn’t require a preview image, you can 
leave Preview set to None. If the EPS will be used in any other 
program, select PICT or TIFF (the latter is more flexible because 
most Macintosh programs can read both PICT and TIFF).
▶Embed Fonts. To make sure that the EPS contains all of the 
fonts you’ve used, choose Complete from the Embed Fonts 
pop-up menu. Why not do this every time? Because your EPS 
files can become huge, bloated, and swollen with included fonts. 
To reduce the size of the EPS, choose Subset to include only the 
characters needed to print the text in the EPS. 
Some fonts cannot be embedded—the font manufacturer 
has included information in the font that prevents embedding. 
When InDesign reads this information, it will not include the 
fonts in the EPS, regardless of the choice you make from the 
Embed Fonts pop-up menu. If you find you’re missing a font in 
an EPS, return to the InDesign publication and convert all of the 
characters that use the missing font to outlines and then export 
the EPS again.
▶Data Format. Choose ASCII if you expect to print the EPS on a 
system connected to a printer via a serial cable, or if you plan to 
edit the EPS using a text editor or word processor—otherwise, 
choose Binary to create a compressed version of the file. Binary 
files are smaller and therefore transmit to the printer faster, but 
they sometimes choke really old networks.
▶Bleed. If you do not enter values in the four Bleed fields (Top, 
Bottom, Inside, and Outside—or Left and Right, in a non-facing-
pages document), InDesign sets the edge of the EPS bounding 
box to the edge of the page you’re exporting. Enter a value in 
the Bleed fields to expand the area of the page. See Chapter 11, 
“Printing,” for more on bleeding off the edge of the page.
Advanced. The Advanced options let you control how images and 
transparency are handled in EPS files.
▶Send Data. In most cases, you want the full resolution of your 
bitmapped images to be included in your EPS files (so they can 

 7. m  x 515
later be printed properly). On occasion, however, you may want 
only a low-resolution version of your images in the EPS file. For 
example, let’s say you were going to rasterize the EPS in Pho-
toshop in order to save it as a GIF or JPEG and place it on the 
Web; there’s no need for the full-resolution images, so you could 
choose Proxy from the Send Data pop-up menu. 
▶OPI Image Replacement. Turn this option on to have InDesign 
perform OPI image replacement as you export the EPS. If you’re 
exporting a page containing EPS graphics with OPI image links, 
you’ll probably need to turn this option on (unless your EPS will 
later be processed by an OPI server).
▶Omit For OPI. To keep InDesign from including a certain type 
of imported graphic file in the EPS, turn on the correspond-
ing option in the Omit section (to omit placed TIFF images, for 
example, turn on the Bitmapped Images option). We discuss 
OPI in more detail in Chapter 11, “Printing.”
▶Transparency Flattener. In order for transparency effects to 
print on most devices, InDesign must “flatten” them. We discuss 
flattening and transparency flattening styles in great detail in 
Chapter 11, “Printing.” Suffice it to say that you can choose a flat-
tener style here, as well as tell InDesign to ignore any flattener 
style spread overrides that you (or someone else) may have made 
in the document (by turning on Ignore Spread Overrides). 
▶Ink Manager. The Ink Manager manages how colors trap with 
each other and how spot colors interact (for instance, you can 
use the Ink Manager to alias one spot color to another). We 
cover the Ink Manager in Chapter 10, “Color.”
Exporting PDF for Printing
InDesign can export Adobe Acrobat Portable Document Format 
files (what normal people call “PDF”), which can be used for remote 
printing, electronic distribution, or as a graphic you can place in 
InDesign or other programs.
Exporting to PDF is two separate options: Adobe PDF (Print) and 
Adobe PDF (Interactive). We’ll cover exporting to interactive PDF in 
Chapter 13, “Digital Publishing.”

516     6
InDesign doesn’t need to use the Acrobat Distiller (or the Distiller 
Assistant) to create PDF files. If you want to use Distiller to make 
PDF files instead of creating them directly using the Export feature, 
use the Print dialog box to write PostScript to disk first (we discuss 
how to do that in Chapter 11, “Printing”). 
You export a PDF by selecting Export from the File menu and 
choosing Adobe PDF (Print) from the Format or Save as Type 
pop-up menu. The Export Adobe PDF dialog box contains seven 
panes for setting PDF export options. Remember that in all paned 
dialog boxes, you can jump to the second pane by pressing Com-
mand-2/Ctrl-2, the third pane with Command-3/Ctrl-3, and so on.
Above all these panes sits the Adobe PDF Preset pop-up menu, 
which lets you select an export preset (each of which is a collection of 
various export options). These styles are basically identical to those 
found in Illustrator and Distiller. We discuss creating your own in 
“Defining a PDF Export Preset,” later in this chapter.
The General pane of the Export PDF dialog box (see Figure 7-24) is a 
hodge-podge of options.
Standard (PDF/X). InDesign fully supports several important inter-
national ISO standards, including PDF/X-1a and PDF/X-4. You can 
select either of these from the Standard pop-up menu or the Preset 
menu. However, if you’re going to use PDF/X, we strongly recom-
mend you choose from the Preset menu instead of the Standard 
menu—otherwise, it’s easy to make a PDF/X file that, while techni-
cally valid, will make the recipient of the file unhappy. 
The PDF/X-1a preset is for a straight CMYK-only (or CMYK plus 
spot color) workflow, and is relatively popular in the United States. 
PDF/X-3 is used in color managed workflows, especially in Europe, 
because they can include RGB and Lab color data, too.
PDF/X-4 is similar to PDF/X-3, but with an important twist: 
While PDF/X-3 is based on the Acrobat 4 format, PDF/X-4 is based 
on Acrobat 5. As we point out below, Acrobat 5 (PDF 1.4) supports 
transparency, so it doesn’t require flattening. That’s why PDF/X-4 is 
the preferred format when printing to a printer with a PDF RIP, such 
as one with the Adobe PDF Print Engine.
Both of these standards aren’t some weird, proprietary flavor of 
PDF; they’re just regular PDF files that specify the sorts of things 
that can be included. For example, all fonts must be embedded in a 
PDF/X-1a file. Note that you can make a PDF/X compliant PDF file 
without choosing from the Standard or Preset pop-up menus; these 
just make it easier.
General

 7. m  x 517
Figure 7-24
Export PDF Options, 
General Pane
Compatibility. Who is your audience for this PDF file? Acrobat X 
has been out for awhile now, so we usually assume that most profes-
sionals have it but many of the general public may only have Acrobat 
5 (or the free Acrobat 5 Reader). If there’s any chance your recipient 
only has Acrobat 4, choose Acrobat 4 from the Compatibility pop-up 
menu. The PDF version numbering can be confusing: Version 1.3 is 
Acrobat 4, 1.4 is Acrobat 5, 1.5 is Acrobat 6, version 1.6 is Acrobat 7, 
and version 1.8 is Acrobat 8, Acrobat 9, and Acrobat X.
There’s another reason you want to pay attention here: If you have 
used any transparency effects in your document, the Compatibility 
pop-up menu controls who does the flattening. Choosing Acrobat 4 
means you want InDesign to flatten the file (see “Transparency Flat-
tener” later in this section, and “Printing Transparency” in Chap-
ter 11, “Printing”). Later Acrobat versions can read the unflattened 
transparency effects. If we’re sending files to our printer, then we’d 
much rather send them Acrobat 6 or later PDF files.
Page Ranges. Which pages do you want to export? Just as in the Gen-
eral pane of the Print dialog box, you can export all document pages 
(click the All option) or specify individual page ranges (135-182) or 
noncontiguous pages (3, 7, 22) in the Range field. Note that unless 
you have Absolute Numbering selected in the General pane of the 
Preferences dialog box, you’ll need to type page ranges with their 

518     6
actual names. For instance, if you want to export the first four pages 
and you’re using roman numerals, you’ll have to type “i-iv”. If you’ve 
specified a page number prefix, like “A”, you’ll have to include that in 
the Range field, too.
Reader’s Spreads. When you turn on the Spreads option, InDesign 
exports each spread in the page range you’ve specified (see above) as 
a single page of the exported PDF. This is called “reader’s spreads” 
because the spread appears as it would to a reader flipping through a 
book or magazine. This does not create “printer spreads,” which you 
need to print a saddle-stitched booklet. You need a separate plug-
in to do that. Personally, when we want to view a PDF in reader’s 
spreads, we don’t turn on this feature; we just turn on the Facing 
option in Acrobat’s View menu—the effect is basically the same.
Embed Page Thumbnails. Creates a preview image, or “thumbnail” 
of each page or spread (if you’re exporting reader’s spreads) you 
export. You can display thumbnails when you view the PDF using 
Acrobat or Acrobat Reader. They increase the size of the file.
Optimize for Fast Web View. The key word here is “Web.” The only 
time you’d want to turn this on is when you’re creating a docu-
ment that will only be viewed on the Web. When this option is off, 
InDesign includes repeated objects (such as objects from master 
pages) as individual objects on each page of the PDF. When you 
choose Optimize PDF, InDesign exports a single instance of each 
repeated item for the entire PDF. When the item appears on a page 
in the PDF, InDesign includes a reference to the “master” item. This 
reduces the file size of the PDF without changing the appearance of 
the exported pages. When this option is on, InDesign also overrides 
the settings in the Compression pane with its own Web-appropriate 
settings, and restructures the file so that it can be downloaded one 
page at a time from a Web server rather than having to download the 
whole megillah.
Create Tagged PDF. Most people expect their PDF files to always 
appear just as they do in InDesign—each line of text ending in the 
same position on the page. But what if someone who is blind wants 
to read your document with a Braille reader? What if someone wants 
to see your PDF on their iPhone or other mobile device? In that case, 
it would be very helpful if the PDF included some “intelligence” or 
“accessibility” in the form of tags that—behind the scenes—declare 
this to be a paragraph that can reflow as necessary, that thing in the 

 7. m  x 519
upper corner of the page to be a page number that doesn’t have to 
appear on a mobile device, and so on.
If you predict that your PDF file might show up in a non-tradi-
tional reader, turn on the Create Tagged PDF checkbox. 
Note that inside the PDF these tags are actually written in XML, 
and any tags you’ve applied with the Tags panel (see “XML,” later in 
this chapter) will appear in the PDF, too. This offers some interesting 
side effects. For example, if you create a tag named “Artifact” in the 
Tags panel and then apply it to a text frame, Acrobat considers the 
object irrelevant and not part of the text flow when reading the PDF 
out loud or displaying it on some mobile devices. That’s perfect for 
text frames such as running heads and page numbers.
If you really want your documents to be accessible (especially to 
be “Section 508” compliant), you will likely need to do a lot more 
clean-up work on them using the Object Export Options dialog box 
as well as style mapping, described near the end of this PDF section.
View PDF after Exporting. When you turn this option on, InDesign 
opens the file in Acrobat after exporting the PDF.
Create Acrobat Layers. Acrobat 6 introduced the idea of hiding and 
showing layers within a PDF file. If you turn on the Create Acrobat 
Layers checkbox, all your InDesign document’s layers (even hidden 
layers) are converted into Acrobat layers and can be controlled from 
within Acrobat. In a stroke of brilliance, even the page marks (like 
crop and registration marks) are put on their own layer. Obviously, 
this only works when exporting in the Acrobat 6 (PDF 1.5) format 
or later.
Export Layers. Normally, an object will only appear in your PDF 
if it’s on a layer that is both visible and printable—that is, the Show 
Layer and Print Layer checkboxes are both enabled in the Layer 
Options dialog box. However, you can override this by choosing 
either All Layers or Visible Layers from the Export Layers pop-up 
menu. The former prints everything, even objects on hidden or non-
printing layers. That’s nice when you forget to turn on hidden layers 
before starting the PDF export process. The latter option prints all 
visible layers (whether they’re “printable” or not).
Bookmarks. If you’ve used the table of contents feature (which we 
discuss in Chapter 8, “Long Documents”), you can tell InDesign to 
automatically build bookmarks for your PDF file based on the table 
of contents. Just turn on the Include Bookmarks checkbox. Or, if you 

520     6
used the Bookmarks panel to add custom bookmarks to your docu-
ment (see Chapter 13, “Interactive Documents”) you have to turn 
this checkbox on to actually see them in the PDF file. Again, this is a 
feature suitable for PDFs destined for onscreen viewing, not prepress.
Hyperlinks. You can use the Hyperlinks panel to add as many 
hyperlinks to your document as you want, but unless you turn on 
this checkbox they won’t appear in your PDF file. When you turn 
this option on, InDesign also creates hyperlinks in your table of 
contents and indexes (see Chapter 8, “Long Documents,” for more 
on these features). Of course, it’s not really appropriate to include 
hyperlinks when sending off a PDF for high-resolution printing. See 
Chapter 13, “Interactive Documents,” for more on hyperlinks.
Non-printing Objects. Ordinarily, nonprinting objects (items for 
which you’ve turned on the Non-printing checkbox in the Attributes 
panel) won’t appear in exported PDF files. You can force them to 
export (overriding the Attributes panel) by turning on the Export 
Non-printing Objects checkbox in the Export PDF dialog box. Why 
would you do this? We bet someone can think of a good reason.
Visible Guides and Grids. If you turn on this export option, InDesign 
exports all visible guides (margins, ruler guides, baseline guides, and 
so on), which may be helpful for designers who are collaborating on a 
project. The only guide type that doesn’t export is the document grid 
(even if it’s visible).
Interactive Elements. If your document contains buttons, movies, or 
sounds and you want them to be active in the PDF document, you’ll 
want to export using the Adobe PDF (Interactive) option. (See Chap-
ter 13, “Interactive Documents.”) If these interactive items appear in 
the PDF you’re exporting for printing purposes, you need to decide 
whether you want to include or leave out the appearance of the inter-
active items.
If you need a printable document that also includes interactive 
items, you’ll probably want to place the interactive items on one layer 
and printable substitutes on a different layer. Then show/hide these 
layers and export two PDF versions.
The options in the Compression pane define the compression and/
or sampling changes applied to the images in your publication as it’s 
exported as a PDF. Compression is almost always a good thing, but 
you need to choose your compression options carefully, depending 
Compression

 7. m  x 521
on where your PDF is headed. PDFs for onscreen viewing can handle 
more compression, and those destined for the Web typically need
a lot of compression to keep file sizes down. A PDF file that you’re 
sending to a printer for high-resolution output requires very little 
compression, if any (unless you have to e-mail the file or it won’t oth-
erwise fit on a disk for transport).
Bitmapped images are almost always the largest part of a docu-
ment, so PDF’s compression techniques focus on them. InDesign has 
two methods of making your files smaller: lowering the resolution of 
the images and encoding the image data in clever ways.
Resampling. If you place a 300 ppi CMYK image into your docu-
ment and scale it down 50 percent, the effective resolution is 600 ppi 
(because twice as many pixels fit in the same amount of space). When 
you export your PDF, you can ask InDesign to resample the image 
to a more reasonable resolution. If your final output is to a desktop 
inkjet printer, you rarely need more than 300 or 400 ppi. Printing on 
a laser printer or imagesetter (or any device that uses halftone screens, 
as explained earlier in this chapter) requires no more than 1.5 to 2.0 
times the halftone screen frequency—a 150 lpi halftone rarely needs 
more than 225 ppi of data to print beautifully. 
Monochrome (or bi-level) bitmapped images do not have halftone 
screens applied to them by the printer and, therefore, are not sub-
ject to the same rules that govern grayscale and color images. In a 
monochrome image, you never need more resolution than the reso-
lution of the printer. If your final output is your 600 dpi laser printer, 
you certainly never need more than 600 dpi monochrome images. 
Imagesetter output rarely requires more than 1200 dpi (though for 
a sheetfed art book, we might bump this up to 1500 dpi). Printing 
on uncoated stock requires less resolution because of halftone spots 
spreading; you can easily get away with 800 dpi for newsprint.
If you’re exporting a PDF for online viewing, you can get away 
with 72 or 96 ppi, unless you want the viewer to be able to zoom in 
on the image and not see pixelation. 
InDesign only downsamples when exporting PDF files. That is, it 
throws away data to decrease image resolution (it won’t add resolu-
tion). Downsampling works by turning an area of pixels into a single, 
larger pixel, so the method you use to get that larger pixel is cru-
cial. When you downsample an image, InDesign takes the average 
color or gray value of all of the pixels in the area to set the color or 
gray value of the larger pixel. When you subsample an image, on the 
other hand, InDesign uses the color or gray value of a single pixel 
in the middle of the area. This means that subsampling is a much 

522     6
less accurate resampling method than downsampling, and shouldn’t 
be used for anything other than proofing your document. We rarely 
use Average Downsampling or Subsampling; instead, the best option 
is Bicubic Downsampling, which provides the smoothest sampling 
algorithm.
Ultimately, however, we much prefer to just get the resolution 
right in Photoshop before placing the image, rather than relying on 
InDesign to downsample it. That way, we can see the result of resam-
pling on the screen, and undo the change if necessary. Otherwise, we 
won’t see the result until we view the PDF. 
Compression. The PDF specification supports both ZIP and JPEG 
encoding for grayscale and color bitmapped images; and CCITT 
Group 3, CCITT Group 4, ZIP, and Run Length encodings for mono-
chrome bitmapped images. In Acrobat 6 or later, you can even use 
JPEG 2000. It’s enough to make your head spin! Which method 
should you use? Again, it depends on where the PDF is going and 
what kind of images you’ve got.
Scanned images generally compress better with JPEG, and syn-
thetic images (such as screen captures that have a lot of solid colors 
and sharp edges) compress better with ZIP. However, JPEG compres-
sion, even at its highest quality setting, removes data from an image 
file (it’s “lossy”). Most designers find that some JPEG compression 
for scanned photographs is an acceptable compromise, as it results in 
dramatically smaller file sizes. JPEG 2000 compresses even smaller 
and results in less degradation. But, ultimately, when we don’t need 
to worry about file size, we prefer to use ZIP for everything because 
ZIP compression does not discard image data (it’s “lossless”). You 
never know when you might need that image data!
If we are using JPEG, then we make a choice from the Image 
Quality pop-up menu: You get the best compression with Minimum 
quality, but who wants to look at the results? Unfortunately, the only 
good way to choose from among the Image Quality options is to save 
two or three to disk, look at them in Acrobat, and compare their file 
sizes.
Exporting PDF files for print is easier: We usually just choose ZIP 
from the Compression pop-up menu for both color and grayscale 
images. However, if you need to save some disk space (again, like if 
you’re emailing the file to your output provider), it’s usually reason-
able to use Automatic (JPEG) compression with the Image Quality 
pop-up menu set to Maximum quality—the resulting JPEG images 
are usually indistinguishable from uncompressed images. Or, if you 

 7. m  x 523
know that the recipient has Acrobat 6 or later, then consider using 
the better-quality JPEG 2000 compression.
As for monochrome image encoding, it’s rare to see much of a dif-
ference among the choices (they’re all lossless and provide reasonable 
compression). We usually use Run Length or ZIP encoding, but only 
because we don’t like the sound of CCITT. Say it aloud a few times, 
and you’ll see what we mean.
Compress Text and Line Art. The Compress Text and Line Art 
option applies to text and paths you’ve drawn in InDesign—we 
cannot think of any reason you should turn this option off.
Crop Image Data to Frames. When you turn this option on, 
InDesign sends only the visible parts of the images in the publica-
tion. This sounds reasonable, and can result in a much smaller file 
for publications that contain cropped images. But it also means you 
won’t have access to the image data if you edit the image in the PDF. 
Most of the time, this isn’t a problem, but you might want to turn 
this option off if your PDF includes images that bleed (so that you or 
your service provider can later increase the bleed area, if necessary).
In a desperate attempt at reducing the redundancy in our overly 
complex lives, we’re going to skip a detailed analysis of the Marks 
and Bleeds pane of the Export PDF dialog box and instead point out 
that these features are exactly the same as the features in the Print 
dialog box (see “Marks and Bleeds” in Chapter 11, “Printing”).
The Output pane lets you control how color in your document is 
handled. A cool new feature is the ability to export a grayscale PDF.
Color Conversion. Choose No Color Conversion from the Color 
Conversion pop-up menu if you don’t want InDesign to mess with 
your colors and just write them into the PDF as specified. That is, 
RGB colors will remain RGB, and CMYK colors will stay CMYK. 
This is what you get with PDF/X3 or PDF/X4, because in that stan-
dard, colors are managed at print time from Acrobat.
If you do want InDesign to manage the colors, you should choose 
either Convert to Destination or Convert to Destination (Preserve 
Numbers). In either case, all RGB colors get converted to CMYK 
based on the CMYK profile you choose in the Destination pop-up 
menu. However, when you choose the “preserve numbers” option, 
any CMYK colors that you have specified in your InDesign document 
Marks and Bleeds
Output

524     6
(such as colors you have applied to text or frames) are left alone—that 
is, they are not converted from your document CMYK profile to the 
destination CMYK profile. For example, this stops 100-percent black 
text changing to four-color CMYK text, or 100-percent cyan chang-
ing to a mix of cyan, yellow, and magenta (which was a problem in 
earlier versions of InDesign).
However, whether or not you choose “preserve numbers,” if your 
CMYK image is tagged with a color profile and that profile was 
preserved when you placed it (which is typically not the case with 
CMYK images), it will get cross-converted to the new CMYK space. 
(See Chapter 10, “Color,” for more on color management.)
If you choose Convert to Destination, the Destination pop-up 
menu includes several options for printing grayscale documents.
Note that choosing CMYK does not separate spot colors to 
CMYK in the PDF file; if you want to do that, you should use the 
Ink Manager (see below). Also note that you can choose a grayscale 
option for your PDF.
If you have turned off color management, then you have only 
three choices: do nothing, Convert to CMYK, or Convert to RGB. 
Either way, InDesign uses its internal RGB-to-CMYK conversion 
method (the default CMYK space is based on SWOP inks—techni-
cally, it’s the default CMYK settings from Photoshop 5; the default 
RGB space is AdobeRGB). 
Profile Inclusion Policy. When you’re converting colors, you can tell 
InDesign whether or not to embed ICC profiles into your PDF file. In 
a color-managed workflow, it is important to include profiles, or else 
other programs (or InDesign, if you’re re-importing the PDF into an-
other InDesign document) cannot color-manage the file. However, if 
you are simply creating a CMYK files (such as a PDF/X1-a workflow), 
there is no reason to include your profiles. Also, turn this option off 
when exporting PDF files for the Web, since the Web isn’t color man-
aged and ICC Profiles increase file size.
Simulate Overprint. Acrobat 4 has no way to preview overprint-
ing instructions, so if you need to use Acrobat 4 and you need to 
proof overprinting, you can turn on the Simulate Overprint option. 
Because everyone we know is using a newer version of Acrobat, we 
rarely have to worry about this feature. Note that Simulate Overprint 
should not be used for final artwork, as it radically changes your 
document (spot colors are changed to process colors, for instance). 
It’s just a low-end proofing tool.

 7. m  x 525
Ink Manager. Have a spot color that should be a process color? Or 
two different spot colors that really should be one? The Ink Manager 
handles these kinds of troubles (for more information, see “Ink Man-
ager” in Chapter 10, “Color”).
PDF/X. If you have chosen one of the PDF/X options in the Stan-
dards pop-up menu at the top of the dialog box, InDesign offers you 
the option of specifying the final output destination profile in the 
mysteriously named Output Intent Profile Name. Fortunately, this is 
almost always exactly the same as the Destination profile you chose 
above. You can also add a short description in the Output Condition 
Name field if you think anyone downstream at the printer will care 
(seems doubtful to us). If the profile you choose is registered some-
where (such as the International Color Consortium at www.color.
org), you can specify a name and URL in the final two fields of this 
section. That information simply gets embedded in the PDF file so 
someone can later decode what you’ve done.
There’s nothing particularly “advanced” about any of the options in 
this pane, and while you probably won’t spend much time messing 
with these settings, it is important to understand what they do and 
why you’d want to change them.
Subset Fonts. InDesign can embed font information in exported 
PDF files, so it doesn’t matter whether the person you give the file 
to has the font. The exception to this is when the font manufacturer 
has specified that their font should not be embedded. Many Asian 
fonts cannot be embedded, for instance. This is a political and legal 
hot-potato that we’re not going to touch. If there isn’t a lot of text in 
that font, convert the text to outlines before printing or exporting.
Anyway, usually the question isn’t whether to embed your fonts, 
but rather how much of the font you want to embed. The value you 
enter in the Subset Fonts field sets the threshold at which InDesign 
includes complete fonts in the PDF you’re exporting. When you 
“subset” a font, you include only those characters that are used on 
the pages you’re exporting, which keeps file size down. Enter 100 
to force InDesign to always save a subset of the font’s characters, or 
enter 0 to force InDesign to include the entire font (or fonts) in the 
PDF. You can also enter some other percentage value to strike a bal-
ance between the two extremes, but we generally find that either we 
want subsets or we don’t.
Advanced

526     6
One reason you might not want to subset your fonts is to maxi-
mize the potential for editing the PDF later. Let’s say you subset your 
fonts, and later need your output provider to edit the PDF (perhaps 
to change a typo). If they need to change “karma” to “dharma” and 
you haven’t used the letter “d” elsewhere in the document, they can’t 
do it (unless they have the font installed on their system).
Another reason not to use font subsetting is if you expect users 
on a platform other than your own to view and print your exported 
PDFs. We know, it’s supposed to work. In our experience, it doesn’t. 
Platform-specific character encoding and printer driver issues always 
seem to cause problems when we subset fonts in a PDF. At least one 
of the authors (Ole!) feels strongly that font subsetting should always 
be avoided for this reason.
Omit for OPI. In an OPI workflow, the high-resolution image data 
is kept separate from your document until it’s merged in at the last 
minute before printing. If you have an OPI server capable of pro-
cessing PDF files with OPI comments, you can keep InDesign from 
including a certain type of imported graphic file in the PDF file by 
turning on the corresponding option in the Omit section (to omit 
placed EPS images, for example, turn on the EPS option). We discuss 
OPI in more detail in Chapter 11, “Printing.”
Transparency Flattener. While Acrobat 5 and later can handle 
InDesign’s transparency effects, Acrobat 4 is clueless. So if you’re 
exporting an Acrobat 4 file, InDesign must “flatten” all transparency 
effects. We discuss flattening and the Transparency Flattener Style 
pop-up menu in great detail in Chapter 11, “Printing.” Suffice it to 
say that you can choose a flattener style here, as well as tell InDesign 
to ignore any flattener style spread overrides you may have made in 
the document (by turning on the Ignore Spread Overrides checkbox).
Job Definition Format. The Job Definition Format (JDF) is talked 
about a lot, but most people don’t realize that it all just comes down 
to adding some metadata about your document to the file (in this 
case, the PDF file). Adobe wants you to think that InDesign directly 
supports JDF, but if you turn on the Create JDF File Using Acro-
bat checkbox, all you really get is a regular PDF file plus a tiny JDF 
file in the same folder. Plus, InDesign launches Acrobat Professional 
(which you have to have installed to make use of this feature) and lets 
you use its JDF tools to fill in the details—such as who is the primary 
contact person for this print job, what kind of paper stock should it 
be printed on, and so on.

 7. m  x 527
Digital Rights Management (DRM) is all the rage these days. The 
basic issue is who gets to do what with your content? When it comes 
to PDF files, you have several DRM options set out in the Security 
pane of the Export PDF dialog box (see Figure 7-25). 
In our view, most of the PDF security features are for PDFs you’re 
exporting for online distribution (that is, the PDF is the final product 
of your production process), and not for prepress use. We might have 
our paranoid moments, but our practicality gets the better of them 
most of the time—and it’s just not practical to lock up a PDF that’s 
headed for printing and prepress work. Think about it—do you want 
your imagesetting service bureau calling you at four in the morning 
to ask for the password you used to lock up a PDF? 
On the other hand, if you’re exporting a PDF to send to a client 
or a printer who you don’t have a close relationship with, you might 
want to activate some of these settings.
Passwords. You can give your PDF file two different passwords: one 
to limit who can open the document (Document Open Password), 
and one to limit who can change the security settings in the docu-
ment (Permissions Password). The two passwords must be different. 
If you’re going to turn on any security settings in the PDF—even 
if you don’t require a Document Open Password—then we strongly 
encourage you to provide a Permissions Password (just in case you 
need to make changes to the PDF later).
Security
Figure 7-25
Export PDF Options, 
Security Pane

528     6
Note that if you choose to export in Acrobat 4 (PDF 1.3) format, 
InDesign only uses the older 40-bit RC4 encryption, which isn’t 
nearly as powerful as the newer 128-bit encryption—you get better 
encryption when you export as Acrobat 5 or later. 
Permissions. The two pop-up menus and three checkboxes in the 
Permissions settings are self-explanatory: They let you control 
whether the file can be printed (or at what resolution), whether it 
can be altered, whether content can be copied or extracted, whether 
screen readers for the visually impaired should be supported, and 
whether your metadata should be readable by databases or search 
systems (see “File Info and Metadata,” earlier in this chapter). These 
are useful if you’re sending a file to a client and you don’t want them 
to do anything but add comments, or if you’re sending a file to be 
printed, and you want to make sure the output provider doesn’t 
“accidentally” change anything. But the security settings can play 
havoc with some non-Adobe PDF readers (like Mac OS X Preview).
The last pane of the Export PDF dialog box, Summary, lists all the 
settings in all the tabs in one long text list. Do we ever sit and read 
through this? Nope. However, it’s nice that you can click the Save 
Summary button to save this list to disk as a text file. If you’re export-
ing a PDF file to send to someone else, consider including this sum-
mary along with it, so that they know how you set up the dialog box 
(and can see whether you did anything inappropriate). You can also 
use this saved summary as a log of what you did to later refer to if 
something prints in an unexpected fashion.
PDF export presets are like paragraph styles—they’re bundles of 
attributes that can be applied in a single action. Almost all of the 
attributes in the PDF Export dialog box are included in a PDF export 
preset (the Ink Manager and the Security settings aren’t). It’s easy to 
create a PDF export preset; set up the Export PDF dialog box with 
the options the way you want them, click the Save Preset button at 
the bottom of the dialog box, and then give the style a name. You can 
then go ahead and export, or just cancel out of the Export PDF dialog 
box (if you just wanted to set up the preset without exporting).
InDesign also has a second method for making PDF export pre-
sets, though we find it slightly more cumbersome (see Figure 7-26).
1. Choose Define from the Adobe PDF Presets submenu, under the 
File menu. InDesign displays the Adobe PDF Presets dialog box 
with a list of the current PDF export presets.
Summary
Defining a PDF   
Export Preset

 7. m  x 529
2. Click the New button. InDesign displays the New PDF Export 
Preset dialog box, but with a few differences: there’s a Name field 
at the top, there’s no Security pane, and Ink Manager and page 
ranges are grayed out. Note that if you select an export preset 
before clicking New, this dialog box will be based on the preset 
you selected.
3. Enter a name for the PDF export preset in the Name field, then 
set up the PDF export options using the panes of the dialog box. 
Click the OK button when you’re done. 
To export a PDF using the settings in a PDF export preset, choose 
the preset name from the Adobe PDF Preset pop-up menu in the 
Export PDF dialog box. InDesign applies the settings of the PDF 
export preset to the controls in the Export PDF dialog box. You’ll 
still need to enter a page range in the General pane—the export 
preset does not include that information.
Note that you can also make PDF presets in Acrobat Distiller or 
any other Creative Suite application. InDesign and the other Cre-
ative Suite programs share PDF presets, which makes creating con-
sistent PDF files much easier.
You can use the Adobe PDF Presets dialog box to add, delete, rename, 
edit, and import or export PDF export presets.
▶To delete a PDF export preset, select the preset name  
and click the Delete button. (You can’t delete the default  
presets: High Quality Print, PDF/X-1a, PDF/X-3, PDF/X-4, 
Press Quality, and Smallest File Size.)
▶To export PDF export presets, select the presets and click the 
Save As button. InDesign displays the Save PDF Export Presets 
dialog box. Specify a file name and location and click the OK 
button.
Managing PDF   
Export Presets
Choose Define from the 
Adobe PDF Presets sub-
menu, under the File menu. 
InDesign displays the Adobe 
PDF Presets dialog box.
Click the New button.
Figure 7-26
Defining a PDF  
Export Preset

530     6
▶To import a PDF export preset or set of presets, open the Adobe 
PDF Presets dialog box and click the Load button. InDesign 
displays the Load PDF Export Presets dialog box. Locate and 
select a file containing the saved presets and click the OK button. 
If the PDF export presets you’re importing already exist in the 
publication, InDesign will create copies (InDesign appends a 
number—usually “1”—to the duplicate presets).
▶To edit or rename a PDF export preset, select the preset name in 
the Adobe PDF Presets dialog box, then click the Edit button. 
Some PDF documents need to be accessible. An accessible PDF is one 
that allows the content of a PDF document to be read aloud using a 
screen reader to people with disabilities. In fact, the US government 
mandates accessibility for many documents, such as with Section 
508 of the US Rehabilitation Act.
To help make PDF documents accessible, InDesign can automati-
cally add tags for tables (and nested tables), bullet and numbering 
lists, footnotes, and hyperlinks. Two new features also improve PDF 
accessibility: Object Export Options and mapping styles for tagging.
Select an image, and choose Object Export Options from the 
Object menu. First, let’s look at the Alt Text pane (see Figure 7-27). 
Alt text is short for “alternative text.” When a screen reader encoun-
ters an image in a document, it reads the Alt text aloud. For example, 
when a screen reader comes across an image of a Winston Churchill 
portrait, it could say, “Painting of Winston Churchill.” You need to 
specify the Alt text. Otherwise, the reader skips the image.
The Alt Text pane of the Object Export Options dialog box lets 
you determine which metadata field should be used to capture the 
Alt Text, or it lets you type your own custom text. The “From Struc-
ture” option gets the Alt text from the Figure element in the Struc-
ture pane. 
The Object Export Options dialog box is modeless, so you can 
specify settings for each object in your document, one after the other, 
without closing the dialog box.
The Object Export Options also has a Tagged PDF pane that lets 
you determine the source of the PDF tags. You can use tags from 
the Structure pane; you can tag the object as “Artifact,” which basi-
cally tells the screen reader the object has no important meaning and 
should be ignored; or you can base the tag on the object—either a 
“story” or “figure,” depending on the object.
For Actual Text Source, you have the same choices as those that 
appear for Alt Text. Actual text is used for text that is actually an 
Object Export Options 
for PDF

 7. m  x 531
image, such as title text converted to outlines, imported images with 
text, or text frames that have been rasterized for eBooks.
Tagged PDF files—that is, PDF files for which the Tagged PDF 
checkbox has been turned on in the Export PDF dialog—have inter-
nal tags on each paragraph, and those tags are quite similar to HTML 
tags. That is, you might use an H1 tag for a heading and a <p> tag for 
a paragraph. These tags pass along the document’s structural infor-
mation to screen readers, mobile devices, and applications such as 
Acrobat. 
The Export Tagging section of the Paragraph Style Options dialog 
box (when you’re creating or editing a paragraph style) lets you spec-
ify which PDF tag is applied to paragraph text. For example, you 
might apply the H1 tag to your “Heading 1” style.
You can also map all your styles at once by choosing Edit All 
Export Tags from the Paragraph Styles panel menu and selecting 
PDF (see Figure 7-28).
For Tagged PDF, the tags automatically define the Role Map in 
Acrobat. Note that tagged PDF does not support any character-level 
tagging, so this option is not available for character styles.
When exporting the PDF, remember to select the “Create Tagged 
PDF” option.
Mapping Styles for 
PDF Tagging
Figure 7-27
Object Export Options
Figure 7-28
Mapping Styles for PDF 
Export Tagging

532     6
InDesign Markup Language (IDML)
What if you could describe your whole InDesign document as a com-
pact text file? That’s what the InDesign Markup Language (IDML) 
formats is: XML representations of each and every object on every 
page of your document, as well as the styles, colors, margins, and all 
other document information. You can export an IDML file, send it 
to someone else, and, when they open it, InDesign creates a new file 
that looks exactly like the one you made. Note that IDML replaced 
the InDesign Interchange (INX) option available in versions before 
InDesign CS5.
Why would you want to do this? One reason is backward com-
patibility—IDML is the only way that you can “save back” from 
InDesign CS6 to InDesign CS4, CS5, or CS5.5. Unfortunately, you 
cannot open IDML files in InDesign CS3 or earlier. Instead, you’d 
have to open it in CS4, then export as INX to save down from there.
Another reason to use IDML is to remove corrupt data that may 
have snuck into your file. For example, some folks have reported 
that they cannot export to PDF or delete unwanted swatches in their 
Swatches panel. In most cases, simply exporting the document in the 
IDML format and then reopening it clears out the trouble.
One last reason you might want to use IDML: It’s really easy 
to edit or even create these files, without ever using InDesign. For 
example, a database could be programmed to write IDML files that 
turn into fully-formatted InDesign documents when you open them. 
We talk more about that in the “XML” chapter posted on the web.
To export an IDML file, choose Export from the File menu, then 
select InDesign Markup (IDML) from the pop-up menu. Or, choose 
Save As from the File menu, and select InDesign CS4 or Later from 
the pop-up menu. You can open an IDML file just as you would open 
any other InDesign document.
Snippets
What happens when you select one or more objects on your page and 
drag them to the desktop? InDesign creates a snippet file with the 
.IDMS file name extension. A snippet is a file written in the InDesign 
Markup language that describes one or more objects from a page 
or spread. (A snippet is similar to an IDML file, which describes an 
entire document in XML language.)
You can also create a snippet file by dragging one or more objects 
into Adobe Bridge, or by selecting and exporting the objects on the 

 7. m  x 533
page and choosing InDesign Snippet from the pop-up menu in the 
Export dialog box.
Snippets are great for sending InDesign objects to someone else 
via email, or for saving objects that you want to reuse. In fact, the 
Library feature (see Chapter 1, “Workspace”) actually saves objects 
internally as snippets. Because snippets are just small XML files, you 
could easily place a bunch of them in a database, and then use some 
program to build your InDesign pages on the fly by pulling just the 
snippets you need from the database.
To place a snippet into your InDesign file, you can use the Place 
command from the File menu to place IDMS files (or INDS from 
previous InDesign versions), or simply drag the snippet file in from 
the desktop, Bridge, or Mini Bridge. If you use File > Place while 
the text cursor is inside a text frame, the snippet will automatically 
become an anchored object (as long as the snippet defines a single 
object or group of objects).
The position of your newly placed snippet depends on the Snippet 
Import setting in the File Handling pane of the Preferences dialog 
box: You can choose between Position at Cursor Location (wher-
ever you drop it or click to Place it), or Position at Original Loca-
tion (which remembers where it was on the page when you originally 
made it). If you want a snippet to always remember its location, lock 
the position of the objects before creating the snippet file.
Data Merge
It’s hard to be creative when you’re faced with hundreds (or thou-
sands) of pieces of data from a database or spreadsheet that need to 
be formatted. Fortunately, there are tools that can help you automate 
mundane formatting tasks like this, and one of them is built right 
into InDesign: Data Merge. Data Merge is not as powerful as other 
database publishing tools—such as Em Software’s InData or Teacup 
Software’s DataLinker—but it’s better than doing the work by hand.
In order for Data Merge to work, you need two things: a file with 
all the raw, unformatted data; and an InDesign file that has template 
information that says where the data should go and how to format 
it. You’ll also need the Data Merge panel, which you can find in the 
Utilities submenu (under the Window menu).
Virtually every database and spreadsheet program lets you export 
your data as a comma-delimited (.csv) or tab-delimited (.txt) file. The 
Setting up the Data

534     6
difference is in what’s used between each field and record (or column 
and row, in a spreadsheet), but Data Merge can read both. Note that 
if you’re exporting a .csv file and a single cell or field includes one or 
more commas (such as “Yoyodyne, Inc.”), surround that field with 
double straight quotes, or else InDesign will get confused as to which 
comma should be in the text and which one is a delimiter. This is one 
reason we almost always opt for tab-delimited files.
By the way, the first line of the data file must list the names of each 
field. You’ll use these same names in the InDesign template.
Using variable images. You can also import images along with your 
text data by including the file path to each image (on your hard disk) 
as one of the fields. The trick is to place an “at” symbol (@) before 
the field’s name in the first line of the data file (see Figure 7-29). Then, 
when you enter each field, specify a file path to the graphic. File paths 
are written differently between the Mac OS and Windows: In Win-
dows, you need to use backslashes between folder names, while on 
the Mac, you use a colon.
Here’s a trick to make sure you get the pathname right. Insert an 
image in an InDesign document. With the image selected, choose 
Copy Info from the Links panel menu, and then choose Copy Plat-
form Style Path. Then paste it in your data source. Presto!
Once you have your data in a file that InDesign can import, it’s time 
to set up a prototype (or template, or proxy, or whatever you want to 
call it) in InDesign (see Figure 7-30). 
1. Open the Data Merge panel (choose Data Merge from the Auto-
mate submenu, under the Window menu).
2. Choose Select Data Source from the panel menu and pick the 
file you created on your disk. InDesign is smart enough to tell 
whether the text is comma-delimited or tab-delimited, but if you 
felt a strong need to tell it (let’s say the import wasn’t working 
properly and you wanted to check the settings), you could turn 
Setting up the   
Template
Figure 7-29
Setting Up the  
Data File

 7. m  x 535
on the Show Import Options in the dialog box. If the data file 
isn’t set up properly (for instance, if the first line in the data file 
ends with some extra tab characters), you’ll see an error alert.
3. A list of all the data field names appears in the Data Merge 
panel. (This is why the first line of the data file needs to list those 
names.) If something looks terribly wrong, you can always select 
Remove Data Source from the panel menu to reset the panel.
4. Place the flashing text cursor in a text frame and click on one of 
the field names in the panel. InDesign inserts the field name at 
that position, surrounded by double angle brackets. (Or drag the 
field name on top of any frame. If the frame is empty, it becomes 
a text frame and the field name appears in it; if the frame has 
text in it, the field name is appended at the end of that text.) No, 
you cannot just type the field name surrounded by angle brack-
ets—you have to use the panel. 
To place an image label (something that was specified as an 
image path in the data file) as an inline graphic, place the text 
cursor where you want it and click the label in the panel. To 
place an image in its own frame on the page, choose an empty 
frame with the Selection tool before clicking on the image name 
in the Data Merge panel.
Figure 7-30
Creating the  
Data Template
Choose Select Data 
Source from the Data 
Merge panel menu.
InDesign loads the field 
names from the first record 
in the file and displays them 
in the Data Merge panel.
You can drag fields from the Data Merge panel and 
drop them into a frame, or you can position the cursor 
in text and double-click to insert a field name.
Format the field 
names as you would 
any other text.

536     6
5. Continue adding field names until you’ve used all the fields you 
want. You do not have to use all the fields in the data source. You 
can put the fields in as many text frames as you want, even on 
more than one page of your document. You can also put text 
around the field names. For example, you might want to insert a 
<<LastName>> field, followed by a comma and a space, followed 
by a <<FirstName>> field, followed by a paragraph return.
6. Apply text formatting to each field name in the text frame. For 
example, if you want the <<company>> data to appear in bold, 
just select that field name and apply the bold style or a bold char-
acter style or paragraph style.
Using a Master Page. You don’t have to insert the data labels on your 
master page, but we usually do because it makes the final merged 
document more flexible. Specifically, if you need to make a change 
or reimport the data, you can do so from the document InDesign is 
about to create rather than having to go back to this original docu-
ment and more or less start the import process over. However, if you 
do put this stuff on the master page, make sure it’s on the right side 
of a facing page document. For example, you probably want to put it 
on the right-hand page of a master page spread, or else nothing will 
show up on page 1 (which is a right-hand page).
InDesign now knows where the data is and what it’s supposed to look 
like in your InDesign document, so it’s time to merge the two. Turn 
on the Preview checkbox in the Data Merge panel and InDesign 
immediately replaces the data labels with the first record from the 
data file (see Figure 7-31). This way you can see if you set up the tem-
plate correctly. To preview another record, click the Next Record 
button at the bottom of the panel, or type a record number in the 
text field.
When you’re certain you’ve got everything arranged just right, it’s 
time to choose Create Merged Document from the Data Merge panel 
menu (or click the button in the lower-right corner of the panel) to 
create a merged document (see Figure 7-32). Alternately, you can 
skip creating an InDesign document and create a PDF file instead by 
choosing Export to PDF from the panel menu.
InDesign then offers you a number of options in the Create Merged 
Document dialog box.
Records. The first tab of this dialog box lets you choose which 
records you want to import from the data file. You can also choose 
Merging the Data
Data Merge   
Layout Options

 7. m  x 537
whether you want each data record to appear on its own page (choose 
Single Record from the Records per Document Page pop-up menu) 
or whether you want more than one record (like a sheet of mailing 
labels). We’ll cover the more-than-one record choice below.
If you turn on the Generate Overset Text Report with Document 
Creation checkbox, InDesign will save a text file to your hard disk if 
the import process causes any text frames to become overset. That’s 
handy so we generally turn it on. Similarly, we turn on the Alert 
When Images are Missing checkbox, because we want to know if 
something has gone wrong during the import process.
Multiple Record Layout. If you choose Multiple Records from the 
Records per Document Page pop-up menu, InDesign attempts to 
duplicate your page objects in a grid on your page. For example, if 
you’re making name tags for several hundred people, you could 
create one or more text frames on your page, insert the data merge 
labels, and then specify Multiple Records. The Create Merged Docu-
ment dialog box has a Preview Multiple Record Layout checkbox that 
shows you what the layout will look like before you commit to the 
data merge procedure. It takes a little time to process, but it’s well 
worth the wait, as you’ll inevitably find you need to tweak something 
the first time you try it.
You can control how InDesign lays out the frames on your page 
in the Multiple Record Layout tab of the dialog box, including how 
much space you want between the rows and columns. The Margins 
fields here simply overrides those in the Margins and Columns 
dialog box. We wish we could save these settings as a preset to recall 
them quickly later, but no can do.
Figure 7-31
Data Merge Preview
Click the Preview option at the 
bottom of the panel, or choose  
Preview from the Data Merge  
panel menu… 
…and InDesign will display a pre-
view layout of the first record (or any 
other record you specify using the 
controls at the bottom of the panel.

538     6
Figure 7-32
Doing the  
Data Merge
Choose Create Merged Document 
(or click the button at the bottom of 
the Data Merge panel).
InDesign displays the Create Merged 
Document dialog box. Set up the 
data merge using the controls in this 
dialog box and click the OK button.
InDesign creates a new document and merges the 
data from the data file into the data template you 
created, duplicating frames and applying formatting 
as necessary. In this example, we chose to lay out 
multiple records per page. 
The headline is on the master spread—if 
it weren’t, it would have been duplicated 
with everything else.

 7. m  x 539
If you have laid out your initial template with more than one 
frame, InDesign treats them all as a single “group” that gets dupli-
cated multiple times across the page. Also, if you have more than one 
page in your template file, you can’t do multiple record layout (n-up 
layout) because... well, because it’ll just get too confusing.
Options. The Options tab of the Create Merged Document dialog 
box lets you control how Data Merge handles imported images, blank 
lines in the data file, and large numbers of imported records. Choose 
a method from the Fitting pop-up menu to control what happens to 
images that don’t match the frame size you’ve drawn in the template. 
For instance, you might want to choose Fill Frame Proportionally to 
get the largest image possible in the frame, but that will crop out a 
portion of the image if the image height/width ratio isn’t the same as 
the frame. If you want imported images to be placed in the center of 
the frame rather than in the upper-left corner, turn on the Center in 
Frame checkbox. (Of course, if you have no images in your data file, 
then you can ignore both of these.)
If Link Images is disabled, InDesign embeds all the images into 
the document itself. When enabled, InDesign acts as though you 
placed the images, linking them to the file on disk.
What should InDesign do when a whole line ends up being blank? 
For example, let’s say you’re inserting someone’s name on one line, 
their company name on the second line, and their address on the 
third line. If someone isn’t affiliated with a company, then you’d nor-
mally end up with a blank line. However, if you turn on the Remove 
Blank Lines for Empty Fields checkbox, InDesign will simply delete 
that line from the final merged document. Note that this only works 
when there would be no text on that line—even a blank space after 
the text label will foil this feature.
The last option, Page Limit Per Document, lets you control how 
large the final document will be. InDesign will import records 
and keep adding pages until this limit is reached. However, if you 
wanted only single-page InDesign documents, you could change this 
number to 1. (That’s a good way to max out InDesign’s resources and 
possibly cause mayhem.)
Doing the Merge. When you’re confident that all is well and you’ve 
chosen your options wisely, click OK. InDesign creates a new docu-
ment based on the one you built (the template) and the settings you 
made. If your data merge labels were placed on the master page, they 
will also be on the master page of this new document, which will 
allow you to update the data, should the need arise.

540     6
When you first import the data source into the Data Merge panel, 
InDesign creates a link between the InDesign file and the .txt or .csv 
file—you can even see this link in the Links panel. Then, when you 
create the new merged document, it, too, has that link (as long as 
the template fields were sitting on the master page rather than the 
document page). That means if some of the data changes, you don’t 
necessarily have to go back to the original and create a new merged 
file. Instead, you can choose Update Content in Data Fields from the 
Data Merge panel menu. However, this appears to work only when 
the data fields appear in a single text frame—if you used more than 
one text frame, it gives you an error message. We think this is prob-
ably a bug.
If the names or number of fields in each record change in the data 
source (perhaps you decided to export from the database with more 
fields), you should to be able to choose Update Data Source from the 
panel menu. We have never gotten this to work correctly. Unfortu-
nately, it appears that the best solution is to remove all of the data 
fields from your original template, choose Update Data Source (or 
Select Data Source again), and then reapply the data fields manually.
Ultimately, we find Data Merge very handy for small or simple 
jobs, but it’s buggy enough and limited enough that we try not to 
lean too hard on it.
XML
XML is a way to mark up (or tag) information in a text file. Any appli-
cation that can write text files can be used to write XML. Like HTML, 
XML uses tags, such as “<h1>” to mark a piece of text. Unlike HTML, 
XML doesn’t have a limited set of predefined tags. That’s what the 
“extensible” part of the acronym means. You’re not limited to <h1>, 
<h2>, <p>, and so on, as you are in HTML.
The following is an outline of one approach we see for working with 
XML in an InDesign document.
1. Create an InDesign document. You can use empty placeholder 
frames, dummy text, fixed text (text you don’t expect to have in 
the XML data file), or you can mark up an existing document.
2. Load XML tags from an XML file. This doesn’t have to be the file 
containing your data, and it doesn’t even have to be an XML file 
with the same structure as you’ll be using. All it needs to include 
Updating Your Data
About XML Workflow

 7. m  x 541
are the names of the elements you expect to have in the XML 
data you plan to import.
Alternatively, you can create XML tags from scratch. You’ll 
have to remember to make sure that the XML tag names match 
the element names for the XML files you’ll be importing.
3. Apply XML tags to frames and text in your template document.
4. Map styles to XML tags using the Map Tags to Styles dialog box.
5. Import XML into the document. When you do this, the data 
in your XML file (including any graphics specified in the XML 
structure) will appear in your layout.
When you import a new XML file and choose to replace the exist-
ing structure, InDesign will apply the formatting you’ve already 
applied. This makes this workflow particularly useful for setting 
up a document with a repeating publication schedule (newsletters, 
product data sheets, and so on). To make certain that new XML files 
match the layout, you might want to export the XML from the docu-
ment to use as a template for the next iteration of the publication, or 
for use in a Web site or database.
You may also want to add XML tags to a document to determine 
the order of content on a page when you’re exporting a document to 
HTML or EPUB format.
Use the options in the Structure view to create XML elements and 
attributes, associate elements with InDesign page items or text, rear-
range XML elements, and delete XML elements (see Figure 7-33). 
To see a short passage of the text associated with the XML ele-
ments, choose Show Text Snippets from the Structure view menu. 
To see which frames are associated with XML elements, turn on the 
Show Tagged Frames option on the View menu. To see text that’s 
been associated with an XML element, choose Show Tag Markers 
from the Structure submenu of the View menu.
You use the Tags panel to manage XML tags, and to apply tags to 
frames and text. To apply a tag, select something—a frame or a range 
of text—and click a tag in the Tags panel (see Figure 7-34). When you 
apply a tag, InDesign creates an element in the XML structure.
To create an XML tag, follow these steps.
1. Display the Tags panel, if it’s not already visible (choose  
Tags from the Utilities submenu on the Window menu).
2. Click the New Tag button at the bottom of the panel.
Inside the   
Structure View
Using XML Tags

542     6
3. Enter a name for the tag.
To import XML into the structure of an InDesign document, follow 
these steps. If you want to import the XML into a specific XML ele-
ment, select the element first.
1. Choose Import XML from the File menu.
2. Locate and select an XML file to import.
3. Turn on the Show Import Options option (most of the time, we 
think you’ll want to have this option turned on).
4. Click the Open button. InDesign displays the XML Import 
Options dialog box.
5. Make any changes you need in the XML Import Options dialog 
box (see “XML Import Options” in the online version of this 
chapter).
6. Click the OK button. InDesign adds the XML data to  
the document.
When you import XML for the first time, the incoming XML data 
will appear in any page items that have been tagged with the Root 
XML element.
Importing XML
Structure view menu.
Figure 7-33
Structure View
Structure view displaying 
several elements.
These frames have been   
associated with an element 
in the XML structure.
Structure view buttons
Add Attribute
Add Element
Delete Element
Validate

 7. m  x 543
Once you’ve created an XML structure in an InDesign document, 
you can export structure to an XML file. This is a good thing, because 
you can then use the exported XML file as a template for future files.
1. If you want to export a selected element (and all of the elements 
it contains), select the XML element you want to export in the 
Structure view.
2. Choose Export from the File menu. InDesign displays the 
Export dialog box.
3. Choose XML from the Format pop-up menu and enter a  
name for the XML file.
4. Click the Save button. InDesign displays the Export XML  
dialog box.
5. Select an encoding for your exported XML document from the 
Encoding pop-up menu. If you want, you can choose to view 
the XML after exporting (and the browser you want to use for 
Exporting XML
Figure 7-34
Tagging Frames  
and Text
Click a tag in   
the Tags panel.
InDesign tags the frame 
and adds a corresponding   
element to the XML   
structure of the document. 
When Show Tagged Frames 
is on, InDesign highlights   
the frame.
Select a frame.

544     6
that purpose). If you want to export the selected element (if any), 
turn on the Export from Selected Element option.
6. Click the Export button to export the XML file. 
Acrobat PDF documents (PDF version 1.4 and above) can include 
eBook structure data. In essence, these are a defined set of XML tags 
that have a specific meaning to Acrobat.
The easiest way to tag the elements in your document with these 
tags is to choose the Add Untagged Items option from the Structure 
view menu. When you do this, InDesign automatically applies a tag 
named “Article” to untagged text frames and applies the tag “Figure” 
to untagged imported graphics.
You can create tags with these names and apply them. You can 
also use the tag name “Artifact” to mark page items you want to omit 
when the PDF is viewed on small-screen devices.
After you’ve applied these tags, turn on the Include eBook Tags 
option as you export PDF. The PDF will then be set up to reflow when 
displayed by the Acrobat Reader software.
Due to space constraints (we would even find a page count limit of 
2,000 pages to be too confining), we moved most of the XML cover-
age to the web, along with other bonus material:
http://www.peachpit.com/realworldindesigncs6
The web version of the XML chapter includes more detailed cov-
erage of the Structure View and Tags panel, mapping tags, creating 
placeholders for repeating content, XML rules, DTDs, and trans-
forming XML with XSLT. If you’re relying heavily on an XML work-
flow, consider getting a copy of James Maivald’s A Designer’s Guide 
to Adobe InDesign and XML.
The Best of All Possible Worlds
Can you get there from here? When you’re working with InDesign, 
you can almost always export or save files in a form you can use in 
another program, and you can usually produce files in other pro-
grams you can import or open using InDesign.
Someday, we’ll have a more complete, universal, and sophisti-
cated file format for exchanging publications. And the streets will 
be paved with gold, mounted beggars will spend the day ducking 
winged pigs, and the Seattle Mariners will win the World Series.
Exporting Structure 
Tags to PDF
Where to Learn More

545
Long Documents

8
What constitutes a long document? Die-hard denizens of the Frame-
Maker universe insist that if a document isn’t over a thousand pages, 
it’s not a long document. Poster designers, on the other hand, main-
tain that folded flyers and newsletters qualify. 
We’re not sure what our definition of a “long document” is, but we 
think that anyone building a book, a magazine, a newspaper, a jour-
nal, or a catalog—just about any document, really, of any number 
of pages—can benefit from the long document features in InDesign.
There are three features in InDesign that relate directly to pub-
lishing long documents.
▶Books. You can tie multiple documents together into a book, 
which appears in the form of a panel in InDesign. From here, 
you can control page numbering, printing, and synchronize 
document attributes as styles, colors, and master pages.
▶Table of Contents. If you use paragraph styles regularly, you’re 
going to love the Table of Contents feature, which can build a 
table of contents (or a list of figures, or a table of advertisers, or 
any number of other things) quickly and easily.
▶Indexes. Building an index is a hardship we wouldn’t wish on 
anyone (we’ve done enough of them ourselves), but InDesign’s 
indexing features go a long way toward making it bearable.

546     6
Books
Even though an InDesign document can be thousands of pages long, 
it’s best to split long documents up into smaller parts. Splitting a 
large project into smaller parts is generally more efficient, especially 
when more than one person is working on the project at the same 
time. The burning question is: if you break up your project into small 
documents, how can you ensure style consistency and proper page 
numbering among them? The answer is InDesign’s Book feature.
In InDesign, a book is a collection of InDesign documents on 
your disk or network that are loosely connected with each other via 
the Book panel. Just because it’s called a “book” doesn’t mean it’s not 
relevant for magazines, catalogs, or any other set of documents.
There are five benefits to using the Book panel.
▶It’s a good way to organize the documents in a project, and it’s 
faster to open them using the Book panel than with File > Open.
▶If you use automatic page numbering in your document (see 
“Numbering Pages” in Chapter 2, “Page Layout”), InDesign  
can manage the page numbering throughout the entire book.
▶You can print, package, or export one or more documents from 
the Book panel using the same settings without even having the 
documents open.
▶The Synchronize feature helps you ensure that styles, colors, and 
other settings are consistent among the documents.
▶By associating files together as a book, you can mix page sizes 
and page orientations in a publication—which you can’t do in a 
single InDesign document (without a third-party plug-in).
The more documents there are in your project, and the more 
pages, styles, colors, and whatnot are used in each document, the 
more useful the Book feature will be to you. Even if you’re juggling 
two or three documents, it may be worth the minor inconvenience it 
takes to build a book.
Building a Book 
To build a new book, select Book from the New submenu of the File 
menu. At this point, InDesign displays the New Book dialog box. 
Tell the program where to save your new book file (you can put it 
anywhere you want on your hard drive or network, but you should 
put it somewhere easy to find—because you’ll be using it a lot).
Book files appear in InDesign as panels. When you’ve saved your 
new book, InDesign displays a new Book panel.

 8.  um 547
Adding and Removing 
Book Documents
To add a document to your Book panel, click the Add Document 
button in the panel and choose a document from your disk or net-
work (see Figure 8-1). If no documents on the panel are selected 
when you add a new document, the new document is added at the 
end of the list. If you select a document first, the new document is 
added after the selected document. You can drag files directly from 
Windows Explorer or from the Mac OS X Finder into a book panel; 
this is often the fastest way to get a folder full of files into a book.
If you accidentally insert a document in the wrong place in a 
Book panel, don’t worry—you can move a document up and down 
on the list. To do this, select the book document and drag it to a new 
location in the list.
Although Adobe’s documentation points out that you can copy a 
document from one book panel to another by Option-dragging/Alt-
dragging, we don’t recommend this in most cases. Having the same 
document in more than one book can cause pagination problems 
and general confusion.
To remove a document from a Book panel, select the document 
and click the Remove Document button. If you want to remove more 
than one document, select the documents (use Shift for contiguous 
selections, or Command/Ctrl for discontinuous selections on the 
list) and then click the Remove Document button. Note that deleting 
a document from the Book panel does not delete the file from disk; it 
simply removes it from the list.
To replace a book document, select the document in the Book 
panel and choose Replace Document from the Book panel menu. 
To add a document 
to an empty book 
panel, click the Add 
button.
Synchronize
Save
Print
Add
Delete
Figure 8-1
Adding a  
Book Document
Select the file you 
want to add.
InDesign adds the 
document to the book.

548     6
InDesign displays the Replace Document dialog box. Locate and 
select the file you want to replace the document with, then click the 
OK button to close the dialog box and replace the document.
Converting Books 
from Past Versions
InDesign CS6 can open and convert books saved in previous ver-
sions of InDesign. It’s pretty straightforward—just open the book. 
There are a couple of options that can help you—or hurt you—during 
the process of converting the book and the documents in the book.
▶If, after opening the book, you choose Save Book from the Book 
panel menu, InDesign will over write the InDesign book file 
with the converted book. Unless you have a backup copy of the 
book file, we think that you should save the converted book to  
a new book file by choosing Save Book As.
▶After you’ve opened and converted a book from an earlier ver-
sion of InDesign, you can select the Automatic Document Con-
version option from the Book panel menu. While this sounds 
like a great idea, it will over write every InDesign document in 
the book with an InDesign CS6 version of the document. Unless 
you have a backup of the previous files, avoid this option. You’re 
better off saving each document in the book to a new file.
Using a Book As a   
Navigational Tool
Because there is only a very loose connection among the various 
documents in the Book panel, you could use this feature as an infor-
mal database of documents. For instance, let’s say you’ve built 15 
different product data sheets and three small brochures for a client, 
and the client is forever updating them. Even though the documents 
may each use very different colors, styles, and so on, you could put 
them all on one Book panel and save this collection under the client’s 
name. Next time the client calls for a quick fix, you don’t have to go 
searching for a document; just open the Book panel and double-click 
the document name to open it.
If you do this, you probably want to turn off the book panel’s 
autorenumbering feature.
Editing Your Book 
Once you’ve added documents to your Book panel, keep as few things 
in mind as you go about your regular routine of editing documents. 
▶Whenever possible, you should open your book’s documents 
while the Book panel is open. (The fastest way to open a docu-
ment is to double-click the document name in the Book panel.) 
When you open and modify a document while the panel is not 
open, the panel isn’t smart enough to update itself (see “File 

 8.  um 549
Status,” below). If InDesign can’t find your document (perhaps 
it’s on a server that is not mounted), it’ll ask you where it is.
▶In general, if you’re going to use automatic page numbering, you 
should let the Book panel handle your page numbering for you 
(see “Page Numbering and Sections,” later in this section).
▶Each time we use Save As, we change the name slightly (“mydoc-
ument1,” “mydocument2,” and so on), so we can go back to an 
earlier version. However, the Book panel doesn’t notice. Every 
time you use Save As, select the original file and select Replace 
Document from the Book panel’s menu.
▶When choosing panel menu options, the options that appear 
depend on whether one or more documents is selected. To make 
changes to the entire book, scroll down to the bottom of the 
panel and click the blank area.
You cannot Undo or use Revert to Saved for changes in the Book 
panels. Also, changes you make to your Book panel, including adding 
and removing documents, aren’t saved until you close the panel, quit 
InDesign, or select Save Book from the panel’s menu.
File Status 
As you work with book documents, the Book panel monitors and 
displays the status of each document in the book. There are five pos-
sible icons in the Status column of the panel: Available, Open, Modi-
fied, Missing, or In Use (see Figure 8-2).
▶Available. The normal status of a document is Available (no 
icon). This means that no one has the document open for editing 
and that the document has not changed since the last time it was 
open on the computer you’re using.
▶Open. When you have a document open on your system, the 
status of that file is listed as Open (an open book icon).
▶Modified. When you or anyone else who has access to the file 
opens and changes a document while the Book panel is not open, 
Figure 8-2
Book Panel  
Status Icons
Modified
Open
Available
Missing

550     6
the status will be listed as Modified in the Book panel (triangle 
icon). It’s easy to change the status back to Available: open the 
file while the Book panel is open, then close the document again. 
Or, even easier: select Update Numbering from the panel’s menu.
▶Missing. If you move a document after adding it to the Book 
panel, InDesign won’t be able to find it, and the status is listed 
as Missing (red stop sign icon). To “find” a file again, double-
click the chapter name in the Book panel; InDesign displays the 
Replace Document dialog box in which you can tell it where the 
document now resides.
▶In Use. If someone else on your network opens one of the docu-
ments in your book via the Book panel, the Status field of the 
Book panel lists that chapter as in use (padlock icon).
It’s important to pay attention to the Status column readings, 
because documents must be either Available or Open in order to 
synchronize, print, or renumber properly.
Books and Networks 
People are increasingly working on projects in groups rather than 
individually. If you put your book file and documents on a server, 
more than one person can open the panel at the same time. (Only 
one person can open an InDesign document at a time, however.) 
While this isn’t as powerful as a full-blown document management 
system, it can be useful.
We don’t like editing documents on a server. It makes us nervous, 
and it’s slow. Instead, we prefer to copy the file to our local drive, edit 
it at our leisure, and then return the file to the server.
Unfortunately, the Book panel doesn’t update properly. Also, 
other people might not realize that you’ve got the “live” file, so make 
it clear to them: hide the document on the server, or put it in another 
folder called “work in progress” or something like that.
Synchronizing Your 
Book Documents
The more documents you’re working with, the more likely it is that 
one or more of them contain settings inconsistent with the others 
in the book. Perhaps you decided to change a style definition in one 
document out of 20, and then forgot to change it in the other 19. Or 
perhaps your art director decided to change a Pantone color in a 
document and you now need to update the color in all of the other 
documents in the book.
Fortunately, the Synchronize Book button on the Book panel lets 
you ensure that items such as styles and color settings are consistent 
throughout the documents in a book. Here’s how it works.

 8.  um 551
The Master   
Document
One document on the Book panel is always marked as the master 
document (by default, it’s the first document you add to the panel; 
InDesign’s documentation refers to this document as the style source 
document). The master document—which has a cryptic little icon 
to the left of it—is the document to which all the other documents 
will be synchronized. That means that if you add a new color to the 
master document and click the Synchronize Book button, the color 
will be added to all of the other documents in the book. If you add a 
new color to a document that is not the master document, the color 
won’t be added when you synchronize the documents.
You can always change which document is the master document. 
To do that, click in the left column of the Book panel next to the 
document you want to set as the master document.
Synchronize 
In order to synchronize your book documents, you must first select 
which files you want to synchronize in the Book panel; remem-
ber that you can Shift-click to select contiguous documents or use  
Command-click/Ctrl-click to select discontinuous documents. Or, if 
you want to synchronize all the files, make sure that no documents 
(or all documents) are selected in the panel.
▶A style, color swatch, variable, numbered list, or master page that 
is defined in the master document but not in another document 
gets added to that other document.
▶If a setting is named the same in both the master document and 
another document, the definition for that setting in the master 
document overrides the one in the non-master document.
▶If a setting is not defined in the master document but exists in 
some other document, it’s left alone. (This means you can have 
“local” settings that exist in one document that don’t have to be 
copied into all the others.)
Figure 8-3
Synchronization 
Options
Turn options on (to 
include them in the 
synchronization) or 
off (to exclude them).

552     6
▶By selecting Synchronize Options in the Book panel’s menu, 
you can choose which settings will be synchronized among the 
documents (see Figure 8-3). However, if the master document 
contains table of contents styles (which we talk about later in 
this chapter) and you turn on the TOC Styles check box in the 
Synchronize Options dialog box, all the character and para-
graph styles are synchronized, even if you’ve turned off the 
Character Styles and Paragraph Styles check boxes. Select Smart 
Match Style Groups if you have moved styles in or out of style 
groups (folders) and all your styles are uniquely named.
Page Numbering   
and Sections
Perhaps the most helpful aspect of the Book feature is that it keeps 
track of your page numbering for you and updates the page numbers 
when you add pages to or delete them from a document, or if you add 
a new document between two other documents in a book. Of course, 
this only works if you’ve placed automatic page numbers on your 
document pages (see “Numbering Pages” in Chapter 2).
Let’s say you’ve got one 16-page document in your Book panel 
already. When you add another document, InDesign sets its first 
page number of the new document to 17 (provided you had not 
already specified the first page as a section start in the Numbering 
and Section Options dialog box). If you later open the first document 
and add two pages, InDesign renumbers the second document—the 
next time you open it, you’ll see that it starts on page 19.
If, on the other hand, you use the Numbering and Section Options 
dialog box (you can jump to this feature quickly by double-clicking 
on the page numbers in the Book panel) to create a section start, the 
Book panel respects that. Any subsequent documents in the Book 
panel continue the page numbering from where the previous docu-
ment’s page numbering left off.
If you don’t use automatic page numbers, or you have manually 
specified page numbers for each document in your book, you will 
probably tire of watching InDesign repaginate your book. Fortu-
nately, you can turn this feature off by selecting Book Page Num-
bering Options from the Book panel’s menu, and unchecking 
Automatically Update Page and Section Numbers (see Figure 8-4).
Figure 8-4
Book Page  
Numbering  
Options
Select page number-
ing options in the 
Book Page Numbering 
Options dialog box.

 8.  um 553
Odd Versus Even   
Page Numbers
	
When chapter 2 ends on page 45, what page number does InDesign 
assign to the first page of chapter 3? If you’re in the book business, you 
probably want chapter 3 to start on page 47, because it’s a right-hand 
page. Catalog and magazine publishers would want the third file to 
begin on page 46, even though it’s a left-hand page. You can specify 
what you want InDesign to do by choosing Book Page Numbering 
Options from the Book panel’s menu. You’ve got three choices: Con-
tinue from Previous Document, Continue on Next Odd Page, and 
Continue on Next Even Page.
When you turn on the Insert blank page option, InDesign adds 
a page to fill any gaps between chapters. For example, if chapter 2 
ends on page 45 and you turn on the Continue on Next Odd Page, 
then InDesign adds a blank page at the end of chapter 2. This page is 
truly blank—it’s not based on any master page. If you want a running 
head on that page, you’ll have to apply the master page yourself. (By 
the way, David once almost drove himself mad trying to figure out 
why he couldn’t delete the last page from a document. The answer, of 
course, was that he had forgotten this feature was on.)
Chapter Numbering 
If you’d like to number each document in your book, you can let 
InDesign handle the numbering for you using chapter numbers. To 
set up chapter numbering, select the first page in the document, then 
choose Numbering & Section Options from the Layout menu (or 
from the Pages panel menu). In the Document Chapter Numbering 
section of the dialog box (see Figure 8-5), choose a numbering Style 
(such as regular numerals, roman numerals, or letters). Then choose 
whether you want to specify a chapter number for this book or base 
the number off the chapter number of the previous document in the 
book panel. Note that even though a single document can have mul-
tiple sections, it can have only one chapter number.
Once you have set up the Numbering & Section Options dialog 
box, you can “type” the chapter number in a text frame by inserting 
a chapter number text variable. For more information on text vari-
ables, see Chapter 3, “Text.”
Note that when your chapter numbering changes (for example, 
if you rearrange the order of the documents in the book panel), the 
chapter numbers in your documents are not updated until you choose 
Update All Numbers or Update Chapter & Paragraph Numbers from 
the Update Numbering submenu in the book panel’s menu. If the 
number on the screen in front of you still doesn’t update, remember 
that text variables only change when you force the screen to redraw.

554     6
Printing and   
Exporting Books
Even though we cover printing documents in Chapter 11, “Printing,” 
we should take this opportunity to mention a few things that are 
specific to printing, packaging, or exporting books. 
Each chapter in a book must be listed as Open, Available, or Mod-
ified on the Book panel in order for the document to print. InDesign 
invisibly opens each document at print or export time.
If you want only certain documents in a book to print or be 
exported, select them in the Book panel. Hold down the Shift to select 
contiguous documents, or Command/Ctrl to select non-contiguous 
documents. If no documents are selected, they’ll all print. (Click in 
the blank area at the bottom of the panel to deselect all documents.)
When you’re ready to print, click the Print Book button in the 
Book panel or select Print Book (or Print Selected Documents if doc-
uments are selected) from the panel’s menu.
You can export your book as an Acrobat PDF file by choosing 
Export Book to PDF (or Export Selected Documents to PDF) from 
the panel’s menu. If you turn on the Create Acrobat Layers checkbox 
when you export the PDF, InDesign merges all layers that have the 
same name into a single PDF layer. However, if you first deselect 
Merge Identically Name Layers on Export in the book panel’s menu, 
the PDF will include individual layers for each document.
Choose Export Book to EPUB from the panel menu to export your 
book to EPUB. Each document starts on a new page in the eBook.
To package all the documents in the book, and their required 
fonts and linked graphics, choose Package Book for Print from the 
panel’s menu. When you package a book, all the linked graphics 
are copied into a single Links folder. If your documents contains 
graphics that are unique but have the same name, InDesign is smart 
enough to automatically rename them.
Figure 8-5
Chapter Numbering

 8.  um 555
Table of Contents
Don’t get fooled into thinking the Table of Contents feature (under 
the Layout menu) is only for making book tables of contents. You 
can build a table of contents, a list of figures, and a list of product 
names—all in the same document or book. Anything you can tag 
with a paragraph style, you can build into a “table of contents.”
This all depends entirely on your using styles. You should be using 
styles anyway—if you’re not, you’re working way too hard; refer to 
Chapter 4, “Type,” to see why you should.
Making a Table   
of Contents
Making a table of contents (or a list of figures, or whatever) is easy, 
but it requires a methodical approach to the Table of Contents dialog 
box (see Figure 8-6).
1. If you only have one list (table of contents, list of figures, etc.) 
in your document, you can leave the Style pop-up menu set to 
[Default]. We’ll cover table of contents styles later in this section.
2. Fill in a name for your list in the Title field. InDesign places 
this title at the beginning of the list, so you might want to type 
“Table of Contents” or “Advertisers” or something like that. We 
usually leave this field blank and later make our own title on 
the document page. If you do include a title, choose a paragraph 
style for it from the Style pop-up menu to the right of the Title 
field. (InDesign automatically adds a paragraph style called 
“TOC title” to your document when you open this dialog box, 
but you don’t have to use that style if you don’t want to.)
3. Choose the paragraph styles that you want included from the list 
on the right. You can click the Add button to add them to the 
list, but double-clicking the style names is faster. You can also 
select more than one style (by Command/Ctrl-clicking each one) 
and then click Add to add them all at once (in which case they’re 
added alphabetically—if you want to rearrange the order, just 
click and drag the style names after adding them).
4. One by one, click each style in the Include Paragraph Styles list 
and choose a paragraph style for it from the Entry Style pop-up 
menu. This is helpful because you’d rarely want a heading from 
your document to appear in your table of contents in the actual 
Heading style; instead, you’d probably create a new style called 
“TOC-head” or something like that. If you want certain para-
graphs to be indented on your final list, you should apply styles 
here that include indentation. InDesign adds a paragraph style 

556     6
Figure 8-6
Creating a Table  
of Contents
Select a paragraph style from 
the Other Styles list and click 
the Add button.
InDesign adds the style to 
the Include Paragraph Styles 
list (the list of styles included 
in the table of contents).
Choose a paragraph 
style to use to format 
the selected table of 
contents style.
Add other paragraph styles 
to the list as necessary.
When you’re ready to build 
your table of contents, click 
the OK button.
Unless you’ve chosen to 
replace an existing table of 
contents, InDesign displays 
a place icon. Click the place 
icon to place the table of 
contents story.

 8.  um 557
called “TOC body text” to your document when you open this 
dialog box, but you don’t have to use it—we just roll our own.
5. If your document is included in a Book panel, you can choose 
to include the entire book in your list by turning on the Include 
Book Documents check box.
6. Finally, when you click OK, InDesign builds the table of contents 
(which might take a little while, especially if you have many doc-
uments in a book). When it’s done, InDesign displays the text 
place icon, just as if you had imported a text file (see Chapter 4, 
“Text,” if you need to know more about placing text).
More Table of   
Contents Options
The default Table of Contents dialog box gives you the basic controls 
you need for a simple table of contents, but for most lists we make we 
click the More Options button (see Figure 8-8).
▶Page Number. You may not want every entry in your table of 
contents to be followed by a page number. Perhaps you want 
page numbers after the headings, but not after the chapter titles 
in a book. You can control how page numbers will appear with 
the Page Number pop-up menu. You’ve got three options for 
numbering: After Entry, Before Entry, and None. The first two 
tell InDesign to include the page number separated from the 
text of the paragraph by a tab character. For a consistent appear-
ance, we create a character style for the page numbers and select 
it from the Style pop-up menu.
▶Between Entry and Number. By default, InDesign places a tab 
character between the entry and the page number (whether the 
page number is before or after the entry). However, you can 
change this to some other character or characters. For instance, 
we usually replace the ^t character (which is code for a tab) with 
^y (a right-indent tab, which always sits flush on the right margin, 
even if you haven’t placed a tab stop). To include dot leaders 
between the entries and the page numbers (which you would set 
up in the Tabs panel), use a character style that adds tracking. 
▶Sort Entries in Alphabetical Order. If you turn on the Sort 
Entries in Alphabetical Order option, InDesign sorts the list in 
alphabetical order when you build it. Whether or not you want 
your final list alphabetized is up to you; you probably wouldn’t 
want it when you build the table of contents for a book, but you 
might if you’re creating a list of items in a catalog.

558     6
▶Level. Each paragraph style you include appears with a different 
indent in the Include Paragraph Styles list. You can control how 
much indent with the Level feature. This only adjusts the display 
in this dialog box; it has no effect on the final list unless your  
list is alphabetized—in which case, the entries are alphabetized 
by level.
▶Run-in. Some tables of contents, such as those found in  
academic journals, are “run-in”—that is, the headings are all  
in one paragraph, separated by semicolons. If you want this  
sort of list, turn on this option (see Figure 8-7).
▶Include Text on Hidden Layers. This option is pretty self-
explanatory. If you have multiple layers in your document, you 
can choose whether to include the text on those layers even 
when the layers are hidden. While it’s rare that you’d turn this 
Figure 8-8
More Table of  
Contents Options
Use the Page Number pop-up 
menu to specify the position 
of the page number relative 
to the table of contents text.
You can select a character style to apply to the   
page number and/or to the separator character.
Figure 8-7
The Run-in Option
Normal.
Run-in.

 8.  um 559
on, you might do so if you have made a layer that contains key-
words or explanatory text that you want in the table of contents 
but don’t want in print (see the next section).
▶Numbered Paragraphs. If you have used automatic paragraph 
numbering in your document, you have a choice of what will 
appear in the table of contents: the entire paragraph (with the 
numbering), the paragraph with no number, or only the number.
Using Dummy   
Text for Lists
One of the things we like most about tables of contents is that they’re 
document-wide rather than simply story-wide. That means that any 
text in any text frame can be included in a table of contents—even 
text in a nonprinting text frame. With this in mind, you can add 
“tags” to items on your page that don’t appear in print, but do appear 
in your table of contents.
One of the best uses for this trick is an advertiser index. You can 
place a text frame with an advertiser’s name on top of an ad in your 
document. Set the text frame’s color to None and turn on Nonprint-
ing Object in the Attributes panel (or put the frame on a hidden layer), 
and it’s almost as though this were a “non-object”—the text won’t 
print, and it won’t affect the ad underneath. But if that advertiser’s 
name is tagged with a style, you can include it on a list of advertisers.
The same trick applies to building a list of pictures in a catalog, or 
for any other instance where what you want on the list doesn’t actu-
ally appear on the page.
Building and   
Rebuilding Tables   
of Contents
There is nothing magic about the text or page numbers in your table 
of contents—they’re just regular text and numbers. That means if you 
update the document on which the list is based (such as adding pages 
or changing the text), the entries and page numbers in the table of 
contents don’t automatically update, and you will have to rebuild it. 
We find that we build and rebuild a table of contents several times for 
each document or book. It isn’t that we’re having so much fun with 
the feature—it’s that we make mistakes.
To update a table of contents, use the Selection tool or Text tool 
to select the text frame containing the list, then choose Update Table 
of Contents from the Layout menu. Or, if you want to make a change 
to the Table of Contents dialog box settings, you can choose Table 
of Contents from the Layout menu, make the changes, turn on the 
Replace Existing Table of Contents check box, and click OK.
Table of   
Contents Styles
Everything we’ve said about table of contents so far is based on the 
idea that you have only one of these in your document. However, you 

560     6
can define lots of different table of contents styles in a single docu-
ment—one for headings, one for figures, one for bylines, and so on. 
The easiest way to do this is to build various table of contents styles, 
which are simply saved collections of settings. Once you set up the 
Table of Contents dialog box just the way you want it, you can click 
the Save Style button to save this setup as a style (see Figure 8-9). 
Later, you can reload those settings by choosing your style from the 
TOC Style pop-up menu at the top of the dialog box.
A second way to build a “style” is to select Table of Contents Styles 
from the Layout menu and click New. You get a nearly identical 
dialog box, but when you click OK your settings are saved for use 
later. You can also use the Table of Contents Styles feature to delete 
and edit styles, or load them from other InDesign documents.
Note that if you save your table of contents style after building a 
table of contents in your document, InDesign isn’t smart enough to 
match your built list to the style name. That means you can’t use the 
Replace Existing Table of Contents feature. Instead, you’ll have to 
delete the already-built list and replace it with a new one.
Figure 8-9
Creating a Table of  
Contents Style
To save the current settings 
of the Table of Contents 
dialog box as a table of 
contents style, click the Save 
Style button.
Enter a name for the style in 
the Save Style dialog box and 
click the OK button.
InDesign adds the style to 
the list of available styles.

 8.  um 561
Indexes (Or Indices)
A good index requires careful thought, an understanding of the sub-
ject matter, and an ability to keep the whole project in your head 
at all times. In short, it requires comprehension—a quality software 
lacks. Fortunately, InDesign has a built-in indexing feature.
Some people ask us, “Why can’t a computer build an index? 
InDesign should just give me a list of all the words in my document 
and what page they’re on.” Unfortunately, this is not an index; it’s a 
concordance. A concordance records the location of words; an index 
records the location of ideas. In general, if you’re looking for an index, 
you’re going to have to do it manually with InDesign’s indexing fea-
tures. Or, better yet, the professional indexer you hire should do that.
You can index a document at any time in the production cycle, 
but it’s almost always best to wait until the text is final. The reason: as 
you edit the text, you may accidentally delete index markers.
The Index panel (choose Index from the Type & Tables submenu, 
under the Window menu) lets you add either single words or whole 
phrases to the index, and it displays a list of currently indexed words 
and phrases (see Figure 8-10). First, we’ll discuss how to add, edit, 
and remove index entries with the Index panel. Then we’ll explore 
how to build a finished index on your document pages.
Adding a New First-
Level Index Entry
There’s very little that is automatic about building an index. Again, it’s 
not difficult, but you have to be methodical about it. Here are the steps 
you should go through for each new index entry. (Note that we always   
differentiate between a new index entry or topic and a new reference 
to an index entry. For example, “Pigs” might be a new entry for page 
34, but when it appears again on page 59, it would simply be a new 
reference to your already added index entry—see “Adding a New 
Reference to an Entry,” later in this section.)
To add an index entry, follow these steps (see Figure 8-11).
1. If the word or phrase you want indexed appears on the page, 
select it and click the New Entry button at the bottom of the 
Index panel, or select New Page Reference from the panel’s 
menu (or better yet, just press Command-7/Ctrl-7). If the index 
entry isn’t found on the page, place the text cursor anywhere in 
the text related to the topic and click the New Entry button. For 
example, a page may include a discussion of cows, but you want 
to index the word under the phrase “Farm animals.” Simply 
insert the cursor and click New Entry (or press the keystroke).

562     6
Figure 8-10
The Index Panel
Index panel in Reference mode.
Index panel in Topic mode.
Go to Selected Marker
Update Preview
Generate Index
Create a New Index Entry
Delete Selected Entry
2. In the New Page Reference dialog box, edit the entry under the 
Topic Levels heading, if needed. Whatever you type here will be 
what shows up in the index. Since we’re focusing on first-level 
entries right now, you can just skip over the other two Topic 
Levels fields. (We’ll discuss the finer points of second-level 
entries in “Adding a New Second-Level Index Entry,” later.)
3. Index entries always appear in alphabetical order. However, 
occasionally you may not want your index entry to appear  
where it would normally be alphabetized. For instance, the 
famous “17-Mile Drive” would ordinarily be placed at the begin-
ning of the index, before the “A”s. You can place it along with 
other words that begin with “S” by typing “Seventeen” in the 
first Sort As field of the New Page Reference dialog box.
4. The Number Style Override feature is yet one more control that 
you will ignore most of the time. Let’s say you want the page 
numbers that refer to an illustration (rather than to just text on 
the page) to appear bold in the final index. You can build a char-
acter style to define how you want the page numbers to appear 
and—when you’re indexing that illustration—you can turn on 
the Number Style Override check box and choose that character 
style from the pop-up menu.
5. An index entry can span a range of pages or text. If, for example, 
your treatise on pigs and goats spans six pages of your docu-
ment, you don’t want to have to make a separate index entry for 

 8.  um 563
each and every page. Instead, you can specify one index entry 
and choose a range of pages in the Type pop-up menu. There are 
nine page-range choices in the Type pop-up menu, plus six more 
cross-reference choices. We cover those last six in “Cross Refer-
ences (X-Refs),” later in the chapter.
▶Current page, the default page range, indexes the page that 
includes the index marker.
Figure 8-11
Adding an Index Entry
In this example, we’ve gotten 
lucky: the text we want to 
add to the index is present 
on the page.
Select the text…
…and click the New Entry button   
or press Command/Ctrl-7.
If necessary, edit the text in the 
Topic Levels field (or fields). 
For this example, we don’t 
need to edit the text.
Choose an indexing range 
from the Type pop-up menu.
Turn on the Number Style 
Override option if you want 
to apply a specific character 
style to the page number in 
the index (we don’t, so we left 
the option unchecked).
InDesign adds the page 
reference to the index. 
If our index contained more 
than this single index entry, 
we’d see a list of other topics 
in this field.

564     6
▶To Next Style Change tells InDesign to index from the  
paragraph containing the index marker to the next para-
graph style change.
▶To Next Use of Style is the option we use most often. This 
indexes from the paragraph containing the index marker to 
the next use of a specific style, which you can choose in a 
pop-up menu next to the Type pop-up menu. For instance, 
let’s say you’ve got a book about farm animals where each 
animal’s heading is tagged with a paragraph style called 
“Heading-A.” You could select the heading “Rabbit” and set 
the Type to “To Next Use of Style.” Then you could choose 
Heading-A from the pop-up menu of styles. If the “Horse” 
section starts three pages after the Rabbit section, the page 
range in the index will span three pages; if it starts 14 pages 
after, the page range will span 14 pages, and so on.
▶To End of Story tells InDesign to index from the paragraph 
containing the index marker to the end of the current story. 
Note that InDesign assumes that the story falls on every page. 
If your story starts on page 1, then skips to page 9, and ends 
on page 12, the index will display pages 1–12, ignoring the 
skipped pages. 
▶To End of Document is the same as To End of Story, but 
it spans from the paragraph containing the index marker 
to the end of the file. In the example of the farm animals 
chapter, you could index the entire chapter by placing the 
cursor anywhere on the first page of the chapter, specifying 
an index entry labeled “Farm animals,” and choosing To End 
of Document.
▶To End of Section is the same as the previous two options, 
but the page range extends from the index marker to the end 
of the current section (see Chapter 2, “Page Layout”).
▶For Next # of Paragraphs works when you know exactly how 
many paragraphs you want indexed. Unfortunately, currently 
InDesign only spans to the beginning of the final paragraph, 
rather than the end of the paragraph—a problem if that para-
graph spans two pages.
▶For Next # of Pages indexes from the index entry marker for 
the number of pages you specify.

 8.  um 565
▶Suppress Page Range. Some first-level index entries don’t 
include page numbers at all. For instance, in the book we’ve 
been discussing, “Animals” is too broad a topic to include 
page numbers (every page in the book would be indexed). So 
you might specify Suppress Page Range for this one entry, 
and then follow it with 15 second-level entries, each with 
appropriate page numbers listed. (Again, we discuss second-
level entries later.)
6. After you’ve chosen the scope from the Type menu, click OK and 
InDesign adds the index entry to the Index panel, along with the 
page range. If the indexed text sits on a master page or on the 
pasteboard, the master page label or “PB” shows up in the Index 
panel, but these items will not actually appear in the final index.
If you’re happy with the default settings of the New Page Refer-
ence dialog box, you can streamline this process significantly by 
selecting a word or phrase on your page and typing Ctrl-Alt-Shift-[ 
or Command-Option-Shift-[, which adds the selection to the index, 
skipping the dialog box. Or, if the selection is a proper name, press 
the ] (right bracket) instead—that indexes the selection based on the 
last word in the selection (so James Joyce would show up as Joyce, 
James). You can control how words in a proper name show up by 
placing a nonbreaking space between them; for instance, if you put 
a nonbreaking space between “King” and “Jr.,” then this keyboard 
shortcut will index the name under King instead of Jr.
Add and Add All 
You may already have spotted the Add and Add All buttons in the 
New Page Reference dialog box. Clicking the Add button adds the 
index entry but leaves the dialog box open so that you can add more 
entries. This is very helpful—you frequently need to index the same 
text using more than one entry.
Add All searches throughout your document for every instance of 
the index entry and adds it automatically to the index. If you select 
the word “Bee” on your page and then click Add All, InDesign places 
another identical index entry at each instance of the word “Bee” in 
your file. (If you have turned on the Book option in the Index panel, 
InDesign also adds all instances of the index entry in other docu-
ments, too—as long as those documents are open.)
When you click Add All, InDesign uses the same scope (Type) 
settings for every instance of the entry text. Whether this is a great 
feature or a potential problem depends on the formatting of your 
index. If each instance of an indexed topic needs special attention 

566     6
(this one only showing up on this page, the next one using a To Next 
Use of Style scope, and so on), you should avoid this feature.
You also need to be careful with Add All because it only finds 
exact matches. That is, if you type “Cow” in the New Page Reference 
dialog box and then click Add All, InDesign won’t find “Cows” or 
even “cows”. 
Cross-References   
(X-Refs)
As you build an index, think of all the ways that your reader might 
look for a topic and include those words in your index. For instance, 
because you’re familiar with your own book, you might include an 
index entry called “Llamas.” However, another reader might look for 
“Cute wool-producing animals that spit.” Fortunately, InDesign lets 
you add cross-references in your index such as “Spitting animals. See 
Llamas” and “Wool 34–46. See also Llamas.”
To add a cross-reference to your index, you go through the same 
steps as you would to add a normal index entry. The one difference is 
that you set the Type pop-up menu to one of the six cross-reference 
settings: See [also], See, See also, See herein, See also herein, and 
Custom Cross-Reference. When you select any of these, InDesign 
provides a text field in which you can enter the cross-referenced 
word or phrase. If you want your index entry to be “Koi. See Carp” 
you would type “Koi” in the first Topic Levels field, and type “Carp” 
in the Referenced field (see Figure 8-12).
▶See is generally used when an index entry has no page number 
references, such as “Supermarket. See Grocery.”
▶See also is used when an index entry does have page references, 
but you also want to refer the reader to other topics, such as 
“Grocery 34–51. See also Farmer’s Market.”
▶We like the See [also] option best, because it uses either See or 
See also, depending on whether you’ve specified page references.
▶See herein is a special case in which you are cross-referencing to 
a second-level entry within the same entry as the cross-reference 
itself, and it’s used more in legal indexes than anywhere else.
▶If you choose Custom Cross-Reference, you can type any kind of 
cross-reference you prefer, such as “Hey dude, go look at page”.
Note that if you’re cross-referencing to an index entry that you’ve 
already added to your index, you can find that entry in the list of 
entries at the bottom of the dialog box and drag it to the Referenced 
field. That’s certainly faster (and probably more accurate) than typing 
the words again.

 8.  um 567
Because no page number is involved in a cross-reference, it doesn’t 
matter where in your document you specify it (though it must be in 
a text frame).
Some people prefer to put cross-references at the end of a list of 
second-level index entries rather than directly after the first-level 
entry. InDesign won’t do this for you automatically, but you can 
fake it by creating a dummy second-level entry (see “Adding a New 
Second-Level Index Entry,” below) and setting its Type to a cross-
reference. The dummy second-level entry should just be named with 
“zzz” so that it automatically falls at the end of the alphabetized list 
of second-level entries. Later, once you build the index onto your 
Figure 8-12
Adding a  
Cross-Reference
…and then choose one of the 
cross reference options from 
the Type pop-up menu.
Drag a topic from the 
list of topics into the   
Referenced field.
Add an index  
reference as you  
would a normal 
page reference…
InDesign adds the cross-reference to the index.

568     6
document pages, you will have to perform a Find/Change to remove 
these symbols.
Adding a New   
Reference to an Entry
Once you’ve got an entry on your Index panel, you can easily add 
more page references to it. Let’s say you added the name “Farmer 
Jones” to your index back on page 13 of your document. Now, 
“Farmer Jones” appears again on page 51.
1. Place the cursor in the appropriate place in the text story. In this 
case, you’d probably put the cursor next to the word “Farmer” 
on page 51.
2. Click the entry in the Index panel. Here, you’d select “Farmer 
Jones.”
3. Alt/Option-click the New Entry button. Make sure that the Type 
pop-up menu is set up according to how you want your new 
reference to appear, and then click OK. If you want to use the 
default New Page Reference dialog box settings, you can just 
drag the index entry on top of the New Entry button instead.
Note that while you don’t necessarily have to click the entry in 
the Index panel in step 2 (you could just retype the entry in the New 
Page Reference dialog box or select it on the page), we recommend 
clicking because it ensures consistency. For example, if you relied 
on your typing ability, you might create the index entry “Chickens” 
and then later—meaning to type the same thing—create a new entry, 
“Chicken,” causing two different entries to be made when you only 
meant to make one.
Adding a New   
Second-Level   
Index Entry
Now that you’ve specified first-level index entries, you can—if you 
wish—add second-level entries. As we mentioned earlier, second-
level entries are subcategories of the first-level entries. For example, 
under the first-level index entry “Grape Varieties,” you might find 
the second-level entries “Merlot,” “Chardonnay,” and “Syrah.” You 
can make a second-level index entry just as you would make the first-
level index entry, but with two added steps.
After you open the New Page Reference dialog box, click the down 
arrow button to move your index entry to the second Topic Level 
field. Then, double-click the first-level entry in the list at the bottom 
of the dialog box (which enters it in the first Topic Level field).
Once you’ve created a second-level entry, you can place a third-
level entry under it. Similarly, you can put fourth-level entries under 
third-level entries.

 8.  um 569
Importing Topics 
Many people prefer to index their text in Microsoft Word before plac-
ing the text in InDesign. Fortunately, InDesign can import Word’s 
index markers, adding the index entries to the Index panel automati-
cally. In fact, if you delete the Word file after importing it, the index 
topics remain in the Index panel. This is one good way to import a 
list of topics into the panel without having to type them manually in 
InDesign. Another way to import index topics is to choose Import 
Topics from the Index panel’s menu, which lets you select any other 
already-indexed InDesign document.
Index entries in your panel that don’t have corresponding index 
markers in the text won’t show up in your final index. If you don’t 
want to see these topics in your Index panel, select Hide Unused 
Topics in the panel’s menu to them. To view the topics you’ve hidden, 
choose Show from the panel menu.
Deleting Entries 
There are several ways to delete an entry from your index.
▶To delete an entire entry, including all its page references, select 
it in the Index panel and click the Delete button. Note that this 
also deletes all the subcategories under it and their page refer-
ences, too.
▶To delete a single page reference, you can select it in the Index 
panel (click the gray triangle next to the index entry to display 
its page references) and click the Delete button.
▶To remove a particular page reference in your index, delete the 
index marker. The marker is a zero-width character, but it is 
a character nevertheless. To view the character, choose Show 
Hidden Characters from the Type menu. To delete it, put the text 
cursor immediately after it (you may have to use the arrow keys 
to accomplish this) and press Backspace/Delete. 
Editing Entries
We make mistakes, so it’s a good thing that InDesign gives us a way 
to edit our flubbed index entries. When you’re editing an index entry, 
you have to decide whether you want to edit the entry itself or a par-
ticular page reference of the entry.
Let’s say that halfway through indexing your document, you 
realize that the index entry “Martha Washington” should have been 
indexed as “Washington, Martha.” You can select the entry in the 
Index panel and choose Topic Options from the panel’s menu—or 
even faster, you can just double-click the entry. In this case, you’d 

570     6
change the first Topic Level field to “Washington, Martha,” and then 
click OK.
One of the most common entry edits is capitalizing an entry, so 
the folks at Adobe snuck a Capitalize feature into the Index panel’s 
menu. While this is nice, we wish there were a further option to 
change an entry to lowercase (useful for level 2 entries, which are 
usually set in lowercase). Maybe next version.
Editing References 
You can also change the scope (type) or style of a particular page 
reference. For instance, let’s say the reference to Martha Washington 
on page 47 should have spanned nine paragraphs, but you acciden-
tally set it to Current Page instead. To fix this, click the gray triangle 
next to the index entry; this displays the page references for the entry. 
Double-click the page reference that corresponds to the one you want 
to change (in this case, you’d double-click the number 47). Change 
the index entry options, and when done, press Return/Enter.
If you actually wanted the above reference to begin on page 48 
instead of page 47, you have to select the entry, cut it to the Clipboard, 
and then paste it in the new location. Selecting entries can be diffi-
cult, so make use of the arrow keys and the Shift key.
Finding Entries 
Know you indexed “bugs” as a second-level entry, but can’t remem-
ber which first-level entry it was under? Select Find from the Index 
panel’s menu to display the panel’s Find field. After typing “bugs” 
into the field, you can click the down arrow to see the next instance 
of this entry in your panel. (Or click the up arrow to see the previous 
instance.)
Sorting Entries
To control which language scripts (such as Greek, Cyrillic, Japanese 
Kana, and so on) you want included in your index, and in what order 
they should appear, choose Sort Options from the Index panel menu. 
For example, if you have indexed special symbols (such as π), and you 
want those to be listed at the end of the index, select Symbols and 
then click the down arrow button to move it below Roman.
Building the Index
You’ve reached the finish line—and it’s finally time to place your 
index on a document page so you can see it in all its glory. This is the 
fun part, because you can just sit back, choose Generate Index from 
the Index menu’s panel, and let InDesign do the work of collecting 
the index entries and page numbers for you. There is still one more 

 8.  um 571
Figure 8-13
Generate Index  
Dialog Box
Generate Index dialog box with options hidden. Click More Options…
…and InDesign displays this 
monster. Daunting though 
they may be, these options 
give you a tremendous 
amount of control over the 
appearance of your index.
dialog box you need to pay attention to: the Generate Index dialog 
box (see Figure 8-13).
The Generate Index dialog box presents a (somewhat bewilder-
ing) array of choices you need to make in order to get the index of 
your dreams. InDesign shows you a few controls by default; you can 
see the others by clicking More Options. Fortunately, once you make 
your choices in this dialog box, InDesign will remember them the 
next time you build an index for this document.
Title. Fill in a name for your index in the Title field. InDesign places 
this title at the beginning of the list, so you might want to type “Index” 
or “My Indexio Grandioso” or something like that. We leave this 
field blank and make our own titles. If you do include a title, choose 
a paragraph style for it from the Style pop-up menu to the right of 
the Title field. (InDesign automatically adds a paragraph style called 
“Index Title” to your document when you open this dialog box, but 
you don’t have to use that style if you don’t want to.)

572     6
Replace Existing Index. InDesign knows when you’ve already built 
an index in a document, and it automatically replaces that index 
with a new one unless you turn off the Replace Existing Index option. 
Probably the only time you’d turn this off would be if you wanted to 
compare two indexes to find differences between them.
By the way, note that when InDesign replaces one index with 
another, it doesn’t just replace the text. It actually deletes all the index 
pages and then rebuilds them from scratch. If you’ve spent two hours 
adding extra formatting to the index, or adding boxes or lines to the 
pages, those additions are removed when you build the new index.
Include Book Documents. If your document is part of a book (see 
“Books,” earlier in this chapter), you can choose to build an index for 
the book by turning on the Include Book Documents option. Note 
that InDesign can generate the index from all the documents even 
if they’re not currently open, as long as they’re available in the Book 
panel (not missing or opened by someone else on the network).
Include Entries on Hidden Layers. If you have multiple layers in 
your document, you can choose whether to include the text on those 
layers even when the layers are hidden. While it’s rare that you’d turn 
this on, you might do so if you have made a layer that contains key-
words or explanatory text that you want in the index but don’t want 
in print (see “Using Dummy Text for Lists,” earlier).
Nested versus Run-In. There are two primary types of index for-
mats: nested and run-in (see Figure 8-14). In a nested index, each 
entry occupies its own paragraph; in a run-in index, the second-level 
entries merge with their first-level entry to form one big paragraph. 
Which you choose is entirely up to you, though it should depend in 
part on the content of the index. Run-in indexes make no sense when 
you have third- or fourth-level entries. On the other hand, run-in 
indexes typically conserve space, especially when they’re set in wide 
columns (because more than one entry fits on a single line).
Include Index Section Headings. In this context, “section” doesn’t 
have anything to do with page numbering sections (which we dis-
cuss in Chapter 2, “Page Layout”). Rather, the section heads refer 
to index sections: “A”, “B”, “C”, and so on. Even when you turn on 
Include Index Section Headings, InDesign only includes the head-
ings for which you have made index entries. If you have no entries 

 8.  um 573
that begin with “b”, the index won’t include a “B” section heading. 
If you really want the empty sections, you can turn on the Include 
Empty Index Sections check box. We’re not sure why you’d want to 
do that, but it’s nice to know you can.
Level Style. The Level Styles section of the Generate Index dialog 
box lets you apply a paragraph style to each entry in the index. In a 
run-in index, there’s only one kind of paragraph: the first-level entry 
(all the second-level entries are merged into the same paragraph). 
In a nested index, however, each entry level is tagged with its own 
paragraph style. If you want all your second-level index entries to be 
slightly indented from the first-level entries (you probably do), make 
a new style that includes indentation, and choose it from the Second 
Level pop-up menu.
Once again, designing a readable index is as much an art as a sci-
ence. Take some time to peruse other people’s indexes, checking for 
details such as indentation (what does a first-level entry do when it’s 
longer than one line, for example?) and punctuation.
Note that InDesign builds styles for you called “Index Level 1”, 
“Index Level 2”, and so on. If you haven’t already created your own 
styles, then use these and adjust their definitions in the Paragraph 
Styles panel later.
Index Style. One of our favorite things about making indexes in 
InDesign is that we can apply paragraph or character styles to every 
index element, down to the page numbers and the cross-reference 
words (such as “See” or “See also”). By assigning styles, you can later 
make global changes to the look and feel of the index by changing 
the style definitions. While we often apply styles in the Section Head-
ing and Cross-reference pop-up menus, we usually leave the Page 
Number and Cross-referenced Topic settings alone. It all depends 
on the index.
Entry Separators. Index formatting is as varied as art directors’ 
whims—or the whims of the indexers, which tend to be even more 
Figure 8-14
Nested and Run-in 
Index Formatting

574     6
obscure. One of the main differences revolves around the incred-
ibly picayune art of choosing punctuation. Do you want an en dash 
between numbers in a page range or a hyphen? An en dash is more 
appropriate, but the ends of the dash bump up against some num-
bers. Fortunately, you can type thin spaces on each side of the en 
dash in the Page Range field in the Generate Index dialog box. (Actu-
ally, we never type these characters themselves; we just select them 
from the menu to the right of the field.)
You can change the punctuation for Following Topic, Between 
Entries (which only applies in run-in indexes or where there are mul-
tiple cross-references per line), Page Range, Between Page Numbers, 
Before Cross-reference, and Entry End (see Figure 8-15).
Putting It Together
The Book, Table of Contents, and Indexing features in InDesign go 
a long way toward making the process of creating long documents 
more bearable.
A Note to the Author Contemplating Self-Indexing. Hire a profes-
sional indexer. You simply know the material too well to create a 
useful index. A professional indexer will read and understand your 
text, and will create an index that opens it up to a wider range of pos-
sible readers than you ever could. It’s what they do.
Figure 8-15
Specifying  
Entry Separators
Entry separators are 
special characters that can 
be automatically inserted 
at various points in the 
index.

575
In the previous chapters, we’ve covered the process of getting text 
and graphics into your InDesign publication. This chapter is all about 
what you can do with those elements once you’ve wrestled them onto 
your pages. The process of moving, rotating, scaling, reflecting, or 
shearing an object is called transformation.
Many of the topics in this chapter have been touched on in the 
preceding chapters—mainly because everything you can do in 
InDesign is interconnected. In the old days, software was entirely 
linear and modal: one had to proceed from this screen to that screen 
following a particular sequence of steps. These days, software is 
extremely nonlinear and non-modal (that is, you can do things many 
different ways in many different orders), and, therefore, much harder 
to write about. It’s enough to drive one mad! Your purchase of this 
book will make our time at the Looney Farm that much more pleas-
ant. Thank you.
Transforming

9

576     6
Transformation Basics
There are many ways to transform an object in InDesign:
▶Select the object using the Selection tool, then drag a selection 
handle to scale the object (but not necessarily the contents).
▶Select a transformation tool from the Tools panel, set the  
center of transformation (if necessary), and drag the tool.
▶Display the Transform panel or Control panel and enter values 
in the panel field corresponding to the transformation you want 
to apply.
▶Choose one of the “preset” rotation or reflection options from 
the Transform panel menu or Control panel menu. See “Trans-
formation Presets,” later in this chapter.
▶Double-click one of the transformation tools in the Toolbox to 
display the corresponding transform dialog box (double-click 
the Rotate tool, for example, to display the Rotation dialog box). 
▶Select the Free Transform tool, and drag the tool around the 
object. See “Using the Free Transform Tool,” later in this chapter. 
▶Press keyboard shortcuts. See “Scaling with Keyboard Shortcuts,” 
later in this chapter.
There’s no “right” or “best” way to do transformations—you can 
experiment with the different methods and see which you like best. 
We change methods depending on the situation (and our mood).
When you select an object and then choose one of the transforma-
tion tools from the Tools panel, InDesign displays the center of trans-
formation icon (it looks something like a small registration mark) on 
or around the object (see Figure 9-1). The initial position of the icon 
is determined by the point selected in the Proxy in the Transform 
panel or Control panel (by default, it’s in the center).
When you scale, rotate, or shear an object, InDesign transforms 
the object around the center of transformation. To reposition the 
center of transformation icon, either drag it to a new position (with 
whatever transformation tool you have selected) or click a point on 
the Proxy in the Transform panel or Control panel.
To transform a point or line segment on a path, select the path or 
point using the Direct Selection tool, then transform it as you would 
any other object (drag it, or enter values in the X and Y fields of 
Setting the Center of 
Transformation
Transforming Line   
Segments and Points

 9. fm 577
the Transform panel or Control panel, or press the arrow keys, or   
display the Move dialog box, or use any of the other transformation 
techniques). This can produce interesting effects (see Figure 9-2).
You can also select the points and/or line segments of a path and 
then copy as you transform the object by holding down the Option/
Alt key after you start dragging or clicking the Copy button in the 
any of the transformation tool’s dialog boxes. In this case, InDesign 
splits the path at the unselected points on the path. This takes a little 
getting used to, but might come in handy. If you want to transform 
line segments or points of a copy of a path, copy the path first, then 
apply the transformation.
When you transform a shape that contains other objects (an image 
frame with a picture in it, for example), you can control whether the 
content is transformed. By default, dragging the handles of a frame 
does not scale the content, but using any of the transformation tools 
or using the scaling fields in the Transform panel or Control panel to 
alter a frame does scale the content. The Width and Height fields in 
the panels, by contrast, scale the frame without scaling the content.
To transform a frame without transforming its content, select the 
frame with the Direct Selection tool—this way, the frame is selected 
Transforming   
Path Contents
When you select an object and choose a trans-
formation tool, InDesign displays the center of 
transformation icon.
Drag the center of   
transformation icon to a 
new location, if necessary. 
It does not have to be on 
the selected object; it can be 
anywhere on the spread.
When you move the cursor over the 
icon, InDesign changes the cursor to 
show that dragging will move the icon.
The center of transformation icon 
appears at the point selected on the 
Proxy (in the Control panel or  
Transform panel).
Drag the tool to transform the object. As you drag, 
InDesign transforms (in this example, rotates) the 
object around the center of transformation.
If you’ve turned on the Show Transformation Values 
option in the Interface panel of the Preferences dialog 
box, InDesign displays the transformation value.
If Live Screen Drawing is set 
to Delayed in Interface prefer-
ences, dragging quickly moves 
only a rectangle representing 
the object.
Figure 9-1
Center of  
Transformation

578     6
but the content is not. At this point, you can transform the object 
as you normally would—the content will not be transformed (see 
Figure 9-3).
If you’re familiar with earlier versions of InDesign, you might be 
asking, “What happened to the Transform Content option?” Don’t 
ask us—we’d like to have it back. 
Select some points using the 
Direct Selection tool.
In this example, the points on 
the inside of the star polygon are 
selected; the outside ones aren’t.
Apply a transformation. In this exam-
ple, we’ve rotated the selected points.
InDesign 
applies the 
transforma-
tion to the 
selected 
points, not 
to the entire 
path.
Figure 9-2
Transforming  
Points, Not Paths
Untransformed object. 
We’ve selected the 
frame using the Direct 
Selection tool.
Scale the frame (we 
entered 200% in the 
scaling fields), and the 
content will not be 
scaled.
Here’s what you’d see if 
the content were scaled 
in this example. Scary.
Figure 9-3
Transforming Path  
Contents (or Not)

 9. fm 579
Transforming text frames in earlier versions of InDesign was frus-
trating because the program would scale the frame and the text in it, 
but the Control, Character, and Paragraph panels would still stub-
bornly display the original point size. If you used the Scale tool to 
double the size of a text frame containing 12-point text with a two-
pica indent, for example, the Point Size field in the Character panel 
would still show “12 pt”, the Left Indent field in the Paragraph panel 
would show “2p”, and the Transform panel would show “200%”.
The same problem haunted the process of transforming groups, 
or transforming frames with objects in them (such as frames con-
taining imported graphics).
Fortunately, Adobe changed this behavior in later releases. Turn 
on the Apply to Content option in the General panel of the Prefer-
ences dialog box, and InDesign will apply the scaling amount to the 
content (text, group items, or frame contents) as you scale. 
With this option turned on, scaling a text frame immediately 
applies the transformation to the text, and the Control panel scaling 
fields revert to 100%. In the example above, the text size would show 
“24 pt” and the indent would appear as “4p”. 
If you like, you can go back to the old system by turning on the 
Adjust Scaling Percentage option in the General panel of the Prefer-
ences dialog box. See Figure 9-4 to get what we’re talking about.
In spite of the wording of these options, the scaling is always 
applied to the content. The only difference lies in the values (point 
sizes or scaling percentages) shown in the relevant panel fields.
You can resize, scale, or rotate multiple objects with the Selection 
tool, and you don’t even need to group them first. Simply select the 
items you want to transform, and you see a transformation bounding 
box around the selected items. Dragging a handle resizes the selected 
elements; holding down Shift resizes them proportionally. Hold-
ing down Command/Ctrl scales them. Holding down Command/
Ctrl+Shift scales them proportionally. Including the Option/Alt key 
performs the transformations from the center of the selected objects.
To rotate the selected items, position the mouse outside one of the 
corner handles of the selection box, and drag to rotate.
Numbers Are Your Friends
If numbers scare you, you’re going to be scared by the Transform 
panel and Control panel. Don’t give in to math anxiety—these panels 
are simply too useful to avoid. The first step to taming them is to 
Apply to Content   
or Adjust Scaling   
Percentage
Transforming Multiple 
Selected Contents

580     6
Figure 9-4
Applying to Content  
vs. Adjust Scaling  
Percentage
When you have the Apply to 
Content option turned on, 
scaling a text frame…
When you have the Adjust 
Scaling Percentage option 
turned on, scaling a text 
frame…
…adjusts the point size of the text, but 
continues to display the original point size 
in the point size fields. The current (scaled) 
point size appears in parentheses. Not only 
is this odd and of questionable utility, but 
it’s hard to see.
…adjusts the point size of 
the text in the text frame and 
shows the correct value in any 
of the point size fields.
understand the controls are called, and what they can do for you (see 
Figure 9-5). To display the Transform panel, choose Transform from 
the Object and Layout submenu of the Window menu; to display the 
Control panel, press Command-Option-6/Ctrl-Alt-6. 
A “proxy” is something that stands in for something (or someone) 
else. The Proxy in the Transform and Control panels stands in for the 
object or objects you’ve selected (see Figure 9-6). The points on the 
Proxy icon correspond to the selection handles InDesign displays 
around an object when you select it with the Selection tool (not the 
Direct Selection tool).
When you select a point on the Proxy, you’re telling InDesign that 
changes you make in the panel affect that point (the X and Y fields), 
or are centered around that point (the Width, Height, Horizontal 
Scaling, Vertical Scaling, Rotation Angle, and Shear Angle fields).
An InDesign page is a two-dimensional surface; a plane. You can 
define the position of any point on a plane using a pair of coordi-
nates: the horizontal location (“X”) and the vertical location (“Y”). 
The Proxy
Understanding Page 
Coordinates

 9. fm 581
The points you see on the Proxy  
correspond to the selection handles 
you see when you select an object.
The point you select in the Proxy determines 
the content of the X and Y fields in the 
Transform panel or Control panel—select the 
upper-left corner (as in this example), and 
you’ll see the coordinates of that corner of the 
selection.
The point you select on the 
Proxy also sets the center of 
transformation.
The numbers you see in the X and Y fields of InDesign’s Transform 
and Control panels represent the horizontal and vertical distance of 
the selected point on the Proxy from the zero point on the rulers.
As you move farther to the right, the value in the X field increases; 
move the object to the left, and the value decreases. Horizontal loca-
tions to the left of the zero point are represented by negative num-
bers. As you move farther down on the page, the value in the Y field 
increases. Vertical locations above the zero point are represented 
by negative numbers. Note that this means that InDesign’s vertical 
coordinate system is upside down relative to the two-dimensional 
coordinate system you learned in geometry class (see Figure 9-7).
Hold down Option/Alt as you press Return/Enter to apply a change 
you’ve made to any of the Transform or Control panel fields, and 
InDesign copies the object and then applies the transformation to 
the duplicate (see Figure 9-8).
Duplicating As You 
Transform
Figure 9-5
Friendly Numbers
Figure 9-6
The Proxy
Proxy
Width
Height
Rotation
Shearing
Horizontal scaling
Vertical scaling
Horizontal coordinate*
Vertical coordinate*
*Coordinates of the point 
correspond to the point 
selected on the Proxy,  
and are measured  
relative to the current 
zero point on the ruler.
Constrain   
Proportions
The Control panel has all of the 
controls found in the Transform 
panel, and offers a few additional 
options, as well.
Most of the time, we use the  
Control panel, but it’s much  
harder to show in our screen shots.

582     6
The options in the Transform panel and Control panel control the 
way that transformations affect objects and their contents. 
Redefine Scaling as 100%. If you had Adjust Scaling Percentage 
enabled in Preferences when you scaled an object, you can make the 
panel fields display “properly” by choosing this option.
Transformation Presets. Some transformations are so common that 
Adobe added the following presets to the Transform and Control 
panels: Rotate 180 degrees, Rotate 90 degrees clockwise, Rotate 90 
degrees counter-clockwise, Flip Vertical, Flip Horizontal, Flip Both. 
These options are buttons in the Control panel (see Figure 9-9), or 
menu options in the Transform panel.
Dimensions Include Stroke Weight. What defines the dimensions of 
a path? Is it the geometric representation of the path itself? Or should 
it include the stroke weight applied to the path? We prefer to work 
with the geometric bounds of a path, so we turn off the Dimensions 
Include Stroke Weight option, which is turned on by default.
Panel Menu Options
Figure 9-7
Page Coordinates
Enter a value in the   
Horizontal Scaling,   
Vertical Scaling, Width,   
or Height fields…
…and press Option-Return (Macintosh) or Alt-Enter (Windows). 
InDesign applies the transformation to a copy of the selected object.
+x
-x
-y
+y
0x, 0y
36x, -36y
36x, 36y
0x, 0y
Traditional two-dimensional 
coordinate system (note that 
values on the y axis increase 
as you go up—the opposite of 
InDesign’s approach).
InDesign’s two-dimensional 
coordinate system. All coor-
dinates are measured from 
the zero point. x represents 
the horizontal location of   
a point; y represents the   
vertical location.
Figure 9-8
Duplicating As  
You Transform

 9. fm 583
Transformations Are Totals. When you select an object that’s con-
tained by a frame, should the panel fields reflect the state of the 
selected object relative to the pasteboard, or relative to the frame 
containing the object? That’s the question you answer by turning the 
Transformations are Totals option on the Transform panel or Con-
trol panel menus on or off (it’s on by default). When it’s on, InDesign 
displays the rotation, scaling percentages, and shear angle of the 
selection relative to the pasteboard. Turn this option off to display 
the information relative to the containing frame (see Figure 9-10).
Show Content Offset. If you nest one object inside another, and then 
select that nested item with the Direct Selection tool, what should 
appear in the X and Y fields of the Transform panel and Control 
panel? By default, the Show Content Offset option is turned on in 
either panel menu, so the X and Y fields display the offset of the 
nested object from the “parent” frame.
Moving Objects
There are many ways to move objects in InDesign—select the object 
and then try any of the methods shown here. (To move the content of 
a frame without moving the frame itself, select the Direct Selection 
tool and click inside the frame.)
Figure 9-10
Transformations  
Are Totals
The outer frame has been 
rotated 15 degrees. The inner 
frame has been rotated by 
20 degrees. The value shown 
in the Rotation field when 
you select the inner frame 
depends on the state of   
the Transformations are 
Totals option (on the   
Transform panel menu or 
Control panel menu)
Transformations Are 
Totals on: 35 degrees.
Transformations Are 
Totals off: 20 degrees.
Rotate 90 degrees clockwise
Flip vertical
Flip horizontal
Rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise
Figure 9-9
Transformation  
Preset Buttons

584     6
Figure 9-11
Moving Objects Using  
the X and Y Fields
Press Return/Enter to move the  
object to that location.
Move to 72
Move  
by 36
…enter the position 
in the X or Y field.
To move an object to a   
specific location on the page 
or pasteboard…
Press Return/Enter to move the object 
relative to its current position.
To move an object by   
a certain amount, add (to 
move to the right or down) 
or subtract (to move to the 
left or up) the amount to the 
value in the X or Y field.
To move an object, select the object with the Selection tool or the 
Direct Selection tool and drag—make sure not to drag the Content 
Grabber or you’ll move only the frame contents. Hold down Option/
Alt as you drag to duplicate the object.
The Live Screen Drawing option in Interface preferences deter-
mines what happens when you move an object. If Immediate is 
selected, the object moves when you drag. If Delayed is selected when 
you start dragging, you’ll see only a box representing an object; how-
ever, holding down the mouse button for a moment before dragging 
causes the object to move as you drag it.
When we need precision, we always move objects by entering num-
bers in the X and Y fields of the Transform or Control panel (see 
Figure 9-11). And it’s not just because we’re closet rocket scientists; 
it’s because we don’t trust the screen display. 
Select the object you want to move. In the Control panel, enter 
values in the X field to move the object horizontally and the Y field to 
move the object vertically. If you want to move the object to an abso-
lute position, enter a new value in the field; to move the object some 
distance relative to its current location, add or subtract that distance 
from the value in the panel field. Press Return/Enter.
Moving Objects   
by Dragging
Moving Objects with 
the Transform Panel or 
Control Panel

 9. fm 585
To use the Free Transform tool to move objects, position the tool over 
any part of the object other than the selection handles, and the Free 
Transform tool works just like the Selection tool. Drag the center 
point, and InDesign snaps it to any active grids or guides. Hold down 
Option/Alt as you drag to duplicate the object as you move it. 
You can also move objects using the Move dialog box. With the 
object selected, double-click the Selection tool, and specify options.
As if dragging by eye and specifying coordinates weren’t enough 
(in terms of movement options), InDesign also sports “nudge” keys. 
Select an object and press one of the arrow keys, and the element 
moves in that direction, using the increments you set in the Cursor 
Key field in the Units & Increments Preferences dialog box.
To move the selected object by ten times the distance you entered 
in the Cursor Key field, hold down Shift as you press the arrow key. 
To duplicate the selection as you move it, hold down Option/Alt as 
you press the arrow key.
When you want to duplicate an object and move the duplicate to a 
new location, or create a series of duplicates, turn to InDesign’s Step 
and Repeat feature. Select an object, then choose Step and Repeat 
from the Edit menu. In the Step and Repeat dialog box, enter the 
number of duplicates you want in the Repeat Count field, then enter 
the horizontal and vertical offsets for each duplicate. Or, select the 
“Create as a grid” option, and specify the number of rows and col-
umns in the grid. Click OK. See Figure 9-12.
InDesign’s Duplicate command remembers the settings from the 
Step and Repeat dialog box. The next time you choose Duplicate, the 
duplicate will be offset from the original by the same distance.
Moving Objects Using 
Other Methods
Duplicating and 
Moving Objects with 
Step and Repeat
Figure 9-12
Step and Repeat
Positive values in Horizontal 
Offset move the duplicates to the 
right of the original; negative 
values move them to the left.
Positive values in Vertical Offset 
move the duplicates down the page; 
negative values move them up.
Enter the number of   
duplicates you want in   
the Repeat Count field.
InDesign duplicates the 
object, spacing the new   
page items according to   
the values you entered.

586     6
Scaling
As is the case with other transformations, you can use a number of 
different methods to change the size of an object. For basic scaling, 
use the Scale tool or Selection tool. For more precise scaling, use the 
fields in the Transform or Control panel or the Scale dialog box.
When you want to scale an object until it “looks right,” use the Scale 
tool (see Figure 9-13).
1. Select the object you want to scale.
2. Select the Scale tool from the Tools panel (or press S).
3. Change the location of the center of transformation icon, if nec-
essary. To do this, either drag the icon to a new location or click 
one of the points in the Proxy in the Transform panel.
4. Drag the Scale tool horizontally to scale the object’s width or 
vertically to scale the object’s height. Dragging diagonally sizes 
the object’s width and height. Hold down Shift as you drag to 
scale the object proportionally. Hold down Option/Alt as you 
drag to duplicate the object and scale the duplicate. 
As you drag the Scale tool, InDesign displays the scaling per-
centages in the Horizontal Scaling and Vertical Scaling fields in the 
Control panel and Transform panel. If you’re scaling a page item 
(a rectangle, ellipse, polygon, line, or frame), these fields return to 
100 percent when you stop dragging. If you’ve selected an imported 
graphic with the Direct Selection tool before scaling it, the fields 
reflect the scaling applied to the object.
Scaling with the   
Scale Tool
Select an object, move the 
center of transformation 
icon (if necessary), and then 
drag the Scale tool on the 
page or pasteboard.
Hold down Shift to scale the object 
proportionally, or Option/Alt to scale 
a duplicate.
Once the object reaches the size you 
want, stop dragging.
Figure 9-13
Scaling an Object  
with the Scale Tool

 9. fm 587
Let’s look at a few other ways to scale.
▶If you use the Selection tool to drag an image or text frame, you 
resize it. But if you hold down Command/Ctrl while dragging, 
you scale the frame and its content. Hold down Shift as you drag 
to resize the object proportionally.
▶To scale a selected object using the Free Transform tool, select 
the Free Transform tool from the Tools panel. Position the tool 
above a selection handle, then drag. Hold down Option/Alt to 
scale the object proportionally around its center point, or hold 
down Shift to scale proportionally.
▶When you know you want to make an object larger or smaller 
by an exact percentage, or to scale the object to a specific width 
or height, use the Transform panel or Control panel (see Figure 
9-14).
Note that the Horizontal and Vertical Scale fields operate differ-
ently than the Width and Height fields. When you enter a value 
in the Horizontal Scale field or Vertical Scale field, and have 
selected the object using the Selection tool, the scaling is applied 
to the content of the object (if any). When you use the Width or 
Height field, the scaling is not applied to the object. Bonus tip: 
You can enter percentages in the Width and Height fields, and 
you can enter measurements in the Horizontal Scale and Verti-
cal Scale fields. Try it!
▶To scale using the Scale dialog box, select one or more objects 
and double-click the Scale tool. You can also choose Scale from 
the Transform submenu of the Object menu. In the Scale dialog 
box, set scaling options. To scale the object proportionally, turn 
on the Uniform option and enter a scaling percentage in the 
Scaling Using Other 
Methods
Press Return/Enter to apply the scaling change.
Enter a scaling percentage 
in the Horizontal Scale or 
Vertical Scale field, or enter 
a new value in the Width or 
Height field.
Select a point on the   
Proxy, if necessary.
Off
On
Turn on the Constrain 
Proportions control 
option, and InDesign 
applies scaling changes 
proportionally; turn it 
off to scale the object 
nonproportionally.
Figure 9-14
Scaling an Object Using 
the Transform Panel

588     6
Scale field. To scale the contents of a path, turn on the Scale 
Content option. 
▶Press a keyboard shortcut. OK, this one needs its own section.
You can also scale the selected object by pressing keyboard short-
cuts. Note, however, that these changes don’t appear in the scaling 
percentages of the Transform panel when you are scaling page items 
(rectangles, ellipses, polygons, lines, and text frames).
▶Press Command-. (period)/Ctrl-. to increase the scale of the 
object by one percent.
▶Press Command-, (comma)/Ctrl-, to decrease the scale by  
one percent.
▶Press Command-Option-. (period)/Ctrl-Alt-. to increase the  
scale by five percent.
▶Press Command-Option-, (comma)/Ctrl-Alt-, to decrease the  
scale by five percent.
Note that these shortcuts do exactly what they say: they scale the 
object relative to its current size, not its original size. They are the 
same as entering scaling percentages in the Horizontal Scale and 
Vertical Scale fields in the Control panel.
If you’d rather have your scaling keyboard shortcuts change the 
size of the object rather than the scaling percentage (as if you were 
entering values in the Width and Height fields of the Control panel), 
those shortcuts are available in the Keyboard Shortcuts dialog box.
We often want to scale a page item without scaling its stroke. This is 
especially true when we’re scaling frames containing images. To do 
this, turn off the Adjust Stroke Weight When Scaling option on the 
Transform Panel or Control panel menu before you scale the frame. 
This option is not available when the Adjust Scaling Percentage 
option is turned on (in the General panel of the Preferences dialog 
box). Oddly, it’s grayed out in the Transform panel menu, but disap-
pears from the Control panel menu altogether.
Rotating Objects
InDesign can rotate any object on a page, in .001-degree increments. 
The rotation angle shown is relative to the pasteboard (where 0 
Scaling with   
Keyboard Shortcuts
Scaling Strokes

 9. fm 589
degrees is horizontal) or to the frame containing the rotated object. 
If you rotate an object by 30 degrees, entering that value again will 
not change the rotation of the object. To do that, you’d need to enter 
“+30” following the value shown in the Rotation Angle field.
One advantage of using the Rotate tool is that you can manually 
move the center of transformation icon. Select the Rotate tools from 
the Tools panel (or press R). Drag the center of transformation to the 
point you want to rotate around, and then start dragging (see Figure 
9-15).
Follow these steps to rotate an object using the Selection tool (see 
Figure 9-16).
1. Select the Selection tool from the Tools panel (or press V).
2. Select the object you want to rotate. Click the Content Grabber if 
you want to rotate the image within the frame. Click the frame 
edge if you want to rotate the frame and its contents.
3. Position the tool anywhere outside the object’s selection handles, 
then drag. InDesign rotates the object around its center point, 
regardless of the Proxy setting. Hold down Shift as you drag to 
constrain rotation to 45-degree increments.
Using the Free Transform tool to rotate an object is basically the 
same as using the Selection tool. Position the tool anywhere outside 
the object’s selection handles, then drag (positioning the tool near 
the selection handles scales the object, so move a bit farther away). 
InDesign rotates the object around its center point. Hold down Shift 
as you drag to constrain rotation to 45-degree increments.
Rotating with   
the Rotate Tool
Rotating with the 
Selection Tool
Select the Rotate tool from the Tools 
panel, then move the center of trans-
formation icon, if necessary, to set 
the point you want to rotate around.
Drag the Rotate tool. If you pause for 
a second before you drag, InDesign 
displays a preview of the rotated 
object.
Figure 9-15
Rotating an Object  
Using the Rotate Tool

590     6
With the Selection tool (or the 
Free Transform tool), position the 
cursor outside one of the object’s 
selection handles.
Drag the handle to rotate the object. 
Hold down Shift to rotate in 45-degree 
increments. 
Figure 9-16
Rotating an Object with 
the Selection Tool
To rotate an object using the Transform panel or Control panel, 
follow these steps (see Figure 9-17).
1. Select the object or objects you want to rotate.
2. Click a point on the Proxy to set the point you want to rotate 
around, if necessary.
3.  Enter a new value in the Rotation Angle field. To rotate the 
object to a specific angle, enter that angle in the field. To rotate 
the object relative to its current rotation angle, add to or subtract 
from the value in the Rotation angle field.
You can enter positive numbers (such as “45”) or negative 
numbers (such as “-270”) between -360 and 360 degrees. Positive 
rotation angles rotate the selected object counterclockwise; nega-
tive values rotate the object clockwise. You enter rotation angles 
in .001-degree increments.
Rotating Objects   
Numerically
Set the center of   
transformation by clicking   
a point on the Proxy.
Enter an angle in the   
Rotation field and   
press Return/Enter.
InDesign rotates the 
selected object around 
the selected point.
Figure 9-17
Rotating an Object 
Using the Transform 
Panel or Control Panel

 9. fm 591
4. Press Return/Enter to rotate the object, or Option-Return/ 
Alt-Enter to rotate a copy of the object.
You can also rotate an object by entering numbers in the Rotate 
dialog box. Double-click the Rotate tool, and enter a rotation angle. 
Turn on Preview so you can see what’s going on.
When you rotate more than one object (we’re counting groups as 
single objects), the objects rotate around a single point. This point 
can be their joint geometric center, or around any other point you’ve 
specified. They don’t all rotate around their individual center points.
Reflecting Objects
Reflecting—or mirroring—objects in InDesign is very simple, and 
you can reflect, or “flip” an object over its vertical axis, its horizontal 
axis, or both its vertical and horizontal axes at once. That’s it. There’s 
no reflection tool, no need to enter a reflection angle anywhere.
To reflect an object, follow these steps (see Figure 9-18).
1. Select the object you want to reflect.
2. Choose Flip Vertical, Flip Horizontal, or Flip Both from the 
Transform panel menu. InDesign reflects the selected object.
Rotating Multiple 
Selected Objects
Select an object…
Flip Horizontal
Figure 9-18
Reflecting an Object
…and then choose one of 
the reflection options in the   
Control panel.
Flip Vertical
Flip Both
Note that reflecting an object 
across an angle is the same 
as reflecting the object across 
its horizontal or vertical axis 
and then rotating.

592     6
No shearing.
Horizontal shearing.
Vertical shearing.
When the object looks the way  
you want it to, stop dragging.
Select an object, then drag the 
Shear tool. As you drag, InDesign 
shears the selection.
Shearing Objects
Shearing (or skewing) an object makes it appear that the plane the 
object’s resting on has been rotated away from the plane of the page. 
It’s good for creating perspective effects—but it’s not a replacement 
for a serious 3D rotation program (see Figure 9-19).
No amount of shearing applied to objects on an InDesign page 
will produce wool.
To shear an object using the Shear tool, select the object and 
choose the Shear tool from the Tools panel. Change the location of 
the center of transformation icon. Drag the Shear tool. As you drag 
Figure 9-19
Shearing an Object
Select an object…
…enter a shear angle   
in the Shear field of the   
Transform panel or   
Control panel.
Press Return/Enter to shear the  
selection. Press Option-Return/ 
Alt-Enter to apply the shear to a  
copy of the selection.

 9. fm 593
the cursor, the skewing angles display in the Shearing Angle field of 
the Transform panel. The panel shows that vertical shearing is actu-
ally done by horizontal shearing (skewing) and rotating the object.
You can also shear an object using the Control panel by entering 
an angle in the Shear X Angle field. Typing a value in the Shear X 
Angle field only lets you skew (horizontal shear) the object. To create 
a vertical shear, type the same angle into the Rotation angle field.
If you Option/Alt-click the Shear X Angle icon, you can use the 
Shear dialog box to shear an object. 
Repeating Transformations
The options on the Transform Again submenu of the Object menu 
give you a way to repeat transformations you’ve recently applied (see 
Figure 9-20). You can repeat individual transformations, or you can 
repeat a series of transformations. InDesign will remember a trans-
Figure 9-20
Transform Again
In this example, we’ll select an  
object and rotate a copy of it (by 
pressing the Copy button) by a  
specified amount.
While the duplicate of the 
object is selected, we can 
press Command-Option-3/ 
Ctrl-Alt-3 to apply the   
transformation again.
You can repeat the transformation 
as many times as you like, and you 
can apply it to other objects.
formation until you apply a different transformation, and will keep 
track of any uninterrupted sequence of transformations.
How it works: select an object and apply a transformation, then 
select another object and choose one of the options from the Trans-

594     6
Figure 9-21
Transform Again  
vs. Transform Again 
Individually
After you’ve selected and 
transformed an object…
…you can select other objects and 
apply the same transformation.
Choose Transform Again, to 
transform all of the objects 
in the selection as a unit.
In this example, Transform 
Again rotates the objects 
around their common 
center; Transform Again 
Individually rotates each 
object around its own center.
Choose Transform Again  
Individually to transform each 
item in the selection.
form Again submenu of the Object menu or use the associated key-
board shortcut. 
There are four ways to use Transform Again:
▶Transform Again. Applies the most recent transformation to the 
selected object or objects.
▶Transform Again Individually. Applies the most recent trans-
formation to each object in the selection (see Figure 9-21).
▶Transform Sequence Again. Applies the most recent series of 
transformations to the selected objects (see Figure 9-22).
▶Transform Sequence Again Individually. Applies the most 
recent series of transformations to each object in the selection.
Want to make a series of objects the same size? Select one of the 
objects, then change its width and height. Select the other objects, 
and choose Transform Again Individually (see Figure 9-23). Fitting 
options that you apply to a frame can also be repeated using Trans-
form again (see Figure 9-24). 

 9. fm 595
Figure 9-22
Transform  
Sequence Again
Figure 9-23
Making Objects  
the Same Size
Object created by moving 
(with Copy), rotating, and 
scaling the original star.
Repeat the sequence of trans-
formations using Transform 
Sequence Again Individually.
Then repeat the sequence for 
the other stars in the row.
Select the other objects.
Choose Transform Sequence again 
Individually. InDesign makes all of 
the objects the same size.
In this example, we use 
Transform Sequence Again 
Individually rather than 
Transform Again Individu-
ally, because changing the 
width and height counts as 
two transformations.
Change the width and height  
of the object.
Select an object.

596     6
Grid Mode
When you’re dragging an object, you can press the arrow keys to 
duplicate the object into a grid. The InDesign team calls this “Grid 
Mode.” You can use Grid Mode to create a grid of objects when you’re 
placing multiple images, when you’re creating objects, or when you’re 
duplicating objects
In Grid Mode, use the arrow keys to change the number of rows 
and columns; use Command/Ctrl plus arrow keys to change the 
gutter space between either rows or columns; use Page Up and Page 
Down to change the gutter space between both rows and columns.
Placing multiple graphics into a grid. Select multiple files in the 
Place dialog box and click Open. Start dragging, and use the arrow 
keys to change the number of columns and rows of the placed images.
Drawing a grid of shapes or text frames. Select a tool that lets you 
draw a frame. Begin dragging. While still dragging, press the right 
arrow key to increase the number of columns and the up arrow key 
to increase the number of rows (see Figure 9-25).
When using the Polygon tool, press the Spacebar while dragging 
to turn on and off Grid Mode. When Grid Mode is off, pressing the 
arrow keys changes the star inset and number of sides.
Duplicating objects into a grid. Use the Selection tool to select an 
object. Hold down Option/Alt and begin dragging. While still drag-
ging, release the Alt or Option key, and press the right arrow and 
up arrow keys to increase the number of columns and rows. Drag a 
rectangle to specify the size of the grid, and release the mouse button.
Figure 9-24
Fitting and  
Transform Again
In this example, we have a 
variety of images in varying 
degrees of distress.
We apply proportional 
scaling to one of the 
graphics, and then 
apply Fit Content 
Proportionally and Fit 
Frame to Content.
We then select all of 
the other graphics 
and choose Transform 
Sequence Again Indi-
vidually. Much better!

 9. fm 597
With the Rectangle tool selected, 
start dragging...
...and then press the up and right 
arrow keys to create a grid.
Figure 9-25
Grid Mode
Here’s a nifty trick. If multiple column guides appear on the cur-
rent spread, InDesign automatically uses the gutter width as the 
amount of space between each frame in the grid. That makes it easy 
to place a grid of images neatly within the columns. And if you’re 
drawing text frames, the frames are threaded automatically.
Aligning and Distributing Objects
InDesign features both object alignment and object distribution. 
InDesign aligns objects based on the object’s bounding box, and 
bases the alignment on the option you’ve selected in the Align To 
pop-up menu in the Align panel. You can align objects to the selec-
tion, to one of the objects, to the page, to the margins, or to the spread 
by choosing the correspondingly named menu options.
When you distribute objects you’re telling InDesign to evenly 
arrange the selected objects.
When you’ve selected the objects you want to align, press Shift-F7 to 
display the Align panel. Click one of the alignment buttons to align 
the selected objects (see Figure 9-26).
If you’ve locked an object in the selection, InDesign doesn’t move 
that object when you apply an alignment. If an object doesn’t seem 
to be following the herd, unlock it by clicking the object’s lock icon.
While none of the alignment or distribution options are assigned 
a keyboard shortcut by default, you can use the Keyboard Shortcuts 
dialog box to add this feature to your copy of InDesign (you’ll find 
them in the Object Editing section).
With InDesign CS6, you can align objects to a selected object. 
Select objects using any method, and then click one of the selected 
objects to make it the key object. When you do so, Key Object is 
selected for Align To in the Align panel. You can click to select a dif-
ferent key object. Click an alignment option to align the objects to 
the key object. Cancel by selecting a different Align To option.
Aligning Objects

598     6
Have you ever wanted to space a bunch of objects at even distances 
from each other (from each other’s centers, at any rate) across a par-
ticular horizontal measurement? If you have, InDesign’s Distribute 
feature should make your day. To distribute the selected objects 
inside the rectangle defined by the objects’ bounding box, click one 
of the distribute buttons in the Align panel. InDesign distributes the 
objects as you’ve specified (see Figure 9-27).
To distribute (or space) the objects by a specified distance, use the 
Use Spacing option in either the Distribute Objects section of the 
Align panel or the Distribute Spacing section (see Figure 9-28). 
When you click one of the buttons in the Distribute Objects sec-
tion, the value you enter in the Use Spacing field sets the distance 
between the object sides (top, bottom, right, and left) or object cen-
ters (vertical or horizontal). If you enter 12 points, for example, and 
then click the Horizontal Distribute Lefts button, InDesign spaces 
the left edges of the objects in the selection 12 points apart.
When you use the Use Spacing option in the Distribute Spacing 
section, InDesign spaces the objects apart by the distance you enter 
in the Use Spacing field. Click the Vertical Distribute Space button 
to distribute the objects vertically, or click the Horizontal Distribute 
Space button to distribute the objects horizontally. The objects do 
not need to be the same shape or size.
Distributing Objects
Select the objects   
you want to align.
Use this pop-up  
to set the basis for  
the alignment or  
distribution (you  
can use the bounds 
of the selection, the 
page, page margins, 
or the spread).
Click one of the alignment 
buttons. InDesign aligns the 
selected objects.
When you want to apply 
both a horizontal and a   
vertical alignment, it’s a   
two-step process: apply   
one of the alignments,   
then apply the other. 
In this example, we’ve 
aligned the objects 
to their horizontal 
centers, then to their 
vertical centers.
Figure 9-26
Aligning Objects

 9. fm 599
When you select several objects, you can resize the space between the 
objects proportionally instead of resizing the actual objects. Simply 
start dragging a selection handle and then hold down the Spacebar 
while still dragging.
The Gap tool lets you adjust the gap size between objects (see Figure 
9-29). The Gap tool is oddly counter-intuitive when you first start 
using it, because you’re not used to working on the space between 
objects. Once you get used to it, you’ll find it’s an easy way to adjust 
your layout.
You can also use the Gap to resize several objects that have com-
monly aligned edges simultaneously, while keeping the gaps between 
them fixed. 
Live Distribute
Using the Gap Tool
Select the objects   
you want to distribute.
Click one of the distribution 
buttons. InDesign distributes 
the selected objects evenly 
across the bounds of the 
selection…
…or use the Use Spacing 
field to space the correspond-
ing object faces (top, bottom, 
side, or center) by a specific 
distance apart.
Figure 9-27
Distributing Objects
To apply an even spacing 
between objects, expand the 
panel to show the Distribute 
Spacing options, then click 
one of the buttons. To space 
the objects apart by a specific   
distance, enter a value in   
the Use Spacing field. 
Figure 9-28
Distributing Space  
Between Objects

600     6
The Gap tool ignores locked objects and master page items.
Select the Gap tool from the Tools panel (or press U), and then 
move the pointer between two objects. Again, you’re working on the 
space between objects, not the objects themselves. Use modifier keys 
to determine how the gap is resized and which objects are affected 
(see Table 9-1).
Here’s a tip that might help—the Gap tool doesn’t have to be 
between objects. You can use it to change the space between objects 
and the edge of the page. 
Drag down to move gap and resize 
objects.
Shift-drag to affect only the nearest 
objects.
Select the Gap tool and move the 
cursor between objects.
Command/Ctrl-drag to increase the 
gap without moving objects.
Command/Ctrl+Option/Alt-drag 
to increase the gap and move the 
objects.
Figure 9-29
Gap Tool
Option/Alt-drag below objects to 
increase the gap and move objects.

 9. fm 601
To do this:
Using the Gap tool, do this:
Move the gap and resize all objects 
along the gap.
Drag between two objects
Move the gap between only the two 
nearest objects.
Shift-drag
Resize the gap instead of moving it.
Command/Ctrl-drag
Resize the gap between only the 
two nearest objects.
Shift+Command/Ctrl-drag
Move the gap and objects in the 
same direction.
Option/Alt-drag
Move the gap and only the nearest 
objects in the same direction.
Shift+Option/Alt-drag
Resize the gap and move the 
objects.
Command/Ctrl+Option/
Alt-drag
Resize the gap and move only the 
nearest objects.
Shift+Command/
Ctrl+Option/Alt-drag
Table 9-1
Gap Tool Shortcuts
When some people first start using the Gap tool, they can’t figure 
out how to “push” a row of objects away from other objects. The trick 
is to move the Gap tool to the other side of the objects and “pull.” It’ll 
make sense once you start using the tool.
Locking Objects
In InDesign, you can lock an object’s position—which means that 
you can’t transform it. You can determine whether locked objects 
can be selected. If the Prevent Selection of Locked Objects option is 
turned on in General preferences, you cannot select a locked object. 
If it’s turned off, you can select the object and copy it or change its 
appearance; you just can’t transform it.
To lock an object, select it and press Command-L/Ctrl-L (or 
choose Lock from the Object menu). To unlock an object, click its 
lock icon (or choose Unlock All on Spread from the Object menu). 
You can also lock or unlock an object in the Layers panel.
Of course, another good way to lock an object is to place it on a 
layer and then lock the layer. An object on a locked layer is totally 
locked; you can’t even select it.

602     6
Hiding Objects
You can hide an object if you don’t want it to be printed, exported, or 
selected. To hide objects, choose Hide from the Object menu or use 
the Layers panel. Choose Show All On Spread from the Object menu 
to view all hidden objects
Transform Your Life!
Fuzzy caterpillars turn into moths. Clark Kent jumps into a phone 
booth and emerges as Superman. Werewolves stalk the moors under 
the full moon. Bewildered authors turn into parents. These transfor-
mations are all everyday, natural phenomena.
Make InDesign’s transformation tools an integral part of how 
you work with the program, and you’ll have their powerful, almost 
magical forces on your side.

603
Color communicates, telling us things about the object bearing the 
color. Without color cues, we’d have a hard time guessing the ripe-
ness of a fruit or distinguishing a poisonous mushroom from an 
edible one. And many animals would have a hard time figuring out 
when to mate, or with whom.
We associate colors with human emotions: we are green with 
envy; we’ve got the blues; we see red. Colors affect our emotions as 
well. Various studies suggest that we think best in a room of one 
color, and relax best in a room of another color.
What does all this mean? Color’s important. A rule of thumb 
in advertising is that a color advertisement gets several times the 
response of a black-and-white ad. Designers of mail-order catalogs 
tell us that color is often cited as the reason for buying a product—
and it’s usually the reason a product is returned.
InDesign features a formidable array of features dedicated to cre-
ating, editing, applying, and printing colors. In addition, InDesign’s 
color management can make what you see on your screen much 
closer to what you’ll get when you print. Before we go any further, 
however, we have to talk about color printing.
Color

10

604     6
Seeing Color, Printing Color
It’s impossible to discuss the process of creating and using colors 
without first talking a little about printing and visual perception. 
The visible spectrum is the range of light wavelengths visible to the 
human eye. It’s the job of our scanners, monitors, printers, and print-
ing presses to reproduce the colors we see in the visible spectrum.
The range of color a device, color model, or printing method is 
capable of reproducing is referred to as its color gamut. There’s no 
device, apart from your eye, that’s capable of reproducing the range 
of light that your eye is capable of seeing. And even your eye isn’t 
consistent from day to day.
Spot and   
Process Inks
Printing presses put ink on paper one ink at a time. Some presses 
have more than one printing cylinder and can print several colors of 
ink on a sheet of paper in one pass through the press, but each print-
ing cylinder carries only one color of ink.
Spot-color printing is simple: your commercial printer uses inks 
that exactly match the color you want (or mixes inks to get the same 
result), then loads the press with that ink. In spot-color printing, we 
sometimes use “tint builds”—screens of inks printed on top of each 
other—to create a new color without using another ink. In process-
color printing, tint builds are where it’s at; we use overlapping screens 
of four inks (cyan, magenta, yellow, and black) to simulate part of the 
spectrum of visible color. If everything’s gone well, the dots of the 
different inks are placed near each other in a pattern called a rosette.
Process-color printing can’t simulate all the colors our eyes can 
see (notably very saturated colors, or metallic and fluorescent colors), 
but it can print color photographic images. Spot colors can print 
any color you can make with pigments, but aren’t generally used 
to reproduce color photographic images (that’s what process color 
printing was designed to be good at).
Color in InDesign
Now that you know all about color perception and color printing, it’s 
time to get down to the process of specifying and applying colors in 
your InDesign publication.
Named and   
Unnamed Colors
InDesign has two basic methods for working with color: unnamed 
colors and color swatches. Both unnamed colors and color swatches 
can change the appearance of an object’s fill or stroke, but swatches 

 10.  605
establish a relationship between the object and the named color 
swatch. Change the definition of the color swatch, and the color of 
all of the objects you’ve applied that swatch to will change as well. 
Here’s another way to look at it: unnamed colors are to color 
swatches as local text formatting is to a character style. You get the 
appearance you’re looking for, but you don’t get the link between the 
style (in this case, the color swatch) and the object. 
Why do you need that link? Because people change their minds. 
The client’s corporate color may have been Pantone 327 when you 
started the job, but it’s now Pantone 199. 
If you’ve used unnamed colors, there’s nothing to do but claw 
your way through the objects in your publication, selecting and 
changing each affected object. If you’ve used named color swatches, 
just change the definition of the swatch, and the objects are updated.
Colors and Inks
It’s worth noting that colors and inks are often two separate beasts. 
Sure, a spot color swatch corresponds directly to an ink you’ll use 
to print the publication. However, most process color swatches are 
made up of some or all of the four process inks (cyan, magenta, 
yellow, and black). 
When it comes time to print, the ink list (in the Output panel of 
the Print dialog box) displays the inks needed to print the colors you 
have defined in your publication. You’ll always see the process inks 
(cyan, magenta, yellow, and black) in the ink list, whether you’ve 
defined process colors or not. If you’ve defined spot colors, you’ll see 
the spot inks associated with those colors in the ink list. If you want, 
you can simulate your spot colors with process inks using the Ink 
Manager (we cover the Ink Manager later in this chapter). 
Color Models 
InDesign lets you define colors using any of three color models—
CMYK, RGB, and LAB. Which color model should you use? That 
depends on how you plan to produce your publication.
Process colors. If you’re working with process colors, specify your 
color using the CMYK color model or a CMYK color-matching system, 
or be ready for some surprises when your publication gets printed. 
It’s always best to look at a printed sample of the process color (like 
those in the Trumatch or Pantone Process swatch books) and enter 
the values given in the sample book for the color. In other words, 
trust what you see on paper, not what you see on your screen.
Spot colors. You can define a spot color using any color space: RGB, 
LAB, CMYK, or a swatch book like a Pantone color. It really doesn’t 

606     6
matter what the color looks like on the screen, as long as you let your 
output provider know what color of ink they should use. That said, if 
you’re going to use a spot color, it’s usually best to choose colors from 
swatch libraries (such as the Pantone libraries), which we cover later 
in this chapter.
Onscreen colors. If you’re creating a publication for on-screen distri-
bution (such as a SWF or interactive PDF), use the RGB color model. 
Tints. If you’re trying to create a tint of an existing color (process or 
spot). You can base your tint on a spot color or a process color, but 
you can’t base tints on another tint. You can mix tints of spot colors 
with a mixed ink swatch, which we discuss later in this chapter.
Color Conversion Errors. When you convert a color from one color 
model to another—from RGB to CMYK, for example—a certain 
amount of error is introduced by the process of conversion. This is 
largely because the color models don’t cover the same color gamut, 
and there is often more than one way to represent the same color in 
a different color space. Each time you convert the color, the round-
ing error is compounded: if you convert 100C 10M 50Y 0K to RGB, 
you’ll get 0R 230G 128B—converting that RGB color back to CMYK 
will yield a color defined as 90C 0M 40Y 10K. Just remember: There’s 
no “round trip” in color model conversion.
InDesign’s Color Controls
InDesign’s controls for working with color are found in several 
panels and menus. The most important panels are the Toolbox, 
because it contains the Fill selector and the Stroke selector, and the 
Swatches panel, because it contains tools for defining, editing, and 
applying swatches (which can be colors, gradients, or tints) to objects. 
The Swatches panel is also duplicated in the Control panel, where you 
can quickly apply a stroke or fill.
You can also use the Color panel and the Gradient panel to create 
and apply unnamed colors and gradients—but, as we’ve noted earlier, 
you’ll be better off if you use named color swatches. If you apply a 
color to an object using the Color panel, there is no swatch associated 
with it—it’s an unnamed color. Unnamed colors are a nightmare for 
output providers and co-workers because it’s hard for them to figure 
out what colors you used if they need to troubleshoot your file. They 
can also be a nightmare for you if you ever need to go back to change 

 10.  607
a color. Given that everything you can do using the Color panel can 
be accomplished using the Swatches panel, we recommend just leav-
ing the Color panel closed.
Fill and Stroke   
Selectors
At the bottom of the Tool panel and in the upper-left corner of the 
Swatches panel and the Color panel, you’ll see the Fill selector and 
the Stroke selector. These aren’t labeled in any way (unless you count 
the tool help we always turn off), but the Fill selector is the filled 
square on the left (here’s proof that InDesign’s user interface, while 
easy to use, is hard to write about). When you want to work with 
an object’s fill, click the Fill selector; to work with an object’s stroke, 
press the Stroke selector (the outlined square). InDesign shows you 
which selector is active by bringing it to the front.
Honestly, we rarely actually click on those squares; rather, we use 
these favorite shortcuts for working with the Fill and Stroke selectors.
▶ Press X (this is another of those keyboard shortcuts that doesn’t 
work when you’re editing text) to toggle between the Fill selector 
and the Stroke selector.
▶ Press Shift-X to swap fill and stroke colors (this is the same as 
clicking the double-headed arrow Swap Fill and Stroke icon).
▶ Press D to apply the default fill and stroke colors to the selected 
object (black stroke and a “None” fill).
▶ To apply the currently selected swatch to an object’s stroke or fill, 
click the Apply Color button (or click the swatch itself, or press 
comma). To remove a fill or stroke from the selected object, click 
the appropriate selector and then click the Apply None button 
(or click the None swatch in the Swatches panel, or press /). To 
apply the last-used gradient, click the Apply Gradient button at 
the bottom of the Tool panel (or press period).
Swatches Panel 
The Swatches panel is InDesign’s “color control center”—it’s where 
you create, edit, and apply colors, tints, and gradients. The Swatches 
panel often displays a bewildering array of icons and symbols. What 
does it all mean? To find out, take a look at Figure 10-1.
Press Command-Option/Ctrl-Alt and click inside the Swatches 
panel to activate the list. Once you’ve done this, you can select a 
color by typing its name, or move up and down in the list of swatches 
using the arrow keys. (But note that this will change the color of any 
selected objects on any page. We prefer to press Command-Shift-A/
Ctrl-Shift-A to deselect all objects before messing with swatches.)
Stroke selector active
Fill selector active
Fill text selector active

608     6
Creating a color swatch. To create a color swatch, follow these steps 
(see Figure 10-2).
1. Choose New Color Swatch from the Swatches panel menu. 
InDesign displays the New Color Swatch dialog box, set to 
duplicate whatever the currently selected color is. As long as 
None or Paper is not selected in the Swatches panel, you can 
also open this dialog box by Option/Alt-clicking on the New 
Swatch button at the bottom of the panel.
2. Enter a name for the new color swatch (it’s optional—InDesign 
will have filled in the Name field with a default name).
3. Define the color using the controls in the New Color Swatch 
dialog box. 
4. Click the OK button or press Return/Enter to close the dialog 
box. InDesign adds the new color swatch to the list of swatches 
shown in the Swatches panel. Alternatively, you can click the 
Add button to add the swatch to the list and immediately start 
working on a new swatch (without closing the dialog box first).
The colors “None” and 
“Black” cannot be edited.
Brackets indicate 
default colors
Tint swatch
Delete Swatch button
Show All Swatches button
Show Color Swatches button
Show Tint Swatches button
New Swatch button
Gradient swatches
Alternative views of 
the Swatches panel
Small name
Large swatches
RGB color icon
Spot color icon
Registration color icon
CMYK icon
LAB color icon
Figure 10-1
Swatches Panel
Select this to hide the 
Tint, Object selector, and 
Stroke/Fill selector. (Why 
would you do this?)
Process color icon
To display the Swatches 
panel, press F5.
Mixed ink icon
Small swatches 
(hover cursor over 
color to see title)
Spot color swatch
Process color swatches

 10.  609
Adding Unnamed Colors. As we said earlier, if you’ve used the 
Color panel to apply a color to an object, that color will not appear 
in the Swatches panel; it’s an unnamed color. Fortunately, there are 
two ways to add unnamed colors to your Swatches panel. First, you 
can add unnamed colors by selecting the object colored with the 
unnamed color, then clicking the New Swatch button (or choose 
New Color Swatch from the Swatches panel menu, then click OK). 
InDesign adds the color applied to the object to the list of colors in 
the Swatches panel.
If you’ve created more than one unnamed color, or you’re work-
ing with a document in which someone else applied unnamed colors, 
you can add all these colors to the Swatches panel at once by selecting 
Add Unnamed Colors from the panel’s menu.
Figure 10-2
Creating a  
Color Swatch
Choose New Color Swatch 
from the Swatches panel 
menu…
InDesign displays the New 
Color Swatch dialog box.
Set up the color type (spot 
or process) and color mode 
(the model used to define the 
color), then adjust the color 
values. 
InDesign adds the new 
color swatch to the list of 
available swatches.
…or turn on the Name with 
Color Value option to have 
InDesign enter a color name.
Enter a name for the color…
Click the OK button 
when you’re done.
…or click the Add 
Swatch button.

610     6
Adding Colors from a Swatch Library. Most of the time, we think 
you should add colors from swatch libraries. Why? Because your 
commercial printer wants you to (when they talk in their sleep, they 
call out Pantone numbers and common process tint builds), and 
because it’s the quickest way to add a named color. To choose a color 
from a color library, follow the steps for adding a color, above, but 
choose a swatch library from the Color Mode menu in the New Color 
Swatch dialog box (see Figure 10-3). This differs from Adobe Illustra-
tor, which forces you to open special swatch library panels.
In some cases, you can also change the Color Mode after select-
ing a color swatch. For example, if you need to simulate a Pantone 
spot color using process colors, first specify the Pantone color, then 
change the Color Mode pop-up menu to CMYK and the Color Type 
pop-up menu to Process. The CMYK values you get depend on the 
current status of the Use Standard Lab Values for Spots checkbox in 
the Ink Manager (see “Ink Manager,” later in this chapter). Of course, 
some Pantone colors don’t convert to process colors particularly well 
because you can’t make any given hue just using process colors.
Adding Swatches from Another InDesign Publication. To add 
swatches stored in a different document, choose Other Library from 
the Color Mode menu in the New Color Swatch dialog box. InDesign 
displays the Open a File dialog box. Locate and select a document, 
then click the Open button. InDesign displays the swatches defined 
in that document, and you can add them to the current publication 
just as you’d add swatches from any swatch library.
Figure 10-3
Working with  
Swatch Libraries
Choose the swatch library 
you want to open from the 
Color Mode pop-up menu.

 10.  611
You can also import color swatches from other InDesign files by 
choosing Load Swatches from the Swatches panel menu. Or, to save 
individual swatches for use in other documents or Creative Suite 
applications, select them in the Swatches panel and choose Save 
Swatches for Exchange from the panel menu. This creates an .ase file 
which you can load with Load Swatches.
Out of Gamut Warning. InDesign constantly monitors the values of 
the colors you create, and when a color swatch definition falls outside 
the gamut defined by the default CMYK document profile, InDesign 
displays an alert icon next to the color sliders in the New Color 
Swatch or Swatch Options dialog box. To adjust the color definition 
so that it falls in the gamut of the separations profile, click the alert 
icon. We discuss document profiles in detail when we explore color 
management later in this chapter. If you choose colors from swatch 
libraries or using the CMYK mode, you won’t see this alert.
Creating a   
Tint Swatch
To create a new tint swatch, follow these steps (see Figure 10-4).
1. Select a color swatch in the Swatches panel. If you select a tint 
swatch, the new tint will be based on the same color as the exist-
ing tint swatch—you can’t create a tint based on a tint.
2. Choose New Tint Swatch from the Swatches panel menu. 
InDesign displays the New Tint Swatch dialog box.
3. Enter a new value in the Tint field or drag the slider.
4. Click the OK button or press Enter to close the dialog box and 
add the tint to the list of swatches in the Swatches panel.
If you remove a color (see “Deleting a Swatch,” later in this chap-
ter), all tint swatches based on that color will change to tints of the 
color you choose in the Delete Color dialog box. If, as you remove a 
color, you choose to convert the color to the default colors “None” or 
“Paper,” InDesign removes all of the tints based on that color from the 
Swatches panel. This is also what happens when you remove a color 
swatch and choose Unnamed Swatch as the Delete Color option.
Creating a   
Gradient Swatch
To create a gradient swatch, follow these steps (see Figure 10-5).
1. Choose New Gradient Swatch from the Swatches panel menu. 
InDesign displays the New Gradient Swatch dialog box.
Out of gamut 
warning

612     6
2. Enter a name for the gradient (the default name of “New Gradi-
ent Swatch” isn’t particularly useful). Edit the gradient’s ramp 
and color attributes using any or all of the following techniques.
▶Click on one of the gradient stops to edit it. Or, to add a new 
gradient stop, click below the gradient ramp.
▶To change the color of a gradient stop, select the stop, then 
adjust the color definition using the controls above the  
gradient ramp. Note that you can dial in a color or pick 
Swatches from the Stop Color pop-up menu (to choose a 
color you’re already saved as a swatch). You can even pick the 
Paper swatch as a gradient stop color.
▶To change the position of a gradient stop, drag it  
along the ramp.
Figure 10-4
Creating a Tint Swatch
Select the color you want   
to use as the “base” color   
for the tint.
Choose New Tint 
Swatch from the 
Swatches panel menu.
InDesign displays the New 
Tint Swatch dialog box.
Enter a tint value, then   
click the OK button.
InDesign adds the tint swatch 
to the Swatches panel.

 10.  613
▶ To delete a gradient stop, drag it away from the ramp.
▶ To change the midpoint location between any two gradient 
stops, drag the midpoint icon along the top of the ramp.
3. Once the gradient looks the way you want it to, click the OK 
button to add the gradient swatch to the Swatches panel. You 
can then apply this gradient to any object (or even text) as easily 
as applying a color swatch.
You can also build a gradient swatch directly within the Gradient 
panel by dragging swatches from the Color or Swatches panel on top 
of the gradient bar (or on top of gradient stops). When you’re done 
with designing the blend, drag the preview swatch from the Gradient 
panel into the Swatches panel.
Also, once you’ve created a gradient swatch and applied it to an 
object on your page, you can fine-tune that object’s gradient using 
the Gradient panel—reversing the order of the blend, dragging the 
Figure 10-5
Creating a  
Gradient Swatch
Choose New Gradient 
Swatch from the Swatches 
panel menu.
InDesign displays the New 
Gradient Swatch dialog box.
To set the color of a gradient stop, select   
the stop and then adjust the color values   
using the controls above the gradient ramp.
InDesign adds the gradient 
swatch to the Swatches panel.
Choose Linear or Radial 
from the Type pop-up menu.

614     6
gradient stops, and so on. Most importantly, the Gradient panel is 
where you can adjust a blend’s angle. (Unfortunately, gradient angle 
can’t be built in to a gradient swatch; you have to change that manu-
ally for each object or use an object style.)
Note that you cannot assign transparency (opacity) to a gradient 
stop, as you can in Illustrator. Instead, you must use the Gradient 
Feather effect. We hope this changes in the next version.
Mixed Ink Swatches 
If you can overlay two tints of process colors to create a third color, 
it stands to reason that you can do the same thing with spot colors. 
InDesign’s Mixed Ink Swatch feature helps considerably, because it 
lets you build a single color based on varying percentages of other 
colors in your Swatches panel. However, there are some issues you 
need to think about when mixing spot colors (also called “tint builds” 
or “multi-ink colors”).
▶ Most spot colors are made with inks that have a different con-
sistency than process-color inks; the more opaque the inks, the 
harder it is to mix varying tints of them on a page.
▶ Some inks don’t tint well; for instance, metallic and fluorescent 
inks lose much of their special appearance unless you use a very 
coarse halftone.
▶ There’s only one spot-color swatch book that shows what hap-
pens when you mix colors together (the Pantone Two-Color 
Selector), and while it’s extensive, it certainly doesn’t show every 
combination of every spot color on the market. Therefore, there’s 
often a lot more guessing involved when you mix spot colors.
Discuss multi-ink colors with your printer before jumping in and 
using them. Ask them if it’ll be okay to mix two particular colors 
on press. Perhaps they’ll make a “draw-down” for you so you can 
see how the colors will look when they’re mixed together (though 
this only shows you what the colors will look like when they’re over-
printed at 100 percent).
Making a Mixed Ink Swatch. It was painful to mix spot colors in the 
old days because you had to duplicate objects, apply a different color 
and tint to each one, and then make sure one properly overprinted 
the other. Now, mixing colors is as easy as one, two, three.
1. Choose New Mixed Ink Swatch from the Swatches panel menu.
2. Click in the checkbox to the left of a swatch color, then type in 
the percentage in the field on the right or use the color slider (see 

 10.  615
Figure 10-6). Repeat this for each color you want included in the 
swatch.
3. Click OK to finish, or click Add to add this swatch and start 
making a new one right away.
You can even mix process colors with spot colors in this dialog 
box. For example, you might want to create darker shades of a spot 
color by mixing it with a tint of black ink.
When you print color separations, each color appears on its 
proper plate, just as you’d expect. However, each color in a mixed ink 
swatch needs a correct halftone angle, or else you’ll get dot-doubling 
(halftone spots that overprint each other, creating muddy colors) or 
moiré patterns when your pages come off press. We discuss halftone 
angles in Chapter 11, “Printing.”
Figure 10-6
Making a Mixed  
Ink Swatch
Click in this column to add 
an ink to the mix
Drag the sliders or enter 
percentages to specify the 
contribution of each ink to 
the mix
Mixed Ink Groups. Once you’ve got the hang of mixed ink swatches, 
you’re going to want to use them all the time because they make two- 
and three-color jobs look much more interesting. However, it’s a pain 
in the tuchus to make a bunch of similar mixed ink swatches. That’s 
where mixed ink groups comes in handy. InDesign can mix two or 
more colors together in varying percentages for you. Unfortunately, 
the user interface is confusing at best. Here’s how you do it.
1. Select New Mixed Ink Group from the Swatches panel menu.
2. Give the group a name (preferably something descriptive).
3. Choose which inks you want in the group by clicking in the 
checkbox in the left column. You must pick at least two colors, of 
which one must be a spot color (see Figure 10-7).
4. For each ink, pick an initial tint. For example, let’s say you’re 
trying to make darker tints of your Pantone color by adding 

616     6
black. The initial value for the Pantone would be 100 percent 
and the initial tint for black could be 10 percent.
5. The Repeat value tells InDesign how many separate ink swatches 
it should build. Choosing a Repeat of 4 results in five inks: the 
initial swatch plus four more. Set Repeat to 0 (zero) to keep the 
color at the initial tint throughout the group.
6. If the Repeat value is anything other than zero, you can set how 
much each repeat increases in the Increment field. For instance, 
you might want an ink to increment by 15 percent, to get 
swatches of 15 percent, 30 percent, 45 percent, and 60 percent.
7. Click the Preview Swatches button to see a list of all the swatches 
InDesign will build when you click OK. This “preview” is pretty 
silly, as it just shows you a bunch of little color swatches, but at 
least it helps you see if you made some obvious mistake (like set-
ting Repeat to 50 instead of 5).
8. Click OK when you’re satisfied.
When you build a mixed ink swatch group, InDesign adds all 
the new swatches to the Swatches panel, plus a “group” swatch. You 
can’t apply this group swatch to an object; it’s just there so that you 
Figure 10-7
Making a Mixed  
Ink Group
InDesign assigns   
spectacularly unhelpful 
names to each swatch.
The mixed ink group swatch
Individual ink swatches in a 
group act like any other swatch.
Pay attention to this 
number—it’s easy to end up 
with too many swatches.
Clicking in this column   
turns inks on or off.
Enter the initial, repeat,   
and increment values   
for each ink.

 10.  617
can later go back and edit the group. Note that InDesign names each 
swatch in the group with a number (like Swatch 1, Swatch 2, and so 
on) rather than anything that would actually be helpful in identi-
fying what the color is. If this annoys you as much as it annoys us, 
please email someone at Adobe and complain.
Editing Groups. You can edit a mixed ink group at any time by 
double-clicking on the group swatch in the Swatches panel (or, more 
slowly, clicking on it and choosing Swatch Options from the panel 
menu; see Figure 10-8). The Swatch Options dialog box lets you 
rename the group, remove inks from the group (by clicking in the left 
column next to the ink’s name), swap one ink for another (by click-
ing on the ink name and picking from the pop-up menu), or convert 
the swatches to process color. We can’t recommend converting spot 
colors to process colors in this way; the results may not match your 
expectations. And deleting colors from the list is problematic, too, 
because InDesign won’t actually remove redundant swatches (so you 
usually get a bunch of swatches that are exactly the same).
You might want to swap one ink for another if, for instance, you 
have a monthly newsletter that uses a different Pantone color each 
month. If you used the mixed ink group swatches throughout your 
document, you’d simply need to change the ink in the group and the 
whole file’s colors would change in one fell swoop.
Process Color Groups. Earlier, we noted that you must have one spot 
color in your mixed ink group. Fortunately, there’s always a work-
around. Let’s say you just want various process-color green swatches. 
You could make a mixed ink group with cyan, yellow, and a spot 
color—but leave both the Initial and Repeat fields for the spot color 
set to 0 (zero). Then, after clicking OK, you could double-click on the 
group swatch and delete the spot color. This converts all the swatches 
to normal process-color color swatches. (But there’s no way to make 
this a group again, other than the normal Undo feature.)
Figure 10-8
Mixed Ink  
Group Options
Click in this column to   
turn an ink on or off.
Use the pop-up menus 
to change the base inks 
in the mixed ink group.

618     6
Managing Swatches 
Once you’ve built up an armory of color, tint, gradient, and mixed 
ink swatches, you need to know how best to manage them.
Changing the order of the swatches in the Swatches panel. You can 
change the order in which colors appear in the Swatches panel by 
dragging them up or down in the panel. This can be handy when 
you’ve got a long list of colors and want to position frequently used 
colors near the top of the panel. (Be careful to deselect all objects 
before playing in this panel or you may apply colors accidentally.)
Editing a Swatch. To edit a swatch, do one of the following:
▶ Double-click the swatch in the Swatches panel. (We don’t use 
this shortcut because the first click applies the swatch to the fill 
or stroke of any object we’ve selected, or applies the swatch to 
the default fill or stroke if no object is selected.)
▶ Select a swatch in the Swatches panel, then choose Swatch 
Options from the Swatches panel menu. Again, this method 
applies the swatch to the selection or to the document defaults, 
so we tend to avoid it.
▶ Right-click (or Control-click with a one-button mouse) on a 
swatch and choose Swatch Options to open the swatch for edit-
ing. We always use this method, as it does not apply the swatch 
to the selection or to the document default fill or stroke.
After any of the above actions, InDesign displays the dialog box 
appropriate to the type of swatch you clicked (the Edit Color Swatch, 
Edit Tint Swatch, or Edit Gradient Swatch dialog box). Make changes 
to the swatch definition, then click the OK button to close the dialog 
box. InDesign updates the appearance of all the objects formatted 
using the swatch.
Note that if you’re looking for a different shade of the same basic 
CMYK color, you can hold down the Shift key while dragging one of 
the sliders. This moves the other sliders at the same time to achieve a 
lighter version of the same hue.
Deleting a Swatch. To delete a swatch from a publication, follow 
these steps (see Figure 10-9).
1. Select the swatch in the Swatches panel (you may want to 
de select all objects on the page first). To select a range of 
swatches, hold down Shift as you click the swatch names. To 
select noncontiguous swatches, hold down Command/Ctrl as 

 10.  619
Figure 10-9
Deleting a Swatch
Select the swatch 
(or swatches) you 
want to delete.
Choose Delete Swatch from the 
Swatches panel menu or click 
the Delete Swatch button.
To apply an existing swatch 
to the objects colored with the 
swatch you’re removing, turn 
on the Defined Swatch option 
and choose a swatch from the 
pop-up menu…
…or choose Unnamed Swatch 
to have InDesign apply an 
unnamed swatch of the same 
color to the objects.
you click the swatch names. If you want to select all the swatches 
that appear in the panel but aren’t used anywhere in your docu-
ment, choose Select All Unused from the panel menu.
2. Click the Delete Swatch button in the Swatches panel (or choose 
Delete Color Swatch from the panel’s menu). InDesign displays 
the Delete Swatch dialog box.
3. If you want to replace the color you’re deleting with an existing 
swatch, turn on the Defined Swatch option and choose the name 
of the swatch from the attached pop-up menu. To replace the 
swatch with an unnamed color (why would you want to do this?), 
turn on the Unnamed Swatch option.
4. Click the OK button. InDesign deletes the swatch and applies 
the replacement swatch (if you selected the Defined Swatch 
option) or an unnamed color (if you selected the Unnamed 
Swatch option) to all of the objects formatted using the swatch 
you’re deleting.
As we noted earlier, when you remove a swatch that you’ve used 
as a basis for tint swatches, InDesign bases the tint swatches on the 
color you specified (if you selected the Defined Swatch option), or 
just deletes the tint swatch if you choose Unnamed Swatch, Paper, 
or None.
Merging Swatches. The folks at Adobe threw a rather confusing little 
feature into InDesign called Merge Swatches. The idea is simple: Take 
two or more swatches in the Swatches panel, merge them together 

620     6
into a single swatch, and delete the others. The problem is few people 
ever figure out how it works. 
The key is that the first swatch you select will be the one that 
survives, the one that the other swatches will get merged into. After 
clicking on one swatch (make sure nothing is selected first, or else 
this click will apply the color to the selected object), then Command/
Ctrl-click on one or more other swatches in the panel. Finally, select 
Merge Swatches from the Swatches panel menu. We find this helpful 
only when you’ve got a lot of swatches you want to merge together; 
for one or two, we usually just use Delete Swatch.
Duplicating Swatches. If you want to base a swatch on an existing 
swatch, select the swatch in the Swatches panel and then choose 
Duplicate Swatch from the panel’s menu. (You can also click the New 
Swatch button in the Swatches panel, but that also applies the dupli-
cate to any selected objects.) InDesign creates a copy of the swatch 
and assigns it a name (the default name is the name of the original 
swatch plus the word “copy”). Now, you can edit the swatch by right-
clicking (or Control-clicking with a one-button mouse) on it.
The Color Panel and the Color Picker
Given that we’ve already stated that you should use the Swatches 
panel instead of the Color panel, you might wonder why we’re both-
ering to write this section. Over the years, we’ve come to realize that 
our methods are not necessarily for everyone, and that some people 
have very different working habits from our own. For some of you, 
working with the Color panel and unnamed colors might be better 
than the process of creating named swatches—and there’s nothing 
wrong with that.
The Color panel is always on—whenever you adjust the controls 
in the panel, you’re applying them to something (either the selected 
object or the document’s default fill and stroke formatting). For a 
look at the Color panel, see Figure 10-10.
The Color panel does have one thing that the Swatches panel’s 
methods for defining colors lack: the color bar. To apply a color, drag 
the cursor in the Color Bar.
Color Panel   
Shortcuts
The Color panel has shortcuts, too.
▶ To display (or hide) the Color panel, press F6.

 10.  621
Figure 10-10
The Color Panel
Select a color model from 
the Color panel menu.
Color panel with 
options hidden
RGB mode
CMYK mode
Tint mode (appears 
when you select a color 
in the Swatches panel)
Fill and stroke selectors
Click this area to 
apply “none.”
Paper color Black color
Enter color values using 
the fields and sliders…
…or drag the 
cursor in the 
color bar.
After you apply a color,   
a swatch appears in this 
area. Click it to apply the 
color last applied.
▶ To change the color mode of the panel, select RGB, LAB, or 
CMYK from the panel menu or Context menu (right-click or 
Control-click). Even faster, just Shift-click on the color bar to 
rotate through these options. If you’re using a named swatch, 
Shift-clicking will also offer you a tint bar of the current color. 
▶ When you enter a value (or a mathematical expression) in one of 
the color value fields, you can hold down Command/Ctrl as you 
press Return/Enter to apply the same percentage change to all of 
the color value fields. 
▶ To select a color that is similar in hue, but different in shade, 
hold down Shift as you drag a color value slider. This moves the 
other sliders in tandem (unless you’re dragging the Black slider, 
or one of the other sliders is set to zero).
Out-of-Gamut Warning. The out-of-gamut warning also appears in 
the Color panel, too, when a color swatch definition falls outside the 
gamut defined by the default CMYK document profile. To adjust the 
color definition so that it falls in the gamut of the separations profile, 
click the alert icon. (See “Color Management,” later in this chapter.) 
Note that as long as you are choosing colors in the CMYK mode, you 
won’t see this alert (because they’re all in gamut, by default). Also, 
note that you won’t see this icon when you’ve chosen Hide Options 
from the panel menu.
You can also choose an unnamed color or create a color swatch with 
the Color Picker dialog box (double-click on the fill or stroke icons at 
the bottom of the Tool panel). The Color Picker is a sad and pathetic 
The Color Picker

622     6
attempt at providing a Photoshop-like feature in a page-layout pro-
gram. We don’t use it. However, if you are going to use it, there is 
one thing you need to know: The kind of swatch you get depends 
on where the text cursor is flashing in the dialog box. If you want a 
CMYK swatch, click in one of the CMYK number fields first.
Applying Colors and Gradients
Once you’ve selected an object, you can use the following techniques 
to apply a color, tint, or gradient to the object (see Figure 10-11).
▶ Click one of the selectors (Fill or Stroke) at the bottom of the 
Toolbox or in the Swatches panel, then click a color in the 
Swatches panel.
▶ Select an object, then choose a color from the Fill or Stroke 
pop-up menu in the Control panel.
▶ Click the Fill selector or the Stroke selector, then click the Apply 
Color button, Apply Gradient button, Apply None button, swap 
fill and stroke icon, or the default fill and stroke icon. Or press 
any of the keyboard shortcuts corresponding to the buttons 
(comma, period, slash, Shift-X, or D, respectively).
▶ Select an object, then adjust any of the controls in the Color 
panel or open the Color Picker and choose from there.
▶Drag a color swatch out of the Swatches panel and drop it on the 
fill or stroke of an object. 
▶Use the Eyedropper tool to pick a color from an existing object, 
then click on another object to apply that color to it.
Applying   
Colors to Text
You can apply a fill or stroke to the characters of text in your pub-
lication. Characters of text act just like individual objects on your 
page, so to apply a color to text, select it with the Text tool, and apply 
a color using any of the techniques described above. Note that this 
means you can apply any color swatch, including gradients or None, 
to text. If you select the text block with the Selection tool, you can 
apply a color to all the text in the frame by first clicking the Format-
ting Affects Text button in the Tool, Swatches, or Color panel.
Applying Colors to 
Imported Graphics
You can apply colors to bi-level (black and white only) TIFFs, and 
grayscale TIFFs (or native Photoshop .PSD files). To apply a color to 

 10.  623
an imported image, select the image using the Direct Selection tool, 
click the Fill selector in the Toolbox, and then click a color swatch. 
When you print, InDesign prints the image on the appropriate sepa-
ration (for a spot color) or series of plates (for a process color). 
Kuler
The kuler.adobe.com Web site is a great way to create sets of colors 
based on a base color, share those color sets with others, or down-
load other people’s sets. Now, the kuler technology has shown up 
inside InDesign in the guise of the Kuler panel, which you can find 
by choosing Window > Extensions > Kuler. 
Figure 10-11
Applying a Color
Select the Fill or Stroke  
selector in the Tools panel  
or the Swatches panel (F5).
Click a color swatch in 
the Swatches panel.
Press X to switch between   
the Fill selector and the 
Stroke selector.
...drag a color swatch onto the 
object. Note that you do not need to 
select an object to apply a color via 
this method.
Click the cursor in the color bar, or 
adjust one of the color controls in the 
Color panel, and InDesign applies the 
color to the selected object.
These three buttons apply 
last-used color swatch,   
gradient swatch, or None.
Press F6 to display the 
Color panel.
Choose a color from the Stroke 
or Fill widgets in the Control 
panel, or...
Click the Formatting Affects 
Text button (it looks like a 
little “T”) to apply a color to 
the text inside a frame rather 
than the frame itself.

624     6
The coolest thing about the Kuler panel is that it’s actually written 
in Flash—that is, the panel is actually a SWF running inside a player 
built into the program, and it retrieves data over the internet in real 
time. The least cool thing about Kuler is that it still only lets you 
create and manipulate RGB colors, so it’s pretty much only useful 
when making interactive documents (such as SWF or PDFs that will 
be viewed on-screen). We hope that Adobe will update this feature 
before too long to be color managed and allow CMYK colors, but 
we’re not holding our breath. 
(To be precise, the Kuler panel can download color sets based on 
CMYK from the kuler web site—for example, if someone created a 
set of colors using CMYK using Illustrator and uploaded that set. 
But creating or editing colors using the panel always results in RGB.)
To find a set of colors that someone uploaded, click the panel’s 
Browse tab (see Figure 10-12). Type a name in the search field, or 
choose a search type from the pop-up menu (for example, Highest 
Rated or Most Popular.) You can add the color set to the Swatches 
panel by clicking the Add Selected Theme to Swatches button.
To create your own color sets, or edit sets you have selected in 
the Browse tab, click the Create tab. To change the colors, drag the 
color circles, adjust the sliders, or choose a rule from the Select Rule 
pop-up menu. If you want to create a color theme around a color 
from your document, set it as the current fill or stroke color, then 
click the Add Current Fill (or Stroke) Color as Current Base Color 
button, just above the RGB color sliders.
Figure 10-12
The Kuler Panel
Add Selected 
Theme to 
Swatches
Hover over a 
theme to see its 
rating.
Click triangle  
for more options
These themes 
(color sets) are 
loaded dynami-
cally from the 
kuler Web site

 10.  625
Ink Manager
One of the most common complaints among prepress service pro-
viders is that too many publishers don’t understand the difference 
between spot and process color inks, and they’re forever creating 
spot color inks that need to be converted to process color at print 
time. If you’re one of those service providers, you’re going to love the 
Ink Manager. And if you’re a designer, the Ink Manager still offers 
a couple of features that you’ll find really helpful. The Ink Manager 
does three things.
▶ You can tell the Ink Manager to convert spot colors to process 
colors at the time of output (but it won’t change the actual color 
swatch definitions in your document). It also gives you some 
control over how the colors will be converted.
▶ You can alias one spot color to another, so two (or more) differ-
ent spot colors will output onto the same plate.
▶You can tell InDesign how your inks act so that the program can 
trap them properly.
We’ll discuss converting and aliasing spot colors here, and hold 
off on the trapping features until later in this chapter.
The Ink Manager appears in four different places: the Output 
panel of the Print dialog box, the Swatches panel menu, the Advanced 
panel of the Export PDF dialog box, and the Advanced panel of the 
Export EPS dialog box. A change made in any one of these places 
affects the Ink Manager in all its locations.
Converting   
Spot Colors
The Ink Manager dialog box lists the four process colors, plus every 
spot color in your document, whether or not they’re actually used 
(see Figure 10-13). When you click in the column to the left of a spot 
color, the color changes to a process color (the little four-color icon 
appears). Click again, and it’s a spot color again. As we said earlier, 
this does not change the color’s definition; the color only changes at 
print or export time.
If you want to output all the spot colors in the document as pro-
cess colors, turn on the All Spots to Process checkbox at the bottom 
of the Ink Manager dialog box.
You can control how your spot colors appear on screen (in RGB) 
and in print (when simulated with CMYK). By default, InDesign 
uses old CMYK tables built-in to the libraries. But you can get newer, 
more accurate simulations by turning on the Use Standard Lab 

626     6
Values for Spots checkbox. It’s disabled by default to maintain con-
sistency with legacy documents; but if you care more for quality than 
legacy, then turn it on and leave it on!
Aliasing   
Spot Colors
Let’s say you create a document with two spot colors, but later find 
that you can only afford to print black and one spot color. You could 
replace one spot color with the other throughout your document by 
deleting one of them (see “Deleting a Swatch,” earlier in this chapter). 
However, it’s easier and more flexible to merge the two spot colors 
together at print time by aliasing one to the other.
To make an alias, select a spot color in the Ink Manager dialog 
box and choose a different color from the Ink Alias pop-up menu. 
Notice that the icon changes to the left of the color’s icon (the icon, 
almost impossible to see without a loupe, is of an arrow pointing to a 
little ink well). You can still convert this color to a process color later 
if you want, using the techniques described above. 
A cool aspect of aliasing colors is that it works not only for spot 
colors applied to InDesign objects, but even to spot colors embedded 
in EPS or PDF graphics. Note that you can preview the spot color 
aliasing in your document by turning on both Overprint Preview 
and Display Performance > High Quality Display in the View menu.
Trapping
A “trap” is a method of overlapping abutting colored objects to com-
pensate for the imperfect registration of printing presses. Because 
registration, even on good presses with good operators, can be off by 
a quarter point or more, abutting elements in your publication may 
not end up abutting perfectly when the publication is printed by your 
commercial printer. What happens then? The paper shows through 
where you don’t want it to.
Figure 10-13
Ink Manager
While the Lab 
values are more 
accurate, turn 
this off to match 
colors in older 
files.

 10.  627
Do we need to tell you what happens when you take your work to 
a press that’s badly out of register or run by turkeys? Disaster. Before 
this happens to you, talk with your commercial printer regarding the 
tolerances of their presses and/or operators. Don’t ask them if they’re 
turkeys—it’s considered rude.
In the “good ol’ days” printers handled all your trapping for you. 
Then came the “bad ol’ days” when designers had to do most of it 
themselves. The basic method of creating manual traps involves 
adding additional strokes to objects and then setting those strokes to 
overprint using the Attributes panel.
But in the past few years, output providers have taken to doing it 
all “in-RIP”—this is far, far better than you trying to do it yourself. 
And, in many cases (especially with digital printing) no trapping 
may be required anyway. So check with your printer first.
If you find you do need to do some manual trapping, please 
download this file for more information: http://www.indesignsecrets.
com/rwid/trapping.pdf
Color Management
When you aim at a target—and it doesn’t matter whether you’re 
aiming a rifle, a bow, a laser, or a camera—you have to make adjust-
ments. You’ve got to consider the atmospheric conditions, the dis-
tance to the target, the characteristics of the target itself. Once you 
know what the variables are, and how they affect what you’re trying 
to do, you’ve got a better chance of hitting the bullseye.
The same thing is true in color management. You need to under-
stand the tools you have to work with, how they work together (or 
don’t), and how they combine to produce the colors you see in the 
printed version of your publication.
It would be nice if we could make what we see on our screen 
exactly match what we’ll get when we print. But we can’t, for a vari-
ety of practical and physiological reasons (not to mention simple lack 
of time and money). That said, we must also add that we can get very 
close—and we can also make the relationship between the display 
and the printed piece more consistent and predictable.
The “device” (a printer, scanner, monitor, or printing press) is 
the key. Every device renders colors in a slightly different way. To 
adjust color in one environment so that it matches the color as seen 
in another environment, color management systems refer to a file 
containing information on the color characteristics of a device 
(how it displays or prints color). This file is called a “device profile.” 

628     6
Device profiles for scanners and printers are usually created by the 
manufacturers who make the hardware, though quite a few come 
with InDesign. You’ve got to make monitor profiles yourself, because 
every monitor is different (just as several television sets from the 
same manufacturer can show the same image differently). The pro-
cess of creating a device profile is called “characterizing” a device.
Once a device profile has been created for a device, you’ve got 
to maintain (or “calibrate”) the device so that it doesn’t vary from 
the profile. Imagesetter operators and commercial printers calibrate 
their equipment regularly (or should) to match industry standards.
InDesign’s color management system uses device profiles com-
patible with the International Color Consortium (ICC) specification. 
If you’re on the Macintosh, you can also use device profiles provided 
by Apple with the system-level ColorSync color management system 
(these profiles are also ICC compatible).
For more on choosing device profiles, see “InDesign’s Color Man-
agement Controls,” later in this chapter.
For More   
Information
Color management is an enormous subject and we can only focus 
on one aspect of the big picture here: How color management works 
in InDesign. If any terminology in this section is confusing to you 
(like gamut, ICC profile, color engines, and rendering intents), we 
encourage you to go look at two other sources for a truly in-depth 
look at getting consistent color Real World Photoshop (which David 
wrote with Bruce Fraser and Conrad Chavez) and Real World Color 
Management, by Bruce Fraser, Chris Murphy, and Fred Bunting.
Do You Need   
Color Management?
Everyone wants consistent color from original to screen to proof print 
to printing press, but it’s worth asking yourself whether you really 
need it. Managing color is not as simple as turning on a checkbox, 
and though it’s not as hard as flying an airplane, it can still cause a 
fair amount of rifling through medicine cabinets trying to ease the 
pain in your head. You may not need to worry a lot about managing 
color in InDesign if you can rely on color swatch books when pick-
ing solid colors, and if you can rely on color prepress professionals to 
deal with your color Photoshop images.
There are other instances when it’s not even worth trying to get 
InDesign to manage your color. For example, InDesign can’t manage 
grayscale images or spot colors. Similarly, InDesign isn’t really set 
up to color-manage vector art when saved as an EPS file (it can do it, 
but we don’t recommend it). Vector art saved as PDF or native Adobe 
Illustrator (.ai) files should work reasonably well.

 10.  629
Nevertheless, we must admit that it is particularly satisfying 
when you work through all the issues and achieve (as close as pos-
sible) parity among your screen, inkjet printer, and final press output. 
Being able to rely on your screen (“soft proofing”) and desktop color 
printer is a great boost in efficiency, too. Plus, as the world becomes 
increasingly reliant on direct to plate technologies, bypassing film 
entirely, color management systems become increasingly important 
to ensure quality output. And if you want to import RGB images and 
let InDesign do the color separation for you at print time, you’ll get 
better results if color management is turned on.
If it’s important to you that what you see on your screen looks as 
much like the printed version of your publication as possible, there 
are a few rules you need to follow.
▶ Characterize and calibrate your monitor with a tool like the 
Datacolor Spyder or X-Rite’s EyeOne. If color is of critical 
importance to you and your publications, find a system that 
works with your monitor, or buy a monitor with built-in color 
management capabilities.
▶ Control the lighting around your monitor and keep it consistent 
when you’re working. The fluorescent lighting used in most of 
our office buildings is the worst possible lighting for viewing 
colors. Turn it off, if you can, and rely on incandescent or “full 
spectrum” lighting. Avoid glare and bright light if possible.
Why is lighting important? Basically, the temperature of the light 
affects what a color “objectively” looks like. 
Remember that, unlike the paper you’ll be printing on, your screen 
is backlit, so it displays colors very differently from what they’ll look 
like when printed. Therefore, any time you’re working with ink, try 
to refer to printed samples, rather than looking at the colors on your 
screen. 
If you’re using uncoated paper, look at samples of the ink (spot 
color) or ink mix (process color) printed on uncoated stock. If you’re 
using coated paper, look at examples printed on coated paper. Even 
better, try to find an example of the ink printed on the paper stock 
you’re using—though these examples are much harder to find. 
Pantone makes a line of swatch books showing their libraries of 
spot and process colors (including process color equivalents of the 
spot colors); they’re printed on both coated and uncoated stocks, and, 
although they’re kind of expensive, they’re not as expensive as pull-
Controlling Your 
Color-Viewing   
Environment
Printed Proofs   
and Swatches

630     6
ing a job off of a press because you didn’t like the press check. They’re 
downright cheap if you consider what they must cost to print.
If you’re specifying CMYK colors, use a swatch book printed with 
process colors that tells you what the CMYK breakdowns are. Our 
favorite is the one made by Trumatch. You can also find process color 
books made by Pantone.
Definitely don’t assume that your color inkjet or laser printers 
will automatically produce an accurate simulation of what the colors 
in your publication are going to look like when they’re printed by 
your commercial printer. To do that, you’ll have to do some work—
we’ll cover that in more detail later in this chapter.
InDesign’s Color Management Controls
You can control how color appears in InDesign in a number of places. 
For example, under the Edit menu, you’ll find Color Settings, Assign 
Profiles, and Convert to Profile. In the View menu, there’s the Proof 
Colors feature. And the Appearance of Black pane of the Preferences 
dialog box also lets you manage one color (black).
Application   
Color Settings
The choices you make in the Color Settings dialog box form the basis 
for how InDesign displays and prints color (see Figure 10-14). These 
controls all match the similarly named features in Adobe Photo shop, 
though the meanings are sometimes subtly different. Note that these 
controls adjust future documents you create, but not already-created 
files—not even the currently-open document.
Settings. In a valiant effort to make color management easier, Adobe 
has created color management “presets” that you can pick in any of 
the Creative Suite applications. You can pick the same setting in all 
the applications to get consistent color as you move files from one 
program to another. (You can automate this by launching Adobe 
Bridge and then choosing Edit > Creative Suite Color Settings.)
If InDesign’s Color Settings dialog box is set up differently than 
other Suite applications, you’ll see a message alerting you to the 
fact that the Suite isn’t synchronized. This isn’t necessarily a bad 
thing—for example, we typically like seeing missing profile alerts in 
Photoshop but not in InDesign. (We cover alerts like this in “Color 
Management Policies,” in a few pages.)
InDesign’s color management is turned on by default. The Set-
tings pop-up menu typically shows five presets.

 10.  631
▶ Emulate Adobe InDesign 2.0 CMS Off. “Off” is misleading—
there is no such thing as truly turning color management off. 
This setting tells InDesign to hide what it’s doing from you. For 
example, if you import an RGB image and print color separa-
tions, InDesign will still convert the RGB to CMYK (which is 
one of the prime uses of color management). The result may look 
only adequate because InDesign is assuming your RGB image is 
based on the Adobe RGB profile and the CMYK ink behavior is 
based on the Photoshop 5 Default CMYK settings. We’d rather 
gnaw off our leg than use this setting.
▶ Monitor Color. This is good for... um... well, it might have some 
marginal use in Photoshop (if you’re creating output for video 
perhaps), but we can’t think of any reason to use it here.
▶ General Purpose. The default setting is General Purpose 2, 
which turns off most of the color management alert dialog boxes 
that make people nervous, uses sRGB as the default RGB space, 
and uses U.S. Web Coated SWOP for the default CMYK space 
(or Fogra or Japan Color in Europe or Asia). This is probably the 
best setting for most InDesign users.
▶Prepress. It’s tempting to choose North American Prepress 2 
(or Europe Prepress 2 or Japan Prepress 2, depending on where 
you’re reading this) if you’re aiming for a printing press. This 
uses the same CMYK default, but standardizes on the Adobe 
RGB model for RGB colors. While we do like this for Photoshop 
Figure 10-14
Color Settings  
Dialog Box

632     6
image editing (because it encompasses a spectrum of colors 
better suited for print than sRGB), it’s both unnecessary and 
often misleading or incorrect in InDesign.
▶ Web/Internet. If virtually all your pages are destined for the 
Web, you might choose the Web/Internet preset. It uses the 
sRGB workspace for RGB colors (it even forces non-sRGB 
images to convert to sRGB), but that’s appropriate for Web files.
Again, these are only defaults—not necessarily what you’ll use for 
your documents. If you have a custom CMYK profile for a project, 
you can use that for your document instead (see “Changing Docu-
ment Spaces,” later in this chapter).
Note that you can also save your Color Settings dialog box setup 
by clicking Save. If you save it in the location that InDesign offers, 
you’ll find it in the Settings pop-up menu in the future. Plus, you 
can use that setting in all your other Creative Suite applications, too.
Working Spaces. Perhaps the most important features of the Color 
Settings dialog box are the two Working Spaces pop-up menus, 
which control InDesign’s default color profiles for RGB and CMYK 
colors. Remember that an RGB value doesn’t mean anything because 
red, green, and blue phosphors are different on different devices. 
Cyan, magenta, yellow, and black inks can also be radically different 
depending on ink manufacturer, paper stock, press conditions, and 
so on. So RGB and CMYK colors are all just a bunch of numbers. 
Profiles assign color meaning to the numbers: such-and-such CMYK 
value on this particular device.
The profiles you choose from the CMYK and RGB pop-up menus 
are the profiles InDesign will use for any swatches you create in 
InDesign, and for any imported graphics that did not include a color 
management profile (and that you have not applied a profile to using 
the Image Color Settings dialog box). Also, as we’ll point out in the 
discussion below about color policies, the default CMYK profile is 
also used for imported CMYK images—even those that have their 
own profile—when you choose the Preserve Numbers option (which 
you probably will).
We generally recommend using sRGB for the RGB working space 
rather than something like Adobe RGB. The reason: the RGB work-
ing space is applied to RGB images that have no embedded profile, 
and if an image has no profile, it was probably pulled off a Web site 
or shot with a cheap camera—in both those cases, sRGB is the safest 
assumption.

 10.  633
The choice of a CMYK working space depends entirely on your 
print workflow. In a perfect world, you’d have a color profile for your 
particular printing press or output device, with your particular paper 
stock, and so on. But in reality, you can typically get away with pick-
ing a generic target profile. The best target profile is probably Coated 
GRACoL when printing on a sheetfed press, or Web Coated Stock 
2006 Grade 3 Paper (or Grade 5 Paper) when printing on a Web press. 
(“Web” here refers to a Web press, as opposed to a sheetfed press, and 
has nothing to do with the World Wide Web.) 
Other “middle of the road” targets include Europe ISO Fogra27 
(which David erroneously pronounces fois gras) and the well-used-
but-pretty-mediocre U.S. Web Coated SWOP v2.
If you’re looking for a particular profile that you know you’ve 
installed in the operating system correctly, but doesn’t appear here, 
try turning on the Advanced checkbox (see “Advanced Color Set-
tings,” later in this section).
Color Management Policies. InDesign assigns the default working 
spaces to each new document you create while color management is 
on. But what should InDesign do when color management is turned 
on and you open a document that was created when color manage-
ment was turned off (so no profile was associated with the docu-
ment)? What if you open a document made by someone else who 
used a different working space? You can tell InDesign what to do in 
these cases with the Color Management Policies section of the Color 
Settings dialog box.
Perhaps more importantly, the Policies section also manages 
what happens to images that you import, which has huge implica-
tions over how they appear in print.
▶RGB. We suggest leaving the RGB pop-up menu set to its default 
value (Preserve Embedded Profiles) most of the time. This 
means InDesign will keep track of embedded profiles in RGB 
images and InDesign documents that contain RGB colors—very 
useful if you receive RGB images or files from other people.
We can’t think of any reason to set RGB to Off (which would 
simply ignore all profiles and stop InDesign from embedding 
an RGB profile in the document, causing untold horrors when it 
comes to getting any sort of color consistency). However, choos-
ing Convert to Working Space could be useful on occasion, if 
you knew you had to open 50 InDesign documents that had 
simply been created with the wrong RGB profile. But watch out: 
Any RGB colors you created in the InDesign document will look 

634     6
the same, but the actual RGB numbers will likely change upon 
conversion. 
▶CMYK. The choice for the CMYK policy is not so cut and 
dry. Most people will want to use Preserve Numbers (Ignore 
Embedded Profile), but if you’re serious about color manage-
ment you may want to choose Preserve Embedded Profile. The 
first choice (Preserve Numbers) tells InDesign to use the current 
CMYK document profile as the profile for all your CMYK colors 
and imported CMYK images. For example, let’s say you make 
a 100-percent cyan in a CMYK TIFF that uses some wacky 
custom CMYK profile, then you import that into your InDesign 
document that uses the default SWOP profile. InDesign ignores 
the wacky profile entirely and just assumes that the image uses 
SWOP. You can override this (see “Applying Device Profiles to 
Images,” later in this chapter), but you wouldn’t want to have to 
do that very often.
Even though Preserve Numbers (Ignore Embedded Pro-
file) sort of defeats the greater purpose of color management, 
it tends to be the choice we recommend—especially when all 
your incoming CMYK images are created with the same profile 
(which is often the case).
On the other hand, if you receive CMYK images that have 
embedded CMYK profiles from a number of sources, you’re 
pretty sure that the sources each used different CMYK profiles, 
and you need to make sure they all look good when you print 
or export PDF, you’ll want to use Preserve Embedded Profile. 
This tells InDesign to keep their appearance consistent with the 
originals (how they looked in Photoshop, for example), even if 
it means changing the CMYK numbers to accomplish that. For 
example, that 100-percent cyan swatch might change to 95-per-
cent cyan plus 5-percent magenta.
Again, we urge people not to set the CMYK policy to Off, as 
it will likely only cause you heartache down the road. (If you’re 
frustrated with your previous experiences with color manage-
ment, choose Preserve Numbers rather than Off.)
Unless you’re obsessive about color management, we recommend 
turning off the two Profile Mismatch checkboxes, and leaving on the 
Missing Profiles checkbox in the Color Management Policies section. 
The mismatch warnings you get tend to be confusing, misleading, 
and annoying. But having a document with no profiles at all could 
cause even more trouble, so it’s good to be alerted in that situation.

 10.  635
Advanced 
Color Settings
While the color management options we’ve described are enough for 
many workflows, you can get even more tweaky by turning on the 
Advanced Mode checkbox (see Figure 10-15). First, when Advanced 
Mode is turned on you can select any color profile installed in your 
operating system for your working spaces (as opposed to only the 
recommended Adobe profiles). Next, you can select an alternate 
color management engine, adjust the default rendering intent, and 
choose whether or not to use black point compensation.
Engine. Color management engines (the actual software at the 
heart of the system that converts one color into another) are made 
by a variety of manufacturers. Ultimately, it’s very unlikely that you 
would ever see a difference between any of these. Unless you have a 
really good reason to switch, you should just use the Adobe (ACE) 
CMS (which is also what Photoshop uses by default). 
Intent. What happens when the color management system encoun-
ters a color that is outside of the gamut of the selected printing 
device? The color management system must change the color to one 
that’s inside the printer’s gamut. How it does that is the topic of the 
Intent pop-up menu. Intent is shorthand for rendering intent.
When you choose either Relative Colorimetric (which is the 
default) or Absolute Colorimetric, the out-of-gamut colors are 
moved to the nearest edge of the color gamut—also called gamut 
clipping—which means that differences between out-of-gamut 
colors can disappear (very red and very, very red both become the 
same in-gamut CMYK red). When this happens, you’ll see an effect 
similar to posterization in the more saturated areas of images. The 
Perceptual rendering intent squeezes all the document’s colors so 
that out-of-gamut colors are brought into the color gamut in a way 
that maintains a distinction between the colors. The Saturation ren-
dering intent, on the other hand, moves all colors toward the edge of 
the color gamut, resulting in more saturated color.
Figure 10-15
Advanced  
Color Settings 

636     6
In general, Relative Colorimetric is best for solid colors and syn-
thetic images (like images made in Illustrator or FreeHand), and Per-
ceptual is best for scanned images. Unfortunately, InDesign uses this 
rendering intent both for colors built in InDesign and for imported 
images (unless you specifically override it, which we discuss in 
“Applying Device Profiles to Images,” below). However, for most 
documents and images—especially those already in CMYK mode—
Relative Colorimetric probably makes the most sense. On the other 
hand, if you use a lot of RGB images with saturated out-of-gamut 
colors, and you’re trying to match these colors with swatches built 
in InDesign, you might want to use Perceptual instead. If you want 
more intense color in business graphics (such as charts and graphs), 
you might try choosing Saturation.
Use Black Point Compensation. The Use Black Point Compensation 
option, when turned on, maps the black of the source profile to the 
black of the target profile. We usually think of black as being “just 
black,” but of course black on different devices appears differently 
(for instance, solid black on newsprint is much more gray than solid 
black on glossy sheetfed stock). We generally recommend leaving 
this turned on, ensuring that the entire dynamic range of the output 
device is used.
Changing   
Document Spaces
By default the document working space is whatever Color Settings 
was set to when you first created the document. If you later change 
Color Settings, the application’s default working space will be differ-
ent than your document’s space; that’s no big deal because InDesign 
always uses the document space if there is one.
What if you want to change the document working space? For 
example, you thought you were going to print on coated stock but 
later found you had to cut your budget and switch to uncoated stock? 
You can add or change a document’s working space profiles using the 
Assign Profiles and the Convert to Profile features in the Edit menu. 
Assign Profiles lets you tag your document with another set of 
RGB and/or CMYK profiles, or even remove the document profile 
entirely (see Figure 10-16). Changing the document profiles with 
Assign Profiles is like saying, “The colors in this document now mean 
something else, because cyan now looks like this, magenta looks like 
this, and so on.” Accordingly, the colors on screen may change, but 
the actual color definitions don’t.
Convert to Profile is the opposite: It actually converts the colors 
in your document to a new profile, changing the color definitions 
to maintain the look of the colors (see Figure 10-17). That means 

 10.  637
Figure 10-16
Assign Profiles
Figure 10-17
Convert to Profile
a 100-percent magenta will end up as something like 96-percent 
magenta, 6-percent yellow (or something else, depending on what 
profile you’re converting to). We encourage you to be very careful 
when using Convert to Profile; it can really mess up your documents, 
or it can be a lifesaver if you really know what it’s doing.
Note that Convert to Profile is the only good way to find out what 
your document space currently is (you’ll find it listed at the top of 
the dialog box).
Applying Device   
Profiles to Images
When you save an image from Adobe Photoshop, by default the 
program embeds a color profile that describes the image’s color 
space (see Real World Photoshop for more on Photoshop’s behav-
ior). InDesign recognizes that profile when you place the graphic 
on your page, though if the CMYK policy was set to Preserve Num-
bers (Ignore Linked Profiles) when you created this document, any 
embedded profile is ignored at this point.
However you can force InDesign to honor the embedded profile if 
you turn on the Show Import Options checkbox in the Place dialog 
box, and then click on the Color tab of the Image Import Options 
dialog box (see Figure 10-18). Of course, this works only with color-
manageable images (that is, pretty much any reasonable format other 

638     6
Figure 10-18
Applying a Profile  
at Import
than EPS). Choose what profile to apply, and what rendering intent 
to use when InDesign needs to convert the colors to a different pro-
file space. If the Profile pop-up menu reads Use Document Profile, it 
means the InDesign document, not the image. To use the embedded 
profile instead, choose it from the pop-up menu near the top of the 
list. Note that this is like using Assign Profile in Photoshop; it doesn’t 
change the data; it just changes the meaning of the data.
Whatever you choose upon placing the image, you can also tell 
InDesign which profile to use by selecting the image and choosing 
Image Color Settings from the Object menu.
Soft-Proofing   
Controls
You probably want to get some sense of what your pages are going 
to look like before you commit to a $50,000 print run. Increasingly, 
proofing is being done not on traditional color proofing systems, 
but rather on desktop inkjet printers and on screen. Proofing color 
on screen is called soft-proofing, and the quality of soft-proofing in 
InDesign is limited only by the accuracy of the profiles involved.
The Proof Colors command on the View menu lets you turn soft-
proofing on and off. But it’s in the Proof Setup submenu that you can 
control what the proof is showing you. Note that the settings you 
make in Proof Setup are specific to the window that’s in the fore-
ground, not the document itself. This means you can create several 
views of the same page (by choosing New Window from the Window 
menu) and apply different soft-proofing settings to each view, letting 
you see how the page will work in different output scenarios.
The three items in the Proof Setup submenu are Document 
CMYK, Working CMYK, and Custom. We typically just use Custom, 
which displays the Proof Setup dialog box (see Figure 10-19), which 
gives us more control over the soft-proof (though not as much as 
Photoshop offers). First, choose the profile of the device you’re trying 
to emulate. InDesign CS6 offers several additional choices, including 
options for Grayscale and Black & White. Then, choose whether to 
preserve CMYK numbers, and whether to simulate Paper White and 
Ink Black.

 10.  639
Preserve CMYK Numbers. The Preserve CMYK Numbers checkbox 
lets you tell InDesign what you want done with the CMYK colors 
you defined in the document and CMYK images that either have no 
embedded profile or have an embedded profile but are using the doc-
ument CMYK profile because you have set the CMYK policy to Pre-
serve Numbers (Ignore Linked Profiles). Which you choose should 
depend on which you’re going to pick in the Print or Export PDF 
dialog box (see “Color Management in Output,” below).
Simulate Black/White. The two checkboxes in this section control 
the rendering of the document’s colors from the proofing space to the 
monitor. When Paper White and Ink Black are turned off, InDesign 
does a relative colorimetric rendering, mapping the white of the 
proof device’s paper to monitor white and the black of the device’s 
black ink to monitor black. This isn’t particularly useful; after all, for 
a soft-proof you’re trying to see what the real paper’s white and ink’s 
blacks will look like. 
Instead, we almost always turn on the Paper White checkbox 
(which automatically also turns on the Ink Black checkbox). This way, 
the monitor simulates the paper’s white (which is often duller than 
monitor white), and you can see the compressed dynamic range of 
print. If you’re simulating a low-dynamic-range process—like news-
print, or inkjet on uncoated paper—turning on Ink Black (or Paper 
White) gives you a much better idea of the actual color range you’ll 
get in print.
Figure 10-19
Soft-Proofing
Select Custom to open the Proof 
Setup dialog box and specify your 
own output profile.

640     6
Unfortunately, the effect of simulating a compressed dynamic 
range is so dramatic that it feels like it ruins the document’s colors. 
It’s a good idea to put the document in Preview mode (press W 
while not editing text), hide your panels (press Tab), then select 
Proof Colors from the View menu, but before actually letting go 
of the mouse button, close your eyes for a few seconds. When you 
open your eyes, your brain can readjust its own internal white point, 
giving you a better sense of what the image really will look like when 
it comes off the printer.
It’s worth noting again that you’ll never get an exact match 
between screen and final printed output. However, like any proofing 
system, the key is not in getting a perfect match, but rather in getting 
pretty dang close, and then learning the relationship between screen 
and printed piece. The more you do this (and the more accurate your 
profiles are), the more accurate you’ll get at predicting final color.
Color Management   
in Output
None of this color management stuff is relevant if you can’t get your 
final design to print well. Fortunately, you can perform color conver-
sions from your document space to a selected profile when you print 
your document or export it to PDF or EPS.
Print dialog box. The key to managing color at print time is to spec-
ify a source space and a target space in the Color Management tab of 
the Print dialog box (see Figure 10-20). That way, the color manage-
ment engine knows where the color is coming from (what the color is 
supposed to look like) and where the color is going (how that device 
images color, so it can convert the colors properly).
▶ The Source. You have two choices for a source space in the Print 
section of this panel: Document (the document working space) 
or Proof (the profile you last chose in the Custom Proof Setup 
dialog box). The Proof option lets you print your file to a com-
posite printer, like a desktop inkjet, and make it simulate the 
CMYK output you’ve been soft-proofing—that is, it gives you a 
hard copy of your soft-proofed document.
When you choose Proof, you can also choose whether to 
simulate the paper color of the final target by turning on or off 
the Simulate Paper Color checkbox in the Color Management 
section of the dialog box.
▶ Who Handles the Color. You next need to determine who is 
going to do the color management: InDesign or your PostScript 
printer. You can choose one or the other from the Color Han-
dling pop-up menu. We virtually always choose Let InDesign 

 10.  641
Determine Color, as we trust Adobe’s color management system 
more than most.
On the other hand, if you don’t have a good profile for your 
printer, or you trust your printer’s PostScript RIP to provide the 
color management, you can choose PostScript Printer Deter-
mines Color. Of course, this only works on PostScript devices, 
and it only works when you’ve selected one of the Composite 
options or InRIP Separations from the Color pop-up menu in 
the Output tab of the Print dialog box.
▶ The Target. The target profiles you can choose from the Printer 
Profile pop-up menu (the space of the print device) depend on 
whether you have chosen an RGB or a CMYK space from the 
Color pop-up menu in the Output tab of the Print dialog box. If 
you’re printing to an inkjet printer, you should probably choose 
Composite RGB and then pick the RGB profile for that device (or, 
if you don’t have a profile, often the sRGB works well).
▶ Preserve CMYK Numbers. When you print, InDesign compares 
your target print space to the document space and the profiles 
applied to or embedded in graphics; if they’re all the same, then 
it doesn’t do any color conversion. Whenever the profiles differ, 
InDesign has to decide whether to run the colors through the 
color management engine to maintain visual consistency of the 
colors. For example, if your document CMYK setting is U.S. 
Web Coated (SWOP) but you choose a Newsprint output profile, 
Figure 10-20
Color Management in 
the Print Dialog Box

642     6
InDesign will obviously have to convert your RGB colors to the 
Newsprint CMYK space. But it may also convert your CMYK 
colors from their original space to Newsprint, too. 
Converting from one CMYK space to another CMYK space 
is called cross-rendering, and it can be a blessing or a curse. It 
can really get you out of a last-minute jam if you don’t have time 
to go back and reseparate RGB images into your new CMYK 
space. However, there’s no way to tell InDesign to cross-render 
your images but not other things, so all your 100-percent black 
text also gets cross-rendered—resulting in four-color CMYK 
text—rarely what you’d expect or want.
Fortunately, you can turn on the Preserve CMYK Numbers 
checkbox in the Print dialog box. When this is on, InDesign 
won’t cross-render any of your document’s CMYK colors or 
CMYK images that either have no embedded profile or have an 
embedded profile but were imported with the Preserve Numbers 
(Ignore Linked Profiles) color policy enabled in the Color Set-
tings dialog box. This is our best friend in the color management 
wars. We suggest you turn it on unless you really know what 
you’re doing. (If the source and target profiles are the same, it’s 
grayed out because colors aren’t in danger of cross-rendering.)
Don’t forget that you can have the Preserve Numbers (Ignore 
Linked Profiles) policy turned on and still force InDesign to 
cross-render a specific image by giving it a profile with the 
Image Color Settings dialog box that we talked about earlier. 
Also, don’t forget that you can change your document profile 
before printing with Assign Profile or Convert Profile.
Export as PDF. You can tell InDesign whether to color-manage your 
exported PDF files in the Output tab of the Export PDF dialog box 
(see Figure 10-21). You have several options here.
▶ Color Conversion. If you don’t want InDesign to convert any 
colors (if you want all the document and image color data left as 
is) then select No Color Conversion from the Color Conversion 
pop-up menu in the Output tab. This is what you get when you 
use the PDF/X3 standard because the understanding is that the 
color management will be handled downstream when the PDF is 
printed.
However, if you want InDesign color manage the file while 
generating the PDF, choose either Convert to Destination or 
Convert to Destination (Preserve Numbers). For example, if 
you’re exporting the PDF for primarily onscreen viewing, 
choose Convert to Destination from the Color Conversion 

 10.  643
pop-up menu and then choose an RGB profile from the Des-
tination pop-up menu—the sRGB profile is probably the most 
useful, as it purports to define the “average” monitor. This forces 
everything into the sRGB space.
If you’re exporting for print and you want to color-manage 
the entire document, then choose Convert to Destination and 
choose your final output device in the Destination pop-up menu. 
However, if the Destination profile is different than your docu-
ment profile, your CMYK colors will likely get cross-rendered 
into a different CMYK space. As we noted earlier, this is the 
cause of the four-color black text problem that many people had 
in early versions. So in most circumstances, we would recom-
mend the Convert to Destination (Preserve Numbers) option, 
which leaves document colors and untagged colors alone.
▶ Include Profiles. The Profile Inclusion Policy pop-up menu 
lets you choose whether or not to embed various profiles in 
your PDF. If you choose one of the two Convert to Destination 
options in the Color Conversion pop-up menu, you can choose 
to either not embed any profiles or to embed the destination 
profile. If you expect your PDF to be further color managed by 
some other application (even to view it properly on screen), you 
should definitely include your profiles. But it does make a larger 
PDF file, so in many cases, we just leave it out.
Figure 10-21
Color Management  
in the Export  
PDF Dialog Box

644     6
If the Color Conversion pop-up menu is set to leave your 
colors alone (again, the assumption here is that your file will 
be color managed later), you have three different choices in the 
Profile Inclusion Policy dialog box: Include All Profiles, Include 
Tagged Source Profiles, and Include All RGB and Tagged Source 
Profiles. Of course, you can also just tell InDesign not to include 
any profile, but we’re not sure why you’d do that.
Export as EPS. There is little color management interface in the 
Export EPS dialog box; when you pick RGB or CMYK from the Color 
pop-up menu, InDesign simply assumes your document profiles are 
the destination profiles, and it color-manages your document—con-
verting all imported images (at least the ones that it can, like TIFF 
and .PSD files) to the document working space. You can avoid this by 
choosing Leave Unchanged from the Color pop-up menu.
The Color “Done”
As you work with commercial printing, always remember that you’re 
at the mercy of a series of mechanical processes that, in many ways, 
haven’t changed since 1900. Temperature, humidity, and ambient 
static electricity play large roles in the process, and the people who 
operate these systems are at least skilled craftspeople; at best, artists. 
Ask them as many questions as they’ll answer, set your job up the way 
they want it, and then sit back and watch your job come off the press.

645
Printing is an ancient art, and has been invented and reinvented 
many times. You can print by rolling a carved cylinder over a sheet 
of wet clay, as the Mesopotamians did. Or you can smear a carved 
block of wood with ink and then press the block into a sheet of paper, 
as the Chinese started doing in the eighth or ninth century. With 
grease, water, and ink, even a slab of limestone can learn to trans-
fer an image to paper, as Alois Senefelder of Munich found in 1798 
(thereby inventing lithography).
In the fifteenth century, Gutenberg (and possibly others) came 
up with moveable type made of cast metal—which, in turn, trans-
formed printing from a craft into an industry. Scribes the world over 
lamented the decline in the quality of written materials.
Printing—the ability to make dozens, hundreds, thousands, mil-
lions of copies of an image—flourished. For whatever reason, we 
humans will go to great lengths to get our pictures, text, and adver-
tising into the hands of our willing or unwilling audience. And, in 
spite of the encroachments of the Web, printing is arguably still the 
best way to do that.
Printing

11

646     6
The InDesign Print Dialog Box
When you press Command-P/Ctrl-P or choose Print Book from the 
Book panel (see Chapter 8, “Long Documents”), InDesign displays 
the Print dialog box. There are so many features packed into this 
dialog box that Adobe had to break it up into eight different panes, 
each listed along the left side of the dialog box: General, Setup, Marks 
and Bleeds, Output, Graphics, Color Management, Advanced, and 
Summary (Figure 11-1).
Even if you’re printing to a lowly desktop printer, it’s worth at least 
glimpsing at each of these panes. Fortunately, you can use keyboard 
shortcuts to navigate among them: Command/Ctrl-Down arrow 
jumps to the next pane, Command/Ctrl-Up arrow jumps to the pre-
vious pane, and holding down the Command/Ctrl key while press-
ing a number from 1 to 8 skips to the corresponding pane number   
(1 for General, 2 for Setup, and so on). We’ll cover each of these panes, 
in order, below. 
Before you go anywhere in the Print dialog box, you’ve got to 
make one or two important decisions. First, you must choose from 
the options on the Printer pop-up menu, which lists the printers 
you have installed on your computer. When you choose a printer, 
InDesign looks to the printer driver to see what PPD (PostScript 
Printers, PostScript 
Files, and PPDs
Figure 11-1
The Print Dialog Box
Hold down Command or 
Ctrl and press 2 to jump to 
the Setup panel, 3 for the 
third panel, and so on.
Click Setup to open the printer driver’s print options. 
In general, you should avoid using the printer driver 
dialog boxes and use InDesign’s controls instead.
Click once or twice on the 
Preview to see more infor-
mation about your print job.

 11.  647
Printer Description) file is associated with that printer, and it dis-
plays it—grayed out—in the PPD pop-up menu. In the case of a non-
PostScript device, InDesign leaves this pop-up menu blank.
If you want to print a PostScript file directly to disk rather than to 
a device (also called making a “PostScript dump”), choose PostScript 
File from the Printer pop-up menu. In this case, you must also pick 
the PPD file that describes your final output device or choose Device 
Independent. You can typically use device-independent PostScript 
files—also called “sep,” “.ps” or “prepress” files—for output using 
imposition and trapping systems.
Most output providers now prefer receiving PDF files rather than 
PostScript files. Some companies don’t even accept PostScript files 
anymore, except from clients that they know will create them prop-
erly (because it’s difficult to make changes to your document once it’s 
written as PostScript). 
Do not create your PDF by printing PostScript to disk or by using 
the PDF “printer driver.” Export the file as PDF, instead, as we dis-
cuss in Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting.”
Note that PPDs are not, and should not be confused with, printer 
drivers. Printer drivers are pieces of software that direct information 
from your system and applications to a hardware port—usually, your 
computer’s printer port or network connection. PPDs work in con-
junction with printer drivers to give applications information about 
the printer (what paper sizes are available? what’s the resolution of 
the printer? what do the printer error messages mean?) and, on occa-
sion, to customize the printer’s operation for the application (what 
PostScript routine does the application use to render halftones?).
InDesign and other applications use PPDs to optimize printing 
for a specific printer. If you are specifying a PPD file, it’s important 
that you choose the right one, or else your pages may not print cor-
rectly (and might not print at all). The settings you choose here deter-
mine what options you have in the rest of the Print dialog box.
By the way, if you have installed a PPD in OS X and it doesn’t 
appear in the PPD pop-up menu, it may be a compressed PPD. Try 
decompressing it using StuffIt Expander first.
Our eagle-eyed readers will quickly find a Setup button (in Windows) 
or Page Setup and Printer buttons (on the Macintosh) at the bottom 
of the Print dialog box. These are doorways into your operating   
system’s printer drivers. At print time, InDesign interacts with what-
ever printer driver you’re using. However, there are very few instances 
when you’d need to click these buttons to change the printer driver 
Printer Driver   
Settings

648     6
settings. In most cases, the settings are duplicated somewhere in 
InDesign’s Print dialog box, and it’s always better to set it within this 
dialog box than in the driver. 
However, if you know of an option in the printer driver that 
InDesign doesn’t handle, click the appropriate button. For example, 
many inkjet printers require you to specify resolution, quality, and 
color adjustments in their own drivers. 
Note that in some rare cases you may get really weird results when 
applying both printer driver settings and Print dialog box settings 
(such as trying to print color separations while, at the same time, tell-
ing the driver to print multiple document pages per printed page).
While InDesign can print to other printers reasonably well, you’ll 
get the best results with Adobe’s printing technologies: PostScript 3 
and the PDF print engine (which is not the same thing as the PDF 
“printer driver”). 
When InDesign detects (based on the driver you’re using) that 
your printer isn’t equipped with PostScript or the PDF print engine, 
it grays out the features in the Print dialog box that don’t work on 
non-PostScript/PDF devices, such as color separations and the trans-
parency Flattener (transparency effects print fine on these devices, 
but you don’t need the Flattener to create them; see “Printing Trans-
parency,” later in this chapter).
InDesign displays a preview of the way your page fits on the selected 
paper size in the lower-left corner of the Print dialog box. The pre-
view provides feedback that can save you from printing pages in the 
wrong orientation or printing pages that won’t fit on the paper.
InDesign displays additional information “behind” the preview 
graphic. Click once on the preview and you can see data such as 
the paper size, the page size, how many tiles will print (see “Tile” in 
“Setup,” later in this chapter), and so on. Click again, and InDesign 
shows you how your page will print relative to the paper path through 
the printer.
General
The General pane of the Print dialog box contains basic printing fea-
tures: which pages do you want to print, how many copies do you 
want, and how do you want them to come out of the printer (see 
Figure 11-2).
PostScript vs.   
PDF Print Engine   
vs. Non-PostScript
Print Preview

 11.  649
Enter the number of copies of the page you want to print in the 
Copies field. You can print up to 9999 copies of your publication.
When you turn on the Collate option, InDesign prints the range of 
pages you’ve specified, in order, for each copy of the publication you 
print. This makes for much slower printing. When you print multiple 
copies of a page, your printer only needs to process each page once 
(and then prints multiple copies of the page using the same image); 
when you turn on the Collate option, your printer must process each 
page once for every copy of the print job.
When you print a multipage document, do you want the first page to 
come out first or last? Turning on the Reverse Order check box tells 
InDesign to print the last page first, then print “backwards” to the 
first page. Turn this on if your pages come out of the printer face up.
Turn on the All Pages option to print all of the pages in the publica-
tion. To print a range of pages, enter the page range in the Range field, 
as shown in Table 11-1.
To print a range within an alternate layout, select Range, choose 
the alternate layout, and enter the range following a colon, such as 
“Letter V: 3-7” to print only pages 3-7 of the Letter V layout.
You can mix and match page ranges. To print pages one, three, 
six through ten, and 20, for example, you’d enter “1,3,6-10,20.” The 
pages and ranges you specify must be in order (you couldn’t, for 
Copies
Collate
Reverse Order
Page Ranges
Figure 11-2
The General Panel  
of the Print Dialog Box

650     6
example, print page 20 before printing page 6). Specifying “1,5,5,9” 
means print page 1, then two copies of page 5, and then page 9. To 
print from page 10 to the end of the document, type “10-”. To print 
from the beginning of the file through page 10, type “-10”.
If you’ve used the Page Numbering and Section feature, then 
printing specific page ranges gets more complicated. For example, 
let’s say your first section uses roman numerals and is 5 pages long. To 
print the first six pages, you type “i-6” (you can’t type “1-6” because 
there is no page called “1”—the first page is called “i”). However, you 
can change this behavior: If you select Absolute Numbering in the 
View pop-up menu of the General pane of the Preferences dialog box, 
then you should type “1-6” because the range now refers to absolute 
page numbering (“the first through the sixth page”).
If your document contains different page sizes, use the widgets 
above the Range field to specify a range containing all pages of the 
matching size. For example, suppose you need to print a brochure 
that has three different page sizes. If you select one of the covers, 
clicking the middle icon adds all the other pages of the same size to 
the range. Click the arrows to the right or left of the middle icon to 
cycle through spreads to print.
Note: If you’ve chosen Absolute Numbering from the View pop-up 
menu in the Page Numbering section of the General Preferences 
dialog box, InDesign expects you to enter absolute page numbers in 
the range field, rather than the number of the page as defined by 
the section containing the page. If page 1 of section 3 of the docu-
ment is the fifteenth page in the document, you would enter “15” in 
the Range field (if, on the other hand, you chose Section Numbering 
from the View pop-up menu, you would enter “Sec3:1”).
To print:
Enter:
Example:
A continuous range  
of pages
first page - last page
12-21
Up to a specific page
- last page
-5
From a page to the  
end of the document
first page -
5- 
Noncontiguous pages
page, page
1, 3
Mixed page ranges
page, range
-3, 6-9, 12, 15-
Pages by alternate layout
layout:page
iPad H:2-7
Pages by section
section:page
Sec1:1, Sec2:5
Table 11-1
Printing Page Ranges

 11.  651
To print even and odd pages, select the All Pages option from the 
Sequence pop-up menu; to print even pages, select Even Pages Only; 
and to print odd pages select Odd Pages Only. These choices affect all 
page ranges, including page ranges you’ve entered in the Range field. 
The only time we’ve used this pop-up menu is when we’ve printed 
double-sided documents on a laser printer (print just the odd pages, 
then flip the pages, put them back in the printer, and print the even 
pages). If you’ve turned on the Spreads option, these options will be 
unavailable. 
When you turn on the Spreads option, InDesign tries to print each 
spread in the publication on a single sheet of paper (or other output 
media). If the spread is larger than the selected paper size, you can 
turn on the Scale to Fit option in the Setup panel of the Print dialog 
box and/or change the paper orientation. This is also called “readers 
spreads.” Note that this is not the same as printer spreads, which are 
a form of imposition, printing the first and last page together, and so 
on (see “Print Booklet” later in this chapter).
Sometimes you need to print your master pages instead of your doc-
ument pages. No problem: Just turn on the Print Master Pages check 
box. When you do this, you cannot specify page ranges—InDesign 
prints all the master pages in the document. 
InDesign normally prints all visible layers and doesn’t print hidden 
layers or layers made non-printing in the Layer Options dialog box. 
However, you can override this, printing All Layers (whether vis-
ible or printable) or all Visible Layers (whether printable or not) by 
choosing these from this pop-up menu.
When you turn on the Print Non-printing Objects check box, 
InDesign prints every object on your pages, regardless of the state 
of the Nonprinting check box in the Attributes panel. However, this 
feature does not print objects that are on hidden (and therefore non-
printing) layers.
What happens when you print a three-page document that has noth-
ing on page 2? By default, only pages 1 and 3 print out. If you want 
the blank page 2 to print, too, you’d better turn on the Print Blank 
Pages check box.
When you turn the Print Visible Guides and Baseline Grids check 
box on, all visible margin guides, baseline grid guides, and page 
Sequence
Spreads
Print Master   
Pages
Print Layers
Print Non-Printing 
Objects
Print Blank Pages
Print Visible Guides 
and Baseline Grids

652     6
guides print out (but not the document grid). We find this particu-
larly helpful when designing templates for others to use.
Setup
When we talk about page size, we’re talking about the page size you’ve 
defined for your publication. This page size should be the same as the 
page size of the printed piece you intend to produce. “Paper size,” on 
the other hand, is the size of the medium you’re printing on. The 
Setup pane of the Print dialog box lets you specify paper size, as well 
as how you want the page to appear on that paper (see Figure 11-3).
PPDs contain information about the paper sizes that a printer can 
handle, and this information then shows up in the Paper Size pop-up 
menu. When you specify a non-PostScript printer, Paper Size changes 
to Defined by Driver, and you’ll have to handle the paper size in the 
printer driver dialog box. Once again, the paper size doesn’t have 
to be the same as your page size; if you’re printing page marks (like 
crop marks), then the paper size will need to be larger. In the case of 
printers that image larger sheets of film, we usually set Paper Size to 
Custom, and then leave the Width and Height fields set to Auto (so 
InDesign figures out the proper imaging area for us).
You can control the rotation of your page on the paper using the Ori-
entation setting. The four choices (each rotated another 90 degrees) 
are indicated with tiny icons, but we find it easier to watch the pre-
view page in the lower-left corner of the dialog box.
The Offset feature controls the placement of your document on the 
paper, film, or plate. The printer’s default paper offset, even when set 
to zero, is almost always large enough so that you don’t have to worry 
about changing the value of Offset here. However, if you need the 
page to image farther from the paper edge, change this value.
The Gap setting, which is really only relevant for roll-fed printers, 
determines the amount of blank space between each page of the doc-
ument as it prints out. Some output providers that print to film like 
to set this to about 2p, so they can cut the pages apart more easily. In 
most cases, you can just ignore this setting.
The Transverse setting is like Orientation, but is used for roll-fed 
imagesetters and platesetters when the Paper Size is set to Custom. 
When you turn on Transverse, the width of the paper is placed along 
the length of the imagesetter’s paper roll, which can save paper or 
film. The best way to get a feel for the Transverse command is to click 
the Preview icon twice (to see the page versus the paper path), then 
Paper Size
Orientation
Offset
Gap
Transverse

 11.  653
turn on and off this check box. Of course, you have to first select an 
appropriate PPD.
You can scale the output of your pages, from as small as one percent 
to as large as 1000 percent of their actual size. You can specify a scal-
ing percentage yourself, or ask InDesign to fit the page to the size of 
the paper. When you use large percentages, watch the print preview 
to see that the enlarged page will fit on the paper you’ve selected. 
If you’re printing using a commercial printing process that dis-
torts the printed images (flexographic printing, for example, typically 
stretches the axis parallel to the rotation of the printing cylinder), 
you can compensate for the distortion by entering different values 
in the Width and Height fields. To do this, turn off the Constrain   
Proportions option, then enter the percentages you want in the Width 
and Height fields. When the Constrain Proportions option is turned 
on, any changes you make in one field are reflected in the other.
When Scale to Fit is on, InDesign calculates the scaling percent-
age necessary to fit the page (plus any printer’s marks you selected in 
the Marks and Bleeds panel of the Print dialog box) onto the selected 
paper size, and uses that scaling percentage when you print.
When you select a paper size that is larger than your document, 
you can use the Page Position pop-up menu to define the relation-
ship of your page to the paper. You’ve got four choices: Upper Left, 
Center Horizontally, Center Vertically, and Centered. Upper Left is 
the default; the other three are self-explanatory. We find this con-
trol a matter of personal preference most of the time, though it’s not 
uncommon for the printer’s internal margins (the area of the paper 
Scale
Page Position
Figure 11-3
The Setup Panel  
of the Print Dialog Box

654     6
where the printer simply cannot lay down toner or ink) to clip off the 
top or left part of your page. In this case, just change the page posi-
tion to Centered and try printing again.
Thumbnails are great when you’re trying to print out an overview 
of your document. For instance, you can print nine pages on a 
single piece of paper—three across and three down—by turning 
on the Thumbnails check box and then choosing 3×3 from the Per 
Page pop-up menu. You’ll also get little page numbers next to each 
thumbnail. Note that on PostScript printers it takes as long to print 
this one sheet as it would to print all nine pages individually, so plan 
your time accordingly.
If your pages just won’t fit on your paper, you’ve got to resort to tiling 
and (horror of horrors) tape, wax, or glue. InDesign offers three ways 
to tile documents—Automatic, Auto Justified, and Manual.
Automatic Tiling. When you choose this option from the Tile 
pop-up menu, InDesign starts the tile at the upper-left corner of the 
page, and prints as much of the page as it can given the paper size. 
Then it starts the next tile, with an overlap as specified in the Overlap 
field. It goes across the page, then moves down the page by the height 
of the paper you’re printing on, and then goes across the page again. 
If you click once on the page preview, InDesign tells you how 
many tiles will be required to print each page. If you find that it’s 
producing lots of tiles per page, try reducing the overlap. If you’re just 
tiling together a proof, a slight reduction in the scaling percentage 
could save you a lot of time with scissors and tape.
Auto Justified Tiling. The Auto Justified tiling option lays out the 
pieces of your page on the paper so that there’s no extra white space 
to the right or underneath the page image (as you typically get with 
Automatic tiling). When you use this option, the Overlap field is 
meaningless; InDesign is actually figuring the overlap amount itself.
Manual Tiling. When you choose Manual tiling, InDesign only 
prints one tile per document page, using the zero point on the ruler 
as the upper-left corner of the tile. To print successive tiles, you have 
to move the zero point and print again. We find Manual tiling much 
more useful than Automatic tiling—have you ever tried cutting and 
pasting to get the halftone dots in a photograph to line up? With 
Manual tiling, you can ensure that items that you want to be able to 
proof are positioned so they’re easy to see.
Thumbnails
Tile

 11.  655
Note: As far as we can tell, there’s no way to turn off the tiling marks 
InDesign adds around the edges of pages printed using Automatic 
tiling.
Tiling: Just Say No. Now it’s time for pure, unfettered, talk-radio-
style opinion. Any time anyone tells us that they plan to tile a publi-
cation, our sense of honesty and fair play forces us to ask them why 
they want to do that. Is it a masochistic streak they’ve had since child-
hood? A profound sense of personal inferiority? Something genetic?
If you can’t find some way to print your publication without tiling, 
then go find a large-format printer or some other process to enlarge 
it to the size you want, rather than printing tiles and then trying to 
paste the printed tiles together. If you don’t know if such a service is 
available in your area, do a Web search for “large format printing.” 
Even if you have to send the publication across the country to get 
it blown up to the size you want, do it. Sure—these services do cost 
money. But what’s your time—or your sanity—worth?
Marks and Bleeds
When you print your publication, you can choose to include (or 
exclude) a number of printer’s marks—crop marks, registration 
marks, and other information (see Figure 11-4). The preview window 
displays the effect (given the current page and paper sizes) of your 
choice of printer’s marks options, though they’re usually too small 
to see well.
Turn on the All Printer’s Marks option when you want to print all of 
the printer’s marks and page information. This is usually more than 
you need; for instance, if you don’t have any objects bleeding off the 
page, then why bother with the Bleed Marks?
Turn on the Crop Marks option to print lines outside the area of 
your page that define the area of the page (these are also called “trim 
marks”). Of course, if your paper size is not larger than your page 
size, InDesign won’t (can’t) print your crop marks. When you select 
Crop Marks, fold marks are printed as solid lines.
Turn on the Bleed Marks option to print lines outside the area of 
your page that define the area of the bleed. Like crop marks, if your 
paper size is not larger than your page size, InDesign won’t print 
your bleed marks. We almost always turn this option off, even when 
All Printer’s Marks
Crop Marks
Bleed Marks

656     6
bleeding objects off the page; in our experience, it doesn’t offer any 
useful information, and it can cause confusion.
When you turn on the Registration Marks option, InDesign prints 
little targets around the edge of your page for your commercial 
printer to use when they’re lining up, or registering, your color sepa-
rations for printing. If your paper size is smaller than your page size, 
InDesign won’t print the registration marks. 
When you turn on the Color Bars option, InDesign prints small 
squares of color outside the bleed area of your printed page. Your 
commercial printer can use these samples to adjust their press as 
they print the publication. It’s worth checking with your printer to 
find out if they really want these before turning on this check box. 
Turn on the Page Information option to print the file name and 
date of your publication on each printed page. In color separations 
InDesign also adds the name of the color plate. This makes it easy to 
tell which of several printed versions is the most current. It can also 
make it easier for your commercial printer to tell which pieces of 
film in a stack of separations go together (it’s easy for you to tell, but 
put yourself in their shoes for a minute). We almost always leave this 
turned on (as long as the paper size is larger than the page size).
Now here’s an intriguing option—a pop-up menu offering only 
“Default” as a choice. The idea is that developers will be able to add 
Registration Marks
Color Bars
Page Information
Type
Figure 11-4
The Marks and Bleeds 
Panel of the Print  
Dialog Box

 11.  657
different printer’s marks at some point. We haven’t seen any yet 
(apart from the specialized Japanese marks in InDesign-J).
To try to spur the development of alternative printers’ marks, 
we’ll show you how to create your own printers mark customization 
files later in this chapter.
You can change the thickness of the page marks by choosing from 
among three options in the Weight pop-up menu: .125 pt, .25 pt, and 
.5 pt. We’re pretty happy with the default weight, .25 pt.
The Offset feature determines how far from the edge of the page the 
page marks should sit. The default value of six points seems a little 
tight to us. We don’t operate a two-ton paper cutter at a bindery, but 
if we did, we’d sure wish people increased the space between page 
and trim marks (and registration marks) to at least 12 points.
The values you enter in the Bleed fields set the real boundary of the 
printed page. When the value in the Bleed fields is zero, InDesign 
neatly clips off any page elements extending beyond the edges of 
the page. This leaves little room for error in trimming the resulting 
printed pages—usually, when you want a page element to bleed off of 
a page, you should allow at least 24 points of bleed to compensate for 
inaccuracies in printing and trimming. If objects bleed off the page 
to the pasteboard, you must change these Bleed values in order for 
the object to still bleed upon printing.
Output
Do you want to print a composite version of your publication, or do 
you want to print separations? If you’re printing separations, which 
inks do you want to print? Those are among the questions you answer 
using the Output pane of the Print dialog box (see Figure 11-5).
If you’ve only used black ink in your document, you can ignore the 
Output pane. However, for those of us who create color documents, 
the most important setting here is the Color pop-up menu, with 
which you can tell InDesign to print composite color or color sepa-
rations. Which of these you should choose depends on your printer 
and the output you’re trying to achieve. 
Desktop inkjet printers and even many color laser printers should 
generally be considered RGB devices (even though they use CMYK 
inks), so you should choose Composite RGB to send them RGB data. 
Weight
Offset
Bleed
Composite vs. 
Separations

658     6
If you choose Composite CMYK, InDesign converts all your RGB 
data (including any RGB TIFF files) into CMYK at print time. You 
can use any of the composite choices when printing to a black-and-
white desktop laser printer.
Composite CMYK is also useful for workflows in which the 
separations will be performed by a RIP, even if that RIP is run-
ning as software on another machine. However, in most of these 
instances, it makes more sense to create a PDF file, a device-indepen-
dent PostScript file, or—for the adventurous—a device-dependent 
PostScript file using In-RIP separations, especially if you are using 
trapping (trapping is not supported in CMYK composite output). 
Choosing In-RIP Separations from the Color pop-up menu instructs 
InDesign to create a special type of composite CMYK file that will 
only print properly on a PostScript 3 output device and some newer 
PostScript Level 2 devices.
To tell InDesign to send the composite color information to the 
printer without changing it, choose Composite Leave Unchanged. If 
you do this, you will not be able to use Simulate Overprint.
You can also tell InDesign to separate each of your pages into four 
plates (or more, in the case of spot colors) by choosing Separations 
from the Color pop-up menu. If you select the Separations or In-RIP 
Separations option, InDesign activates the Inks list and its associated 
controls (the Flip, Frequency, Angle, Trapping settings, and so on).
One problem with printing proofs on a desktop laser printer is that 
it’s sometimes difficult to read colored text because it appears as a 
Text As Black
Figure 11-5
The Output Panel  
of the Print Dialog Box

 11.  659
tint. Similarly, when you want to fax a black-and-white version of 
your document, screened text becomes almost unreadable. When 
you turn on the Text as Black check box, InDesign ensures all your 
text appears as solid black—except for text that is already set to solid 
white, Paper color, or None.
The Trapping pop-up menu controls whether InDesign applies auto-
matic trapping to your documents. Choose one of the following trap-
ping options from the Trapping pop-up menu:
▶ Off. Use this option if you’ve done all of your trapping manually 
(using InDesign’s fills and strokes) or if you plan to separate and 
trap the publication using a post-processing program.
▶ Application Built-In. Choose Application Built-In when you 
want InDesign to trap your publication as it’s sent to the printer 
(or to disk).
▶ Adobe In-RIP. Select this option when you want to leave trap-
ping up to the RIP in your printer or imagesetter. This feature, 
which makes us rather nervous, only works on PostScript 3 and 
some PostScript Level 2 printers.
We cover trapping in a bit more detail in Chapter 10, “Color.”
InDesign can mirror pages at print time if you choose Horizontal, 
Vertical, or Horizontal & Vertical from the Flip pop-up menu. Flip-
ping an image is used for creating either wrong- or right-reading film 
from imagesetters, or film with emulsion side up or down. This is 
often handled in the imagesetter or platesetter, so be careful before 
you go changing this setting. The same thing goes for the Negative 
check box, which inverts the entire page so that everything that is set 
to 100-percent black becomes zero-percent black (effectively white). 
Never make assumptions about what your output provider wants; 
what you think will help might actually hinder (and cost you money 
in the long run).
What halftone screen frequency (in lines per inch) and screen angle 
do you want to use to print your publication? If you selected Com-
posite Gray in the Color pop-up menu, you can choose either the 
printer’s default (which is defined by the PPD you selected) or you 
can choose Custom and then enter your own values in the Frequency 
and Angle fields. 
Trapping
Flip and Negative
Screening

660     6
When you’re printing separations, you’ll see more choices on the 
Screening pop-up menu, and the values shown in the Frequency and 
Angle fields change as you select inks in the Inks list. Where the heck 
are these choices and values coming from? They’re coming from the 
PPD. Every PPD contains a list of screen frequencies and screen angles 
optimized to avoid moiré patterns on the specific PostScript device 
described by the PPD. Because of the way that PostScript halftoning 
(or any digital halftoning, for that matter) works, a PostScript RIP 
cannot perfectly “hit” just any halftone screen. 
On PostScript Level 1 devices, the screen angle and screen fre-
quency you’d get would sometimes fail to match the frequency and 
angle you specified. This often resulted in serious output problems 
and severe moiré patterns. PPDs list combinations of screen angles 
known to be safe for a given printer at a screen frequency and angle.
While the need for these optimized screen angles has diminished 
somewhat with newer versions of PostScript, we strongly advise you 
to stick with them when you’re printing separations.
To override the optimized screen settings for an ink, select the 
ink in the Inks list and then enter new values in the Frequency and 
Angle fields. Again, we don’t recommend this, but you might have a 
very good reason for doing so that we simply haven’t thought of yet 
(like perhaps you’ve lost your mind).
The optimized screen angles only cover the process inks, however. 
When your publication includes spot inks, InDesign sets the screen 
angle of every spot ink to 45 degrees.
For spot-color work—especially where you’re overlaying tints of 
two spot colors or using duotones from Photoshop based on two spot 
inks—you need to specify the screen angles appropriately. Here’s 
how to set them.
▶ If the spot inks never interact, set the screen angle for the inks to 
45 degrees (because a 45-degree halftone screen is the least obvi-
ous to the eye).
▶ If you’re creating lots of two-ink tint builds, or using duotones, 
you have a few choices, and two (somewhat contradictory) goals. 
You want both colors to print as close as possible to 45 degrees 
(especially the dominant, or darker, color), and you want as 
much separation between the angles as possible (the greater the 
separation between angles—45 is the maximum possible—the 
less patterning will be visible where the screens interact). Table 
11-2 lists some options.

 11.  661
▶ If you’re printing with two spot inks and the spot colors don’t 
overprint any process inks, use the default screen angles for 
Magenta and Cyan from the optimized screen you’ve selected.
Note that even if you set specific screen frequencies and angles for 
every color, you may not get what you ask for. Most imagesetters and 
platesetters these days strip out all screening settings and replace 
them with their own unless you (or your output provider) turns off 
this process. We’ve been caught by this several times, when we’ve 
chosen low-frequency screens in order to create a special effect, only 
to find our instructions ignored and the normal 133 lpi halftone 
appear. Very annoying.
When you select the Separations option, InDesign activates the Inks 
list. In this list, you’ll see at least the four process inks (yes, they’ll 
appear even if you aren’t using process colors in your publication), 
plus any spot inks you’ve defined. When you select an ink in the Inks 
list, InDesign displays the halftone screen properties for that ink in 
the Frequency and Angle fields (see “Screening,” above).
To tell InDesign not to print an ink, click the printer icon to the 
left of the ink name in the Inks list. You can also turn on or off all the 
inks by Option/Alt-clicking. Don’t worry about inks that aren’t used 
Inks
Subordinate:
Dominant:
Notes:
15
45
Traditional. Only a 30-degree 
separation, but neither angle is 
very obvious on its own.
0
45
Avoids patterning. Ideally, the ink 
printed at zero degrees is a very 
light color—otherwise, the hori-
zontal bands of halftone dots will 
be too obvious.
22.5
67.5
The complete compromise. Both 
angles are more obvious than 45 
degrees, but less obvious than 0, 
and you get the full 45-degree 
separation to avoid patterning.
75
30
The dominant color screen is 
slightly less obvious than the 
subordinate screen. Full 45-degree 
separation.
Table 11-2
Screen Angles for  
Spot Color Work

662     6
in your publication—InDesign will not generate a blank separation 
for them. If, for example, your publication uses only black ink and 
a spot ink, InDesign will not create separations for Cyan, Magenta, 
and Yellow, even though those inks appear in the Inks list.
As we discussed in Chapter 10, “Color,” you can set various objects 
to overprint using the Attributes panel. However, most composite 
printers (like laser printers and inkjets) don’t support overprinting. 
Fortunately, you can simulate overprinting on these output devices 
by turning on the Simulate Overprint check box. Because this can 
change color definitions (spot colors get converted to process, for 
example), you don’t want to turn this on for anything other than 
proofing your files on composite printers.
The Ink Manager manages how colors trap with each other and how 
spot colors interact (for instance, you can use the Ink Manager to 
alias one spot color to another). We cover the Ink Manager in Chap-
ter 10, “Color.” 
Graphics
The options in the Graphics pane control the way that InDesign 
prints the fonts and graphics in your publication (see Figure 11-6).
The Send Data pop-up menu affects what InDesign does with bitmaps 
in TIFF, JPEG, and other explicitly bitmapped file formats. It has no 
effect on images inside imported EPS or PDF graphics.
Do you want to print that 30-megabyte color scan every time you 
proof a document on your laser printer? Probably not. The Send Data 
pop-up menu gives you four options to control what InDesign does 
with images when you print: All, Optimized Subsampling, Proxy, 
and None, each of which is described below. 
All. Use this option when you want InDesign to send all of the image 
data from the image file to the printer. We recommend that you 
always use this option when printing the final copies of your pages.
Optimized Subsampling. This option tells InDesign to only send 
as much information from the image as is necessary to produce the 
best quality on the given output device using the current settings. It 
reduces the amount of data that has to be passed over the network 
and imaged by the printer. It can speed up printing immensely.
Simulate   
Overprint
Ink Manager
Send Data

 11.  663
How InDesign pares down the data depends on whether the 
image is color/grayscale or black and white.
▶ Color/Grayscale images. As we mentioned in Chapter 7, 
“Importing and Exporting,” there’s no reason for the resolution 
of grayscale and color images (in pixels per inch) to exceed two 
times the halftone screen frequency (in lines per inch). When 
you choose Optimized Subsampling from the Send Data pop-up 
menu, InDesign reduces the resolution of grayscale and color 
images to match the halftone screen frequency you’ve selected 
(in the Output pane of the Print dialog box). If you’ve set up a 
75-line screen (for instance), InDesign won’t send more than 150 
dots per inch of image resolution. Note that InDesign does not 
change the resolution of the images in your publication—it just 
reduces the amount of data that’s sent to the printer.
▶ Black-and-white (bi-level) images. When you’re printing 
bi-level, black-and-white images, and have selected Optimized 
Subsampling from the Send Data pop-up menu, InDesign 
matches the images it sends to the resolution of the output 
device. So if you’ve got a 600-pixels-per-inch black-and-white 
TIFF, and you’re printing on a 300-dpi laser printer, InDesign 
reduces the resolution of the image to 300 pixels per inch before 
sending it to the printer. For those who really want to know, 
InDesign gets the printer’s resolution from the DefaultResolu-
tion keyword in the PPD.
Figure 11-6
The Graphics Panel  
of the Print Dialog Box

664     6
The real value of the Optimized setting lies in printing laser proof 
copies of jobs that are destined for high-resolution (hence high half-
tone screen frequency) output. If you’re producing a document that 
will be printed with a 133-lpi screen, for instance, you may be work-
ing with images that have resolutions of 250 or even 300 ppi. But for 
proofing on a 600-dpi laser printer (which has a 85-lpi default screen 
frequency), you only need 106 dpi—maximum. By subsampling to 
this lower resolution, InDesign is sending less than one fifth of the 
information over the wire. Obviously, this can save you a lot of time. 
With high-resolution line art, InDesign might send only a sixteenth 
of the data.
Printing an image using the Optimized Subsampling option pro-
duces a more detailed printed image than using the Low Resolution 
option, but doesn’t take as long to print or transmit as would the full-
resolution version of the image. 
While Optimized Subsampling might sound like the universal 
cure for perfect (speedy, high quality) printing, it isn’t. Subsampling, 
by its nature, blurs and distorts images, especially in areas of high 
contrast. Therefore, we think you should use this option for proof 
printing, but not for printing the final copies of your pages.
Proxy. Choose Proxy from the Send Data pop-up menu to have 
InDesign send only the low-resolution preview images it displays on 
your screen to the printer. Again, this is an option to use when you’re 
printing proof copies of your pages, not for final output.
None. When you choose this option, InDesign prints all of the 
imported graphics in your publication as boxes with Xs through 
them. As you’d expect, this makes it print faster. Proof printing is 
great when you’re copy-editing the text of a publication—why wait 
for the graphics to print? 
Note that you can speed things up a bit, without completely elimi-
nating the graphics, by using the Proxy or Optimized Subsampling 
option on the Send Data pop-up menu. Also, note that you can turn 
off the printing of a particular type of imported graphic using the 
Omit EPS/PDF/Bitmap Images options in the Advanced pane of the 
Print dialog box.
One of the best ways to speed up InDesign’s printing is to manage 
downloaded fonts sensibly. You can save many hours over the course 
of a day, week, month, or year by downloading fonts to your printer 
in advance, and by understanding the way that InDesign handles 
font downloading.
Font Downloading

 11.  665
The basic concept is pretty simple: Fonts can be either “resident” 
(which means that they’re stored in your printer’s memory or on a 
hard drive attached to the printer) or “downloadable” (which means 
they’re stored somewhere on your system or network).
When you print, InDesign checks the printer PPD to see if the 
fonts are available on the selected printer. If the font is available, 
InDesign sends a reference to the font, but does not send the font 
itself, which means that the text will be printed in the font available 
on the printer.
What happens when a font is not available in the printer’s memory 
or on its hard drive? That depends on the option you’ve selected in 
the Fonts section of the Graphics pane of the Print dialog box.
When you choose the None option, you’re directing InDesign 
to refrain from including any fonts in the PostScript it’s sending to 
the printer (or to disk). If text in your publication has been format-
ted using fonts that are not resident on the printer, that text will be 
printed using the printer’s default font (usually Courier).
When you choose the Complete option, InDesign checks the state 
of the Download PPD Fonts option. If this option is on, InDesign 
sends all of the fonts used in the publication to the printer’s memory. 
If the option is turned off, InDesign downloads all of the fonts used 
in the publication that are not listed in the PPD (PPDs contain lists 
of fonts available on a given make and model printer, plus any you’ve 
added by editing the PPD). InDesign downloads the fonts once for 
each page that’s printed. As you’d expect, this increases the amount 
of time it takes to send the job to your printer.
To decrease the amount of your printer’s memory that’s taken 
up by downloaded fonts, or to decrease the amount of time it takes 
InDesign to send the fonts to your printer, choose the Subset option. 
When you do this, InDesign sends only those characters required to 
print the publication. This can speed up printing tremendously.
At the same time, subsetting fonts can cause problems with some 
printers. If you find that you are losing characters, that the wrong 
characters print, or that your printer generates a PostScript error 
when you’re trying to print using the Subset option, use one of the 
other options. If you’re printing a file to disk as PostScript for deliv-
ery to a service bureau or to create a PDF using Acrobat Distiller, do 
not use the Subset option. 
Adobe would love it if everyone had PostScript 3 or PDF print engine 
devices. Not only would they make money from licensing fees, but 
Postscript Level

666     6
their software could also take advantage of all the cool features 
in PostScript 3 RIPs. However, currently many people only have 
PostScript Level 2 devices. (Please don’t ask us why “PostScript 3” 
omits the “Level” moniker. We can only assume that Adobe’s mar-
keting strategists have their reasons.) In most cases, InDesign reads 
the PostScript version from the PPD, so you don’t have to think about 
this. However, if you’re making a device-independent PostScript file 
you will need to choose Level 2 or Level 3. (Here Adobe does use 
“Level.”) 
The Data Format feature controls how bitmapped images (like TIFF 
and JPEG) are sent to the printer. While sending the information 
in ASCII format is more reliable over some older networks, binary 
is almost always fine and has the benefit of creating a much smaller 
PostScript file (the images are half the size of ASCII). We usually use 
binary unless we’re sending files to an output provider that we know 
requires ASCII. 
Color Management
The features in the Color Management pane of the Print dialog box 
are complex enough that we need to cover them in a separate section. 
We discuss color management, including all these Print dialog box 
settings, in Chapter 10, “Color.” 
Advanced
We’re not sure what makes this pane more “advanced” than the 
others, but it’s where you specify how InDesign should print to non-
PostScript printers, images in an OPI workflow, and objects that have 
transparency settings (see Figure 11-7).
If (and only if) you’re printing to a non-PostScript/PDF device, your 
pages need to be rasterized (converted to a bitmap). You can control 
who does the conversion: If you turn on Print as Bitmap, InDesign 
rasterizes at a particular image resolution that you specify. If you 
turn it off, InDesign writes vectors to disk and lets the operating 
system do the conversion. In general, it works pretty well either way.
When you’re printing through an OPI server, you can direct the 
server to replace the low-resolution images you’ve used to lay out 
Data Format
Print as Bitmap
OPI Image   
Replacement

 11.  667
Figure 11-7
The Advanced Panel  
of the Print Dialog Box
your document with the high-resolution images you’ve stored on the 
server. To do this, turn off the OPI Image Replacement option and 
turn on the appropriate Omit for OPI check boxes. This omits the 
images from the PostScript output, leaving only the OPI link infor-
mation in their place.
Note that you can specify which types of images you want to 
replace with OPI comments: EPS, PDF, or Bitmap Images. When you 
turn on the EPS option, you’re telling InDesign not to print any EPS 
graphics in the file, but if PDF and Bitmap Images are still turned off 
then the program will include that image data at print time.
When you turn on OPI Image Replacement, InDesign acts as 
an OPI server at print time, replacing the low-resolution OPI proxy 
images with the high-resolution versions. InDesign needs access to 
the server or drive containing the files for this to work. To retain OPI 
image links to images stored inside imported EPS graphics, make 
sure that you turn on the Read Embedded OPI Image Links option 
in the EPS Import Options dialog box.
We hate to give you the runaround, but if you’re reading this hoping 
to learn all about how the flattener works, you’re out of luck. We cover 
all the issues regarding printing transparency later in this chapter. 
We will say, however, that you can use the Transparency Flattener 
section of the Advanced pane of the Print dialog box to choose a 
default Flattener setting for your print job, and to tell InDesign 
whether to ignore any Flattener settings you’ve applied to particular 
spreads in your document with the Pages panel.
Transparency   
Flattener

668     6
Use Medium Resolution when printing proofs and High Reso-
lution when printing final artwork. But “Medium” and “High” can 
mean different things depending on the Flattener settings, so you 
still need to go read that other section. Sorry.
Summary
The last pane of the Print dialog box, Summary, simply lists all the 
various settings in all the panes in one long text list. It’s darn silly 
(not to mention difficult and time-consuming) to read through this 
unformatted list of settings on screen. Fortunately, you can click the 
Save Summary button to save this list to disk as a text file. 
Print Presets
We don’t know about you, but we find we print a typical InDesign 
publication (at least) three different ways. We print a proof copy on 
our laser printer, a color proof on a color printer, and then we print 
our final copies on an platesetter. In the first two instances, we print 
composites; when we print to an imagesetter, we may print color 
separations. You might think that for each type of printing we have 
to claw our way through the settings in the Print dialog box. Instead, 
we save our Print dialog box settings in a print preset—which means 
that switching from proof to final printing is as easy as selecting the 
appropriate print preset. 
Print presets are like paragraph styles—they’re bundles of attri-
butes that can be applied in a single action. Almost all of the attri-
butes in the Print dialog box and in the printer driver dialog boxes 
are included in a print preset.
It’s easy to create a print preset; set up the Print dialog box with the 
options the way you want them, click the Save Preset button at the 
bottom of the dialog box, and then give the preset a name. You can 
then go ahead and print, or just cancel out of the Print dialog box (if 
you just wanted to set up the preset without printing).
InDesign also has a second method for making print presets, 
though we find it slightly more cumbersome.
1. Choose Define from the Print Presets submenu of the File  
menu. InDesign displays the Define Print Presets dialog box  
(see Figure 11-8).
Creating a   
Print Preset

 11.  669
Figure 11-8
Creating a Print Preset
Choose Define from the Print 
Presets submenu of the File 
menu. InDesign displays the 
Print Presets dialog box. 
Enter a name for the new 
printer preset and set up 
the New Print Preset dialog 
box the way you want it.
To print using the printer 
preset, choose the preset name 
from the Print Presets sub-
menu of the File menu (hold 
down Shift if you want to print 
without displaying the Print 
dialog box).
InDesign adds the new print 
preset to the list of available 
presets.
For a fun surprise, try 
making a print preset named 
“Friendly Alien”. With 
that selected in the Preset 
pop-up menu in the Print 
dialog box, click the Preview 
window in the lower left 
corner of the dialog box.
Click the New button. 
2. Click the New button. InDesign displays the New Print Preset 
dialog box, which is nearly identical to the Print dialog box.
3. Enter a name for the print preset in the Name field, then set 
up the dialog box with the settings you want, and click the OK 
button. InDesign returns you to the Print Presets dialog box and 
adds the new print preset to the list of available presets. 
To print using the settings in a print preset, you can choose the 
preset from the Print preset pop-up menu in the Print dialog box. Or, 

670     6
even easier, select the print preset name from the Print presets sub-
menu of the File menu. InDesign displays the Print dialog box. Click 
the Print button (or the Save button, if you’re printing to disk), and 
InDesign prints the specified pages.
To print without displaying the Print dialog box, hold down Shift 
as you choose the print preset name from the Print Presets submenu 
of the File menu.
You can use the Print Presets dialog box to add presets, delete presets, 
rename presets, edit presets, or import or export print presets.
▶ To create a new print preset that is based on an existing preset, 
open the Print Presets dialog box, select a print preset, and then 
click the New button. Enter a name for your new print preset, 
then modify the settings in the panels of the Print dialog box. 
Note that this does not link the two presets—changes made  
to the “parent” print preset will not affect any presets you’ve 
based on it.
▶ To delete a print preset, select the preset name and click the 
Delete button. 
▶ To export a print preset (or presets), select one or more presets 
and click the Save button. Specify a file name and location for 
the print presets document and click the OK button.
▶ To import a print preset or set of presets, open the Print Presets 
dialog box and click the Load button. Locate and select a print 
presets document (or an InDesign publication containing print 
presets), then click the OK button. If the print presets you’re 
importing already exist in the publication, InDesign will create 
copies of the presets (InDesign will append a number—usually 
“1”—to the duplicate print presets).
▶ To edit a print preset, select the preset name in the Print Presets 
dialog box, then click the Edit button. InDesign displays the 
Print dialog box. Make the changes and click the OK button to 
save the edited preset.
Custom Printer Marks
If there’s one thing we’ve learned about our fellow desktop publishers 
over the years, it’s that you’re picky about printer’s marks. You want 
to control the offset of the crop marks and bleed marks from the edge 
Managing   
Print Presets

 11.  671
of the page. You want to use star targets instead of, or in addition to, 
the standard registration marks. You want the color bars to print at 
the top, the bottom, the left, or the right of the page.
There is utterly no way for a page layout program to provide for 
all of your individual preferences—what’s right for one person is not 
just wrong, but is probably offensive to another.
InDesign, in recognition of this fact, provides a (very obscure) 
way for you to define your own marks with printer’s marks defini-
tion (also known as PMD or .mrk) files. They’re text files that can be 
edited with any text editor (the free TextWrangler on the Mac OS 
or Notepad in Windows work quite well). Once you’ve saved a PMD 
file to a specific folder on your system, a new entry will appear in the 
Type pop-up menu in the Marks and Bleed panel of the Print dialog 
box. Choose the option, and InDesign will print using the marks 
defined in the file.
Instead of boring most of you with arcane code here, we’ve made 
this section, including example code, available as a PDF file for you 
to download here: www.indesignsecrets.com/downloads/mrk.pdf
Printing Booklets
As we mentioned earlier, there’s an important difference between 
reader spreads and printer spreads. In reader spreads, page 2 and 3 
appear opposite each other, as left and right facing pages. But if you 
want to print, fold up, trim, and bind a book or magazine, you need 
to print it using printer spreads. If you have an 8-page booklet, you 
need to print page 1 and 8 next to each other (the front and back 
cover), then page 2 and 7, then 3 and 6, and so on. The process of 
creating printer spreads is called imposition, and there are expen-
sive, dedicated applications (such as Kodak PREPS, Farrukh Systems 
Imposition Publisher, and Impostrip from Ultimate) that can impose 
8 or 12 or 32 document pages onto an enormous plate.
There are also a number of mid-range solutions—typically Acro-
bat plug-ins such as Quite Imposing (www.quite.com)—that can 
impose any PDF.
But what if you just want to print up a little booklet from inside 
InDesign? The answer is the Print Booklet feature, found at the 
bottom of the File menu. Print Booklet is perfect for pretty much any 
small publication you would print on a desktop printer—such as a 
saddle-stapled office telephone directory. Here’s how to manage the 
Print Booklet dialog box (see Figure 11-9):

672     6
1. If you have already created a Print Preset for your output device, 
you can choose it from the pop-up menu at the top of the dialog 
box. Alternately, click the Print Settings button at the bottom of 
the dialog box to view the Print dialog box, pick a printer, and 
choose from all the features we’ve been talking about. 
2. Choose a page range to print. For example, typing 1,6-11,18 will 
print pages 1, 6 through eleven, and 18.
3. Pick an arrangement from the Booklet Type pop-up menu:
▶
Saddle Stitch. In a saddle-stitched imposition, you end up 
folding all the sheets in half and stapling them in the middle 
(see Figure 11-10). InDesign can do 2-up saddle stitching, so 
you’d get two document pages printed on each side of the 
sheet of paper. In most cases, this is what you’ll likely use.
▶
Perfect Bound. In a perfect bound imposition, you build 
signatures, then bind those signatures together (typically 
by gluing them inside spine a cover). InDesign only creates 
2-up sheets (two pages on each side of the sheet). You need to 
specify how large each signature should be in the Signature 
Size pop-up menu. 
▶
Consecutive. The Consecutive booklet type is for documents 
such as tri-fold brochures where you want the first three 
pages of your document to be on one side of a sheet, and the 
fourth through sixth pages to be on the opposite side. While 
Figure 11-9
Print Booklet

 11.  673
we can see the appeal of building your document this way, 
there are two problems. First, the third panel of a trifold 
typically has to be slightly narrower than the first two, or 
else it won’t fold properly. The amazing PageControl plug-in 
from DTPtools lets you create different-sized pages in your 
InDesign document, but we’re not sure how much to trust 
Print Booklet with these files. 
4. Enter values, if necessary, for Creep, Space Between Pages, and 
Bleed Between Pages.
▶
Creep. Sheets of paper have thickness, so when you stack 
a bunch of them and fold them together, the sheets on the 
inside get pushed out a little. To accommodate for that, you 
can increase the Creep value, which pushes pages incremen-
tally closer to the binding as they approach the middle of the 
booklet. The value you enter in the Creep field defines the 
full adjustment of pages at the middle of the booklet. The 
actual value you should use for Creep depends entirely on the 
thickness of the paper. If you have fewer than 6 or 8 sheets of 
paper, you probably don’t even need to worry about it. And, 
yes, Nirvana fans, you can enter a negative creep value.
▶
Space Between Pages/Bleed Between Pages. If you know 
exactly how far apart you want two pages on your spreads to 
sit from each other, you can enter that in the Space Between 
Pages value (but only for perfect binding). And if you have 
increased the amount of Space Between Pages, you can also 
Figure 11-10
Saddle Stitch versus 
Perfect Bound
Saddle stitched, 8-page document (or 
an 8-page perfect bound document 
with an 8-page signature)
Perfect bound 16-page document, 
8-page signatures
Perfect bound 8-page 
document, 4-page 
signatures
1
3
8
6
1
5
1
3
9

674     6
increase the Bleed Between Pages value (up to one half the 
amount of Space Between Pages)—this lets some of page 2 
bleed into the blank space to the left of page 3, for example. 
In general, we feel that if you need these kinds of features, 
then you’re likely outgrowing the usefulness of Print Booklet 
and should probably look around for a more robust imposi-
tion solution.
5. In most cases, you can leave the Automatically Adjust to Fit 
Marks and Bleeds checkbox turned on, letting InDesign figure 
out where to put your page marks.
6. Finally, click on the Preview pane to see how the final imposition 
will look (see Figure 11-11). Most importantly, check the Mes-
sages and Warning sections to see if InDesign had to add blank 
pages or if it expects any other problems printing. For example, 
if your document has only 6 pages, InDesign will have to add 
two blank pages in order to fill out two 2-up sheets (eight pages). 
Notice that you can scroll through the imposed document to see 
each spread.
If InDesign tells you that the imposed page won’t fit on your 
current page size, you can click Print Settings, change the page 
size in the Print dialog box, and click OK. This returns you to 
the Preview pane, where you can see the effects of your change.
7. When you’re convinced that it will output correctly, click Print.
Figure 11-11
Print Booklet

 11.  675
Note that Print Booklet does not let you create a new imposed 
InDesign document; it only prints the imposed pages and doesn’t 
change your current document at all. If you find you need to impose 
your document yourself in order to send to someone else to print, 
you can always “print” using Print Booklet to a PDF file. However, 
you shouldn’t send an imposed document to a printer unless they 
specifically ask you to—they should have software to do it better 
(especially for their press) than you do.
Here’s another reason you may have to print the booklet to a PDF: 
If you don’t have a duplex printer (one that can print on both sides 
of a sheet of paper). Instead, print the imposed file to a PDF file and 
open it in Acrobat. When you print from Acrobat you can choose to 
print just the odd pages. Then flip the printed pages over, put them 
back into the paper tray, and print all the even pages backward (with 
the Reverse checkbox turned on in Acrobat’s Print dialog box).
Unfortunately, there is no way to use Print Booklet with a book. If 
you need to impose a book, it’s better export the book as a PDF and 
then use a third-party Acrobat plug-in to do the imposition.
Separations Preview
If there’s one feature we’ve longed for since desktop publishing pro-
grams gained the ability to print color separations (yes, Junior, there 
was a time when they didn’t), it’s a separations preview—a way that 
we could look at the individual separations of a document before 
committing them to expensive imagesetter film or printing plates.
We’ve tried all sorts of workarounds—rasterizing files in Photo-
shop and then splitting channels; printing separations to disk and 
then converting the PostScript to PDF using Acrobat Distiller…you 
name it, we’ve probably tried it in our quest to see what our separa-
tions would look like without having to print them.
That’s all over now, thanks to InDesign’s Separations Preview 
panel. With this modern marvel, you can see what your separations 
will look like without even having to leave InDesign.
To view your pages as separations, display the Separations panel 
(choose Separations from the Output submenu of the Window menu, 
or press Shift-F6). Choose Separations from the View menu in the 
Separations panel. Click the column to the left of the Ink names to 
turn the display of that ink off or on (see Figure 11-12). You can also 
use keyboard shortcuts, as shown in Table 11-3.
Booklets of Books

676     6
To Display:
Press:
First spot plate
Command-Shift-Option-5/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-5
Second spot plate
Command-Shift-Option-6/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-6
Third spot plate
Command-Shift-Option-7/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-7
Fourth spot plate 
Command-Shift-Option-8/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-8
Fifth spot plate
Command-Shift-Option-9/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-9
All plates
Command-Shift-Option-` (accent grave) 
/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-` (accent grave)
Black plate 
Command-Shift-Option-4/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-4
Cyan plate
Command-Shift-Option-1/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-1
Magenta plate
Command-Shift-Option-2/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-2
Yellow plate
Command-Shift-Option-3/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-3
Table 11-3
Keyboard Shortcuts for 
Separations Preview
Figure 11-12
Separations Preview
Separations preview off.
Separations preview on, Black plate displayed.
Figure 11-13
Ink Limit
InDesign highlights the areas in which 
the ink concentration is greater than the 
percentage you’ve entered (shown as black 
here, as we don’t have color to work with).
Choose Ink Limit…
…and enter a percentage in the associated field (the per-
centage should match the maximum ink coverage for the 
type of press and paper you’re printing on).
All other objects are rendered 
using gray values corresponding 
to the intensity of ink coverage in 
the area.

 11.  677
Figure 11-14
Previewing  
Overprinting
Stroke greatly enlarged for illustrative purposes!
You can use the Separations 
Preview panel to view over-
printing before you print.
You can choose to display the separations in the ink color, or you 
can view the separations in black—to do the latter, choose Show 
Single Plates in Black from the Separations panel menu.
As you move the cursor over objects on the page, the Separa-
tions Preview panel displays the inks percentages used in the objects 
beneath the cursor.
The Separations Preview panel can also help you watch the ink 
densities of objects on your pages. Choose Ink Limit from the View 
pop-up menu in the Separations Preview panel, then enter an ink 
coverage percentage in the associated field. When the ink coverage 
in an area exceeds the percentage you entered, InDesign highlights 
the area in red (see Figure 11-13). 
One really cool thing about the Separations Preview is that you 
can see the effect of overprinting, as shown in Figure 11-14. This fea-
ture alone is worth a great deal, as you can use it to preview simple 
text trapping and special overprinting effects without having to print 
the document.
Printing Transparency
Two of the most important figures in the desktop publishing revo-
lution—Tim Gill (founder of Quark, Inc.) and John Warnock (co-
founder of Adobe, Inc.)—each had a blind spot that led to a tragedy 
of unparalleled proportions. Well, maybe not quite that strong (they 
both retired quite happily in recent years). But the blind spots did 
have interesting results that caused their companies—and their cus-
tomers—difficulties.

678     6
Tim Gill didn’t believe that HTML or PDF was worth paying 
much attention to, and Quark suffered by being late to supporting 
the Web and the PDF standard. John Warnock didn’t believe trans-
parency was important in the print industry and so it took PostScript 
20 years to support it. Today, everyone knows that vector transpar-
ency is important to designers, but because PostScript couldn’t print 
it, programs couldn’t support it.
But wait, you say, some programs have had transparency features 
for many years! Photoshop supported transparency because it only 
had to worry about pixels, not vector artwork. The transparency fea-
tures of every other program (including Illustrator, FreeHand, and 
so on) worked by faking the effects at print time, “flattening” the 
transparent objects into a form that PostScript could handle.
In recent years, transparency has finally made its way into 
PostScript 3 by way of the PDF 1.4 specification. RIPs that sup-
port transparency in PDF (such as those based on the Adobe PDF 
Print Engine) can print transparency. For older equipment, however, 
InDesign users will still have to flatten files that include drop shad-
ows, feathering, or any other cool transparency effects.
Adobe’s technology for turning transparent objects into a form 
suitable for older RIPs is called “the flattener.” The flattener works 
by breaking up transparent objects into smaller non-transparent 
objects. It uses three basic methods to do this.
▶ Divide and conquer. If you have a 50-percent transparent 
magenta square partially over a cyan square, the flattener splits 
this into three objects: where the two squares overlap, it creates a 
rectangle made of cyan and magenta; where they didn’t overlap, 
it makes two L-shaped objects, one cyan, the other magenta.
▶ Clip it up. Let’s say you have a 20-percent transparent picture 
partially overlapping that cyan square (or vice versa, a partially 
transparent cyan square overlapping a picture). The flattener 
splits the picture into two (or more) pieces by drawing invisible 
frames (clipping paths) and putting pieces of the picture into 
them. The part of the picture that is inside the square gets cyan 
added to it to finish the effect.
▶Rasterize. When all else fails, and InDesign realizes that it’ll 
take too long to use the previous two methods (too long to flat-
ten means the file will probably also take way too long to print), 
it punts and just turns the whole thing into a bitmapped picture 
(converting vectors into bitmaps is called rasterizing).
The Flattener

 11.  679
Again, all of this is done behind the scenes and only at print time 
(or when you export the file as an EPS or an Acrobat 4 PDF file, both 
of which also use the flattener). In most cases, you’d never know that 
InDesign was doing any of this if we hadn’t told you, because the 
results are extremely clean. In some cases, primarily when InDesign 
ends up rasterizing part of your page, you may find the results only 
fine, okay, or (rarely) unacceptable.
Transparency is all about accepting compromise, and if you can’t deal 
with compromise then you might consider avoiding transparency 
altogether. The first compromise is time versus quality: the better the 
quality, the more time your files will take to print (or export). The 
next compromise is that if you want to play with transparency (or 
your clients want to, and you’ve agreed to print their documents), 
you need to pay attention to how your document is created and be 
prepared to proof the final results carefully.
Here are a few things you should pay attention to when messing 
with transparency:
▶Transparency comes in all sorts of forms. If you use the Drop 
Shadow or any other feature in the Effects panel, you’re intro-
ducing transparency. So does importing a native Photoshop, 
Illustrator, or PDF document that includes any transparent 
object. If the page icon in the Pages panel has a checkerboard 
icon under it, you can bet that the flattener will kick in.
▶
If you can avoid placing text or other vector objects (especially 
small text) behind a transparent object, you probably should. For 
example, a black drop shadow falling on top of black text looks 
the same whether the text is over or under the shadow, so you 
should definitely put the text on a layer higher than the shadow. 
But if your design depends on the text being beneath a transpar-
ency effect, then by all means go for it—and be prepared to proof 
it and make sure it prints correctly.
▶
If you’re going to use transparent objects in Illustrator (includ-
ing transparent brushes, most filters, drop shadows, and so on), 
make sure you’re using version 9.02 or later (you should probably 
just use version 10 or later). Also, we suggest saving files in the 
native .ai format, the Acrobat 5 PDF format, or an .eps format 
compatible with Illustrator 9 or later (not earlier versions). This 
way InDesign handles flattening at print time instead of you 
worrying about Illustrator getting it right.
Transparency   
Tricks

680     6
▶
If you’re importing Illustrator documents that include images 
and use transparency effects, it’s probably a good idea to embed 
the images in the Illustrator file itself rather than relying on 
linking to the file on disk.
▶
Set the Transparency Blend Space (in the Edit menu) to CMYK 
rather than RGB, and—if you’ve turned on color management—
use Convert to Profile (Preserve Numbers) to convert the docu-
ment working space to your final output space.
▶
Spot colors offer a number of opportunities for problems, espe-
cially the flattener converting spot colors to process colors (or 
worse, converting part of an object to process color and leaving 
the rest of the object a spot color). This typically happens when 
you use fancy transparency modes (such as Color, Saturation, 
Difference, and so on) or when you have spot color gradients 
involved with transparency.
▶The flattener must work with high-resolution images on disk, 
which means that an OPI workflow—which relies on importing 
low-resolution images that get swapped out with high-resolution 
later—is out. (Of course, if you have OPI images that are not 
involved with transparency then you can still use them.) DCS 
files do work with transparency flattening. Adobe’s documen-
tation used to say that EPS duotones are also a no-no, but we 
haven’t run into any problems with them.
▶
It’s better not to mix overprint settings (such as Overprint Stroke 
or Overprint Fill) with transparency. If you’re using transpar-
ency anyway, consider using the Multiply blend mode rather 
than turning on Overprint Fill.
▶
Most PostScript RIPs can handle the flattener tricks just fine, 
but we have encountered some RIPs that cause problems. For 
example, because older Scitex (now part of Creo) RIPs rely on 
separating continuous tone imagery from line work (vector) 
images, you can get some very bad results, especially where text 
interacts with transparent objects. Creo says they’re working on 
a fix for this, but be extra careful when perusing your output if 
you (or your output provider) are using this sort of RIP.
▶
In fact, it would behoove you to always look over your final 
output carefully. Look for spot colors that were converted to  
process, overprinting instructions that were ignored, vector 
objects that were rasterized in unpleasant ways, unintentionally 
rasterized type, and text or strokes that became heavier.

 11.  681
As we said earlier, flattening is a matter of compromise. Fortunately, 
you have a say in the matter, by selecting among various flattener 
presets. A flattener preset essentially asks: how hard should InDesign 
try before giving up and rasterizing the artwork?
InDesign ships with three predefined flattener presets: Low Reso-
lution, Medium Resolution, and High Resolution. You can mentally 
replace the word “resolution” with “quality.” You should typically 
use Low or Medium when printing to a desktop laser printer and 
High when printing to an imagesetter or platesetter (see “Applying 
Flattener Presets,” later in this chapter).
Flattener Presets
Figure 11-15
Creating a  
Flattener Preset
Select Transparency   
Flattener Presets from   
the Edit menu.
To base a new preset on  
an existing preset, select  
a preset and click the  
New button.
Set up the options for the 
preset, then click the OK 
button to save the preset.
Occasionally we find a need to create our own flattener preset. If 
you’re doing a lot of proofs on a black-and-white desktop laser printer, 
you could probably get away with making a “Very Low” preset, which 
may print faster than Low Resolution with “good enough” quality. 
Or, if you’re getting unacceptably slow printing, printing errors, or 
poor quality on an imagesetter with the High Resolution preset, you 
might want to create a custom preset that works better for you. 
To make a custom flattener preset, select Transparency Flattener 
Presets from the Edit menu (see Figure 11-15). While you cannot edit 
the default presets, you can base a new one on a default preset by 
selecting the preset, then clicking the New button, which opens the 
Transparency Flattener Preset Options dialog box. Beyond the name 
of the preset (enter whatever you want), there are six controls here.
Raster/Vector Balance. The Raster/Vector Balance slider is a graphic 
representation of the quality/speed compromise. Push the slider all 
the way to the left and InDesign rasterizes everything on the page 

682     6
(we can’t think of any good reason to do this). Push the slider all the 
way to the right and InDesign tries its best to maintain every vector 
in the document, even if that means taking a long time to flatten and 
a long time to print. As left-leaning as we tend to be, we always prefer 
pushing this to the far right when printing on imagesetters. However, 
on a complex page, this creates so many clipping paths that your file 
might not print at all. In that case, you’d need to take it down a notch. 
Line Art and Text Resolution. When InDesign ends up rasterizing a 
vector object, it looks to the Line Art and Text Resolution setting in 
order to find the appropriate resolution. The Low Resolution flattener 
preset uses a flattener resolution of 288 ppi (pixels per inch), which 
will look very slightly jagged on a desktop laser printer. The High 
Resolution flattener preset uses 1200 ppi. If you were printing on 
newsprint, you could easily get away with creating a flattener preset 
that used 800 ppi. If you’re printing on glossy stock for a coffee table 
book, you could probably raise this to 1600 ppi.
The flattener resolution also acts as an “upper boundary” when 
imported bitmapped images are involved with transparency. For 
example, let’s say you import a 300 ppi image, put transparent text 
over it, and then print using the Low Resolution flattener preset. 
InDesign resamples the image down to 288 ppi. However, if you use 
the High Resolution flattener preset, InDesign will not upsample the 
image to 1200 (that would be crazy).
Gradient and Mesh Resolution. Sometimes objects get rasterized 
no matter what happens—for instance, soft drop shadows or feather 
effects. This setting determines the appropriate resolution for these 
sorts of raster effects. The Gradient and Mesh Resolution setting in 
the Low Resolution flattener preset defaults to 144 ppi, even though 
you typically don’t need more than 100 ppi on any desktop printer. 
You generally don’t need more than 200 ppi for high-resolution 
output. (After all, you need resolution to capture detail in an image, 
and these “images” have no detail).
InDesign may upsample images if they’re involved with transpar-
ent areas of the page and they’re lower resolution than the Gradient 
and Mesh Resolution setting. For example, if you import a 72 ppi 
image (like a JPEG saved from a Web site) and change its transpar-
ency setting, the flattener upsamples the image to the gradient reso-
lution. Unfortunately, if you import a 200 ppi TIFF image (which is 
very reasonable for most printed artwork today), set its transparency, 
and print it using the High Resolution flattener preset, InDesign also 
upsamples it to 300 ppi—causing slower printing and possibly image 

 11.  683
degradation. (InDesign uses “nearest neighbor” interpolation, which 
results in pretty clunky images.)
Convert All Text to Outlines. When text gets involved with trans-
parency (either it is transparent or something transparent is on top 
of it), the type almost always gets turned into paths that act as clip-
ping paths. This slows down printing a bit, and sometimes that text 
appears heavier than the equivalent characters that aren’t converted 
to outlines, especially on lower-resolution printers. If, for example, 
you had an image that was partially transparent on top of half a 
column of text, the text under the image might appear like it was 
very slightly more bold than the rest of the text. One answer would 
be to create a flattener preset in which the Convert All Text to Out-
lines option was turned on and apply that to this particular spread 
(we discuss applying flattener presets below). This way, all the text on 
that spread gets converted to outlines. The page prints even slower, 
but is more consistent. This is rarely a problem when imagesetting or 
platesetting, however, so we usually just ignore this feature.
Convert All Strokes to Outlines. The problem with type “heavying 
up” is also an issue around thin lines. The flattener converts lines 
involved with transparency effects into very thin boxes. These lines 
may appear thicker than other lines of the same stroke weight. Turn-
ing this feature on ensures that InDesign will convert all of the lines 
in the document, making them more visually equal. Again, this is 
rarely an issue on high-resolution printers.
Clip Complex Regions. When InDesign does resort to rasterizing 
vectors, it usually does so in rectangular areas, called “atomic 
regions” (sort of like the smallest regions the flattener deals with). 
The problem with this lies along the line between a rasterized area 
and an area drawn with vectors—in many cases, the step from raster 
to vector is visually obvious (sometimes called “stitching”), which 
sort of ruins the whole point. When you turn on the Clip Complex 
Regions check box, however, InDesign works extra hard to make the 
transitions between raster and vector occur only along the edges of 
objects. The result is a better-looking page that is more complex and 
prints more slowly (or not at all).
After reading all of this, don’t you wish you had an Adobe PDF Print 
Engine-enabled device that could print transparency effects without 
flattening? Until you have one, however, you’d better know about 
how to apply these flattener presets.
Applying   
Flattener Presets

684     6
You can set the flattener preset to either the whole document (the 
“default preset”) or specific page spreads (a “local preset”). To apply 
a default preset at print time, choose it from the Transparency Flat-
tener Preset pop-up menu in the Advanced pane of the Print dialog 
box. You can also set the default preset in the Advanced panes of the 
Export as PDF and Export as EPS dialog boxes, as well as the Export 
as SVG dialog box (if you click More Options).
To apply a local flattener preset, select one or more page spreads 
in the Pages panel and select from among the choices in the Spread 
Flattening menu in the Pages panel menu: Default, None (Ignore 
Transparency), or Custom. If you choose None, InDesign prints this 
spread without any transparency effects. You might use this as a 
troubleshooting technique if your page isn’t printing properly.
If, at print time, you want to override any and all flattener presets 
applied to the document with the default preset, you can turn on the 
Ignore Spread Overrides check box in the Print dialog box.
It’s driving you crazy. The Pages panel is displaying the icon that 
means there’s transparency on a page, but you can’t figure out which 
object is transparent. This sort of thing often happens when you’re 
working on a file created by someone else. Wouldn’t it be great if you 
could see the transparent areas at a glance?
You’ve set up your flattener to encourage rasterization, but you 
want to be certain that text near transparent areas is not rasterized. 
Is there some way to see which areas will be rasterized?
The Flattener Preview panel is the answer to both questions. 
To display the Flattener Preview panel, choose Flattener from the 
Output submenu of the Window menu. Note that this panel has been 
misnamed; it’s really more of a “flattener alert” than a preview. That 
is, it’s not technically showing you what something will look like 
after it is flattened; it’s just pointing out what will be flattened.
To use it, first choose from the Highlight pop-up menu to high-
light the type of transparency you’re looking for (see Figure 11-16). 
In the first example we described, you’d choose Transparent Objects; 
in the second, you’d probably want to choose All Rasterized Regions. 
The other options on the menu give you more specific control over 
the type of transparency you want to highlight.
You can have InDesign refresh the transparency highlight for you 
by turning on the Auto Refresh Highlight option, or turn it off to 
speed up your screen display and click the Refresh button as needed.
The Flattener Preview panel gives you a way to “audition” flat-
tener presets, which can help you decide which preset will work 
best. Choose a preset from the Presets pop-up menu, and InDesign 
Flattener Preview

 11.  685
Figure 11-16
Flattener Preview
Choose a flattener preview from 
the Highlight pop-up menu.
InDesign highlights transparent areas on 
the page in red (shown here in dark gray).
In this example, we’ve applied a 
drop shadow to the text.
Choosing All Rasterized Regions 
shows that the drop shadow will  
be rasterized (according to the  
currently selected flattener preset).
When we switch flattener  
presets to a preset that encourages 
rasterization, InDesign highlights 
the rasterized text.
highlights the appropriate areas based on the new preset (if you’ve 
turned off the Auto Refresh Highlight option, you’ll have to click the 
Refresh button to see the effect). Turn on the Ignore Spread Over-
rides option to use the preset you’ve selected, rather than using the 
flattener applied to the spread, if necessary.
Once the preview looks good to you, you can apply the flattener 
preset to your print settings by clicking the Apply Settings to Print 
button (you’ll see this change reflected in the Advanced panel of the 
Print dialog box).

686     6
Preparing an InDesign File for Imagesetting
We’ve listened long and carefully to the grievances of imagesetting 
service bureau customers and operators. We’ve heard about how this 
designer is suing that service bureau for messing up a job, and we’ve 
heard imagesetter operators talking about how stupid their clients 
are and how they have to make changes to the files of most of the 
jobs that come in. We’ve listened long enough, and we have only one 
thing to say: Cut it out! All of you!
There’s no reason that this relationship has to be an adversarial 
one. We don’t mean to sound harsh. We just think that we can all 
cooperate, to everyone’s benefit.
Designers: You have to learn the technical chops if you want to 
play. That’s just the way it is. The challenges are no greater than those 
you mastered when you learned how to use a waxer, an X-Acto knife, 
or a copy camera. (Or whatever it is designers learn nowadays.)
Your responsibility to your imagesetting service bureau is to set 
your file up so that it has a reasonable chance of printing and to com-
municate to your service bureau exactly how it is you want your pub-
lication printed.
Service bureau folks, you’ve got to spell out the limits of your 
responsibility. If you don’t think you should be fixing people’s files, 
don’t do it. If you do think it’s your responsibility, tell your customer 
up front you’ll fix the files, and tell them what you’ll charge for your 
time. And if you get customers who know what they’re doing, give 
them a discount. This will encourage everyone else.
Okay, back to the book.
You have three basic choices in transporting your document to an 
output provider: sending the file itself, sending a PDF, or sending 
a PostScript file. While our preference is to send a PDF file, many 
service providers want the InDesign file itself. 
When we send an InDesign file off to be printed on someone else’s 
system, we don’t know whether their fonts are different, whether 
they’ll forget to set up registration marks, and so on. If you send 
them a PDF (and you know what you’re doing), you can be reason-
ably sure that the file will print correctly. The only things that can go 
wrong are related to film handling and processing—the wrong film’s 
used, the film’s scratched, or the film’s been processed incorrectly.
However, no matter what you’re going to send to your output 
provider, you have to be dead certain you’ve thought of everything 
before it goes, because it’s difficult to change things after that. For 
Sending   
Your File

 11.  687
instance, you need to make sure that any linked graphics in the pub-
lication are up to date.
Make certain that the Print dialog box is set up correctly: What 
screening are you using? Is tiling turned off? Do you need separa-
tions or composite color? What inks to print? Do you want spot 
colors or process colors? Your output provider should be able to help 
you with these decisions.
If you’re sending a PDF for printing, don’t create the PDF by 
printing PostScript to disk and then running that file through Acro-
bat Distiller. This is a recipe for disaster, and asking for it is a clue 
that your service provider doesn’t know what they’re doing. Instead, 
simply export PDF from within InDesign.
There is one file format type that you should never provide to a 
service provider for printing, and that’s INX or IDML. We’ve heard 
of cases where the service provider does not have the latest version 
of InDesign and asks for an INX or IDML file—don’t do it. While 
these formats provide “backward compatibility,” they don’t guaran-
tee a perfect translation from one version of InDesign to another. If 
nothing else, text composition will likely change when you open the 
file in a previous version of InDesign. If your service provider makes 
such a request, it’s time to start looking for a new service provider.
Preflight and Package
Are all systems “go”? Do you know the number of kilometers, meters, 
and centimeters it’ll take to get your publication safely in orbit 
around Mars? Or is it miles, feet, and inches?
To make sure that your publication is really ready for “prime time,” 
you use the Preflight panel (see Figure 11-17). To display the Preflight 
panel, double-click the Preflight icon at the bottom of the InDesign 
window (or choose Preflight from the Output submenu of the Win-
dows menu, or press Command-Option-Shift-F/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-F). 
You can work with Preflight “live” (always on), or turn it on only 
when you need to check your document. Having Preflight turned on 
can slow InDesign performance; experiment to see if it’s a problem.
When you turn preflight on, InDesign examines the publication 
for missing fonts, lost image links, and other conditions that might 
cause you problems and/or embarrassment when you print your 
document. When InDesign finds a problem, the indicator in the Pre-
flight icon turns red; if everything is okay, the indicator is green. To 
Preflight

688     6
get more information on a specific problem, double-click the indica-
tor to display the Preflight panel.
There’s more to Preflight than just the default settings—Preflight 
can check for many conditions in your document. The default “Basic” 
preflight profile (or the Digital Publishing profile for digital publish-
ing documents) covers only the most obvious of errors (missing/
incomplete fonts, missing links, and overset text); it’s up to you to 
define preflight profiles that match your documents and workflow.
A key point here is that the preflight warnings do not, by them-
selves, mean that something is wrong with your document. Even the 
warnings produced by the Basic profile are not necessarily bad. It all 
depends on your workflow and printing process. For example, the 
Basic profile will always flag images that use the RGB color space. It 
might be that RGB images are fine in your workflow—it’s up to you 
to decide whether to ignore the error message or not. In similar fash-
ion, you might want to set up custom profiles that alert you to benign, 
but possibly unexpected, conditions in your documents.
Defining preflight profiles. To define a preflight profile, follow these 
steps (see Figure 11-18).
1. Display the Preflight panel.
2. Choose Define Profiles from the Preflight Panel menu. InDesign 
displays the Preflight Profiles dialog box.
3. Click the New Preflight Profile button (“+”).
4. Enter a name for your new profile.
Figure 11-17
Preflight Panel
Choose Preflight Panel from the Preflight 
pop-up menu. Use the Preflight Document 
option turn the Preflight feature on or off.
If preflight is on, you can 
double-click the Preflight icon 
to display the panel.
The Preflight panel gives 
you a quick look at the 
status of the preflight 
check. If anything is amiss 
(according to the current 
preflight profile), you’ll see 
it reported here.
When you select an item in the 
Error list, the Info area shows 
more detail about the error.
Click the link to go to 
the page containing the 
error.
Define the range of 
pages you want to check 
using these controls.
Choose the preflight 
profile you want to use.
Click this icon to embed 
the preflight profile in 
the document.

 11.  689
Figure 11-18
Defining a  
Preflight Profile
5. Work your way through the different areas of the dialog box, 
turning preflight checks on and off as necessary.
6. When the preflight profile includes all of the checks you want it 
to, click the OK button to save the profile.
To use the profile, select the profile name from the Profile pop-up 
menu in the Preflight panel. To edit the profile, return to the Pre-
flight Profiles dialog box and select the profile name. The Preflight 
panel will fill in with the conditions you’ve defined for the profile.
Performing a preflight check. Once you’ve selected a preflight pro-
file, all you need to do is turn it on. To do this, display the Preflight 
panel (choose Preflight Panel from the Preflight pop-up menu), then 
turn on the On option. You can control the range of pages checked 
using the options at the bottom of the Preflight panel. 
As InDesign checks your document against the preflight condi-
tions defined in the profile, any errors found will appear in the Pre-
flight panel. Links in the Preflight panel will take you to each error.
Embedding preflight profiles. You can embed a preflight profile in a 
document, which means that the document can travel to other sys-
tems and still be checked for the conditions you defined in the profile. 
To embed a profile, select the profile from the Profile pop-up menu in 
the Preflight panel, then click the Embed Profile button.
Click the + button to add a 
new Preflight profile.
InDesign displays the 
settings for a new profile. 
Work your way through the 
settings to define the error 
conditions you want to look 
for during a preflight check.

690     6
Saving Preflight Reports. To save a preflight report (the list of errors 
shown in the Error section of the Preflight panel) as a text file or 
PDF, choose Save Report from the Preflight panel menu. InDesign 
displays a standard file dialog. Enter a file name and folder for the file, 
then choose the format you want to use to save the report from the 
Save As Type pop-up menu. Click the OK button to save the report.
Setting Preflight Options. The Preflight Options dialog box (choose 
Preflight Options from the Preflight panel menu) gives you a way to 
define various settings for the way that InDesign interprets and uses 
preflight profiles.
Settings in this dialog box are pretty much self-explanatory: 
choose whether you want to use a profile as a default, whether you 
want the profile to check master pages and page items on the paste-
board, and so on. If you ever work with files created by others, we 
think you should keep the Use Embedded Profile option turned on. 
Without it, you might not notice the profile someone else has set up, 
and end up “correcting” mistakes that aren’t mistakes at all.
You can assemble all of the files needed to print the publication 
using the Package plug-in (this is similar to QuarkXPress’ “Col-
lect for Output” feature, or PageMaker’s “Save For Service Provider” 
plug-in). InDesign also creates a report containing detailed informa-
tion about your document, including fonts and pictures you used. 
Then all you have to do is get the folder to your output provider.
If you use the Digital Publishing Suite, you’ll be relieved to know 
that packaging includes overlay files in an Overlay Assets folder. 
Now you can transfer folio source files easily.
To “package” a publication, follow these steps (see Figure 11-19).
1. Choose Package from the File menu (or press Command- 
Option-Shift-P/Ctrl-Alt-Shift-P). InDesign displays the Printing  
Instructions dialog box.
2. Enter contact information in the Printing Instructions dialog 
box—this information will appear in the final text report that 
InDesign adds to the package you’re creating.
3. Click the Continue button. InDesign displays the Create Pack-
age Folder dialog box. Set the options you want and enter a 
name for the folder that will contain the packaged publication.
When you turn on the Copy Fonts or Copy Linked Graphics 
option, InDesign copies the files to the folder you specify. The 
Update Graphic Links in Package option tells InDesign to set 
Package

 11.  691
the links for non-embedded images to the images in the pack-
aged folder (rather than leaving them linked to the original files). 
It’s pretty rare that you’d want to turn this off. When you turn 
on the Use Document Hyphenation Exceptions Only option, 
InDesign flags this document so that it won’t reflow when some-
one else opens or edits it on a machine that may have different 
dictionaries and hyphenation settings. We generally turn this on 
when sending the file to an output provider.
4. Click the Package button. InDesign creates the folder and copies 
the publication and the files you specified into it. If the Copy 
Fonts option was turned on, InDesign also alerts you that copy-
ing fonts may be a violation of your rights. Adobe fonts can be 
copied to send to an output provider, but some font vendors 
don’t allow this (though we’ve never heard of anyone being 
taken to court for this).
When you send this folder full of files to your printer or ser-
vice bureau, make sure you remind them that there is a file called 
Instructions.txt in there that they should read. 
Finally, if you’re working on really large files with hundreds of 
megabytes of images, you need to be careful with the Package feature 
so that you don’t run out of hard disk space.
The Package command can generate a Document Fonts folder when 
you want to move your document to another computer. Fonts in the 
Document Fonts folder are temporarily installed when the docu-
ment is opened, and uninstalled when the document is closed. Fonts 
installed by one document are not available to other documents. 
Document installed fonts are listed in a submenu of the Font menu.
You don’t need to use the Package command to generate the Doc-
ument Fonts folder. You can create a Document Fonts folder that’s 
in the same location as an InDesign document, and add fonts to it.
Some fonts can’t be installed temporarily as document fonts, 
including some Type 1 fonts, Mac Postscript fonts, and dfont pack-
ages or some older TrueType fonts with Mac-specific encodings.
InDesign looks first in the Document Fonts folder, then in 
InDesign’s Fonts folder, then in the Adobe Application Support 
Fonts folder, then in the user fonts folder (on a Mac), then in the gen-
eral Library folder (on a Mac), then finally, in the operating system 
fonts folder. If there are duplicate fonts and something doesn’t look 
right, open the Find Fonts dialog box, select the font, and then choose 
Reveal in Finder/Explorer to view the file location.
Document   
Installed Fonts

692     6
When you choose   
Package from the File menu 
(or click the Package button 
in the Preflight dialog box), 
InDesign displays the   
Printing Instructions   
dialog box.
Enter your contact 
information and any 
notes you want to 
include in the fields; 
these instructions will 
be saved as a text file.
After you click the Continue 
button, InDesign displays 
the Package Publication 
dialog box.
Choose the files you want to 
copy to the package folder.
Enter a name and 
location for the pack-
age (the publication 
file and any other 
files you choose to 
copy).
Figure 11-19
Packaging a Publication 
for Remote Printing
All the News That Prints to Fit
Printing is all about thinking ahead. When you create a new pub-
lication, you really should be thinking “How the heck are we going 
to print this thing?” By the end of the production process, you’ll be 
tired, cranky, and less able to deal with any problems that come up—
so make your decisions about paper size, color selection, and graphic 
file types as early as you can. 

693
Most of the time, we tell a program (an application, a plug-in, or our 
system software) what to do by manipulating the program’s user 
interface—we click, drag, and type. Scripting is a way of telling a 
program to perform the same tasks and accomplish the same things. 
The difference is that, with scripting, we don’t have to click the but-
tons, type the characters, or choose the menu items. The script does it 
for you. Scripting is what computing is supposed to be about: having 
your computer take over boring, repetitive tasks so that you can 
spend more time playing World of Warcraft. Er, we mean, concen-
trating on your creative work.
Scripting also gives you the ability to add the features you need 
to InDesign now, rather than waiting for Adobe to give them to 
you. Even better than that, scripting gives you a way to customize 
InDesign to match your publications and habits to a degree that 
Adobe is never going to provide.
We’re convinced that the reason many people have not taken up 
scripting is that they’re scared. They think scripting is difficult, and 
is only for people with advanced computer science degrees. And they 
tell themselves that they’re too “intuitive” and “artistic” to master the 
minimal analytical skills required to write a script.
Scripting

12

694     6
Be Not Afraid
You do not need to know how to write scripts to be able to run scripts. 
This is a misunderstanding that prevents many people from even 
trying scripting, even though existing scripts might save them enor-
mous amounts of time and trouble.
Even if you don’t want to write scripts, or know anything about 
how they’re written, you can use scripts. For that matter, chances 
are quite good that you know someone who is interested in writ-
ing scripts for you, and would be willing to do so for the occasional 
expression of admiration (or beer).
All you need to know is how to install scripts—and that’s very 
simple: just put the script in the Scripts Panel folder in the Scripts 
folder inside your InDesign folder. When you do this, the script will 
appear in the Scripts panel in InDesign. 
Here’s a tip for finding the Scripts panel folder. Open the Scripts 
panel, select a folder such as User, and then choose Reveal in Finder 
or Reveal in Explorer. That’s where you keep your scripts.
That’s pretty simple, right? If not, we’re not certain you should be 
using a computer at all (or driving a car, for that matter).
To run a script, double-click the script name in the Scripts panel. 
There are a few other options, as discussed in “Using the Scripts 
Panel and the Script Label Panel,” later in this chapter. Many scripts 
will display a dialog box (or other user interface item).
Next, we encourage everyone to consider learning to write scripts.
Ole says: “Look. I’m practically a high school dropout, and my 
background is in illustration, not computer science. I have never 
taken a single class on programming. As a rebellious teenager I did 
my best to ignore the sciences and to panic at the sight of even simple 
equations (in psychoanalytical terms this makes sense: my father was 
a high school algebra teacher).
“I got over it. These days, I write scripts. You can, too.”
System Requirements
Here’s what you need to write and run scripts for InDesign:
▶The InDesign scripting documentation and sample scripts. Our 
very own Ole did most of this work over the years.
▶A good understanding of the way InDesign works.
Installing Scripts
Running a Script
Writing Scripts: How 
Hard Could It Be?

 12.  695
▶The standard scripting system for your computer (if you plan  
to use the platform-specific scripting languages rather than 
JavaScript). You probably already have this.
▶Confidence.
It also helps to have a repetitive task that you wish you would 
never have to do again. This is not required, but it helps.
InDesign supports an Adobe version of JavaScript called Extend-
Script. ExtendScript complies with the ECMA JavaScript 1.5 stan-
dard, and adds a few features to make it more useful for scripting a 
desktop application (as opposed to a web browser).
InDesign JavaScripts are cross-platform—they run in both the 
Windows and Mac OS versions of InDesign. There are a few minor 
differences between platforms—but they’re limited to the way that the 
scripts work with files and the operating system (as you’d expect).
If JavaScript is cross-platform, why does Adobe bother supporting 
the platform-specific languages? First, because scripters might prefer 
those languages. Adobe’s goal should be to increase the number of lan-
guages that can be used, not to limit them. Next, because InDesign’s 
JavaScript does not know how to communicate with other applica-
tions on your system (such as FileMaker or Access); the platform-
specific languages do that very well. 
Luckily, we can use both, and we can tie the platform-specific 
and platform-independent languages together with InDesign’s “do 
script” method, which lets scripts run other scripts. A JavaScript, for 
example, can run an AppleScript, or a VBScript can run a JavaScript. 
Note: Some InDesign JavaScripts have the file extension “.js”, which 
is the standard extension for JScripts in Windows, they will not work 
if run from the operating system (at best, you’ll get an error message). 
Instead, run these scripts using InDesign’s Scripts panel. Try to get in 
the habit of using the “.jsx” extension, rather than “.js”.
On the Mac OS, all you need is AppleScript. You almost certainly 
already have it installed, but in case you don’t, it comes on the Mac 
installation CD. If you can’t find your installation CD, you can 
download AppleScript directly from Apple (http://www.apple.com). 
What’s the easiest way to tell if it’s installed? Search for a file named 
“Script Editor” (this is the application you use to write and run 
AppleScripts). If you can’t find it, you’ll have to install it from the 
Mac OS X installation CD.
JavaScript
Mac OS

696     6
Alternative script editors are available—if you’re planning to do 
serious AppleScript development, we strongly recommend Script 
Debugger, from Late Night Software (http://www.latenightsw.com). 
Script Debugger is an astonishingly good piece of software, well 
worth its purchase price. And no, we are not paid to say this.
InDesign can run uncompiled AppleScripts—script files saved as 
text. To use an uncompiled AppleScript, save the file with the file 
extension “.applescript” (or “.as”) in the Scripts Panel folder inside 
the Scripts folder in your InDesign folder, and then run the script 
from the Scripts panel.
On the Windows side, you’ve got a number of options. There are (at 
least) three different scripting systems claiming to be the system stan-
dard: Visual Basic Script (VBScript), Visual Basic for Applications 
(VBA), and various forms of Visual Basic (VB)—including Visual 
Basic 6, Visual Basic .NET, and Visual Basic 5 Control Creation Edi-
tion (VB5 CCE). They’re all from Microsoft, and they’re all variants 
of the Basic programming language. Almost all of them work.
Our Recommendation: Use VBScript. To write a VBScript, all you 
need is a text editor. Notepad does the job quite handily. You don’t 
need anything to run a VBScript—you can run them from Explorer 
or from InDesign’s Scripts panel. If you run them from InDesign’s 
Scripts panel, though, they’ll run much faster.
Using VBScript makes distributing and deploying your scripts 
easier, too. Since they’re just text, they’re easy to post on web pages or 
send to other people.
The InDesign sample scripts are provided in VBScript, so you’ll 
have a lot of code to work with that won’t require much translation 
(as it would if you were to try to use them in VB.NET, for example).
Our Further Recommendation: Use VBA to develop VBScripts.
Troubleshooting (debugging) VBScripts can be difficult. All you can 
do is run the script and then note any error messages that appear—
and they’re not particularly useful. What you need is a real program-
ming environment, where you can step through the lines of your 
script one by one, as you can when you use Visual Basic.
Visual Basic for Applications, the version of Visual Basic that’s 
built into most Microsoft Office applications, works quite well for 
developing VBScripts for InDesign. Chances are pretty good that 
you’ve already got an Office application.
VBA works very well for developing VBScripts for use in 
InDesign. You can write your VBScript in VBA, making certain that 
Windows

 12.  697
you don’t use part of Visual Basic that does not exist in VBScript; 
debug the script, and then, when everything works the way you want 
it to, copy the contents of the subroutine to a text editor and save it as 
a VBScript (.vbs) file. We’ll talk more about this later in the chapter.
We know of InDesign scripters who are using C#, C, C++, Perl, 
Python, JScript, OSA JavaScript, Delphi, and other languages to 
drive InDesign. If your favorite programming language can connect 
to the platform standard means of passing messages between appli-
cations (that’s OSA/AppleEvents on the Mac OS and DDE/COM in 
Windows), it can probably communicate with InDesign. 
We’re not going to spend any time on those languages, how-
ever, because, frankly, we have more than enough to do explaining 
VBScript, AppleScript, and JavaScript. Forgive us.
Learning About InDesign Scripting
Once you’ve gathered and installed the software you need to start 
scripting, you need to learn about how InDesign implements script-
ing. You’re in luck—you’ll find the scripting documentation, sample 
scripts, on the InDesign scripting home page:
http://www.adobe.com/go/scripting_id
Once you’re there, you might need to click the Scripting Resources 
tab to display scripting-specific goodies. Adobe updates these pages.
The Adobe InDesign Scripting Tutorial is a PDF that contains an 
introduction to scripting, and basic tutorials (including introductory 
scripts). The Adobe InDesign Scripting Guide comes in three flavors: 
AppleScript, JavaScript, and Visual Basic. Pick the one that matches 
the language you want to work with.
In addition, the InDesign scripting forum is at:
http://forums.adobe.com/community/indesign/indesign_scripting
The forum is a great source of scripting information—it's the 
center of the InDesign scripting community. The forum is the place 
to find example scripts (literally hundreds of them), ask questions, 
and generally hang out with other scripters. Do not be afraid to ask 
“newbie” questions—we’ve all been there!
You’ll find a number of sample scripts in the Scripts Panel folder 
inside the Scripts folder in your InDesign folder (you can also see 
Other Scripting   
Languages
Example Scripts

698     6
them in the Scripts panel). Even if you don’t intend to write scripts 
of your own, you might find something useful in the sample scripts. 
Note that the InDesign scripting home page mentioned above also 
contains a downloadable archive of these scripts.
▶AddGuides. Draws guides around the currently selected object 
or objects. This script shows you how to get positioning informa-
tion back from InDesign, and how to create ruler guides.
▶AddPoints. Adds points to a path: each point is added at the 
midpoint of each line segment in a path. This script demon-
strates simple Bezier math and path and point manipulations.
▶AdjustLayout. Moves the page items of even/odd pages by speci-
fied distances. Use this script to move objects back into the cor-
rect position after adding pages or applying master pages.
▶AlignToPage. How many times have you wanted to position an 
object in the center of the page? This script does that, and many 
other page alignments—including the ability to align the objects 
relative to the page margins.
▶AnimationEncyclopedia. Creates a new document with a 
number of different buttons and animated objects. Use the Pre-
view panel to see the animated objects in action.
▶BreakFrame. Removes the selected text frame and its contents 
from the story. This feature has been frequently requested by 
PageMaker users. Doesn’t really work when tables span multiple 
text frames.
▶CornerEffects. Ever want to round one or two corners of a rect-
angle, while leaving the other corners square? If you have, then 
this script is for you. The script redraws the path and applies a 
corner effect to a pattern of corners you specify.
▶CreateCharacterStyle. When you create a character style in 
InDesign by basing the style on the selected text, InDesign 
records only those attributes that differ from the default for-
matting of the surrounding text. While this is a powerful and 
flexible way of working with character styles, it’s also different 
from the way that other applications (such as QuarkXPress and 
FrameMaker) work. In those applications, character styles apply 
every formatting attribute. The CreateCharacterStyle script  
creates a new character style based on the selected text and 
defines every formatting attribute.

 12.  699
▶CropMarks. Draws crop and registration marks around the 
selected object or objects. Like AddGuides, this script shows how 
to create new objects around existing objects.
▶ExportAllStories. Exports all of the stories in a document to a 
specified folder using the file format of your choice (RTF, tagged 
text, or text only). Shows how to traverse all stories in a docu-
ment and how to export text.
▶FindChange Support. Runs a sequence of find/change opera-
tions on the selected text. The find/change parameters are 
stored in a tab-delimited text file (it should be in a folder named 
FindChangeSupport inside the same folder as the sample script). 
By default, these searches cover the standard stuff: changing 
double spaces to single spaces, changing double returns to single 
returns, changing double dashes to em dashes, and so on—but 
you can add your own favorite searches to the text file (including 
the ability to find/change formatting). You’ll find instructions 
at the beginning of the script, and in the corresponding find/
change file.
▶ImageCatalog. Places all of the graphics in a folder in a grid in 
an InDesign document.
▶MakeGrid. Splits the selected frame into a grid of frames. If the 
frame contains content, the script can duplicate the frame.
▶Neon. Creates a simple “glow” effect by duplicating the selected 
path or paths. Each copy of the path is slightly smaller than the 
original, and slightly lighter. The final duplicate path is a white 
hairline. The resulting group of paths is something like an Illus-
trator blend.
▶PathEffects. This script includes the ever-popular Illustrator, 
path effects “Bloat” and “Punk,” as well as a few others. If you 
want to learn about scripting InDesign paths, path points, con-
trol handles, and Bezier math, this is a good place to start.
▶PlaceMultipagePDF. InDesign can place all of the pages in a 
multi-page PDF, but it’s a manual process—you have to click 
the place icon for each PDF page you want to place. This script 
places all of the pages of a PDF on sequential pages, placing one 
PDF page per page, adding pages to the document if necessary as 
it does so.
▶SelectObjects. Selects all of the objects on a spread that belong to 
a specific object type (or set of types). This script is only slightly 

700     6
useful by itself, but it shows you how to traverse the objects on a 
spread to find objects based on their type or content. It’s a great 
starting point for any graphic “search and replace” operation.
▶SortParagraphs. Alphabetically sorts the paragraphs in the 
selection. Shows how to sort text using a simple “bubble sort” 
algorithm, and how to move text in an InDesign story.
▶SplitStory. Converts each text frame in the selected story to  
an independent text frame (story), retaining the content in  
the frames. Doesn’t really work when tables span multiple text 
frames.
▶TabUtilities. This script automates two tasks: setting a right tab 
stop at the right margin of a paragraph, and setting a left tab at 
the current cursor position.
When you launch InDesign, you’re probably aware that you’re not 
really launching a single program—you probably know that you’re 
starting a plug-in manager and several hundred plug-ins. 
What you probably don’t know is that each plug-in is responsible 
for its own scripting support, and that InDesign’s scripting object 
model—the library of objects and the properties and methods of 
those objects that make scripting work—is created anew each time 
you change your plug-in configuration.
In other applications that support scripting, the developers try 
to determine what features users of their product might want to 
automate. They then provide scripting support for those features. 
The trouble with this approach, of course, is that they always miss 
something—and their users, in the field, are stymied. The users then 
complain, and are generally given the response, “Why would anyone 
want to do that?” (Translation: “We didn’t think of that.”)
InDesign scripting doesn’t work that way. InDesign provides 
scripting access to everything (well, almost everything) you can do 
to the database that is an InDesign document.
 Thinking About Scripting
Because scripting is a great tool for automating large, repetitive tasks, 
many of us think that that’s all it’s good for. But there’s far more to 
scripting than that. Scripting is also good at little things—operations 
that might save you only a few seconds a day, but can make your work 
easier or more precise. 
InDesign Scripting 
Philosophy

 12.  701
By “little things,” we means scripts that save you only a few mouse 
clicks, drags, or key presses at a time. It’s these tiny tasks, repeated 
dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of times day by day, that add up 
to fatigue, irritation, and repetitive motion injuries. When you take 
a common task that involves some number of actions and replace it 
with a simple double-click or keystroke (all it takes to run a script), 
you reduce the difficulty and complexity of your work.
Scripting, which many of us think of as being somehow opposed
to the creative process, can be a powerful creative tool. We often 
imagine effects we’d like to use in a publication layout that would 
be difficult to accomplish by hand. When there’s time, we turn to 
scripting for help. Frequently, in the course of working on a script, 
we’ll find a variation on the effect that leads us in an entirely new cre-
ative direction. Scripting gives us time to experiment—and we think 
experimentation has a lot to do with creativity.
What we’re getting at here is that scripting is what you make of it, 
and how you think about it. If you only think of scripting as some-
thing applicable to massive projects, you’re missing out on many of 
the benefits—and most of the fun.
Using the Scripts Panel and the Script Label Panel
InDesign includes two scripting-related plug-ins: the Scripts panel 
and the Script Label panel. The Scripts panel gives you a way to run 
scripts without leaving InDesign, and significantly speeds script exe-
cution; the Script Label panel gives you a way to enter text into the 
Label property of a page item.
To display the Scripts panel, choose Scripts from the Utilities sub-
menu of the Window menu (see Figure 12-1). The Scripts panel dis-
plays the scripts (and folders) stored inside the Scripts Panel folder 
inside the Scripts folder in your InDesign folder.
In general, we think it’s better to store your scripts somewhere 
else, and place aliases (on the Mac OS) or shortcuts (in Windows) in 
this folder. Why? We’ve accidentally deleted all of our scripts by re-
installing InDesign more than once. It’s painful.
To run a script, double-click the script in the Scripts panel. To edit 
a script, hold down Option/Alt and double-click the script. InDesign 
will open the script in your script editor (or in the ExtendScript Tool-
kit, for JavaScript files). To delete scripts from the Scripts panel, open 
the Scripts Panel folder inside the Scripts folder in your InDesign 
folder and move the scripts to another location (or delete them).
Scripts Panel

702     6
To open the folder containing a script, hold down Command-
Shift/Ctrl-Shift and double-click the script name in the Scripts panel. 
InDesign will open the folder containing the script in the Finder or 
Windows Explorer.
Adding Keyboard Shortcuts to Scripts. You can add keyboard 
shortcuts to scripts, just as you can to menu items. When you open 
the Edit Shortcuts dialog box, you’ll find a list of installed scripts in 
the Scripts section. You assign a keyboard shortcut to a script in the 
same way that you assign any other keyboard shortcut.
There’s a catch. The keyboard shortcut you apply is tied to a spe-
cific location in the list of scripts displayed in the Scripts section of 
the Edit Shortcuts dialog box. If you add or remove scripts, the short-
cut could very well end up pointing to a different script.
Controlling Script Order. You can control the order in which scripts 
appear in the Scripts panel by entering numbers (from 00 to 99) fol-
lowed by a close parenthesis character (“)”) before the first character 
of the file name. The Scripts panel hides the numbers, leaving only 
the name of the script visible. In any folder in the Scripts Panel folder, 
the file or folder with a name beginning with “00)” will appear first 
in the Scripts panel; the file beginning with “01)” will appear next.
To display the Script Label panel, choose Script Label from the Utili-
ties submenu of the Window menu (see Figure 12-2). The Script Label 
panel has only one purpose—it gives you a way to enter text into the 
label of an object. Once you work with scripting for a bit, you’ll real-
ize how useful the label property of a page item is.
Script Label Panel
Figure 12-1
Scripts Panel
To run a script, 
double-click the 
script name in the 
Scripts panel.
To edit a script, hold down 
Option/Alt as you double-click 
the script. Your script editor will 
open the script for editing.
“Install” scripts in the Scripts panel by adding them 
to the Scripts Panel folder in the Scripts folder in your 
InDesign application folder.

 12.  703
An object’s label can store an apparently unlimited amount of 
text, so you could store quite complex scripts (which are just text, 
after all) inside an object. Or a label could contain an XML represen-
tation of the object, or any other type of text data you can think of.
A page item can have more than one label, thanks to the “insert 
label” method and the corresponding “extract label” method. If a 
single label on an object isn’t enough for your needs, you can always 
add your own.
Getting Started
Work through the Adobe InDesign CS6 Scripting Tutorial. Don’t type 
the scripts yourself—download the Zip archive from the scripting 
home page. Use your script editor to open the first script file—Hello-
World—in the language or your choice. Try running it. Once you’ve 
gotten it working, you can move on to the more advanced scripts.
There are only three scripts in the tutorial. They’re short, they 
show you how to create a new document, create a new text frame, 
add text to the text frame, and apply formatting to that text.
Once you’re done with the tutorial, start thinking about the tasks 
in your work that you’d like to automate, and look through the exam-
ple scripts for something related to the things you’d like to do. 
At this point, you’re ready to move on to the Adobe InDesign CS6 
Scripting Guide for the scripting language of your choice. When you 
need to look something up, use the bookmarks in the PDF and/or 
Acrobat’s search feature to find likely terms. Scripting terms tend to 
mirror the terms you see used in the user interface.
Again, use the scripts from the Zip archive (there are around 200 
of them for each language). Don’t try to copy/paste from the Script-
ing Guide PDF. Not only does copying/pasting from a PDF introduce 
Figure 12-2
Script Label Panel
Select an object.
Choose Script Label from the 
Automation submenu of the 
Window menu to display the 
Script Label panel.
Enter a label for the object.  
Adding the label does not change 
the object in any visible way.

704     6
extra characters and line breaks that can cause the script to fail, but 
most of the scripts shown in the Scripting Guide are not complete 
scripts—they’re “snippets,” intended to show only the feature or 
technique being discussed.
You can download all of the scripts listed in this chapter from the 
web site David co-hosts. Don’t type them yourself—most of the 
scripts shown here are not complete.
http://www.indesignsecrets.com/downloads/RWCS6scripts.zip
We’re only able to show the JavaScript version of the scripts, but 
you can find AppleScript and VBScript versions online (see “Where 
to Get the Scripts,” earlier in this chapter).
We admit that we feel a thrill of pride when we look at our neatly 
ordered lists of paragraph styles in the Paragraph Styles panel. We 
don’t get out enough. But a “+” (plus sign, indicating a local format-
ting override) after a style name drives us crazy. What’s that doing 
there? Evil, local formatting is interfering with our dream of format-
ting and organizational goodness!
It doesn’t matter how the local formatting crept into the docu-
ment (be it something in a Word file or an errant co-worker)—it’s 
easy to get rid of, as long as you use the following script. It’s very 
short, but it can save you hours of work.
Follow the steps shown earlier in this chapter for creating a 
JavaScript, then enter the following text or download the script (see 
“Where to Get the Scripts,” earlier in this chapter).
To create the JavaScript, follow these steps.
1. Start the ExtendScript Toolkit and target InDesign. If InDesign 
is not already running, you’ll be prompted to start it.
2. Enter the following text (note that it’s one line).
app.documents.item(0).stories.everyItem().clearOverrides();
3. Save the script as a plain text file with the file extension “.jsx” to 
the Scripts Panel folder inside the Scripts folder in your InDesign 
folder.
4. To test the script, double-click the script in the Scripts panel.
When you want to get an object or series of objects out of a frame 
you’ve pasted them into, you end up doing a lot of selecting, cut-
ting, and pasting. A script that could remove all of the objects from a 
Where to Get   
the Scripts
Overriding   
All Overrides
A Short, But   
Useful, Example

 12.  705
frame (while maintaining the positions they occupied in the frame) 
would save you time and trouble. Right? Let’s go!
This script assumes you have an object selected, and that the 
object contains at least one other object. The script will not ungroup 
a group as it processes the objects.
Follow the same steps as above to create the script. Don’t worry 
about the indents, JavaScript doesn’t care about them—they’re just 
here to make reading the script a little bit easier.
//CutContents.jsx
//An InDesign CS5 JavaScript
//Cuts the contents of the selected page items and places
//them in the proper page position and stacking order.
var myObjectList = new Array;
if(app.documents.length != 0){
if(app.selection.length != 0){
for(var myCounter = 0; myCounter < app.selection.length;
  myCounter ++){
   switch(app.selection[myCounter].constructor.name){
    case "Rectangle":
    case "Oval":
    case "Polygon":
    case "GraphicLine":
//If the item is a page item, add the item to the list.
  
if(app.selection[myCounter].pageItems.length != 0){
  
 myObjectList.push(app.selection[myCounter]);
  
}
  
break;
  
}
  }
//If there were qualifying items in the selection, pass them
//on to the myCutContents routine for processing.
if(myObjectList.length != 0){
   myCutContents(myObjectList);
  }
}
}
function myCutContents(myObjectList){
var myPageItem;
var myGeometricBounds;
for(var myCounter = 0; myCounter < myObjectList.length; 
myCounter ++){
var myDone = false;
myPageItem = myObjectList[myCounter];
do{
if((myPageItem.constructor.name != "Group")&&
(myPageItem.pageItems.length != 0)){
myPageItem = myPageItem.pageItems.item(0);
app.select(myPageItem, SelectionOptions.replaceWith);
app.cut();
app.pasteInPlace();
myPageItem = app.selection[0];
}

706     6
 
 else{
 
  myDone = true;
 
 }
} while(myDone == false);
}
}
Now that you’ve saved the script, switch to InDesign. Select a path 
that contains one or more objects. Double-click the script name in 
the Scripts panel. InDesign will remove each nested object inside the 
frame and paste it into the same position as it occupied while inside 
the frame (see Figure 12-3).
Testing the   
CutContents Script
Once you’ve entered and saved 
a script, select an object you’ve 
pasted other objects into.
Run the script, and InDesign 
will “un-nest” the objects while 
retaining their original positions.
Figure 12-3
CutContents Script
More Fun with Scripting
It’s a shame that we’re under so much pressure to reduce our page 
count, because there are a lot of other things we’d like to show you. 
Instead, we’ll talk about a couple of creative things you can do with 
scripting, and show examples. You can find the script files online (see 
“Where to Get the Scripts,” earlier in this chapter).
Have you ever played with a Spirograph? Or been fascinated by one 
of the geometric patterns created by M. C. Escher? The authors admit 
a fondness (well, more like an obsession) for geometric art. While 
writing this book, we stumbled across a very interesting web site: 
http://www.washington.edu/bibsys/mattf/nina/. Matt Freedman, at 
the University of Washington, invented (or is it “discovered”?) a very 
nifty new algorithm for drawing shapes he’s named NINAs (NINA 
being an acronym for “Nina Is Not An Acronym”). NINAs are fasci-
nating shapes, and we had to see if we could write InDesign scripts 
that make use of the NINA algorithm (with Mr. Freedman’s permis-
sion). Figure 12-4 shows some of the NINAs drawn by our script.
Drawing NINAs

 12.  707
InDesign scripts can create their own dialog boxes, and can populate 
those dialog boxes with static text labels, check box controls, pop-up 
menus, text entry fields, and a variety of number entry fields (mea-
surement units, integers, percentages, and real numbers).
There’s good news and bad news about InDesign script dialog 
boxes. The good news is that InDesign takes care of all spacing and 
sizing issues. The bad news? InDesign takes care of all spacing and 
sizing issues. This means that you don’t have to worry about setting 
pixel coordinates for every control, but it also means that you have 
very little control over the appearance of your dialog boxes. At the 
same time, it’s easy to create a dialog box (see Figure 12-5).
Adding a   
User Interface
Figure 12-4
Various NINAs

708     6
Another interesting geometric figure is the “Mystic Rose”—a poly-
gon where every point connects to every other point. Ole thought it 
would be fun to have a script that would draw these, so he wrote one 
(see Figure 12-6). We’ve included this script with the other scripts in 
the Zip archive you can download from David’s web site (see “Where 
to Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier in this chapter).
Mystic Rose
InDesign dialog boxes can include a 
range of controls not shown in this 
example, including pop-up menus, 
check boxes, and a variety of other 
number and text entry fields (only 
measurement edit box controls and 
integer edit box controls are shown 
here). As in all other InDesign 
numeric entry fields, you can do 
arithmetic and enter measurement 
overrides in these fields.
Figure 12-5
NINA User Interface
By adding a user interface 
to your script, you can make 
it much easier to use. This 
example dialog box was gen-
erated by InDesign—no Dia-
logDirector, no AppleScript 
Studio, no Visual Basic 
form. How cool is that?
Figure 12-6
Mystic Rose
End Script
Scripting is all about empowerment. Don’t just sit around telling 
yourself that the reason you’re working late is that InDesign can’t do 
something you’d like it to do. Sure, there are things in every program 
we’d like the manufacturer to fix, but, with InDesign’s scripting fea-
tures, we’ve finally got the tools we need to fix them ourselves.
By urging you to take up scripting, we’re urging you to take con-
trol of InDesign, your publications, your work, and your life. We 
know you can do it!

709
A hundred years ago, when David was a young pup, he turned in a 
school essay he had typed using an amazing new device called a per-
sonal computer and printed on that technological marvel, the dot-
matrix printer. His teacher was so impressed that she wrote her copi-
ous corrections on a separate page, so as not to spoil the appearance 
of David’s “professionally published” work. Today, a school report 
printed on a color laser or inkjet printer is de rigueur, and teachers 
may question a student’s work ethic if they don’t have a correspond-
ing Web site and public relations team.
Communication has come a long way, and while print is far from 
dead, you can bet that the future of publishing isn’t solely a matter 
of throwing more ink at paper. Today’s communicators have to be 
adept at creating both print and interactive documents—files that 
include buttons, sounds, animation, page transitions, and movies. 
Fortunately, InDesign offers a number of features for the “rich media” 
producer. Many of these tools don’t produce any visible effect on your 
InDesign pages, but change the behavior of the PDF, Flash SWF or 
FLA, HTML, EPUB, or DPS files that you export. 
Digital  
Publishing

13

710     6
The key thing to understand about InDesign’s interactive features 
is that they work only when you export the file to a format that can 
support them, such as PDF, SWF, FLA, EPUB, DPS, or HTML. And, 
different formats support different features (see Table 13-1).
Acrobat PDF. Interactive PDF files can include hyperlinks, buttons 
and forms, bookmarks, movies and sounds, and page transitions. 
When you export an interactive document to PDF, select the Adobe 
PDF (Interactive) option. If you select the Adobe PDF (Print) option, 
your document won’t include any interactive elements.
EPUB. If you wanted to export EPUB files before InDesign CS5.5, 
you were better off creating a separate, simplified version of the doc-
ument. Now, you can take complex documents designed for print-
ing, make a few adjustments, and export a clean EPUB file that looks 
great on the Kindle, iPad, and other eBook readers. 
HTML. Many features that help you create beautiful EPUB files also 
improve exported HTML files. While EPUB can be the final product, 
exported HTML is effectively a collection of files from which you can 
create a website using a different tool—unless it’s a simple website.
SWF. InDesign can export one or more pages from your document 
directly to SWF format. Exporting to SWF is great for interactive 
presentations and simple SWF files for the web, but if you need to 
create more advanced SWF files, export using the FLA format.
FLA. InDesign’s SWF export is cool for simple projects, but limited. 
If you know ActionScript, or you’re working with a Flash developer, 
you’ll want to export your InDesign document in FLA format. (In 
InDesign CS4, the equivalent format was XFL.) FLA is a format that 
can be opened in Flash Professional. When you export to FLA, page 
transitions, buttons, and animation remain in effect. Hyperlinks are 
broken in FLA files. Movies and sound clips are also broken; only 
the posters are included. However, supported media files appear in a 
resources folder saved in the same location as the exported FLA file.
Digital Publishing Suite (DPS). You can create folios that appear in 
mobile devices such as the iPad and Kindle Fire. DPS folios are usu-
ally more interactive than EPUB or Interactive PDF files. The Folio 
Overlays panel includes interactive features available only for DPS. 
InDesign interactivity features—hyperlinks, buttons, media clips, 
and multi-state objects—are supported to varying degrees.
Interactive Only   
After Export

 13.  u 711
Hyperlinks
What is an interactive page without links? Links help your readers 
explore your file, jumping between pages, to other documents, or 
even to Web sites. You can also add links to files that your readers 
can download, and you can add links for sending email. 
A hyperlink is essentially a button—it’s a “hot” area that performs 
some action when you click it. There are two big differences between 
a hyperlink and a button: First, you can apply a hyperlink directly 
to a range of text—though behind the scenes, InDesign is still more 
or less drawing a button around that text. Second, you can save a 
hyperlink destination and use it more than once. That said, if you 
have a choice between using hyperlinks and buttons, go with buttons. 
Buttons are more versatile and more reliable.
To make a hyperlink, you’ll need to open the Hyperlinks panel 
from the Interactive submenu under the Window menu. The Hyper-
links panel also includes the Cross-References panel; we discuss 
cross-references in Chapter 3, “Text.”
When you make a hyperlink, you need to decide whether it should be 
a hyperlink that can be used multiple times (which InDesign calls a 
“Shared Hyperlink Destination”), or a one-off link. Because these are 
similar in concept to named and unnamed color swatches, we tend 
to call these named and unnamed hyperlinks.
Named versus 
Unnamed Hyperlinks
Hyperlinks
Buttons/Forms
Object States
Animation
Movies/Sounds
Bookmarks
Page Transitions
PDF
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
SWF
Yes
Partial
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
FLA
No
Partial
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
DPS*
Partial
Partial
Yes
No
Partial
No
No
EPUB*
Yes
No
No
No
Yes**
No
No
HTML
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
* DPS and EPUB formats are evolving rapidly. More features will likely be sup-
ported after this book was printed.
** Media files are supported only in some eBook readers.
Table 13-1
Interactivity 
Support Matrix

712     6
Named hyperlinks are actually easier to make, but they can slow 
you down if you’re going to make dozens (or hundreds) of them, 
because each one you add takes a position on the Hyperlink panel’s 
URL pop-up menu. Searching through 100 URLs is a hassle. There-
fore, although we tend to eschew unnamed color swatches, we actu-
ally use unnamed hyperlinks most of the time.
On the other hand, if you are going to use a hyperlink several 
times in a document, it’s great to make it named. That way, if you 
need to edit the link, you can change it once and it gets updated 
everywhere in the file.
The fastest way to make a hyperlink is to select some text (with the 
Type tool) or a frame (with the Selection tool) and type a Web address 
into the URL field at the top of the Hyperlinks panel (see Figure 13-1). 
After you press Return/Enter, you’ll see the link appear in the list in 
the middle of the Hyperlinks panel.
Unfortunately, this method has several significant drawbacks: 
First, this always creates a named hyperlink; there is no choice here. 
Second, InDesign usually places a big, ugly black rectangle around 
the text or object. Third, you can only make links to URLs (no page 
links, and other goodies we’ll explain in a minute). Finally, if you 
selected a frame, the link appears in the panel as something generic, 
like “Hyperlink.” If you selected some text, the text itself appears in 
the list, often causing confusion.
Fast Hyperlinks
Figure 13-1
New Named  
Hyperlink
After selecting text or an object, type any 
URL here.
By default, the “name” of the hyperlink is 
the text you have selected.
Double-click 
the hyperlink 
to display the 
Edit Hyperlink 
dialog box.

 13.  u 713
You can search your document for URLs such as www.adobe.com, 
http://indesignsecrets.com, and president@whitehouse.gov, and con-
vert them to hyperlinks. If you want to apply a character style to the 
hyperlinks, create a character style with the appropriate attributes, 
such as blue and underlined, before you do the conversion. For some 
reason, the InDesign team didn’t add a New Character Style option 
to the pop-up menu in the dialog box.
Choose Hyperlinks & Cross-References from the Type menu, and 
then choose Convert URLs to Hyperlinks (see Figure 13-2). Select 
whether you want to convert the URLs in the document, story, or 
current selection. If you decide you want to convert URLs only in the 
selection, you can select text while the dialog box is still open. 
Select a character style if you want visual indicators for the URL 
hyperlinks. Click Find to locate the first URL, and then click Con-
vert or Convert All. These options are similar to the Change and 
Change All options in the Find/Change dialog box. InDesign creates 
named hyperlinks.
If you change your mind after the conversion, keep in mind that 
Undo undoes only one change, even if you choose Convert All. So 
press Ctrl/Command+Z for as many URLs as you converted.
Converting URLs   
to Hyperlinks
Figure 13-2
Convert URLs
If you want to make a named hyperlink, using the URL field works 
fine. But immediately after making the link you should edit it. First, 
you can rename any link in the Hyperlinks panel by clicking on it 
and choosing Rename Hyperlink from the panel menu. If you do 
this a lot, make yourself a custom keyboard shortcut.
Then, double-click on the link in the Hyperlinks panel to open 
the Edit Hyperlink dialog box. You have several options.
Link To and Destination. You can tell InDesign what to link to by 
choosing one of the six options in the Link To pop-up menu. The first 
three let you make unnamed or named links; the last is for shared, 
named links. If you have already made a named link with the URL 
field, you can convert the link to a local link, but the original named 
link you made still remains in the URL list—we’ll explain how to 
remove it later in the chapter.
Editing Hyperlinks

714     6
▶URL. To target a URL, choose URL from the Link To pop-up 
menu and type the address into the Destination URL field. A 
URL is typically a place on the Internet, like an HTTP or FTP 
site. Note, however, that Acrobat or Flash just passes this URL to 
the default Web browser to deal with. 
▶File. If you want your hyperlink to open another PDF or file on 
your disk or on the server, you can choose File from the Link To 
pop-up menu. Unfortunately, Acrobat and Flash also hand these 
links to your Web browser to open, which is kind of crazy. If the 
browser knows what to do with it, it’ll display it; if not, the file 
will likely be downloaded. To jump from one PDF to another, it’s 
usually better to use a button, which we discuss in a later section.
▶Email. If you want your link to send you an email, you could 
make a URL link that begins with mailto://, but it’s easier to set 
the Link To pop-up menu to Email, then fill in the Address and 
Subject Line fields. When the viewer clicks on this kind of link, 
Acrobat launches your default Web browser and creates a new, 
addressed email message.
▶Page. To link to another page within your document (but not 
to specific text or an object on the page), choose Page from the 
Link To pop-up menu. Enter the page number you want to link 
to in the Page field and which magnification you want to use 
to view that page from the Zoom Setting pop-up menu. Most 
of the zoom settings (such as Fit Width in Window) are pretty 
self-explanatory; the only two that we find confusing are Inherit 
Zoom and Fixed. Inherit Zoom leaves the viewer’s magnification 
setting alone. Fixed is supposed to remember the zoom setting 
in InDesign when you created the hyperlink destination, but 
it only seems to produce the same effect as Inherit Zoom. The 
Zoom Settings are ignored in SWF files. 
You can also choose a different file from the Document 
pop-up menu (if you have another InDesign document open). 
This sounds good, but it doesn’t really work—you’re asking Flash 
or Acrobat to open your other InDesign file, which it cannot do.
▶Text Anchor. If there is some text you want to target, you should 
choose a Text Anchor from the Link To pop-up menu. We dis-
cuss how to make a text anchor later in this chapter.
▶Shared Destination. If you want your hyperlink to point to a 
link you have already created as a named link, choose Shared 
Destination, then choose the link from the Name pop-up menu.

 13.  u 715
Character Style. If your hyperlink is on selected text, you can tell 
InDesign to apply a character style to it. For example, you might 
want to give the text a light blue underline to indicate to the reader 
that this is “clickable.” Very helpful. What you can not do is make a 
character style that automatically applies a hyperlink. We hope to see 
that in a future version of InDesign.
Appearance. Remember that a hyperlink is technically a button in 
the PDF. The Appearance section lets you control how that object 
appears in the PDF file. If you want it to be invisible, set the Type 
pop-up menu to Invisible Rectangle. If you do this, you should be 
sure to apply some character style to the text; otherwise, the only way 
anyone will know that the link is there is that the cursor will change 
when it moves over it.
The other Appearance options are pretty dorky. Maybe someday 
InDesign will offer cooler hyperlink options, such as making the text 
highlight when you hover over it and then glow or burst into flame 
when you click it. Until then, only buttons provide interesting link 
effects (see “Buttons,” later in this chapter).
By the way, if you import a Word document that has lots of 
words surrounded by rectangles, they’re probably hyperlinks. You 
can make all those rectangles disappear quickly by selecting all the 
hyperlinks in the Hyperlinks panel (click on the first and then Shift-
click on the last), choosing Hyperlink Options from the panel menu, 
and then changing the Type pop-up menu in the Appearance section 
from Visible Rectangle to Invisible Rectangle.
If you want to bypass making a named hyperlink entirely, select 
the text or frame and click the Create New Hyperlink button in the 
Hyperlinks panel (or choose New Hyperlink from the panel menu). 
This opens the New Hyperlink dialog box, which offers all the same 
features that we discussed in the last section.
InDesign also lets you make a named hyperlink without actually 
applying it to any text or objects. Of course, these links won’t do any-
thing, but it might be helpful if you have a list of known destinations 
Making a New   
Unnamed Hyperlink
Making a New   
Hyperlink Destination
Figure 13-3
Creating a New  
Hyperlink Destination
Use the Type pop-up 
menu to select the 
type of hyperlink 
destination you 
want to create.

716     6
you’ll be targeting multiple times as you lay out your file. To do 
this, select New Hyperlink Destination from the Hyperlinks panel 
menu (see Figure 13-3). You can choose from among three types of 
hyperlink destinations: Page, Text Anchor, and URL.
▶Page. After you choose Page from the Type pop-up menu, you 
can choose which page and zoom setting to use. Now give your 
Page hyperlink destination a name. Or, better yet, turn on the 
Name with Page Number check box, which names it automati-
cally. This name is what you’ll later use to apply this hyperlink 
destination to the text or object on your page.
▶URL. The URL hyperlink destination lets you enter two values: 
The Web site or mailto address you want to target, and a name 
for this destination. Again, you’ll be using this name later when 
you create the hyperlink.
▶Text Anchor. The Text Anchor option lets you create an anchor 
to a specific piece of text in your document. Once you have 
created a text anchor, you can target it when making a hyper-
link (which we talked about earlier). To do this, first place the 
cursor in the destination text (or select one or more characters 
of the text), or else this option will be grayed out. Then, in the 
New Hyperlink Destination dialog box, simply give the anchor a 
name. This is identical to how most HTML authoring programs 
create text anchors, too.
Unfortunately, while the URL pop-up menu in the Hyperlnks panel 
gives you a list of all the named hyperlink destinations you’ve built 
in a document, it won’t let you edit them or delete them. To do that, 
choose, Hyperlink Destination Options from the Hyperlinks panel 
menu—this displays the Hyperlink Destination Options dialog box. 
From here, you can view and select the existing hyperlink destina-
tions using the Destination pop-up menu. To edit a hyperlink desti-
nation, select it from the pop-up and click the Edit button. To delete 
a named hyperlink, select it and click the Delete button.
If you’ve already typed a URL in a text frame and now you want 
to make that URL a hyperlink, use the Text tool to select the URL 
and choose New Hyperlink from URL from the Hyperlinks panel 
menu. This is a two-for-one: InDesign first makes a URL destination 
(giving it the same name as the URL itself), and then applies that 
destination to the selected text or object, also using the URL as the 
hyperlink source name that appears in the panel. Cool, huh?
Editing Hyperlink 
Destinations
Hyperlinks from   
URLs in the Text

 13.  u 717
We’ve already mentioned that you can delete a hyperlink destination, 
but what about the hyperlink on the page? If you delete the source 
itself (the text or object marked as a hyperlink), the hyperlink disap-
pears. You can also select the hyperlink in the Hyperlinks panel and 
click the panel’s Delete button. This leaves the text or page object 
alone, but it no longer has a hyperlink attached to it.
If you need to delete two or more hyperlinks, you can Command/
Ctrl-click to select them individually or Shift-click to select a range. 
Then click Delete.
What if you applied a hyperlink to the wrong text or object? No 
problem—select the correct text or object, select the hyperlink name 
in the Hyperlinks panel, and then choose Reset Hyperlink from the 
Hyperlinks panel menu. The link is moved from the old source to the 
selected source.
Once you have a bunch of hyperlink sources in your document, you 
need some way to navigate through them. If you set the Appearance 
of the hyperlinks to Visible, you can view them by choosing Show 
Hyperlinks from the Extras submenu on the View menu. 
If you can’t find the source of a hyperlink, select the link in the 
Hyperlinks panel and click the Go to Source button (or choose Go to 
Source in the panel menu).
Alternatively, you can select a hyperlink name in the panel and 
click the Go to Destination button (or choose Go to Destination from 
the panel menu) to invoke the hyperlink itself. This means you can 
use hyperlinks to navigate around your document (or documents) 
even if you never plan on exporting the files as PDF or SWF at all! 
Don’t forget that you can put hyperlinks on a master page so that 
they’ll show up on all the document pages based on that master.
If you’ve used named hyperlink destinations from another docu-
ment and those hyperlink destinations later change (perhaps a URL 
changes, for instance), then you’ll need to update your hyperlink 
source. To do that, select the hyperlink source in the Hyperlinks 
panel and choose Update Hyperlink from the panel menu. If the 
other document isn’t currently open, you’ll need to hold down the 
Option/Alt key when choosing Update Hyperlink.
As we noted earlier, hyperlinks are only “live” in your exported PDF 
or SWF files (with the exception of the Go to Hyperlink Destina-
tion button in the Hyperlinks panel). However, your hyperlinks will 
only be included in the PDF or SWF if you turn on the Hyperlinks 
checkbox in the PDF Export or SWF Export dialog box.
Deleting and   
Resetting Hyperlinks
Navigating Hyperlinks
Updating Hyperlinks
Exporting Hyperlinks

718     6
Bookmarks
Any PDF file longer than a few pages should have bookmarks, which 
appear in the Bookmarks tab on the left side of the screen in Acrobat. 
In InDesign, bookmarks appear in (surprise) the Bookmarks panel, 
shown in Figure 13-4 (choose Bookmarks from the Interactive sub-
menu in the Window menu).
Whenever you build a table of contents in a document, you can 
automatically add those entries to the Bookmarks panel by turning 
on the Create PDF Bookmarks check box in the Table of Contents 
dialog box (see Chapter 8, “Long Documents”). You can also add a 
bookmark anywhere in your document. Select an object or place the 
text cursor in some text and click the New Bookmark button in the 
Bookmarks panel. You can name the bookmark anything you want.
As with the hyperlinks in the Hyperlinks panel, you can use 
the bookmarks to navigate around your InDesign document, even 
without exporting as PDF. To jump to a bookmark, double-click the 
bookmark name in the Bookmarks panel.
Rembember, bookmarks won’t show up in your PDF unless you 
select Bookmarks in the Export PDF Options dialog box.
What if you want bookmarks generated from a table of contents 
to appear in the Bookmarks panel, but you don’t want the actual 
TOC? Place the table of contents on the pasteboard, and make sure 
that an edge of the TOC text frame overlaps a page. 
You can move a bookmark by dragging it up or down in the list. If 
you drag the bookmark on top of another bookmark, the bookmark 
becomes a sub-bookmark. To “unnest” it, drag it out again.
If you add one or more custom bookmarks to a document and 
then update your table of contents, the custom bookmarks will 
appear at the bottom of the list again. Oops! One way to fix this is 
to select Sort Bookmarks from the panel menu—this sorts the list of 
bookmarks chronologically by page, and alphabetically for multiple 
bookmarks within each page.
Sorting and Editing 
Bookmarks
Figure 13-4
Bookmarks Panel
Believe it or not, these are actual  
bookmarks from one of David’s  
other book projects!

 13.  u 719
Buttons and Forms
Buttons are useful in interactive PDF, SWF, and DPS files. Buttons 
can do all kinds of things—jump to another page, play a movie, 
sound or animation, or hide or show another button. With InDesign 
CS6, the Buttons and Forms panel also includes a bunch of new 
options for creating form fields for PDF documents.
You can make any selected frame or line into a button (except 
for frames that contain movies or sounds)—just choose Convert to 
Button from the Interactive submenu, under the Object menu or in 
the Context menu. Or, click the Convert Object to a Button button in 
the Buttons and Forms panel (which you can find in the Interactive 
submenu, under the Window menu). You can also turn a button back 
into an object by selecting Convert from Button. 
An object turned into a button acts like any other object—you 
can even print it. But the object comes to life when you turn on the 
Include All option in the Export to Interactive PDF dialog box or the 
Export SWF dialog box, or when you view a DPS article.
It’s important to remember that buttons are containers, like a spe-
cial kind of frame. When you turn an object into a button, InDesign 
actually puts that object inside a button “frame.” This means you can 
select that nested frame (with the Direct Selection tool or by click-
ing the Select Content button in the Control panel), move it around, 
delete it, replace it with something else, and so on.
To make a button react when the user clicks it, you must change the 
button’s behavior in the Buttons and Forms panel (see Figure 13-5).
1. Enter a descriptive name for the button (at the top of the  
Buttons and Forms panel).
2. Choose Button from the Type pop-up menu, or specify a form 
type. (We’ll cover the form button options later.)
3. Choose a trigger from the Event pop-up menu: On Release or 
Tap (that’s when the user lets go of the mouse button or taps on 
a mobile device), On Click (when the mouse button is down), 
On Roll Over (when the cursor is above the button), On Roll Off 
(when the cursor leaves the button), On Focus (when the button 
is selected—either by a click or by a press of the Tab key), or On 
Blur (when a Tab click moves the focus to another field).
4. Select one of the actions you want to associate with the Event 
from the Actions pop-up menu.
The Way of Buttons
Creating   
Buttons

720     6
 13. v um 720
▶ Go To Destination. If you used the Hyperlinks panel to 
make a text anchor in this or another document, use this 
action to jump to that point. If the document that contains 
the anchor isn’t open, you can click Browse to select it. 
▶ Go To First/Last/Next/Previous Page. Use any of these 
actions to jump to the first, last, next, or previous page. For 
example, you might assign these as navigation buttons, and 
put them on a master page of a document. Buttons work well 
on master pages because they appear on every document 
page tagged with that master. 
▶ Go To URL. Like a URL hyperlink, the Go To URL action 
hands off the URL you specify to the default Web browser. 
This can be any URL, including http://, file://, or mailto:.
▶ Show/Hide Buttons and Forms. Buttons are a kind of “field” 
(in PDF parlance). Whenever you want objects to appear or 
disappear on your page, make them into buttons. Even if 
those buttons have no behavior of their own, they can still 
be made visible or hidden using the Show/Hide Buttons and 
Forms action. When you select this action, the panel lists all 
the fields in your document. You can click once in the box 
to the left of the field name to make the button visible (you’ll 
Figure 13-5
Adding Behaviors  
to a Button
As you add Actions, InDesign 
adds them to the list.
InDesign ships with a library full  
of sample buttons you can use: 
Choose Sample Buttons from the 
panel menu.
Button behaviors can 
affect all other buttons in a 
document. In this example, 
other buttons are affected 
by clicking the button.
Button appearances can 
change what the button 
looks like when it’s being 
rolled over or when clicked.
This button converts objects to 
buttons or vice versa
SWF Preview button

 13.  u 721
see a little eyeball), or click again to make the button hidden 
(InDesign draws a red line through the eyeball). Click a third 
time to make it neutral (this action won’t affect the button).
▶ Sound. After you import a sound file into your document, 
you can Play, Pause, Stop, or Resume it with this action. In 
exported SWF files, you can stop all sounds.
▶ Video. If you placed a movie file (see “Audio and Video,” 
later), you can control it using the Video action. After select-
ing Video, select a movie, and then specify what you want to 
do to it: Play, Pause, Stop, Resume, or Play from Navigation 
Point. Use the Media panel to set navigation points.
▶ Animation. If you animated an object (see “Animation,” 
later), you can control it using the Animation action. After 
selecting Animation, select the animation name, and then 
specify what you want it to do: Play, Stop, Pause, Resume, 
Reverse, and Stop All. Turn on the Reverse on Roll Off check 
box if you want, say, an animated object that flies onto the 
page to fly back off the page when you mouse off the button.
▶ Go To Page. Go To Page (which jumps directly the page 
number you specify), works only when exported in a SWF 
file. In a PDF file, use Go To Anchor.
▶ Go To State/Next State/Previous State. If you created a 
multi-state object (see “Multi-State Objects,” later), you can 
jump to a specific state. For example, use the Go To Previous 
State and Go To Next State actions in navigation buttons that 
let users click through images in a slide show.
▶ Clear Form. In the PDF form, this action clears any action 
taken on form fields, returning to the default form state.
▶ Go to Previous View. This action returns to the last page the 
viewer displayed. If you jump from page 5 to page 20, Go to 
Previous View would jump back to page 5.
▶ Go to Next View. This action only works if someone has 
already invoked a “Previous page” action; it’s like the For-
ward feature in a Web browser.
▶ Open File. Use this action to open another file. You need to 
specify the file using an absolute file path; it’s much simpler 
to click the Browse button to let InDesign figure out the path 
for you.

722     6
 13. v um 722
▶ Print Form. In the PDF form, this opens the Print dialog box.
▶ Submit Form. In the PDF form, this action submits the 
form data to the URL specified. To collect form data on a 
server, type the location, such as http://www.[domain]/[folder]/
[subfolder]/ for an Internet address or \\[server]\[folder]\
[subfolder]\ for a location on a local network. To collect form 
data as attachments to email, type mailto: followed by the 
email address, such as mailto:person@domain.com. If you want to 
change submission details or use FDF data, you can do that 
in Acrobat.
▶View Zoom. A button can control the current view settings 
in Acrobat. After selecting the View Zoom behavior, choose 
from among the many options in the Zoom pop-up menu, 
including Zoom In, Zoom Out, Fit in Window, Rotate Clock-
wise, and Single Page.
After creating an action, you can select another Event/Action 
combination and add it to the button. This means one button click 
can do a bunch of things in sequence: go to another page, show a 
hidden object on that page, and start playing a movie. To remove an 
action, select it and click the Delete Action button.
When you open a PDF in Acrobat and press the Tab key, the focus 
jumps to the first field on the page; press Tab again, and it skips to 
the next field. If the field is a button, you can press Return/Enter to 
“click” the button. But who specifies the order of the buttons? You 
do. You can use two different methods. One method is to choose Set 
Tab Order from the Interactive submenu (under the Object menu). 
To reorder a field in the list, select it and click the Move Up or Move 
Down buttons—or better, just drag it into the correct position. The 
other method is to use the Articles panel to add and arrange buttons.
A rollover is an image on an interactive page (like a PDF or a SWF) 
that changes in some way when the user moves the cursor over it. The 
rollover may appear to change color or shape; or maybe it lights up 
to indicate that it’s a hotspot. When you move the cursor away, the 
image returns to its original form. InDesign supports both normal 
rollovers and two-state buttons (buttons that change when you click 
on them). It also lets you make “hot spot” rollovers—where you roll 
over or click a button and a different image pops up.
We use the term “image,” but rollovers can involve text or lines as 
easily as images; it’s up to you. However, if you are using images, you 
Tab Order
Rollovers and States

 13.  u 723
Figure 13-6
Button Rollovers
Create separate appear-
ances in the exported file for 
when the mouse rolls over 
the button, and for when it 
clicks it.
Select the state, and then 
change the appearance of the 
button object.
Rollover state
Normal state
Click state
need to create the graphics for each state of the rollover: the original 
image on the page (the “off” state), and the image you see when the 
cursor is over the image (the “on” state).
It’s easy to add and change states (see Figure 13-6):
1. Select the button or form field and open the Buttons and Forms 
panel. (Double-clicking the button opens the panel).
2. To add a Rollover state, click the [Rollover] tile in the Appear-
ance section of the Buttons and Forms panel. If you want to add 
a state for when the mouse is clicked, click the [Click] tile. For 
radio buttons and check boxes, you can specify on/off appear-
ances for each condition, such as [Rollover On] and [Rollover 
Off]. If you later decide you don’t want a state, select it and click 
the Delete button at the bottom of the panel.
If the thumbnails in the panel aren’t big enough, make them 
larger by choosing Panel Options from the panel menu.
3. Click the state you want to alter, and then, on the document 
page, make a change to the content of the button. Let’s say you 
have a button with a picture in it. You can click on the Rollover 
state, and replace the picture with a different one (just the way 
you normally would; with the File > Place command). Or, you 
could make the edge of the button turn red.
Each state actually contains a different object and the But-
tons and Forms panel gives you a way to make each one vis-
ible—one at a time—almost like the Conditional Text panel. So 
you can add a drop shadow to the object inside the Rollover state 
and when you switch back to the Normal state, the drop shadow 
disappears.
4. Test the states using the SWF Preview panel. 

724     6
 13. v um 724
Making a rollover that affects objects elsewhere on the page involves 
creating a set of actions: Convert all of the relevant objects to buttons 
and then use the On Roll Over and On Roll Off events to make those 
objects Visible or Hidden at the appropriate time(s). You could, for 
example, have one button that, when rolled over, makes two other 
buttons visible.
Why have an invisible button? Don’t think of buttons as just 
something you click; if you want a picture to appear when you click 
a button, you make two buttons: a visible one that you click and a 
hidden one that appears when you click the other button.
For example, let’s say you want an image of a dog to appear when 
you mouse over a text button. For the dog image, you convert it to a 
button, and you select the Hidden Until Triggered check box in the 
Buttons and Forms panel, This hides the dog image in the SWF or 
PDF file until it’s made visible. For the text button, you choose On 
Roll Over for Event and Show/Hide Buttons and Forms for Action, 
and set the dog image to become visible. To make the dog image dis-
appear again, create an On Roll Off event that makes the dog image 
invisible when the mouse leaves the text button.
Before InDesign CS6, using the InDesign/Acrobat combination to 
create forms was clumsy. You had to create your layout in InDesign 
and then add your form elements—radio buttons, signature fields, 
dropdown lists, and so on   —in Acrobat. If you had to fix a typo, you 
had to edit the InDesign layout and then redo all the form work in 
Acrobat (at least for the edited pages).
With InDesign CS6, you can add all your form fields in InDesign, 
including fields to reset, print, and submit the form, and then export 
to PDF (see Figure 13-7). If you need to edit the layout, make the 
changes and create a new PDF. This process works well for basic 
forms. For more advanced form fields, you can enhance the form in 
Acrobat.
1. Create the frame to be used as the form field. Use the Rectangle 
tool, or use one of the predefined buttons by choosing Sample 
Buttons and Forms from the Buttons and Forms panel menu 
(see Figure 13-8).
2. Select the object and choose a form field option from the Type 
pop-up menu in the Buttons and Forms panel.
3. Specify the PDF Options settings that the form field calls for. 
Let’s go over each type of form field, and then we’ll cover the 
PDF Options settings.
Hot Spots
PDF Forms

 13.  u 725
Figure 13-7
PDF Forms
Add form fields to InDesign 
document.
Open PDF in Acrobat.
Check Boxes
Combo Box settings in   
Buttons and Forms panel.
Choosing Combo Box   
option in PDF form.
Radio Button
Text Field
Combo Box
▶Check Box. A check box can either be selected or unselected. 
▶Combo Box / List Box. A combo box shows a single selection 
and includes a drop-down menu. A list box displays a list of 
items the user can select. When adding items, press Shift+Enter 
to keep the cursor in the field.
▶Radio Button. Only one radio button in a set can be selected. 
You can include multiple sets of radio buttons on a page. Use the 
same Name value for each radio button in a set to unite them. 
▶Signature Field. Lets the user electronically sign a PDF docu-
ment with a digital signature.

726     6
▶Text Field. Determine the initial view settings and layout of the 
PDF when it’s opened. You can specify the font size. If you select 
Auto for Font Size, the text can shrink to fit within the form field. 
Create Clear Form, Print Form, and Submit Form buttons to go with 
form fields. Create a normal button, and then specify the action.
What about creating a tooltip for a button in the PDF file? How can 
you hide a button or form field from printing? With the button or 
form field selected, expand the PDF Options section in the Buttons 
and Forms panel menu, and then change the settings. The settings 
you see depend on what type of button or form field is selected.
Description. This option appears for all buttons and form fields. 
Type a description, such as “Turn to next page.” Whatever you type 
in the Description field appears as a tooltip when users mouse over 
the item in the PDF form.
Printable. Determine whether the button or form field is printed. For 
example, you may want a “Submit” button to appear on the screen 
but not print when the PDF is printed. Turn off the Printable setting.
Required. Forces the user to fill in the selected form field. If the user 
attempts to submit the form while a required field is blank, an error 
message appears and the empty required form field is highlighted.
Password. Characters the user types appear as asterisks (***).
Read Only. Prevent the user from changing the form field content.
PDF Options
Figure 13-8
Sample Form Objects

 13.  u 727
Multiline. Allow user to type more than a single-line entry in the 
text field. If the user types more characters than appear in the field, 
either a plus sign appears if Scrollable is not selected, or scroll bars 
appear if Scrollable is selected.
Scrollable. A scroll bar appears for text that extends beyond the 
boundaries of the text field, and text wraps to the next line. The user 
can press Shift+Enter to start a new line.
Selected by Default. For radio buttons and check boxes, indicate 
whether the option is selected when the user opens the form. Only 
one radio button in a set can be selected by default.
Multiple Selection. For list boxes, allow the user to Shift-click (or 
Command/Ctrl-click) to select more than one item.
Sort Items. When you’re adding entries for a list box or combo box, 
selecting Sort Items automatically sorts the items by alphabet. If Sort 
Items is not selected, you can drag items to rearrange them.
Button Value. If the user selects a check box or radio button, the 
button value you specify is used when the form data is submitted. If 
left blank, the Name value is used.
Multi-State Objects
The purpose of the Object States panel is to let you create little slide 
shows within an interactive document. Here’s the way it works. You 
insert a bunch of images that act as slides in a slide deck. Then you 
arrange them on top of each other, select them, and use the Object 
States panel to convert them into a multi-state object, with each 
image becoming a state. Finally, you create navigation buttons for 
cycling through the images (see Figure 13-9).
There is no limit to the number of states that you can include in a 
multi-state object. Only one state is visible on the page at a time. 
For print and PDF output, only the active state appears in the final 
output. That means you can use multi-state objects as a way to create 
conditional images in your document. Just make sure you have the 
right state selected when you print or export.

728     6
1. Place or create the objects that will be part of the multi-state 
object. If you’re creating a slide show, you probably want the 
image frames to be the same size. By the way, a state does not 
have to be a single item—it can be a collection of items, such as 
an image and its caption.
2. To stack the images, select them, and click Align Horizontal 
Centers and Align Vertical Centers in the Control panel.
3. With the images still selected, click the New button in the Object 
States panel. (To open the Object States panel, choose Object 
States from the Interactive submenu on the Window menu.)
A dashed frame appears around the multi-state object.
4. Use the Buttons and Forms panel to create navigation buttons 
that trigger the Go To Next State and Go To Previous State 
actions when the mouse button is released.
5. Use the SWF Preview panel to test the navigation buttons for 
SWF, or use the Adobe Content Viewer to test a DPS article.
6. Export the document to SWF or DPS format. (Unfortunately, it 
doesn’t work in PDF.)
Figure 13-9
Create a Multi-State 
Slide Show
Select the multi-state objects 
and align them horizontally 
and vertically.
Click the New 
button in the 
Object States 
panel to create a 
multi-state object.
Create navigation buttons that cycle 
through the images (or states) in the 
SWF file or DPS article.

 13.  u 729
Editing a multi-state object is fairly intuitive. If you resize or rotate 
the selected multi-state object, all the states are transformed as well.
One tricky issue is figuring out the difference between adding a 
slide to a slideshow and adding an object to a state. For either task, 
select both the object and multi-state object. Click the Add Objects 
to Visible State button to add an object to the selected state. Click the 
New button to add a whole new state to the multi-state object.
To paste objects into an existing state, cut or copy one or more 
objects, select the multi-state object, click the state in the Object 
States panel, and choose Paste Into State from the panel menu.
To duplicate a state, select a state to base the new state on, and 
choose New State from the panel menu. 
To convert a single state in a multi-state object back to a set of 
independent objects, select the state in the Object States panel and 
choose Release State To Object from the panel menu. To convert all 
states in the multi-state object to objects, choose Release All States 
To Objects.
To hide the multi-state object in the exported file until it’s trig-
gered by a button, choose Hide Until Triggered from the panel menu.
To reset all multi-state objects in the document to the first state, 
choose Reset All Multi-State Objects To First State from the panel 
menu. When you select a state, the object remains in that state, even 
if you close and reopen the document. This option is a quick way to 
reset all the multi-state objects.
Audio and Video
Sometimes movies and sounds in PDF, SWF, and DPS files do a 
better job of explaining things than plain ol’ quiet, static print. For 
instance, watching a movie about how to change the oil in your car 
might help more than trying to figure it out from ten pages of printed 
diagrams and explanations.
For movies, you should place FLV, F4V, SWF, or any video file 
with H.264 encoding, such as MP4. For sounds, place MP3 files. 
These formats take advantage of the rich media support offered in 
Acrobat 9 or later and Flash Player 10 or later.
But what about AVI, MOV, and MPEG videos and WAV, AIF, and 
AU sound files? They should play just fine in interactive PDF files, but 
they don’t work in exported SWF files. Use the Adobe Media Encoder 
application to convert video file formats to FLV or F4V. Adobe Media 
Encoder doesn’t convert audio files, but you can use a program like 
Apple iTunes to do that.
Edit States

730     6
You import a sound or a movie file in the same way that you import 
text and graphics—use the Place feature or drag the file from a 
Finder/Explorer window (see Figure 13-10). To place the file on a 
page, click the place icon to create a frame that is the size of the origi-
nal file. If you drag the place icon (to specify the size of the frame), 
then immediately choose Fit Frame to Content to scale the frame. 
Placed movies and sounds are automatically embedded.
By the way, when you import a sound or a movie, make sure you 
don’t put any other text or graphics on top of it. Acrobat isn’t smart 
enough to play rich media behind other objects (see “Movie Limita-
tions,” late in this chapter).
Importing Sounds   
and Movies
Figure 13-10
Placing a Movie
Choose Place from the File 
menu, select a movie file, 
and then click the Open 
button to import the movie.
Use the Media panel to 
set options for the movie, 
including the poster. 
When you view the PDF, Acrobat 
displays the poster…
…and the movie starts playing.

 13.  u 731
Instead of placing a movie, you can link to a movie on a Web site (via 
a URL). Linking to an online movie is useful if the movie will change 
after you export the PDF file, or if the movie is large and you don’t 
want to transport it along with (or inside of) your PDF or SWF file.
Draw a rectangle of any size—you’ll resize it later—and then select 
it and choose Video from URL from the Media panel menu. Specify 
the URL containing the a video file that Flash supports: FLV, F4V, or 
H.264-encoded MP4. You can use either the standard http:// URL or 
an rtmp:// URL, which is Adobe’s format developed for streaming 
video over the Web. Click OK. If the movie is valid, InDesign finds 
the movie on the Web and gets its dimensions (you need a live Inter-
net connection for this to work, obviously).
After you click OK, use the Fitting features to make sure the frame 
is the same size as the movie. You can scale the movie, but don’t try 
to clip or mask it. There doesn’t appear to be any way to link to a 
streaming audio file; just video.
When you select a movie object, the Media panel displays options 
for that movie (see Figure 13-10). To open the Media panel, choose 
Interactive from the Window menu, and then choose Media.
▶ Play on Page Load. When you turn on this check box, the movie 
begins playing as soon as the page it’s on is displayed.
▶ Loop. When you turn on this check box, the movie plays in a 
continuous loop in the SWF file.
▶ Poster options. A poster is a still image associated with a movie 
or sound—basically what you see on the InDesign page and in 
the PDF file (before you activate the movie). If you choose From 
Current Frame, InDesign grabs the first frame of the movie. If 
you don’t want the first frame, drag the slider to “scrub” the 
movie until you see the frame you want to use. Then click the 
icon to the right of the Poster pop-up menu to use that frame 
as the poster. If you’re creating a document that will be used for 
both print and onscreen web, then you should probably select 
Choose Image—this lets you pick a high-resolution image (like 
a PSD or a TIFF file) to stand in for the movie, both as a poster 
and when you print.
You can use any size poster you want, but posters are always 
cropped to the size of the movie itself. It’s best to make sure that 
the poster and the movie have the same dimensions.
▶ Controller. This option determines which controller buttons 
appear while the movie is playing. If the movie file is a Flash 
Linking to Web Videos
Movie Options

732     6
Video (FLV or F4V) file or an H.264-encoded file, you can 
choose from a number of controller skins that vary in style, but 
they all do essentially the same thing—let users play, pause, and 
stop the video and control volume. The controller is hidden. If 
you want the controller to appear when the user mouses over the 
movie, turn on Show Controller on Rollover.
If you’ve placed an AVI, MPEG, or other legacy file, you can 
display a basic controller that appears in the PDF file. Note that 
SWF files you place may have their own controller skins applied. 
Use the SWF Preview panel to preview the selected controller.
▶ Navigation Points. Navigation points are useful if you want 
to play the movie from a different starting point. To create a 
navigation point, advance the video to a specific frame, and 
then click the plus sign icon. For example, in a training video, 
you could set navigation points at the beginning of each section. 
Create separate buttons that start the movie at each navigation 
point. (When you create a button that triggers a video action, 
select Play from Navigation Point, and then specify the point.)
▶ PDF Options. Choose PDF Options from the Media panel menu. 
The Description you type appears as a tool tip when you mouse 
over the movie in Acrobat (but only if the movie has a poster). If 
you want the movie to play in a floating window rather than on 
the page itself, turn on Floating Window, and specify the size 
and position of the window. 
Use the Media panel to set sound options for the selected sound 
object, usually an MP3 file. 
▶ Play on Page Load. When you turn on this check box, Acrobat 
begins playing the sound as soon as the page it’s on is displayed.
▶ Stop on Page Turn. Stop playing the sound when the page is 
turned. This option isn’t availablefor non-MP3 audio files. 
▶ Loop. Play the sound file continuously. This option isn’t available 
if the audio file is a non-MP3 file. 
▶ Poster. You only need to give a sound a poster image when you 
want the viewer to be able to click on it to play the sound. If you 
have set up another button to play the sound, you can leave the 
Poster pop-up menu set to None. If you do want to use a poster 
image, choose Standard (which gives you a silly little speaker 
icon image) or Choose Image to select an image from a standard 
file dialog box. 
Sound Options

 13.  u 733
To change the default Standard image, save an image in the 
JPEG format to a file named StandardSoundPoster.jpg, and 
put it inside the Images folder in the Presets folder inside your 
InDesign folder.
Some aspects of exported movies and sounds are still a bit clunky. 
For example, there’s usually a pause before and after a movie plays, 
making it hard to have seamless loops of movies. (A pain when you 
want to have a soundtrack looping in the background.)
Here are a few other limitations Acrobat and Flash Player have, 
and how they affect making interactive documents using InDesign:
▶You can scale a movie on your page and it does appear scaled 
when you play it. However, you cannot crop a movie, even 
though you can crop the movie’s poster image on your InDesign 
page—the movie will scale itself to fit inside the cropped area.
▶Similarly, you can’t clip movies into nonrectangular shapes. 
Acrobat and Flash Player can’t deal with nonrectangular movies, 
so they’ll appear as full-frame rectangles in the PDF or SWF file.
▶As exciting as it might feel to rotate or shear movies and sounds, 
all that goes away in the final exported document. Oh well.
▶You can use the Hyperlinks panel to apply a hyperlink to a 
movie or sound frame (or to a button), but, unfortunately, 
they’re not active in the exported document.
▶While it might appear that you can apply transparency effects to 
movies and buttons, these effects will not appear in the exported 
file. Drop shadows, however, work (because drop shadows are 
images behind the movie).
Animation
The Animation feature gives you the feeling that you can be a Flash 
developer without knowing a thing about scripting. In a matter of 
seconds, you can make an object appear to fly in from off the page, 
spin around, or fade into view. 
Animation works only in an exported SWF file, not in a PDF file. 
But there’s a workaround to animate a PDF, which we’ll get to later. 
Animation also should work when liquid HTML5 formats—such as 
EPUB3 or liquid DPS articles—are supported.
Media Limitations

734     6
Let’s quickly define our terms. In InDesign, animation consists of 
the animated object and, in some cases, a motion path, which is the 
path along which the object travels (see Figure 13-11). The circle end 
of the motion path is where the animation begins; the arrow end is 
where the animation ends. Of course, some animations, such as Fade 
In and Shrink, don’t move along a path. 
InDesign includes motion presets that make it easy to animate an 
object quickly. For example, you can draw a red ball, select it, and 
choose the Bounce and Smoosh motion preset in the Animation 
panel, and . . . that’s all there is to it. When you export the document 
to SWF, turning to that page makes the red ball drop, appear to flat-
ten out as it hits bottom, and rise.
The Animation panel has plenty of options to sort through, but don’t 
be intimidated. Most of the options are easy to figure out.
▶Preset. Choose the motion preset you want to apply. You can 
then modify the settings, and you can use the Pen tool and 
Direct Selection tool to edit the motion path. If you want to 
reuse these settings, save the motion preset. You can use saved 
presets in other documents and even in Flash Pro.
▶Event(s). Use the Event(s) option to determine what triggers 
the animation in the SWF file, such as clicking the animated 
object or mousing over it. You can trigger the animation using 
more than one event. In fact, be aware that turning on one event 
doesn’t turn off another. For example, if you choose On Self 
Click (which starts the animation when you click the object), On 
Page Load remains selected.
If you choose On Roll Over, you can create a cool effect by 
selecting Reverse on Roll Off. So if the animated object flies in 
from the left when the object is moused over, the object flies back 
where it came from when the mouse moves away.
▶Speed. Do you want the animation speed to be a steady rate? 
Choose None. Do you want it to start slowly and speed up? 
Choose Ease In. The object moves faster where points on the 
motion path are closer together.
▶Animate. The Animate pop-up menu options help you print the 
animated object properly.
For example, suppose you want an object to fly in from off 
the page, but you want the object to appear on the page for print-
ing. If you choose To Current Appearance from the Animate 
Motion Presets
Animation Panel

 13.  u 735
Figure 13-11
Animated Objects
This animated object will 
move in from the left side of 
the page.
Use the Animation panel to 
change animation settings.
Use the Timing panel to determine 
the order of objects being animated. 
In this example, they play at the 
same time. Then use the Preview 
panel to test the animation.
Click to show Timing panel.
Click to preview.
Motion path
Animated object
pop-up menu, the object’s properties are used as the ending 
point of the animation. That way, the object appears on the page 
at the start, and can be printed in slide shows.
But what if you want to print an animated object that flies 
in from off the page and then blurs? If you choose To Current 
Appearance, the printed object is blurry. Instead, choose To Cur-
rent Location from the Animate pop-up menu. This option uses 
the current object’s properties (not blurry) as the starting point 
of the animation and the object’s position as the ending point.
▶Opacity. Choose None if you want the animated object to 
remain solid. Choose Fade In if you want the object to gradually 
become visible or Fade Out to gradually become invisible.
▶Visibility. Select Hide Until Animated or Hide After Animating 
to make an object invisible before or after playback.

736     6
Create a custom animation by selecting an object and a path and 
clicking the Convert to Motion Path button in the Animation panel 
(see Figure 13-12). Then change the settings in the Animation panel. 
If you selected two closed paths, such as two rectangles, the path on 
top becomes the motion path. You can convert only two objects.
When you convert selected objects to a motion path, the path 
start moves to the center of the object. This means the path may flip 
to the opposite site of the object, depending on the path direction. If 
you don’t like the direction, undo the animation and choose Reverse 
Path from the Paths submenu on the Object menu. Then try again.
Edit the motion path the same way you edit other paths. Use the 
Direct Selection tool to select the path and move points. Use the Pen 
tool to add and remove points.
The points on the path determine the speed of the object; the 
object moves faster where points are further apart. To slow down 
the object at a certain point of the path, add more points in that area.
Buttons and animation play nicely together. In the Buttons and 
Forms panel, you can create buttons that play, pause, stop, and 
reverse an animated object. See “Buttons” earlier in this chapter.
What if you want to animate the same object multiple times? For 
example, let’s say you want a headline to fly in from off the page, spin 
around, and fly off the other side of the page. Although you can apply 
only one animation to an object, you can copy and paste the object, 
and then use the Paste in Place command to make sure the object 
appears in the same place.
Custom Animation
Edit Motion Paths
Button Launch
Complex Animation
...Select the drawn path and 
object, and click the Convert to 
Motion Path button.
The motion path moves next to 
the newly animated object.
Figure 13-12
Draw a Motion Path
Draw a path using the Pen 
tool or Pencil tool, and insert 
the object that you want to 
move along the path...

 13.  u 737
Think of it like a relay race. In this example, the first animated 
object uses the Fly in from Left preset with Hide After Animating 
selected. The next copied object uses the Rotate preset with both 
Hide Before Animating and Hide After Animating selected. The last 
copied object uses the Fly out Right preset with Hide Before Animat-
ing selected. It’s a little clumsy, but you can always use Flash Pro or 
Adobe Edge....
By default, animated objects play in the order in which they were 
added. Use the Timing panel to change the order, play animation 
effects at the same time, or delay animation (see Figure 13-13).
Turn to the spread containing multiple animated objects and dis-
play the Timing panel (choose Timing from the Interactive submenu 
on the Window menu).
The Timing panel shows the animations on the current spread 
based on page events. If you have one set of animations that occurs 
when the page is turned to and another set that occurs when the 
page is clicked, you can change the timing of each event. To do this, 
choose Page Load or Page Click from the Event menu. Page Load and 
Page Click appear only if at least one item on the page uses that event.
Drag items up and down in the list to change their order. The 
items at the top of the list are animated first.
To play multiple animated objects at the same time, select the 
items in the list and click the Play Together button to link the items. 
If you decide you don’t want one or more of the linked items to play 
together, select them and click the Play Separately button.
To play a group of items a specific number of times or to play 
them in a loop, select the items and then specify the number of times 
the animations play, or select Loop.
You can change which event triggers the animation either in the 
Timing panel or the Animation panel. In the Timing panel, select 
the item and choose Reassign To On Page Load or Reassign To On 
Page Click from the panel menu.
The Timing Panel
Figure 13-13
Timing Panel
These two objects will 
play together.
Choose whether to change the timing order of 
animated objects on page load or page click.
Play Together and Play Separate buttons
The train and bus objects are animated 
together, followed by an explosion. Then the 
rain starts.

738     6
Animated objects are not included when you export a document to 
interactive PDF. However, if you want your InDesign animation to 
appear in the exported PDF, there is a fairly simple workaround.
To get animation in a PDF file, you can select an animated object 
in InDesign, export the selection to SWF format, and then place the 
SWF file in the InDesign document. Depending on your circum-
stances, you may want to use different layers for the original anima-
tion and the placed SWF file, or you may want to move the original 
animation to the pasteboard. When you export to PDF, the SWF file 
can be played in the exported PDF.
The motion presets you see in the Animation panel are the same ones 
that appear in Flash Professional. In fact, when you create a custom 
motion preset in InDesign, you can save it as an XML file and import 
it into Flash Pro, or you can send it to your InDesign pals.
To save an animation, select the animated object, and choose Save 
from the Animation panel menu. Type the name and click OK.
If you want to make the saved preset available on another com-
puter, in Flash Pro, or to someone else, save the preset as an XML 
file. Choose Manage Presets from the Animation panel menu (see 
Figure 13-14). Select a preset and click Save As. Specify the name and 
location of the motion preset, and click Save. When you do this, the 
motion path is saved, along with the Duration, Speed, Scale, Rotate, 
and Opacity settings.
To import motion presets that have been exported from either 
InDesign or Flash Professional as XML files, click Load in the 
Manage Presets dialog box, and then double-click the XML file you 
want to import.
Animation in PDFs
Reuse Motion Presets
Figure 13-14
Manage Presets
Saved custom presets
Export preset 
to XML.
Import saved 
XML files.

 13.  u 739
Page Transitions
Normally, if you switch from one page to another in your interac-
tive document, the transition is (more or less) instantaneous—like 
flipping from one channel to the next. But you have the option to 
spice up (or cheesify, according to some designers) your multi-page 
PDF and SWF files by adding more interesting transitions. You can 
find the Page Transitions panel in the Interactive submenu under the 
Window menu (see Figure 13-15).
The Page Transitions panel gives you two ways to choose a type 
of transition: You can pick from the Transition pop-up menu, or you 
can choose Choose from the panel menu. Both do the same thing, 
but the latter displays a dialog box that shows you all the transitions 
at the same time. In either case, you can get a preview of the transi-
tion by placing your cursor over the displayed graphic. The transi-
tion is applied to the current page.
Most transitions also let you specify one or two parameters, such 
as which way a wipe wipes or how fast a dissolve dissolves. You can 
control those in the lower half of the panel.
If you want every page to have the same transition, you can turn 
on the Apply to All Spreads checkbox in the Page Transitions dialog 
box, or click Apply to All Spreads at the bottom of the panel. You can 
override those transitions later on a page-by-page basis.
You can use the SWF Preview panel to test transitions (make sure 
in Document Mode, not Spread Mode).
You can also choose Page Transitions for all the spreads in the 
Export to Interactive PDF or Export SWF dialog box. The Export 
SWF also has an Interactive Page Curl option, which lets people drag 
a corner to turn the page.
To view transitions of an exported PDF in Acrobat, make sure 
that you’re in Full Screen Mode. In the Export to Interactive PDF 
dialog box, you can select the Open in Full Screen Mode option. In 
Acrobat, choose Full Screen Mode from the View menu; press the 
Escape key to exit.
Figure 13-15
Page Transitions panel
Tired of transitions? 
You can clear your 
document of them by 
choosing Clear All 
from the panel menu.

740     6
Previewing Interactive Documents
With the SWF Preview panel, you can quickly test your interactive 
objects without having to export to PDF or SWF first. You can pre-
view buttons, hyperlinks, media, page transitions, and animated 
objects from within InDesign (see Figure 13-16). 
A quick word of caution. If you’re creating interactive overlays for 
DPS articles, ignore the SWF Preview panel. Instead, use the Adobe 
Content Viewer on either the desktop or mobile device.
To display the SWF Preview panel, choose SWF Preview from the 
Interactive submenu on the Window menu. You can also click the 
Preview button in the lower left corner of the Animation, Timing, 
and Buttons and Forms panels. 
In its default state, the SWF Preview panel is too small. You’ll 
want to drag it out to enlarge it. In the lower right corner of the panel, 
click a button to determine whether you’re previewing the selection, 
spread, or document. If you’re previewing the document, you can 
click the Go To Previous Page and Go To Next Page arrows at the 
bottom of the panel to move to different pages.
Change the settings to determine what displays in the SWF Pre-
view panel. Choose Edit Preview Settings from the panel menu. The 
options are the same as those in the SWF Export dialog box.
You can also preview the document in your default web browser 
by choosing Test in Browser.
Figure 13-16
SWF Preview Panel
Click this icon to preview 
the document instead of 
the selection or spread.
Click the Play button 
to start previewing.
Click an interactive object, 
such as this button, to 
make sure it works.
Presentation Mode
When you turn on Presentation Mode, all the panels, menus, and 
toolbars are hidden. Only the content appears. Does it preview inter-
active objects? Unfortunately, no. As its name implies, it’s especially 
useful for giving presentations in which you need to jump in and 

 13.  u 741
make changes to the presentation information. Presentation Mode 
can turn your document into a well-designed slide show.
Press Shift-W to turn Presentation Mode on and off. Or, choose 
Presentation Mode from the View > Screen Mode submenu. Table 
13-2 shows which shortcut keys work in Presentation Mode.
You can’t edit the document in Presentation Mode. But with a 
dual screen monitor, you can have two windows open on the same 
document (choose New Window from the Arrange submenu on the 
Window menu), and put one of them into Presentation Mode.
To do this:
Press:
Turn on/off Presentation Mode
Shift+W
Go to next spread
Mouse click, Right arrow, or 
Page Down
Go to previous spread
Shift-click, Right-click, Left 
Arrow, or Page Up
Exit Presentation Mode
Esc
First/Last spread
Home/End
Black background
B
White background
W
Gray background
G
Table 13-2
Presentation Mode 
Shortcuts
Interactive PDF Export
There are separate commands for creating print PDF files and inter-
active PDF files. You export an interactive PDF by selecting Export 
from the File menu and choosing Adobe PDF (Interactive) from the 
Format or Save as Type pop-up menu. InDesign displays the Export 
to Interactive PDF dialog box (see Figure 13-17).
Pages/Spreads. Some designers use the same document for both 
printing and exporting interactive PDF files. For this workflow, it’s 
useful to select Pages when you export the PDF so that pages don’t 
appear side by side in Acrobat or Adobe Reader. 
Embed Page Thumbnails. Create a thumbnail preview for each page 
being exported. Thumbnails are displayed in file dialog boxes and in 
Bridge. Turn off this option if you want a smaller file size.

742     6
Create Acrobat Layers. Save each InDesign layer as an Acrobat layer 
within the PDF. The layers are fully navigable, which lets Acrobat 
readers generate multiple versions of the file from a single PDF.
View and Layout. Determine the initial view settings and layout of 
the PDF when it’s opened.
Open In Full Screen Mode. Display the PDF in Acrobat or Reader 
without menus or panels. To advance the pages automatically in a 
presentation, select Flip Pages Every and specify the number of sec-
onds between page turns.
Page Transitions. If you used the Page Transitions panel to specify 
transitions, choose the From Document option to use those settings, 
or override them by selecting one page transition for all pages.
Create Tagged PDF. During export, InDesign can tag text elements 
based on a subset of the Acrobat tags that InDesign supports. This 
includes recognition of paragraphs, basic text formatting, lists, and 
tables. If you want more control over the tags, use the Tags panel to 
apply tags before you export. See “XML” in Chapter 7, “Importing 
and Exporting.”
Figure 13-17
Interactive PDF  
Export Options

 13.  u 743
Use Structure for Tab Order. If you used the Articles panel to add 
and arrange form fields and buttons, select this option. If you didn’t 
use the Articles panel, you can use the Set Tab Order dialog box.
Forms and Media. Select Include All to allow movies, sounds, and 
buttons to be interactive in the exported PDF. Select Appearance 
Only to include the normal state of buttons and the video posters 
without interactivity.
Compression, JPEG Quality, and Resolution. To keep file size down, 
images are compressed. You can control the trade-off between qual-
ity and file size in these three pop-up menus.
SWF Export
We’ve been babbling on for the past 20 pages about creating inter-
active SWF files; it’s time we get down to actually making one. To 
export a document in the SWF format, choose Export from the File 
menu, and choose Flash Player (SWF) from the pop-up menu. After 
clicking Save, you’ll see the Export SWF dialog box (see Figure 13-18). 
Most of the features in this dialog box are self-explanatory: For 
example, you can choose a size (in pixels, or by a percentage of the 
current document size). Remember that one pixel equals one point. 
You can choose which pages to export, and if your document is set up 
for facing pages, you can choose whether or not to treat each spread 
as a single page. 
We can never remember how to write the HTML for embed-
ding a SWF file into a Web page. Fortunately, the Generate HTML 
checkbox does all that for us. And, if you turn that checkbox on, you 
can also turn on the View SWF after Exporting checkbox to open it 
(the HTML with the embedded SWF) in your default Web browser. 
There are several other features of this dialog box that require a tad 
more explanation.
Interactivity and Media. Have you made buttons, hyperlinks, and 
page transitions in your document? If so, you need to turn on these 
checkboxes to make them live in the SWF. If you turn on the fourth 
checkbox, Include Interactive Page Curl, people viewing your SWF 
will be able to “turn the page” by dragging a corner (as in a book). 
This effect might have worn out its welcome. Or, as my teenage niece 
might say, “That interactive page curl thingie is, like, so 2007.”

744     6
Rasterize Pages (Advanced tab). You can turn all vector objects 
(including text) into a bitmap by turning on the Rasterize Pages 
checkbox. That removes interactive elements and tends to make a 
large SWF file. It’s very rare you’d want to do this.
Flatten Transparency (Advanced tab). This option removes live 
transparency from the SWF and preserves the transparency appear-
ance. But if you select this option, all interactivity is removed from 
the SWF file.
Text (Advanced tab). InDesign and Flash compose text differently, so 
if you choose Flash Classic Text in the Text pop-up menu, your text 
may appear different in the final SWF. Nevertheless, in most cases, 
this is the option you want, as it keeps file size down and makes the 
text visible to search engines. You can also choose to convert text to 
vector paths (outlines) or to bitmaps (pixels), which maintains the 
look and feel, but at significant cost.
Compression and Quality (Advanced tab). To keep file size down, 
bitmapped images are usually compressed using JPEG and complex 
vector curves are sometimes simplified in the SWF. You can control 
the quality of these algorithms in the final three pop-up menus.
Figure 13-18
SWF Export Options 
Note that when creating a 
document for SWF export 
(or for an interactive PDF), 
you get a better onscreen 
view of transparency and 
color effects if you first 
choose Document RGB from 
the Transparency Blend 
Space submenu, under the 
Edit menu.

 13.  u 745
FLA Export
As we said at the start of the chapter, if you really want cool SWF 
files, you’re going to need Adobe Flash CS6 Professional. But you can 
still use your InDesign layouts—just export them to the Flash format, 
FLA (which was called XFL in CS4). When you do this, you’ll see the 
Export Flash CS6 Professional (FLA) dialog box.
Most of the features are the same as the options for creating SWF 
files. Flatten Transparency requires explanation, though. Flash does 
not share the same transparency engine with InDesign, so transpar-
ent objects may look very different after you open the FLA in Flash. If 
the look of the object is more important than your ability to animate 
it in Flash, you can turn on the Flatten Transparency checkbox.
Text conversion is similar to SWF export, but there is another 
option, Flash TLF Text, that maintains links between text frames. If 
this option is turned on, you can select Insert Dictionary Hyphen-
ation Points to allow hyphenation.
Whoever edits the FLA file in Flash Pro will be happy that, unlike 
in CS4’s XFL output, buttons, page transitions, hyperlinks, and ani-
mation transfer to Flash Pro. Only the appearance of movies and 
sounds are passed on in the FLA file, but the media files are pack-
aged in a resource folder, making it easy for the Flash developer to 
hook them back up.
EPUB Export
For years, David has been saying that eBooks will be the most impor-
tant technology. Thanks to Kindles, Nooks, and iPads, not to men-
tion the Internet, David’s forecasting is proving accurate. InDesign 
uses the EPUB file format, which is used by Apple iBooks, Sony 
Reader, Barnes & Noble Nook, and many other readers. It’s also easy 
to convert EPUB files to other formats such as the Kindle MOBI. For 
more information about the EPUB file format, visit www.idpf.org.
With InDesign CS5 and earlier, the best way to export an eBook 
from an existing publication was to re-create a simplified version of 
the document. Starting with InDesign CS5.5, that was no longer the 
case. You can keep your elaborate page layout intact and determine 
how your document is exported (see Figure 13-19).
Because of the way eBooks reflow on different devices, it makes 
sense for some content to be excluded during export. Master page 
items, automatic page numbers, page breaks, and shapes created 

746     6
with drawing tools are removed by default, along with some text for-
matting. The cool thing is that you can control what’s included or 
excluded, how page items are ordered, and how to control format-
ting—all while keeping your complex formatting intact.
Let’s cover features that help with EPUB setup.
You can use three methods to control the order of items on an 
exported page: page layout, XML structure, or the Articles panel. 
Relying on page order is fine if you’re creating a simple document 
specifically for an eBook and you keep all the objects in one column. 
To determine order, InDesign scans pages left to right and then top 
to bottom. If your layout has side-by-side text frames, look out.
The Articles panel is an easy way to determine the order of page 
items in your eBook or HTML file without changing the formatting. 
It’s also a way to determine which page items should be excluded 
from the exported file.
1. Choose Window > Articles to open the Articles panel (see 
Figure 13-20).
2. Select an object, and then click the plus icon at the bottom of the 
Articles panel. Specify the article name and click OK.
3. To add all page items in the document to the Articles panel, 
Command/Ctrl-click the plus icon.
Articles Panel
Figure 13-19
Creating an eBook
Source InDesign 
document
Exported EPUB

 13.  u 747
Each article consists of one or more “elements.” You can add all 
the desired page items to one article, or you can create multiple arti-
cles. Drag the elements to put them in the right order. If an image is 
anchored to a text frame, you don’t need to add it separately to an 
article; it’s already included as part of the text.
You can hide objects only on an article level, not an element level. 
So if you want to exclude an object from a eBook, create a new article 
for it (or add it to an article with other excluded objects).
If you use the Articles panel to determine flow, remember to 
include all the content. After you add your text and images to the 
Articles panel and export to EPUB, it’s common to go back and edit 
your layout. Perhaps you’ll add a table of contents or a new image. If 
you don’t include that new content in an article, either by anchoring 
it to an existing text frame or by adding it to the Articles panel, the 
new object doesn’t appear in the EPUB.
When preparing content for EPUB or HTML export, use the Object 
Export Options dialog box to specify individual conversion settings 
for each object. You can also do little tricks such as rasterizing vector 
shapes so that they’re included in the EPUB and HTML files.
When you export to EPUB or HTML, you can specify global 
appearance settings for all images in the file. Use Object Export Set-
tings if you want to use different settings for a specific object, or if 
you want to rasterize a group or shape so that it’s exported properly.
Choose Object Export Options from the Object menu, and then 
click the EPUB and HTML tab (see Figure 13-21). Select an object 
(image or text frame) or group, and apply settings to determine the 
object’s appearance in the exported HTML or EPUB file.
Note that the Object Export Options is a “modeless” dialog box, 
kind of like a panel. Any change you make is immediately applied to 
the selected object. That way, you can select different objects one by 
one and continue to apply settings without exiting the dialog box. Of 
course, there’s no Cancel button; use Undo instead.
We’ll cover these settings when we discuss the various page items.
Object Export Options
Figure 13-20
Articles Panel
Use the Articles panel to 
determine the order of 
page items.

748     6
To better control text formatting in EPUB and HTML, use the Export 
Tagging section in the Paragraph Styles and Character Styles panels. 
Define how text with InDesign styles should be marked up in either 
the HTML/EPUB (or in the tagged PDF). The markup is displayed as 
a simple drop list that contains the most commonly tags used such as 
<h1> through <h6> and <p>.
In previous releases, InDesign exported all block level text to 
a <p> tag and relied on CSS for the visual presentation. However, 
accessibility readers could not interpret text as headings, and read-
ers with no support for CSS presented all text as generic paragraphs.
Open the Paragraph Styles panel, and then click Export Tagging. 
Click EPUB/HTML, and then map the style to a known tag, and 
specify a class (see Figure 13-22). If you want to associate another 
tag not listed in the UI, such as <address>, type the name in the Tag 
field (without angle brackets) and specify a class. Note that InDesign 
doesn’t check whether the custom tag is supported.
Mapping Styles
Figure 13-21
Object Export Options
Rasterize vector shapes so 
that they can be included. 
It can also keeps a group of 
objects together.
Control formatting of 
objects.
Figure 13-22
Style Mapping
Map the style to a tag.
Select this option to make 
this one of the styles that 
starts a new page in the 
EPUB.

 13.  u 749
Each existing tag can includes “class” properties associated with 
it. Class names are used in EPUB and HTML as a common way to 
differentiate slight variations in styling; for example, <p class = “first-
Paragraph”> may have rules associated with it with one set of spac-
ing and indentation parameters, and <p class = “bodycopy”> may 
have another set of rules.
To map all styles, choose Edit All Export Tags from the Para-
graph Styles or Character Styles panel menu, and then map the styles.
If tag mapping is specified in both and the XML structure view, 
the styles settings are honored. If styles are mapped to Automatic, 
the XML structure settings are honored.
Let’s go over what happens to different page items when the EPUB 
is created and how you can improve the appearance. Formatting 
attributes are included in a separate Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) file, 
which you or someone else can edit.
Images and captions. Anchor graphics and other design elements 
within the main body of text so that they travel with the text when 
it reflows. The easiest way to anchor an image is to drag the blue box 
in the image to the right location (see Figure 13-23). If an image is 
not anchored to text, it appears before or after the entire text thread.
EPUB Page Items
The image is anchored at 
the end of this paragraph...
...in the EPUB, the image 
appears after the paragraph 
where it’s anchored.
Figure 13-23
Anchored Objects

750     6
If your images have captions, do not group the caption with the 
image and anchor the group. Instead, anchor both to the same place, 
the image followed by the caption.
Inline and anchored text frame attributes are translated to the 
CSS, including size, border style and width, fill color, padding (inset 
on text frame), and margin (on text wrap).
Shapes and drawn objects. By default, shapes you create with 
the Pen tool, Rectangle tool, and so forth are not included in the 
eBook because they’re vectors. But there’s an easy fix. Group the 
shapes, select the group, and then select Object Export Items from 
the Layout menu. In the EPUB and HTML section, select Custom 
Rasterization (see Figure 13-24). The object (or grouped object) can 
then be included in the EPUB.
Note that ungrouping a group removes the object export settings. 
If you do this, you’ll need to apply the object export settings again, 
and you may need to remove the old element from the article and add 
it again. We like to use the Layers panel to add and remove objects 
in groups.
Cover Page and Title Page. You won’t see any mention of “Title Page” 
in InDesign, but it’s important to make a distinction. The cover page 
appears in the reader library. The title page —which may be the same 
as the cover page—is the first page of the eBook. When you export 
to EPUB and view it in iBooks, for example, the cover appears in the 
bookshelf, and the title page is the first page that appears when you 
open the book the first time.
When you export, you can choose to include no cover, use the 
first page of the document as a rasterized cover, or specify an image. 
Some of us prefer using an image so that we have the option of using 
a different title page. When you specify an image, a new XHTML 
document is created.
If your cover includes several objects, remember to group them 
and apply the “Custom Rasterization” setting in the Object Export 
Options dialog box. If you don’t group the objects, each object will 
be separated and stacked on top of each other.
Footnotes. During export, you can make the footnote text appear 
after the paragraph in which the footnote reference number appears. 
Otherwise, the footnote appears at the end of the text thread.
Page breaks. Remember, the Page Break attribute in InDesign has 
no effect in an eBook. The most versatile way to control page breaks 

 13.  u 751
Select the shape or 
group of objects...
Select the Custom 
Rasterization option 
so that the object can 
appear in the EPUB.
Figure 13-24
Rasterize Objects
is specify a paragraph styles option during export. You can use the 
Split Document option to break pages using either an individual 
style or any paragraph style with the Split Document option selected.
If you export a book to EPUB, each document starts at a new page. 
To export all the chapters into one EPUB file, choose “Export Book 
to EPUB” from the Book panel menu.
Large or full-page images. Do you want an image to stand by itself 
on a page? Simple. Select the image (or group of objects), and choose 
“Before and After Image” from the Insert Page Break pop-up menu in 
the Object Export Options dialog box.
If possible, check the appearance of your full-page image on sev-
eral eBook readers. The most common eBook readers have 6" diago-
nal screen with 3:4 aspect ratios.
Navigation/Table of contents. If you generate a table of contents, it’s 
now included in the EPUB, and each entry is a hyperlink. However, 
eBook readers offer separate navigation controls, so a table of con-
tents may be redundant. To determine what appears in the eBook 
navigation, you don’t need to generate a table of contents. Just create 
a TOC style. Choose Table of Contents Styles from the Layout menu, 
and add the styles (such as Head1) you want to include. Then select 
that TOC style when you export the EPUB file, and your heading text 
appears in the eBook navigation.

752     6
In some cases, the large image at the start of a chapter includes an 
image that represents text. To make the appropriate text appear in 
the eBook navigation, create an invisible text frame (stroke and fill 
set to none, text set to [Paper]).
Line breaks. Some designers press Shift+Enter near the end of the 
line to improve the appearance of the text composition. By default, 
these forced line breaks will start a new paragraph in eBooks, but 
you can select Remove Forced Line Breaks during export. Even 
though this option is available, it’s much better to use Discretion-
ary Line Breaks instead of Forced Line Breaks when adjusting text 
composition.
Audio and video tags. Audio files and h.264 video files you place are 
enclosed in HTML5 <audio> and <video> tags. Anchor the placed 
media file to the text to determine its location. Note that not all 
eBook readers, including Digital Editions, support HTML5 <audio> 
and <video> tags. If you have an iPhone or iPad, you can view movies 
and sounds in eBooks you add to your iBooks app.
Bulleted and numbered lists. Lists formatted using the InDesign 
auto-bullet and auto-number features are represented in the EPUB 
or HTML as nested ordered <ol> and unordered lists <ul>. Custom 
bullet and numbering marker strings are exported.
Figure 13-25
EPUB Export Options 
General
Select the EPUB format.
Select this option if you 
added objects to the Articles 
panel.

 13.  u 753
Tables. Table colors, headers and footers, and attributes for column 
width and row minimum height are exported to EPUB and HTML. 
You can also convert table cell styles to CSS.
Metadata. Use the File Info dialog box to display the author’s name 
and keywords. Choose File Info from the File menu, and type the 
author’s name in the Author field. If you want people to be able to 
find your eBook, add keywords as well.
The publish date value is automatically included in the EPUB 
when you export. If you need to edit the publish date, use a third-
party tool such as Calibre, or convert the .epub file to .zip and edit 
the files you unzip.
To preview your EPUB file, you’ll need the Digital Editions soft-
ware, which you can download free at www.adobe.com/products/
digitaleditions. Be aware that using Digital Editions to preview the 
EPUB offers only a rough representation of the eBook. Once you 
identify all the glaring issues, you’ll want to preview your EPUB on 
your target eBook reader, such as iBooks.
After you set up your document, you’re ready to export the .epub 
file. Open the InDesign document you set up and choose Export 
from the File menu. Choose EPUB as the type of format you want, 
and then give the .epub file a name and tell InDesign where to save it. 
You’ll see the EPUB Export Options dialog box. (If you’re exporting 
documents in a book, choose Export Book to EPUB from the books 
panel menu.)
General pane. In the General pane of the EPUB Export Options 
dialog box (see Figure 13-25), choose the EPUB format. Use EPUB 
2.0.1 to create an EPUB that works with any eBook reader. Choose 
EPUB 3.0 to create an eBook for the new EPUB standard approved 
in 2011. This format supports new features such as audio and video. 
The most popular eBook readers don’t support EPUB 3.0 when this 
book was written, but it’s only a matter of time. You can also choose 
EPUB 3.0 with Layout, which in the future can support alternate 
and adaptive layouts, multiple columns, and text wrap. We would 
say more about this option, but the nanotranscapacitor in our time 
travel machine is leaking fluxoid plasma.
The General pane lets you control cover options and the order 
of page items, which we covered earlier. Click the link icon if you 
want to change margins individually. You can also control how para-
graphs with automatic bullets or numbering should be handled. In 
Creating the EPUB File

754     6
general, you should choose Map to Ordered List for numbered lists 
and Map to Unordered List for bulleted paragraphs; however, if you 
want, you could force InDesign to convert either one to text (so the 
bullet or number character becomes a character in the text).
Image pane. In the Image pane, select Preserve Appearance from 
Layout to inherit image object attributes such as cropping, rotating, 
and scaling. Turn off this option only if you have a clear reason for 
doing so. We know of one book publisher who turns this option off 
to make sure that the same image used at the beginning of each sec-
tion isn’t duplicated in the EPUB.
Specify a resolution (in points per inch) in 72 (the only option 
in previous releases), 96 (Windows default), 150 (average of eBook 
devices), and 300 (print and “Retina Display”) quality. For Image 
Size, you can choose “Relative to Page” to size the image relative to 
the InDesign page width. If an image takes up half the InDesign page, 
it will be resized to half the width of the page in the eBook reader.
With the Image pane, you can also determine the alignment 
and spacing of images. The settings are straightforward. An impor-
tant point is that you can apply global settings in the EPUB Export 
Options dialog box and specific settings for each object in the Object 
Export Options dialog box. Or, you can override object settings by 
selecting Ignore Object Export Settings.
For Image Conversion, you can choose GIF, JPG, or PNG. PNG 
images are not compressed. Select PNG for lossless images or for 
images that include transparency but with better quality than GIF.
Advanced pane. In the Advanced pane, choose an option for Split 
Document to determine where page breaks in your eBook occur. We 
like to choose the Based on Paragraph Style Export Tags setting so 
that a page break occurs with any style in which the Split Document 
option is selected in the Export Tags section.
Select Include Document Metadata to export the metadata entered 
in the File Information dialog box. If you are exporting from a book 
file, make sure that the style source includes the metadata. Publisher 
information isn’t included in the File Information dialog box, but 
eBook creators wanted it, so you can specify publishing information 
in the Publisher field. You can also type a specific unique identifier, 
such as the ISBN, if you don’t want it to be generated automatically.
Under CSS Options, if you turn on Include Style Definitions, 
InDesign attempts to match the attributes of the InDesign text for-
matting with CSS equivalents. If you turn off this option, the EPUB 
file includes empty declarations. You can edit these declarations 

 13.  u 755
in Dreamweaver or an HTML editor. If you select Preserve Local 
Overrides, local formatting such as italic or bold is included. Select 
Include Embeddable Fonts to include all fonts that have embedding 
information.
Specify any additional CSS file that includes style definitions you 
want to apply to the EPUB file. In InDesign CS6, the .css file that 
gets created is named after the document (such as mybook.css), not 
template.css.
With an EPUB 3.0 format, you can specify Javascript options to 
enable scripted interactivity in your EPUB. You’ll want to pay atten-
tion to which scripting options your target eBook readers allow.
In some cases, exporting your .epub file is all you need. But if you 
want to convert the EPUB file to a different format or break open 
the .epub file and edit the CSS file, for example, you’ll want to make 
things easy on yourself. Here are a few resources.
Calibre. The Calibre conversion program is great for converting 
EPUB files to formats such as MOBI, which is used by Amazon 
Kindle. Calibre runs on Windows, Mac, or Linux and is available for 
download at http://calibre-ebook.com/download.
Adobe resources. Adobe provides white papers about creating EPUB 
files for the iBookstore or Amazon Kindle as well as links to useful 
tools for validating EPUB files:
http://www.adobe.com/devnet/digitalpublishing.html
EPUB Secrets resources. Saving the best for last, one of David’s 
InDesign Secrets spin-off sites has a fantastic set of links to resources:
http://epubsecrets.com/resources
Exporting HTML
Many of the same new features that make exporting eBooks so pain-
less have dramatically improved HTML export. Despite all the great 
new options, the HTML workflow still has a few limitations. For one 
thing, InDesign still cannot import HTML, so this is still a one-way 
road.
Despite all the great new changes, don’t plan on using InDesign to 
build anything other than simple Web pages. For good Web design, 
you’ll want to export content (text and images) in a form that some-
one who knows about HTML and Web authoring can clean up.
EPUB Resources

756     6
Three features we just covered also improve HTML export.
▶Articles panel. Instead of basing the order of HTML objects on 
the page layout (left to right, top to bottom) or the more compli-
cated XML structure pane, use the Articles panel to determine 
the order of objects. It’s also useful for excluding objects from 
HTML export.
▶Object Export Settings dialog box. You can change spacing 
and alignment settings for all objects on export. If you want 
any individual object to have different settings, use the Object 
Export Settings dialog box. This dialog box is also useful for 
converting a group of objects into a single object on export and 
for rasterizing paths or frames so that they can be exported.
▶Mapping styles. Use the Export Tagging section in the Char-
acter Style Options or Paragraph Style Options dialog boxes to 
map a style to an HTML tag. For example, you can map a Bold 
character style to the <Strong> HTML tag. Or, map all the styles 
in one fell swoop by choosing Edit All Export Tags from a styles 
panel menu.
In addition, a couple of features we’re going to cover in the Digital 
Publishing Suite section improve HTML export.
▶Insert HTML. You can choose Insert HTML from the Object 
menu to paste HTML code to create an HTML snippet—great 
for Google Maps or Twitter feeds. This HTML object is included 
when you export the HTML file.
▶Placed Adobe Edge files. When you place an OAM file exported 
from Adobe Edge, the animated object is included when you 
export the HTML file.
Figure 13-26
HTML Export Options 
General Pane
To export a single story, 
or a group of images 
and stories on a spread, 
select them first, then 
choose Selection here.

 13.  u 757
What gets exported. The list of what gets exported is growing. 
InDesign exports all stories, placed and embedded images, SWF 
movie files, footnotes, text variables (as text), auto bullets and auto 
numbers, internal cross-references, and hyperlinks that jump to 
text or web pages. Tables are also exported with limited formatting. 
Tables are assigned unique IDs, so they can be referenced as Spry 
data sets in Dreamweaver. Placed audio and h.264 video files are 
enclosed in HTML5 <audio> and <video> tags.
What doesn’t get exported. Objects you draw (such as lines and poly-
gons), text converted to outlines, and pasted objects are not exported 
unless you anchor the objects to text or use the rasterization trick 
with the Object Export Options dialog box. Also not exported are 
hyperlinks (except for links to web pages and text anchors within the 
same document), XML tags, books, bookmarks, SING glyphlets (for 
you Japanese users), page transitions, index markers, objects on the 
pasteboard that aren’t selected and don’t touch the page, or master 
page items (unless they’re overridden or selected before export).
To export a document to HTML, choose Export from the File menu, 
and then choose HTML for the format type. Choose a file name and 
location and then click Save.
Let’s go over some of the new options in the HTML Export dialog 
box, most of which we already covered in the EPUB section.
Exporting HTML
Figure 13-27
HTML Export Options  
Image Pane
Turn on this checkbox to 
ensure your rotation and 
scaling is applied to the 
converted images.

758     6
General pane. In the General pane of the HTML Export Options 
dialog box (see Figure 13-26), choose whether you want to export the 
entire document or only the currently-selected objects. If you choose 
Selection and you have a text frame selected, InDesign exports the 
entire story, even if part of the story is overset or if the story threads 
across multiple pages.
In the General panel, you can use three methods to control the 
order of items on an exported page: page layout, XML structure, or 
the Articles panel. If you choose Page Layout, InDesign scans pages 
left to right and then top to bottom. You can also use the XML struc-
ture as defined in the Structure view or the order you’ve defined in 
the Articles Panel.
The General pane also lets you control how paragraphs with 
automatic bullets or numbering should be handled. In general, you 
should choose Map to Ordered List for numbered lists and Map to 
Unordered List for bullet paragraphs; however, if you want, you could 
force InDesign to convert either one to text (so the bullet or number 
character becomes a character in the text). You can also choose to 
convert numbered paragraphs using Map to Static Ordered List, 
which still applies the <ol> tag, but adds a “value” attribute to each 
paragraph.
Images pane. In the Image pane (see Figure 13-27), use the Copy 
Images pop-up menu in the Image pane to choose what to do with 
images in your document or selection. If you choose Original, 
InDesign copies the original linked files into an “images” folder in 
the same location as the HTML file—similar to what happens when 
Figure 13-28
HTML Export Options  
Advanced Pane
Select CSS options to 
determine layout format-
ting in the HTML file.

 13.  u 759
you Package for output. (Actually, the folder is given a name con-
structed of the HTML file plus “-web-images”.)
If you choose Optimized, InDesign creates a new version of the 
image. Unfortunately, InDesign does not have the Save for Web 
dialog box (as in Photoshop and Illustrator), so you have very limited 
options for the conversion. Turn on the “Preserve Appearance from 
Layout” checkbox to apply image cropping, scaling, rotation. How-
ever, in general, you’ll get a much better conversion to GIF or JPEG 
if you use a program such as Photoshop, Fireworks, or Illustrator to 
optimize these images.
The third option, Link to Server Path, won’t copy or convert your 
images at all, or even create a folder for them. Instead, it lets you 
specify a folder name in which the final images will be placed. For 
example, if you choose this and then type “images/” into the Path on 
Server field, InDesign assumes you are converting the images your-
self and putting them in a folder called “images” in the same direc-
tory as the HTML file. Alternately, you can type a specific URL here, 
such as “http://mydomain.com/files/images/”.
We already covered the resolution, alignment, and image conver-
sion settings in the EPUB section.
Advanced pane. In the Advanced pane, choose how you would like 
the CSS tags to appear in your document:
Embedded CSS. When exporting to XHTML, you can create a 
list of CSS styles that appears in the header of the HTML file 
with declarations, or attributes. If you turn on Include Style 
Definitions, InDesign attempts to match the attributes of the 
InDesign text formatting with CSS equivalents. If you turn 
off this option, the HTML file includes empty declarations. 
You can edit these declarations in Dreamweaver. If you select 
Preserve Local Overrides, local formatting such as italic or 
bold is included.
No CSS. If you just want your text (and optionally, graphics) 
without any tags, choose No CSS. You still get basic tags, 
such as “<div>” and “<p>”, so it’s easy to import this neutral 
content into any Web authoring program.
External CSS. The last option, External CSS, lets you set up a 
link to an external CSS. For example, you might type “../
styles/mycss.css” here. Most newspapers or magazines will 
choose this option because they’ll have a CSS file already 
created for their Web site. The only problem then is that the 

760     6
paragraph and character styles in the InDesign file usually 
don’t match the external file’s CSS style names properly, so 
you may have to do some clever search/replace in the final file 
in order to get the style names right.
You can specify additional CSS files to control HTML formatting. 
The final feature in the Advanced pane lets you include JavaScript 
files in the exported HTML file.
Finally, click the Export button to save the XHTML file to disk.
By the way, there is another way to get HTML out of InDesign—
a method that can actually apply text formatting such as <em> to 
italic text, and so on. However, the trick is sort of a hack and takes 
a while to explain. If you’re curious, you can read Anne-Marie Con-
cepción’s description here: tinyurl.com/yr5fuo (the actual page is at 
the InDesign Secrets website).
David often also resorts to simply copying and pasting text from 
InDesign into an HTML editor, even though he loses text formatting 
as he does so. You could also export an RTF file from InDesign, open 
it in Microsoft Word, export that as HTML, and then open that file 
in a Web authoring tool.
Digital Publishing Suite
With the Digital Publishing Suite (DPS) tools, you can create rich, 
interactive content for display on mobile devices such as the Apple 
iPad or iPhone, Samsung Galaxy Tab, and Kindle Fire.
DPS—and the digital publishing industry—is a work in progress. 
You can expect a new release of DPS tools every 6–8 weeks. Keep in 
mind that some things we write in this book could be misleading by 
the end of 2012.
Before you jump in and start using the new tools, learn what you 
can and cannot do. Anyone with InDesign CS6 can create folios of 
any size, preview it on a mobile device or desktop, and share those 
folios with any number of individuals. However, if you want to create 
your own viewer app such as a magazine title or book and submit it to 
the Apple Store or to Google Play, you need more than just InDesign. 
You either need to subscribe to the Digital Publishing Suite or obtain 
a Single Edition licence through either a one-time purchase or sub-
scription to the Adobe Creative Cloud.
Other Techniques

 13.  u 761
Figure 13-29
InDesign Source  
Layouts
The source document 
has multiple layouts 
that target different 
orientations and devices.
iPad
iPhone
When you install InDesign CS6, you can choose Folio Overlays or 
Folio Builder from the Window menu. Before you can use these 
panels, however, you need to run an updater. To do so, choose 
Updates from the Help menu, and then update the DPS Desktop 
Tools. Once you update these tools, the two panels will work, and 
folio preview options will appear on the File menu.
The final setup step is to verify an Adobe ID to work with DPS. 
Go to http://digitalpublishing.acrobat.com and sign in using the email 
account you want to use. To verify the Adobe ID, open an email mes-
sage Adobe sends you and click the verification link. You’ll use this 
Adobe ID to upload folios to the cloud and download them to devices.
Getting Set Up

762     6
A folio is a collection of articles, such as an issue of a magazine. If 
you’re going to create a single-issue viewer app to add to the the Apple 
Store, the folio includes all the content for your app. If you’re creating 
a multi-issue app or using the standard Adobe Content Viewer to 
preview content, all the folios you create appear in the library.
The most common way to create articles is to use InDesign for the 
source documents. You can also create articles based on HTML. At 
some point after this book was written, it will likely be possible to use 
InDesign source files to create liquid HTML articles that flow onto 
any device based on liquid page rules. When that happens, you’ll 
want to pay attention to the differences between “liquid” and “static” 
articles. For example, liquid articles will likely support native anima-
tions, but won’t support some of the DPS overlays. But we’re getting 
ahead of ourselves.
With InDesign CS6, create a source document for each article. When 
you create the document, choose Digital Publishing from the Intent 
pop-up menu, and specify the target device. In the source document, 
create alternate layouts for each target device. You can also create the 
different layouts in different documents.
Use the Folio Builder panel to create a folio. Each folio can 
include multiple articles. Each article can include two layouts, one 
horizontal and one vertical for when the user rotates the device (see 
Figure 13-29). These layouts can come from alternate layouts within 
the same document or from different documents. Note that you can’t 
mix and match articles with different orientations in a folio. 
Choose Folio Builder from the Window menu. Click Sign In, and 
then sign in using a verified Adobe ID. Once you sign in, click New to 
create a folio. Specify the size of your target device, such as 2048x1536 
for the retina display iPad or 1024x600 for the Amazon Fire.
With the folio open in the Folio Builder, click New to create an 
article. Specify a name for the article. Use the real article name such 
as “Biking in Spain,” not “spain_cycling_h.”
After you create the folio, use the Add button to create the article 
with alternate layouts (see Figure 13-30). While the Add button is 
fine for creating articles for testing, the Import command is more 
useful for creating large folios.
Any article you create is uploaded to the cloud—an acrobat.com 
server. It’s ready to be downloaded from the cloud to the Adobe Con-
tent Viewer on the mobile device. Before you preview the folio on the 
device, it’s a good idea to edit the properties of both the folios and the 
articles.
DPS Basics
Create Folios
Metadata Properties

 13.  u 763
Figure 13-30
Folio Builder Panel
This article is created from 
two alternate layouts in 
the same document.
Folio view
Article view
Layout view
In the Folio Builder panel, select the folio, and the choose Proper-
ties from the panel menu. Specify a folio name and cover images in 
the same size as the target device. This content appears in the viewer 
library.
Drill down to the next level and specify properties for each article. 
Select the article and choose Properties from the panel menu. This 
metadata, such as the author and article title, appears in the viewer.
Don’t expect all the interactivity features designed for SWF and PDF 
to work in your folios. Some features, such as animations, bookmarks, 
page transitions, and cross-references, don’t work in DPS articles. 
Other features, such as buttons, video and audio, are supported with 
limitations. And yet other features such as image sequences and pan-
oramas are available only for DPS, not interactive PDF or SWF.
An overlay is called an overlay because it sits on top of all the 
non-interactive content on a page. This non-interactive content gets 
converted to a single image file. With the Folio Overlays panel, you 
create overlays and change overlay settings.
Interactive Overlays

764     6
Interactive content is how a folio size can get bloated, which is a 
concern. You don’t want your customers to download 500 MB folios 
if you can avoid it. Videos are the primary culprit. Compress videos 
as much as possible. Also, when you create assets for overlays such 
as image sequences and image pans, use the Save for Web & Devices 
command in Photoshop to save the images in the target dimension 
(such as 400x300 pixels) in 72 ppi.
Want to know a great way to learn about overlays? Download 
Bob’s free “DPS Tips” app onto your mobile device. We guarantee 
complete satisfaction or a full refund for the cost of the app.
There are two main ways to preview: on the desktop and on your 
device. Let’s go over each method. 
To preview the current layout, choose Folio Preview from the File 
menu. If your document includes multiple layouts, each layout is ren-
dered, and you can preview any layout (see Figure 13-31). The desk-
top version of the Adobe Content Viewer opens the folio you added. 
You can test your interactive items.
While previewing on the desktop is a good way to make sure 
everything is working as planned, previewing on the target device 
is important. Open the Adobe Content Viewer on your device, and 
then sign in using the same Adobe ID you used to sign in to the Folio 
Builder. Your folio appears in the library, where you can download it.
Previewing Content
Figure 13-31
Folio Preview
Choose the target preview.

 13.  u 765
Figure 13-32
Insert HTML
Pasting Twitter widget
code creates an instant
Web Content overlay that
displays a Twitter feed.
Folio renditions are variations of an issue that appear on different 
devices. Let’s say you’re creating the July issue of a magazine. If 
you set up folio renditions with 480x320, 960x640, 1024x768, and 
2048x1536 dimensions, the viewer on the iPhone or iPad makes only 
one of the renditions available for download. The rest are ignored.
If you’re creating folios for an Apple device, you need to use the 
precise aspect ratio—either 4:3 for the iPad or 3:2 for the iPhone—or 
the folio won’t appear on the device. With folios for Apple devices, 
articles can be scaled up or down. We prefer creating 1024x768 
articles and adding them to 2048x1536 folios. The content scales up 
nicely, so we don’t have to deal with different source files for the dif-
ferent iPad models.
Android viewers display any folio. If the folio is larger or smaller 
than the device, the folio is scaled down and black bars are added as 
needed.
There is also a tricky issue with Android devices such as the 
Motorola Xoom that use the Honeycomb OS. The 48-pixel nav bar 
needs to be factored into your folio size. If you create a 1280x800 
folio, the viewer on the Xoom will cause the content to scale. That’s 
why a 1232x752 size option appears when you create a folio—so you 
can avoid scaling content, which hurts performance.
If you choose Insert HTML from the Object menu, you can paste 
HTML code, such as embed codes for YouTube videos, Google Maps, 
or Twitter widgets. Click OK, and the HTML snippet appears in your 
layout. For Figure 13-32, we went to the Twitter site and specified 
settings to create a custom Twitter widget, which requires no knowl-
edge of HTML or Javascript. Then we copied and pasted the link in 
Renditions for   
Different Devices
Insert HTML

766     6
the Edit HTML dialog box. To preview the HTML, export the layout 
to HTML or choose Folio Preview from the File menu.
Need to edit the HTML code? Right-click the HTML object and 
choose Edit HTML.
One drawback to this feature is the fact that it’s difficult to create a 
poster image for the HTML object. At least we can’t figure out how to 
do it. When we need a poster, we paste our copied code into Dream-
weaver, export the HTML file, and create a Web Content overlay that 
points to the local HTML file. That’s how we roll.
Need to create an elaborate animation for your DPS article? With 
Adobe Edge, you can create HTML animations as a DPS Web Con-
tent overlay or to include in an  exported HTML file.
When you export in Adobe Edge, you can change the publish set-
tings to create HTML5 content specifically for InDesign and DPS. 
When you do this, an OAM file is created. If you choose Place from 
the File menu, you can place this OAM file in InDesign. The design 
is placed and InDesign fetches a poster image. Select the content and 
edit the settings in the Folio Overlays panel.
We didn’t come close to covering the entire DPS workflow. To learn 
more, here are some resources.
To see examples of viewer apps created with DPS tools, go to:
http://blogs.adobe.com/digitalpublishinggallery
To ask questions about DPS, go to the forum: 
http://forums.adobe.com/community/dps
Have we mentioned you can download the Bob’s “DPS Tips” app 
on your mobile device at the low, low price of free?
Web Publishing
The day has arrived. InDesign can create rich media PDF, SWF, 
HTML, EPUB, and DPS files. Most of us are still making money with 
print projects (or trying to, anyway), and some designers have made 
more money with digital publications than they ever made with 
print. Oh, and then there’s the fact that creating digital publications 
is a blast.
Place Adobe Edge Files
DPS Resources

index 767
A
* (asterisks), 4
@ (at signs), 534
< > (angle brackets), 238, 247, 748
‘ (apostrophes), 39–40, 197, 200
! (exclamation marks), 485
“ (left double quotes), 
39–40, 50, 197
‘ (left single quotes), 39–40, 50
( ) parentheses, 114, 239
+ (plus signs), 156, 160, 
315–316, 325
? (question marks), 485
“ (quotation marks). See 
quotation marks (“)
” (right double quotes), 
39–40, 50, 197
’ (right single quotes), 39–40, 50
[ ] (square brackets), 85, 238, 271
 ~ (tildes), 216
0 setline-width strokes, 357
1.1.1-style lists, 311
2-position rollovers, 723
2-sided printing, 675
3D Ribbon path text option, 457
5%-400% views, 63
A
above line frames, 434. See 
also inline frames
above line objects, 441–442
Absolute Colorimetric intent, 635
absolute page numbering, 36, 650
absolute positioning, 584
accepting changes, 210
accessibility features, 518–
519, 530–531, 748
accuracy of screen color. See 
color management
accursed files, 75
ACE CMS system, 635
Acrobat. See Adobe Acrobat; 
PDF graphics and files
actions for buttons, 719–722, 724
activated TOCs and indexes, 520
active publication windows, 8
ActiveWorkspace.xml file, 35
Actual Size 100% view, 63
Actual Text Source 
options, 530–531
adaptive layouts, eBook 
support, 753
Add button (dictionaries), 215
Add Objects to Visible 
State button, 729
Add Page button, 82–83, 95
Add Pages To pop-up menu, 41
Add path operation, 352, 353
Add Point tool, 17, 18, 21
Add to Autocorrect List 
dialog box, 217
Add Untagged Items 
command, 544
Added Text option, 53
AddGuides script, 124, 698
AddPoints script, 698
Adjust Dashes command, 361–362
Adjust Gaps command, 
361–362, 363
Adjust Scaling Percentage 
option, 37, 579, 580, 588
Adjust Spacing Automatically... 
option, 41
Adjust View Settings preferences 
settings, 55–56
adjusting layouts
alternate layouts, 110–114
liquid page rules, 106–110
master pages, 99–100
overview, 103–105
AdjustLayout script, 698
Adobe Acrobat
Acrobat layers, 742
compatibility of PDF files, 517
layers option, 742
PDF. See PDF graphics and files
transparency and, 374
Adobe Bridge
launching, 4
metadata from, 190, 504
Mini Bridge, 6
revealing linked files in, 490
snippets in, 532
Adobe CMS system, 635
Adobe Connect, 741
Adobe Content Viewer, 
740, 762, 764
Adobe Corporation, notes for, 444
Adobe Creative Cloud, 760
Adobe Creative Suite, 503
Adobe Digital Editions, 752–753
Adobe Dreamweaver, 755, 757, 759
Adobe Edge, 756, 765
Adobe EPUB resources, 755
Adobe IDs, 761–762
Adobe Illustrator. See 
Illustrator graphics
Adobe In-RIP trapping option, 659
Adobe InCopy, 210, 212–213, 227
Adobe InDesign 
Breakthroughs, 447
Adobe InDesign Scripting Guide 
and Tutorial, 697, 703
Adobe Media Encoder, 729
Adobe Paragraph Composer, 
278, 298, 303
Adobe PDF Preset pop-up 
menu (export styles), 516
Adobe PDF Presets dialog 
box, 528–530
Adobe PDF Print Engine, 
374, 648, 665, 678
Adobe Photoshop. See 
Photoshop graphics
Adobe RGB color model, 631, 632
Adobe Single Line Composer, 298
Advanced pane (HTML Export 
Options dialog box), 759–760
Advanced pane (Print dialog 
box), 666–668
i n D e x

768 e d de indein c6
A
Advanced Type Preferences 
dialog box, 42
After Entry page number 
option, 557
agates, 16
AI files. See Illustrator graphics
AICB setting (Illustrator), 468
AIF or AIFF files, 729
alert icon, 233, 485, 494
aliasing spot colors, 625, 626
Align Away from Spine option, 278
Align options, path text, 458, 460
Align panel, 11, 597–598
Align Stroke... options, 357–358
Align to Baseline Grid button, 287
Align To Character tab stops, 283
Align Towards Spine option, 278
aligning objects
above-line objects, 441–442
captions, 464
frame contents, 502–503
Gap tool, 20, 599–601
grids of objects, 596–597
for HTML export, 756
images in eBooks, 754
to Key objects, 597
liquid page rules and, 110
multi-state objects, 728
overview, 597–598
Smart Guides, 128–130
aligning strokes, 357–358
aligning Tabs panel, 283
aligning text
to baseline grid, 286–289
captions, 464
optical margin alignment, 
333–334
paragraph formatting, 278
path text, 458, 460
tabs and tab stops, 281–286
alignment buttons, 278
Alignment option, 502–503
AlignToPage script, 698
all caps formatting, 264–265
All Pages field, 649
All Printer’s Marks option, 655
Allow Fast Saves option 
(Word), 199
Allow Graphics and Groups 
to Resize option, 105
Allow Object-Level Display 
Settings feature, 478
Allow Pages to Shuffle 
feature, 85–86
Allow Ruler Guides to 
Move option, 105
Allow Selected Spread to 
Shuffle option, 85
Allow Split Footnotes option, 222
Alpha Channel import option, 479
alpha channels, 479, 510
alphabetizing
cross-references, 567
index entries, 562
table of contents entries, 557
Alt Text (alternative text) 
options, 530
Alternate Layout header, 79, 80, 81
alternate layouts
creating, 110–114
DPS folios, 762
eBook support, 753
in Folio Builder, 763
Liquid HTML5 pagination 
options, 114
multiple windows displaying, 8
in Pages panel, 79, 80, 81
text styles in, 332
Alternates for Selection 
command, 172
alternating fills in tables, 421–422
Alternating Pattern 
menu, 421–422
Always Subset Fonts... option, 36
Amazon Kindle, 110, 112, 
745, 755, 760–766
anchor markers, 436, 446
anchor points. See points
anchored boxes. See inline frames
Anchored Object Options 
dialog box, 442
anchored objects. See also 
inline frames
anchor markers, 436, 446
characteristics of, 434–436
creating, 442–448
drop caps, 447
eBook graphics, 747, 749
exporting to HTML, 749, 757
graphics and captions, 747, 749
groups, 750
hanging side heads, 448
locking position, 446
positioning, 444–446
Reference Point proxies, 444
removing, 441
selecting, 441
unanchoring, 441
wrapping text around, 446–447
anchors. See anchored 
objects; cross references; 
destinations (hyperlinks)
Android devices, 110, 112, 760–766
angle brackets (< >), 238, 247, 748
angles
drop shadows, 381
feathering, 386
halftone screens, 659–661
Animate pop-up menu, 734–735
animation
Adobe Edge files, 756, 765
Animation panel settings, 
734–735
AnimationEncyclopedia 
script, 698
audio and video, 729–733
buttons and, 721, 736
complex, 736–737
creating, 733–734
customizing, 736
delaying, 737
DPS issues and support, 
762, 763
exporting to Flash files, 745
fades, 735
Flash Professional, 738
hiding or showing objects, 735
importing presets, 738
interactive file format 
support, 711
looping, 737
motion presets, 734, 738
multiple objects, 736–737
order of, 737
in PDF files, 738
playing multiple effects 
at once, 737
previewing, 740–741
printing animated 
objects, 734–735
speed, 734
Timing panel, 735, 737
transparency and, 735
Animation action, 721
Animation panel, 734–735
AnimationEncyclopedia 
script, 698
ANSI encoding, 247
anti-aliasing, 54, 57, 58, 477, 512
apologies by authors, 293
apostrophes (‘), 39–40, 197, 200

index 769
B
Appearance of Black Preferences 
dialog box, 58–59
Appearance Only option, 743
Appearance pop-up menu, 224
Apple ColorSync system, 628
Apple devices. See IOS devices; 
iPads; iPhones
Apple iBooks, 745, 750, 755
Apple iTunes, 729
Apple Store, 755, 760, 762
AppleScript, 695–696, 704
Application Bar, 3, 4, 5
Application Built-In 
trapping option, 659
application defaults, 62
Application Frame option, 2
application-level 
preferences, 35–36
Apply Color button, 18, 27
Apply Gradient button, 18, 27, 368
Apply Leading to Entire 
Paragraphs option, 40, 254
Apply Master dialog box, 99
Apply Master to Pages 
command, 99
Apply None button, 18, 27
Apply Photoshop Clipping Path 
option, 478–479, 481
Apply Style to Selection 
option, 318
Apply to Content option, 
37, 579, 580
apps (Digital Publishing 
Suite), 762, 764, 766
Arabic numerals, 90, 92
arithmetic, 16
Arrange Document 
pop-up menu, 4
arranging objects. See also 
order of items
aligning objects, 597–598, 698
contents of frames, 502–503
distributing objects, 598–601
distributing table rows 
or columns, 405
EPUB and HTML export. 
See order of items
pages in spreads, 84–86
path operations, 352
arrays of objects (Grid 
Mode), 596–597
arrow keys, 46, 585
arrowheads, 360, 361
arrows on tool icons, 18
art boards, 481–482
Article view, 763
articles
animation in, 733
creating, 762–765
items in, 747
layouts in, 762
liquid HTML, 762
liquid or static, 762
primary text frames and, 101
tab order in PDF files, 743
uploading to cloud, 762
Articles panel, 746–747, 
752, 756, 758
Artifact tag, 519, 530, 544
AS files, 696
ascenders in path text, 458, 460
Ascent baseline option, 155, 438
ASCII encoding, 247
ASCII files, exporting, 514
ASE files, 611
Asian fonts, embedding, 525
aspect ratios, devices, 765
Assign Profiles dialog 
box, 636, 637
asterisks (*), 4
At End of Layout reflow 
option, 114
atomic regions, rasterizing, 683
attributes
formatting, 232–234
object find and replace, 144–146
XHTML CSS files, 759
Attributes panel, 11
AU files, 729
audio files
button actions for, 721
converting to importable 
formats, 729
embedding in PDF 
files, 520, 710
exporting interactive 
documents, 743
exporting to DPS files, 763
exporting to EPUB, 752
exporting to Flash files, 745
exporting to HTML, 757
importing and playing, 729
interactive file format 
support, 711
Media panel options, 732–733
posters, 732–733
previewing, 740–741
streaming audio, 731
authors
bewildered, 602
caption metadata, 464
metadata in DPS files, 763
metadata in eBooks, 753
auto-bulleted lists, 752. See also 
bullets and bulleted lists
Auto-Collapse Icon 
Panels option, 38
Auto-Fit option, 110, 502
Auto Justified Tiling option, 654
Auto leading, 255, 303, 438, 439
auto-numbering, 752. See 
also numbering
Auto Page Number command, 92
Auto Refresh Highlight 
option, 684
Auto-Show Hidden Panels 
option, 38
Auto-Size Text Frames option, 110
Auto-Size text options, 156–157
Autocorrect feature, 52, 
53, 184, 217–218
Autocorrect Preferences 
dialog box, 52, 53
autoflow text flow, 68, 166, 167
Autoflow text place icon, 68
automatic bullets. See bullets 
and bulleted lists
Automatic Document 
Conversion option, 548
automatic kerning, 258–260
automatic page numbering, 
92–93, 548, 549, 552
Automatic reflow option, 114
automatic text flow, 68, 166, 167
Automatic Tiling option, 654
automatic trapping 
methods, 626–627
Automatic XML tagging, 749
Automatically Adjust to Fit Marks 
and Bleeds option, 674
Automatically Use Correct 
Optical Size option, 40
Automatication.com, 484
Available document 
status icons, 549
Average Downsample option, 522
AVI files, 729, 732
B
background color. See
transparency

770 e d de indein c6
Background Tasks panel, 27
backing up workspace files, 35
backslashes, 238
backward compatibility 
of files, 532
badges in Content 
Conveyor, 496, 497
Balance Columns option, 151
Balance Ragged Lines 
option, 303–304
bandages, ancient page 
layout and, 17
Barnes & Noble Nook, 745. 
See also devices (mobile, 
reading, tablet); Digital 
Publishing Suite; eReaders
base colors, 623
Based on Master pop-up menu, 97
baseline grid
aligning paragraphs to, 286–289
custom baseline grids, 287
exporting PDF files, 520
hiding and displaying, 
121, 130–131
overview, 47
printing, 651
Snap to Guides command, 131
Baseline Grid preferences 
settings, 47
baseline JPEG images, 512
Baseline Shift field, 47
baselines of text
aligning path text, 458, 460
baseline shift, 42, 262–
263, 269–270
first baseline position, 155–156
inline frames in text, 439–440
leading and, 254–255
Basic Feather effect, 384–385
Basic Graphics Frame 
object style, 451
Basic Paragraph style, 321–322
basic shapes, drawing, 336–337
Basic Text Frame object style, 451
battleship Nadesico, 378
BBEdit, 246
beer, scripts and, 694
Before and After Image option, 751
Before Entry page number 
option, 557
behaviors of buttons, 719–722
Bermuda Triangle of 
page layout, 389
Between Entry and Page 
Number option, 557
between tags, finding text 
that is, 239–240, 243
Bevel effect, 383, 384
Beveled Join option, 358
Bezier paths, 337
Bi-directional links, 486
bi-level images (monochrome), 
476, 521, 663
Bicubic Downsample option, 522
BIG5 encoding, 247
binary files, 514
bitmap graphics
choices for file formats, 472
compression options, 521–522
display performance settings, 56
importing, 478–480
OPI replacement, 666–667
print settings, 662–664
pros and cons of, 473–474
raster images, 473–474, 666
transparency and, 682
black and white art, 476, 521, 
522, 523, 663, 682
black background with 
white text, 261
black inks. See also inks
appearance of black, 58–59
black point compensation 
setting, 636
managing color, 630
matching ink on screen, 
58–59, 639–640
overprinting, 59, 677
rich blacks, 58–59
black point compensation 
setting, 636
blank lines in imported 
data files, 539
blank pages, printing, 651
blank space between 
printed pages, 652
Blatner, David
“Blatner” as common 
household word, 215
cross references and 
tiny hearts, 191
difficulties with 
pronunciation, 633
distracting grids and, 131
drawing abilities of, 351
dreams about formatting 
and organizational 
goodness, 704
as driven batty by Smart 
Guides, 130
eBook evangelism, 745
EPUB Secrets Web site, 755
fondness for 16-point 
Georgia, 208
geometric art obsession, 706
HTML editing habits, 760
idiosyncratic bookmarking, 718
indexer’s eternal affection 
towards, 574
left-leaning yet flattening-far-
right tendencies of, 682
as middle-of-the-road guy, 55
next-odd-page madness 
and, 553
as not getting out enough, 704
old style numeral disagreements 
with Ole, 274
other books by, 447, 476, 628
preferences for cubits, 45
risky glyph-scaling visibility 
and, 302–303
as “select-challenged,” 118
side head self-experimentation 
and, 448
strong stomach of, save 
for runts, 300
tab tzarism of, 282
as taking “the hard way” 
because he can, 447
as triumphant in legal 
wrangling over 
templates, 76
troubles with tables, 397
unsatisfied expectations for 
ragged lines, 303
as young pup publisher 
long ago, 709
Bleed Between Pages 
option, 673–674
Bleed fields (EPS exports), 514
bleed marks, 655, 670
Bleed Marks option, 655
Bleed setting, 657
bleeds
bleed areas, 72
bleed marks, 655, 670
bleed options, 70
booklets, 673–674
cropping PDF files to, 482

index 771
B
facing pages and, 86
JPEG exports, 512
print settings, 657
blending modes, 375–377, 387
blends (gradient fills). See 
gradients and gradient fills
blindness, overuse of 
effects and, 379
blinking cursors, 55, 209
Bloat effect, 699
Block cursors, 55, 208–209
block level text, 748
blue-green highlights, 44
blurring
On Blur events, 719
drop shadows, 381–383
text, 387–388
blurry animated objects, 735
BMPs. See bitmap graphics
bold type, 257, 755
book covers, 87
Book Page Numbering Options 
dialog box, 552
Book panel, 549–550. 
See also books
Booklet Type pop-up 
menu, 672–673
booklets, 671–675
bookmarks, 519–520, 711, 
718, 757, 763
Bookmarks panel, 718
books
adding documents to, 547–548
Book panel, 546, 547
chapter numbering in, 553–554
converting from earlier 
versions, 548
creating, 546
document status icons, 549–550
editing documents in, 548–549
EPUB exports, 554, 753
exporting as PDF files, 554
finding text in multiple files, 228
generating indexes for, 570–574
managing file revisions, 
548, 549
master documents, 551
moving documents in, 547
networked workgroup 
document 
management, 550
not exported to HTML, 757
organizing documents in, 547
overview, 546
page numbering, 546, 
548, 549, 552–553
printing, 554
removing files from, 547–548
renumbering pages, 
546, 548, 549
section numbering, 
552, 553–554
synchronizing files, 
546, 551–552
tables of contents. See 
tables of contents
tips and guidelines for, 548–549
updating chapter numbers, 
553–554
bookshelves in eReaders, 750
borders
around cells, 414–416
around paragraphs, 411, 412
around table cells, 413–416
around tables, 421
EPUB and HTML export, 750
Bottom vertical justification 
method, 154
bounding boxes
cropping PDF files to, 482
exporting EPS graphics 
with, 514
wrapping text around, 431
boxes
around cells, 414–416
around paragraphs, 411, 412
displaying graphics as, 477
printing graphics as, 664
braces ({ }), 238
brackets, angle (< >), 247
brackets, square ( [ ] ), 85, 238, 271
Break Link to Style command, 453
BreakFrame script, 698
breaking links
to files, 484–485
between object and style 
definitions, 453
between text and style 
definitions, 319
between text frames, 
162–163, 164, 165
breaks
column breaks, 43, 304–306
entering, 169, 170
inserting special characters, 
169, 170
page breaks, 43, 198, 304–306
preventing line breaks 
in text, 270
Bridge. See Adobe Bridge
Bring Forward command, 132–133
Bring to Front command, 132
Bringhurst, Bob
“Bringhurst” as common 
household word, 215
cross references and 
tiny hearts, 191
DPS Tips app, 764
dreams about formatting 
and organizational 
goodness, 704
geometric art obsession, 706
indexer’s eternal affection 
towards, 574
left-leaning yet flattening-far-
right tendencies of, 682
niece’s disdain for page 
curls, 743
as not getting out enough, 704
strong stomach of, save 
for runts, 300
tab tzarism of, 282
Broback, Steve, 62
brochures, 672–673
Brown, Russell, 376
browsers
browser-safe colors, 632
previewing interactive 
files in, 740
bubble sort algorithm script, 700
bugs, updating merged 
data and, 540
building
indexes, 570–574
tables of contents, 559
built-in presets. See presets
bullets and bulleted lists
bullet characters, 307, 308–309
converting bullets to 
normal text, 314
creating, 306–309
eBook options, 753, 754
finding glyphs, 242–245
hanging indent formatting, 
280–281
HTML exports, 757, 758
lurking invisible fonts and, 276
named lists, 311–314
paragraph styles and, 314
positioning bullets, 307
removing bullets, 314

772 e d de indein c6
C
Bullets and Numbering 
dialog box, 305–314
Bunting, Fred, 628
business cards, 87
Butt cap option, 358
Button Value option, 727
buttons
animation and, 736
Buttons and Forms 
panel, 719–724
descriptions, 726
DPS files, 710, 763
exported to Flash files, 745
exporting interactive files, 743
form functions, 726
hidden, 724
interactive file support, 711
multi-state objects, 728
non-printing, 726
PDF or SWF files, 520, 
719–724, 743–744
previewing, 740–741
printable, 726
rollovers and states, 722–723
slide show navigation, 729
tab order, 743
tooltips for, 726
video navigation points, 732
Buttons and Forms panel
buttons, 719–724
forms, 724–726
C
C, C#, C++, etc., 697
c shortcut, 463
calibrating devices, 628, 629
Calibre, 753, 755
Cap Height option, 155, 438
Cap options, 358
capitalized words. See also 
case of characters
autocorrecting cap errors, 217
hyphenation, 300
index entries, 570
capitals. See case of characters
Caption Setup dialog box, 463, 464
captions
anchoring, 750
creating and updating, 463–466
EPUB and HTML 
export tips, 749
metadata, 464, 504
static, 465–466
text variables, 175, 178, 187–190
troubleshooting, 466
carriage returns
as defining paragraphs, 276
importing text-only 
files, 199, 200
leading and, 256
removing with GREP 
methods, 243
showing hidden characters, 205
space before and after vs., 286
Cascade command, 8
Cascading Style Sheets. 
See CSS files
case of characters. See also 
capitalized words
all caps formatting, 264–265
case in find/change options, 228
changing, 265–266
character formatting, 265–266
small caps, 42, 261, 
264–265, 272
text variable numbering, 178
tracking and, 261
Case Sensitive option, 228
catalogs of images, 699
caterpillars, transformation 
and, 602
Caution icon, 485
cave-dwelling EDLIN-
using uncles, 246
CCITT compression, 522
Cell Alignment setting, 201
Cell Options dialog box, 
407, 413–420
Cell Proxy, 415–416
Cell Range setting, 201
cell styles, 423–424, 426, 
496, 497–498
Cell Styles panel, 426
cells in tables
border strokes, 413–416
Cell Proxy, 415–416
creating styles, 423–428
defined, 395, 396
diagonal lines, 419–420
entering tab characters, 400
fills or strokes, 413–420
gradients, 418–419
graphics in cells, 400, 402
height or width, 399, 406–407
importing cell styles, 428
including styles in table 
styles, 424
mapping cell styles, 
496, 497–498
merging, 410–411
overriding cell styles, 427
overset text, 398
rotating, 411, 412
selecting cells, 399–400
selecting text in cells, 401
splitting, 411
Center Content command, 
500, 502
Center in Frame option, 539
center-justified text alignment, 278
center of rotation, 23
center of transformation, 
576, 577, 581
center points of gradients, 368, 369
Center vertical justification 
method, 153
centered paragraph alignment, 278
centered tab stops, 282–283
centerfolds, 87
centering
contents in frames, 500, 502
liquid page rules for, 106–107
Change All button, 214, 230
Change Bars option, 54
Change button, 214, 230
Change Case command, 265–266
Change Case option, 178
Change/Find button, 230
Change Format Settings 
dialog box, 232
Change Object Format Options 
dialog box, 145–146
Change To field, 230
change tracking. See 
tracking changes
Chapter Number variable, 175, 178
chapter numbering, 175, 
178, 553–554
chapters in eBooks, 751
character encodings, 247, 543
character formatting. See also 
paragraph formatting
all caps formatting, 264–265
applying to all characters, 277
baseline shift, 262–263
case of characters, 265–266
Character panel, 11, 251
Control panel, 251
copying (Eyedropper 
tool), 24, 25
filling characters, 276, 277

index 773
C
font selection, 251–253
fractions, 271–272
horizontal scaling, 262
kerning, 258–260
language assignment, 263–264
leading. See leading
ligatures, 269, 272
line breaks, preventing, 270
numerals, 272, 274–275
OpenType fonts and, 270–275
outlining, 276, 277
overview, 251
point size, 253–254
removing space underlines, 266
skewing, 263, 264
small caps, 42, 261, 264–265
strikethrough, 268–269
stroking characters, 276, 277
styles. See character styles
super- and subscript, 42, 
269–270, 273–274
swash characters, 272
titling characters, 272
tracking, 260–262
underlining, 266–267
vertical scaling, 262
character ligatures, 171, 
226, 269, 271, 272
Character panel, 11, 251. See 
also character formatting
character sets, 199, 238
Character Settings preferences, 42
Character Style option, 220
Character Style Options 
dialog box, 756
character styles
alternate layout style groups, 113
alternate layouts, 332
applying to text, 319–320
basing on example text, 317–318
basing on existing 
styles, 328–329
bulleted lists, 307
changing fonts in, 276
Character Styles panel, 
11, 317, 331
copying from other 
files, 331–332
creating, 317–318, 698
deleting attributes of, 319
deleting styles, 321
deleting text with specified 
styles, 236
drop cap styles, 291
editing, 320
external CSS files and, 760
formatting attributes and, 318
hyperlinks, 713, 715
index styles, 573
interaction with paragraph 
styles, 323, 324
mapping for eBooks, 748
mapping for HTML export, 756
mapping with Content 
Conveyor, 332, 
496, 497–498
nested styles, 290–297
numbered lists, 311
overview, 316–317
parent-child relationships, 
328–329
vs. QuarkXPress styles, 318
Quick Apply feature, 460–463
redefining, 320–321
removing from text, 
319, 323, 324
resetting to base styles, 329
saving in libraries, 332
style groups, 329–331
synchronizing in book 
files, 551–552
table of contents styles, 557
tagged PDFs and, 531
tagged text and, 202
Character Styles panel, 
11, 317, 331, 748
characterizing devices, 628, 629
characters
applying colors to, 622
bullets, 307–309
converting to outlines, 
432–434, 683
escaping, 239
finding and replacing. See 
finding and replacing
formatting. See character 
formatting
hidden, 205
highlighting substituted 
glyphs, 44
importing text-only files, 199
inline frames as, 436
leading. See leading
nested style metacharacters, 292
special or symbol. See 
special characters
styles. See character styles
subsets of, in fonts, 36
tab leaders, 285–286
tables of contents leaders, 557
transparency flattener and, 683
Unicode values, 27
wildcard metacharacters, 
229–230
charts, 200
Chavez, Conrad, 476, 628
cheating software, 373
check boxes (forms), 725, 727
Check In/Check Out 
commands, 491
Check Links Before Opening 
Document option, 60, 491
Check Spelling panel, 11, 213–218
checkerboard page icons, 679
checking links, 60, 491
checking spelling
adding or removing words from 
dictionary, 215–216, 217
autocorrecting errors, 217–218
Check Spelling panel, 
11, 213–218
deleted text, 54
dictionary options, 49–51
dynamic spelling, 51, 
216–217, 218
hyphenation points, 215–216
including note text, 52
language and character 
formatting, 263–264
preferences, 51–52
child layouts, 114
child linked objects, 493–494, 496
child links in alternate layouts, 113
child master spreads, 97, 98
child pages in alternate 
layouts, 112
child style documents, 497
Chinese history and printing, 645
Chinese text, 42
Choke option in feathering, 384
cicero override abbreviation, 16
circles, drawing, 22
circles, red, 485
classes (tags), 748, 749
cleaning imported files, 199–200
Clear Attributes Not Defined by 
Style button or command, 452
Clear Form action, 721
Clear Form button, 726
Clear Overrides command, 427
clearing forms, 721, 726

774 e d de indein c6
C
clearing overrides
layer visibility and, 
483, 506–507
local text formatting, 
323, 324, 704
master page items and, 102
object formatting, 452–453
paragraph style scripts, 704
table formatting, 427
Clip Complex Regions option, 683
Clipboard, 61, 234
Clipboard Preferences 
dialog box, 61
clipping movie frames, 733
Clipping Path dialog box, 507–510
clipping paths
applying to graphics, 478–479
compared to transparency, 508
converting to frames, 510
creating, 507–510
flattening methods, 678
importing EPS files with, 481
vs. path operations, 352
removing, 510
selecting, 508–509
close (>) angle brackets, 247
close boxes and buttons, 3, 4
Close Path button, 354
closed paths, 344–346, 351, 354
closing
open paths, 344–345
panels, 10
windows, 4, 9
cloud publishing, 760–763
CMYK color model. See also color 
management; color models
choosing models, 605–606, 621
CMYK working space, 
632–633, 636
color management policies, 634
color management settings, 631
composites and separations, 
657–658
converting EPS images to, 513
converting RGB images to, 523
cross-rendering, 642
EPS files, 513, 644
JPEG files, 512
PDF, PDF/X... files, 
516, 642–644
preserving numbers, 
639, 641–642
presets, 631
switching to, 621
Coated GRACoL setting, 633
coated papers, 629, 636
collaboration tools, 550
Collapse All Footnotes 
command, 208
collapsing
footnotes, 208
layer display, 135–136
notes, 212
panels, 10
Collate option, 649
Collect All Threaded 
Frames option, 496
collecting form data, 722
color
applying
basic techniques, 18, 
27, 622–623
behind paragraphs, 392–393
to cell borders, 414–416
to drop shadows, 381
to fills, 366–367, 607
to gaps in strokes, 360, 361
to graphics, 510–511, 622–623
to objects or text, 11, 
27, 622–623
to page thumbnails, 81
to strokes, 607
in tables, 413–420
checking in Preflight, 688
Color panel, 11, 366–367, 
606, 620–621
color spectrum, 604
composite color, 657–658
compressed ranges of, 639–640
copying with Eyedropper 
tool, 24, 25
finding and replacing, 144–146
gamuts, 604, 611, 621, 635–636
gradients. See gradients 
and gradient fills
image resolution and, 521
ink list, 605, 661
Ink Manager. See Ink Manager
of interface elements
change bars, 54
change tracking markups, 198
composition issue 
highlights, 42–44
conditional text, 224
dynamic spelling, 51, 217
grids, 47
guides, 48, 126
layers, 136, 138
menu items, 33
notes, 52
Story Editor window, 54, 208
text changes, 53
Kuler panel, 623
matching. See color 
management
mixed ink swatches, 614–617
models. See color models; 
names of specific color 
models (RGB, CMYK, etc.)
named colors, 604–605
printed samples of, 629–630
printing. See printing
process colors. See 
process colors
profiles. See color profiles
proofs and proofing, 629–
630, 638–640, 662
separations. See color 
separations
sets of, 623–624
spot colors. See spot colors
swatch libraries, 610
Swatches panel, 11, 607–611
synchronizing in book 
files, 551–552
tints, 392–393, 606, 611, 
612, 619, 660
transparency. See transparency
trapping. See trapping
unnamed colors, 604–
606, 609, 619
visual perception, 604
color bars, 621, 656, 671
Color Burn blending mode, 376
color composites, 657–658. See 
also color management
Color Conversion pop-up 
menu, 642
Color Dodge blending mode, 376
color gamuts, 604, 611, 
621, 635–636
Color Handling pop-up 
menu, 640–641
Color Label command, 81
color management. See 
also color profiles
additional resources for, 628
advanced settings, 635–636
bitmapped images and, 479–480
black inks, 58–59, 639–640
black point compensation 
setting, 636

index 775
C
compressed dynamic 
range, 639–640
determining need for, 628–629
document profiles, 636–637
engines, 635
EPS graphics and, 513, 644
gamuts, 604, 611, 621, 635–636
gnawing off legs and, 631
imported images and, 637–638
in-RIP trapping, 659
matching ink on screen, 
58–59, 639–640
monitor guidelines, 629
optimizing environment 
for viewing, 629
out-of-gamut colors, 611, 
621, 635–636
overview, 627–628, 630
paper color, matching, 639–640
PDF, PDF/X... files, 483, 
516, 523, 642–644
policies, 633–634
presets, 630–632
printed color samples, 629–630
printing, 640–644
proofing, 629–630, 638–640
rendering intents, 635–636
saving custom settings, 632
soft-proofing, 638–640
SWF files and, 744
synchronizing CS Suite, 630
transparency blending modes 
and, 375–377, 680
working spaces, 632–633, 
636–637
Color Management pane (Print 
dialog box), 640–644
Color Management Policies 
settings, 633–634
color models
Adobe RGB, 631, 632
choosing, 605–606
CMYK. See CMYK color model
conversion errors, 606
LAB, 605, 621
RGB. See RGB color model
Color panel, 11, 366–367, 
606, 620–621
Color Picker, 621–622
Color pop-up menu, 224, 657
color printers, 630
color profiles
applying to images, 637–638
changing, 636–637
CMYK profiles, 632–633
color management 
policies, 633–634
converting to new 
profiles, 636–637
default profiles, 632
device profiles, 627–628, 632
embedded profiles, 512, 637–638
exporting PDF files, 
524, 642–644
ICC profiles, 524, 525
output profiles, 524, 640–642
RGB profiles, 632–633
soft-proofing, 638–640
source and target profiles, 
640–642
transparency and, 680
working spaces, 632–633, 
636–637
color separations. See also 
color management
previewing, 675–677
printing, 657–661
Color setting (grids), 47
Color Settings dialog box, 630–632
color spaces, 28, 512, 642
color spectrum, 604
color swatches. See swatches
Color transparency 
blending mode, 377
ColorSync management 
system, 628
column guides
adjusting layouts and, 105
changing, 78, 121–122, 123
defined, 119
manual text flow and, 166
preferences, 48–49
columns in grids, 596–597
columns in tables
adding, 407–409
alternating fills or 
strokes, 421–422
defined, 395
deleting, 409, 410
distributing evenly, 405
resizing, 406–407
selecting, 399–400
table styles and, 426
width of, 399
columns on pages
alternate layouts, 110–114
balancing automatically, 151
column breaks, 43, 304–306
column guides, 48–49, 78, 105, 
119, 121–122, 123, 166
creating in text frames, 150–151
eBook export options, 753
flexible columns, 110, 151
gutter width, 122, 123
headlines for multiple 
columns, 157–159
hyphenation and, 301
importing Word/RTF files, 198
layout adjustment 
settings, 103–105
leading and, 257
liquid page rules, 106–110
master spread settings, 94
New Document dialog 
box, 70, 71
optical margin alignment, 
333–334
page layout options, 78
page rules, 106–110
splitting, 157–159
width of, 121–122, 123, 150–151
combining panels, 13
combo boxes (forms), 725, 727
comma-delimited (.csv) 
files, 533, 534
comments, 210, 236
commercial printers. See 
imagesetters and 
service providers
Compatibility pop-up menu, 517
complex path operations, 350–354
complex stroke patterns, 359–360
Compose Using options, 50
Composite CMYK 
option, 657–658
composite color, printing, 657–658
Composite Leave Unchanged 
option, 658
composite paths. See 
compound paths
Composite RGB option, 657–658
Composite RGB profile, 641
composition
highlighting composition 
issues, 42–44, 304
multi-line composition, 297–299
Paragraph Composer, 298, 303
preferences, 42–45, 304
Single Line Composer, 298
Composition Preferences 
dialog box, 42–45, 304

776 e d de indein c6
compound paths (composite 
paths). See also outlines
converting text to paths, 
432–434
converting to simple paths, 434
creating, 347
editing, 348
joining open paths, 347
path operations, 350–354
selecting portions of, 20
splitting, 348
compressed dynamic color 
range, 639–640
compressed PPDs, 647
compression
exporting PDF files, 520–522
file formats and, 474
interactive document 
settings, 743
resampling images, 521–522
in SWF files, 744
videos in folios, 764
Compression pop-up menu, 743
compromise, transparency 
and, 679
Compugraphic E-scales, 46
Compugraphics, 249
computers
capacity to build indexes (in 
your dreams, maybe), 561
as objects to be thrown out 
of windows, 449
Concepción, Anne-Marie, 447, 760
concordances, 561
condensed typefaces, 262
condition sets, 224
conditional images, 727
conditional text, 223–225
Conditional Text panel, 223–225
confidence, scripts and, 695
Configure Plug-Ins dialog box 
(Extension Manager), 67
conflicting text variables, 180–181
connect-the-dots puzzles, 335, 338
consecutive hyphens, 300
consecutive imposition, 672–673
Constrain Proportions 
options, 653
contact sheets, 472
container selections, 120
content. See text
Content Collector tool, 17, 
18, 21, 332, 495
Content Conveyor tool
copying and placing 
objects, 21, 493–498
mapping styles, 332, 
496, 497–498
placing linked objects, 493–494
Content Grabber tool, 19, 39, 115, 
116, 498–499, 500–501, 589
Content Placer tool, 17, 18, 
21, 332, 485, 495–496
content selections, 120
Content Viewer, 740, 762, 764
context menus, 29, 478
contextual ligatures, 272
Continue from Previous 
Document option, 553
Continue on Next Even 
Page option, 553
Continue on Next Odd 
Page option, 553
continuing numbers, 309
contouring text wrap, 430–431
control handles (direction 
lines), 336
converting points, 340, 342
corner and curve points, 
339–340
deleting, 343
manipulating and 
retracting, 343
overview, 339–340
tips for working with, 343
Control panel, 3
applying formatting 
with, 251, 277
customizing options on, 34
docking problems, 14–15
moving objects with, 584
Proxy, 576, 577, 580, 581
rotating objects with, 590
scaling objects with, 587
shortcuts, 11
table controls in, 402
transforming methods, 576–583
Controlled by Master 
page rule, 107
Convert All Strokes to 
Outlines option, 683
Convert All Text to Outlines 
option, 683
Convert Clipping Path to 
Frame command, 510
Convert from Button 
command, 719
Convert Object to a Button 
command, 719
Convert Point operations, 354
Convert Point tool, 18, 21, 340, 342
Convert Quotes option (Use 
Typographer’s Quotes 
option), 39–40, 197, 201
Convert Shape operations, 
353–354
Convert Table to Text dialog 
box, 398, 399
Convert Tables To option, 197
Convert Text to Table dialog 
box, 396, 398
Convert to Beveled-Corner 
Rectangle button, 353
Convert to Column Breaks 
option, 198
Convert to Destination (Preserve 
Numbers) option, 523, 642
Convert to Destination options 
(PDF export), 523
Convert to Ellipse button, 354
Convert to Header/Footer Rows 
commands, 403–404
Convert to Inverse-Rounded-
Corner Rectangle button, 354
Convert to Line button, 354
Convert to Note command, 212
Convert to Polygon button, 354
Convert to Profile dialog 
box, 636–637
Convert to Rectangle 
operation, 353
Convert to Rounded-Corner 
Rectangle button, 353
Convert to Text command, 212
Convert to Triangle button, 354
Convert to Vertical or Horizontal 
Line button, 354
Convert URLs to Hyperlinks 
dialog box, 713
Convert Variable to Text 
command, 183
converting
audio formats, 729
bullets or numbers to 
HTML text, 758
clipping paths to frames, 510
color management working 
spaces, 523, 633–634
colors to different models, 606
colors to new profiles, 636–637

index 777
C
compound paths to 
simple paths, 434
corners to rounded 
edges, 354–355
EPUB files to other formats, 745
EPUB to MOBI, 755
frames to text frames, 
39–40, 148
images in eBooks, 754
multi-state objects to 
independent elements, 729
notes to text, 212
objects to buttons, 719
objects to groups for 
HTML, 756
older booked documents, 548
older InDesign files, 74
optimizing graphics for 
HTML, 759
page breaks to column 
breaks, 198
PageMaker files, 74, 75
paths to motion paths, 736
point operations, 354
points, 18, 21, 340, 342
QuarkXPress files, 74–75
quotation marks to 
typographer’s quotes, 
39–40, 197, 201
shapes to text frames, 148
spot and process colors, 
617, 625–626
strokes to outlines, 683
table rows to headers or 
footers, 403–404
tables in Word files, 197
tables to text, 398, 399
text to notes, 212
text to outlines, 432–434, 683
text to tables, 396, 398
text variable instances 
to text, 182, 183
URLs to hyperlinks, 713
video formats, 729
Conveyor. See Content 
Conveyor tool
coordinates in Transform and 
Control panels, 38, 580–581
Copies field, 649
Copy Fonts option, 690
Copy Full Path command, 491
Copy Images pop-up menu, 758
“copy” in style names, 202
Copy Link(s) To command, 491
Copy PDF to Clipboard/Preserve 
PDF Data At Quit option, 61
Copy Platform Style Path 
option, 491, 534
Copy Text Styles to New Styles 
Group option, 332
copyfitting text in multiple 
windows, 8
copying
Content Collector options, 495
Content Conveyor options, 
19, 495–497
dragging and dropping 
text, 205–206
duplicating and transforming, 
581, 582
duplicating with Step 
and Repeat, 585
effects, 388
file paths, 491
formatting with 
Eyedropper, 24, 25
importing graphic files, 468
layers between publications, 140
linked files, 491
linked text frames, 163–164, 165
linking copied objects, 493–498
master spreads, 95, 97
metadata from files, 504
objects, 349
objects into states, 729
objects to other layers, 138, 139
pages and page spreads, 83
pathnames, 534
PDF files, permissions and, 528
PDF formats on Clipboard, 61
ruler guides, 128
stroke styles, 365, 366
styles between publications, 
331–332
styles to alternate layouts, 332
styles to style groups, 113, 330
swatches, 620
tables from other programs, 397
text into HTML editors, 760
text variables, 180–181
Copyright metadata, 464
CorelDraw files, 489
Corner Options dialog box, 22, 355
corner points
control handles. See
control handles
converting to curve 
points, 340, 342
corner options and, 355, 356
creating, 339
drawing, 340–342
point conversion 
operations, 354
stroke join options, 358
CornerEffects script, 698
corners
adjustments on strokes, 363
corner effects, 22, 354–355, 356
dotted or dashed line 
corners, 361–362
feather corner options, 384–387
join options, 358
miter limit, 358–359
Corners pop-up, 360
corrupt data, removing 
from files, 532
corrupted files, 77
Cover Page options, 750
cover pages, eBooks, 750, 753
covers, 87, 650
crash recovery, 77
Create Acrobat Layers 
option, 519, 554, 742
Create Alternate Layout 
dialog box, 112–113
Create Guides dialog box, 124
Create JDF File Using 
Acrobat option, 526
Create Links When Placing 
Text and Spreadsheet Files 
option, 60, 203, 492
Create Merged Document 
command and dialog 
box, 536, 537, 538
Create New Hyperlink button, 715
Create Outlines command, 433
Create Package Folder 
dialog box, 690–691
Create PDF Bookmarks 
checkbox, 718
Create Tagged PDF option, 
518–519, 742
CreateCharacterStyle 
script, 318, 698
Creation Date metadata, 464
Creation Date variable, 175, 178
Creative Suite, 503
creativity, scripting and, 
693, 700–701
Creep option, 673
Creo Scitext RIPs, 680
crimes, glyph scaling and, 303

778 e d de indein c6
Crop Amount option, 502
crop marks, 655, 670, 674, 699
Crop Marks option, 655
Crop Pages dialog box 
(Acrobat), 482
Crop To setting, 482
CropMarks script, 699
cropping. See also clipping 
paths; crop marks
eBook export options, 754
exporting PDF files and, 523
HTML export options, 759
importing PDF graphics 
and, 482
movie frames, 733
Page tool and, 20
during placing, 502
printing crop marks, 655
retaining after relinking, 492
cross-platform scripting, 695
Cross Reference Formats 
dialog box, 193, 194
cross references
to document sections, 191
DPS issues, 763
HTML export, 757
in indexes, 566–568
text variables and, 176
cross-rendering CMYK 
images, 642
crotchety graphics formats, 473
“Cruddy Preview” option, 481
CSS files (Cascading Style Sheet)
applying no CSS tags, 759
defined, 749
embedding in HTML, 759
external CSS files, 759
including with eBooks, 755
mapping styles, 748
tags in HTML files, 759
CSS Options (eBooks), 754
CSV files, 533, 534
Cthulhu (elder space 
god), 308, 388
cubits, 45
curled page effect, 743
curly quotes, 39–40, 197, 200, 201
current animated object 
appearance, 734
Current Page option, 563
Cursor Key field, 46, 585
cursors and cursor icons
1980s Block cursor, 55
behavior in story 
windows, 54–55
blinking cursors, madness 
and, 209
Block cursor, 208–209
drag and drop icons, 205–206
dragging place icons, 470–471
graphic place icons, 68
highlighting objects under, 38
link icons, 162
moving cursor through 
text, 204–205
multiple-file place icons, 68
place icons, 68, 470–471
preview images for, 37
shadow cursors, 6
smart cursors, 38, 128, 129
Story Editor display, 208–209
table editing cursors, 401
text flow icons, 68, 166
text insertion point, 160
tools and, 18
unlink icons, 162
curve points, 339, 340–342. 
See also control handles
curves of line segments, 
343, 344, 354
custom baseline grids, 287
Custom Cross-Reference 
setting, 566
Custom Measurement 
Unit dialog box, 6
Custom Rasterization 
option, 750–751
Custom soft-proofing setting, 638
Custom Style Mapping 
dialog box, 497–498
Custom Text variable, 
175, 178, 184–185
Custom Tracking/Kerning 
option, 44
Customize Control Panel 
dialog box, 34
Customize Style Import 
option, 199
customizing
animation, 736
baseline grids, 287
color management settings, 632
Control panel options, 34
cross-references, 566
measurement units, 6
menus, 32–33
objects or text. See editing
printer’s marks, 655–657, 
670–671
style imports, 199
text variables, 177, 180
time and date stamps, 184
tracking and kerning, 44
CutContents script, 704–706
cute woolly animals that spit, 566
cutting
CutContents script, 704–706
points and paths in two, 26
D
damaged files, 77
Darken transparency mode, 376
Dashboard, 409n
dashed blue lines, 108
dashed strokes, 359, 360–362, 363
dashes, 170. See also hyphenation
data
collecting in forms, 
722, 724–726
data fields, 534, 540
merging. See data merge
data files
importing, 200–201
merging into InDesign, 533–540
setup, 533–534
updating merged data, 540
Data Format setting, 514, 666
data merge
blank lines in data file, 539
data file setup, 533–534
importing images with text, 534
importing indexing 
with text, 569
limiting number of records, 539
master pages and, 536
multiple records on 
pages, 537, 539
overview, 533–540
template setup, 534–536
updating merged data, 540
Data Merge panel, 533–540
Datacolor Spyder, 629
DataLinker, 533
dates
creation dates, 175, 464
eBook publish dates, 753
formatting text, 178
metadata, 464, 753
modification dates, 175, 178
output dates, 176, 178, 184

index 779
D
printing on output, 184
in text variables, 175–
176, 178, 184
time and date stamps, 175, 184
days in text variables, 179
DCS files and workflows, 
56, 474, 475, 680
DDE/COM, 697
deadly Word features, 199
debugging scripts, 696–697
Decimal Places option, 201
decimal tabs and tab stops, 283
declarations, 754, 759
Default Fill/Stroke icon, 18
Default View Settings options, 55
defaults
application defaults, 62
Auto leading setting, 255
bullet characters, 308–309
character styles, 320
color management, 630–632
document defaults, 62
fills and strokes, 18
flattener presets, 684
keyboard shortcuts, 2, 30
link options, 494
new documents and, 73
numeral formatting, 275
object styles, 451
paragraph styles, 325
radio and check boxes, 727
reverting to original defaults, 62
setting, 62
text variables, 176
view settings, 55
Define Document Presets 
dialog box, 72
Define Print Presets dialog 
box, 668–670
defining
keyboard shortcuts, 29–32
presets, 72–73, 668–670
stroke styles, 363–365
text variables, 181
Delete All Guides command, 128
Delete End Punctuation 
option, 178
Delete Layer button/
command, 135, 140
Delete Master Spread 
command, 100
Delete Note button, 212
Delete Point tool, 18, 21
Delete Style button, 453
Delete Swatches dialog box, 619
Delete Text Variables 
dialog box, 182
Delete Type on a Path 
command, 460
Delete Unused Layers 
command, 140
Deleted Text option, 53
deleting. See also removing
alternate layouts, 114
anchored objects, 441
blank lines in data, 539
bullets or numbers, 314
character styles, 321
clipping paths, 510
colors, 618–619
conditions from text, 224
Content Conveyor objects, 495
control handles, 343
corner effects, 355
corrupt data from files, 532
documents from books, 
547–548
effects, 388
empty pages, 113
fill or stroke colors, 366–367
frame-fitting options, 502
hyperlinks, 716
index entries, 569
inline frames, 441
items from Quick Apply list, 462
items in frames, 704–706
keyboard shortcuts, 30
layers, 135, 140
line breaks, 494
line segments, 22
linked objects, 494
linked text frames, 163
master spreads, 100
notes in stories, 212
object styles, 453
objects, 144, 704–706
optical margin adjustments, 334
pages, 79
paragraph styles, 327
PDF export presets, 529
points from paths, 18, 22, 344
preference settings, 62
print presets, 670
punctuation in text 
variables, 178
ruler guides, 128
scripts accidentally, 701
shapes after path operations, 351
stroke styles, 365
swatches, 619
tab stops, 284
table columns or rows, 409, 410
tables, 409
text from paths, 460
text variables, 182
text with specified styles, 236
tracking changes to text, 53
unplaced graphics from 
cursor, 471
unused layers, 140
unwanted color swatches, 532
words from dictionaries, 
216–217
delimiters, 396, 398, 534
Delphi, 697
denominator characters, 274
descenders, 267, 458, 460
Description metadata, 464
Description panel (File Info 
dialog box), 504
descriptions
buttons, 726
files, 504
forms, 726
metadata, 464
deselecting objects, 116–117
A Designer’s Guide to Adobe 
InDesign and XML, 544
destinations (buttons), 720
destinations (cross references), 191
destinations (hyperlinks), 
713–715, 714, 720
Detach All Objects from 
Master command, 103
Detach Selection from Master 
command, 103
detecting edges for clipping 
paths, 509
device-independent 
PostScript, 647
device profiles (monitors, printers)
applying to images, 637–638
CMYK profiles, 632–633
color management 
policies, 633–634
default profiles, 632
defined, 627–628
embedded profiles, 637–638
RGB profiles, 632–633
soft-proofing, 638–640
devices (mobile, reading, tablet)
checking graphics on, 751

780 e d de indein c6
D
Digital Publishing 
Suite, 760–766
downloading folios to, 762
eBook reflow on, 745
eReader-friendly PDFs, 530–531
library cover pages, 750
renditions for, 764–765
targeting layouts for, 110, 112
troubleshooting, 765
dfont packages, 691
diagonal lines
in cell styles, 424
in tables, 419–420
dialog boxes, 16, 708, 747. See also
names of specific dialog boxes
dictionaries. See also
checking spelling
adding words to, 215–216, 217
dictionary-style headers, 
186, 189
importing text-only files, 200
language and character 
formatting, 263–264
merging into documents, 51
preferences, 49–51
Dictionary Preferences 
dialog box, 49–51
dictionary-style headers, 186, 189
didots, 16
Diffused feather corner 
option, 385
Digital Editions, 752–753
Digital Publishing Intent files, 112
Digital Publishing Suite
Adobe Edge files, 765
Adobe IDs, 761
alternate layouts and, 112
animation, 733, 765
audio and video in, 729–733
DPS Desktop Tools, 761
example viewer apps, 766
folio renditions, 764–765
folios and articles, 762
HTML code in, 765
HTML export options, 756
interactive overlays, 740
interactivity, 710, 711, 
740, 763–764
metadata properties, 762–763
overview, 760
previewing content, 740, 764
resources, 765–766
source documents, 690, 761, 762
subscriptions, 760
updating DPS Desktop 
Tools, 761
Digital Rights Management, 
527–528
digital signatures, 725
digits. See numbers
dimensions
folio images, 764
folio renditions, 765
page coordinates, 582
resizing to guides, 50
Dimensions Include Stroke 
Weight option, 582
Direct Selection tool, 18, 20, 116, 
118–119, 142, 250, 499
direct to plate printing, 629
direction
drawn paths, 338
motion paths, 736
direction lines. See control 
handles (direction lines)
Directional Feather effect, 
385–386, 387
directories. See folders
disabilities and accessibility, 
518–519, 530–531, 748
disaster recovery, 77
discretionary hyphen 
characters, 301
discretionary ligatures, 271
Discretionary Line Breaks 
option, 752
disdain for page curls, 743
Display All Blacks... options, 59
Display Item Information 
button, 28
Display Performance Preferences 
dialog box, 55–58
display type, 257
displaying
animated objects, 735
baseline grid, 121
black inks, 58–59
changed text, 53
conditional text, 224
Content Conveyor, 495, 496
controls for interactive 
features, 731–732
fields, 720
glyphs and characters, 172
guides and grids, 47–49, 
121, 139
hidden characters, 176, 205
hidden menu items, 33
hidden panels, 38
hidden tools, 18
hyperlinks, 716
import options, 195, 196
interactive documents 
full-screen, 742
kerning amounts, 260
keyboard shortcut list, 30, 32
layers, 135–136, 138
library item information, 28
links between text frames, 
148, 160, 161
metadata, 187–190
multiple windows, 7–9
nested object’s offset, 583
notes, 213
page views, 4–5
panels as icons, 38
prefixes or suffixes, 220
problem tags, 202
rotating page view, 89–90
Story Editor preferences, 54–55
subsets of libraries, 28
tag markers, 541, 542
tagged frames, 541
text snippets, 541
text threads, 148, 160–161
text variables, 176
thumbnails, 37, 80
Tool Tips, 37
transparency on screen, 57
displays. See screen display
dissolves, 739
distances, measuring, 24, 25
distortions
objects. See transformations
printing process, 653
Distribute Columns Evenly 
command, 405
Distribute Rows Evenly 
command, 405
distributing objects
Liquid HTML5 pagination 
options, 114
Live Distribute feature, 599
overview, 598–601
table rows or columns, 405
<div> tags, 759
“do script” method, 695
docked publication display, 39
Document Bleed settings, 512
Document Chapter Numbering 
options, 553–554
Document CMYK setting, 638

index 781
E
document defaults, 62
Document dictionary 
preferences settings, 50
Document Fonts folder, 691
document grid, 47–48, 
121, 130–131
Document Grid preferences 
settings, 47–48
Document Open Password 
setting, 527
document pages
alternate layouts, 110–114
applying master edits, 103–105
applying master spreads, 
83, 84, 97–99
creating master pages from, 95
HTML5 pagination options, 114
liquid page rules, 106–110
optional, in alternate 
layouts, 114
overriding master items, 
100, 102–103
document presets, 72–73
Document Recovery Data 
preferences, 59–60
Document RGB setting, 744
Document Setup dialog box, 78, 84
Document source spaces, 640
document spaces (color), 636–637
documents. See publications
dodecagons, drawing, 22
donut shapes, 347
dorkiness of hyperlink 
appearance options, 715
DOS look, achieving, 208–209
dot-doubling, 615
dot leaders, 285–286, 557
dots per inch (dpi), 476
dotted strokes, 360–365
double quotes (“), 39–40, 50, 197
double-sided printing, 675
double spaces, cleaning up, 243
doughnut shapes, 347
downloadable fonts, 
printing, 664–665
downloading
articles or folios to 
devices, 761, 762
color sets, 623–624
fonts, 664–665
renditions for devices, 765
subsets of glyphs in fonts, 36
downsampling images, 
476, 521–522
dpi (dots per inch), 476
DPS Desktop Tools, 761
DPS files. See Digital 
Publishing Suite
drag and drop features
applying fills, 366
applying master pages, 97
copying text, 205–206
greeking graphics during, 39
Grid Mode and, 596–597
image redraw settings, 39
importing graphic files, 468
importing multiple files, 471
importing text files, 148
magnifying area of 
screen, 64, 65
moving objects, 584
moving text, 205–206
placing items, 470–471
resizing tables, 404–406
scrolling, 66
snippets on desktop, 532
sorting list/combo box 
options, 727
text editing, 41, 205–206
draw-downs, 614
drawing. See also lines and line 
segments; paths (drawn); 
names of specific shapes
basic shapes, 336–337
Bezier paths, 337
drawing tools, 17, 18, 336
drop shadows, 380–383
feathering, 384–387
fills. See fills
frames, 335, 336
gradients. See gradients 
and gradient fills
motion paths, 736
NINAs, 706–707
paths, 21, 335, 340–349
with Pen tool, 21, 340–342
with Pencil tool, 21–22, 340, 341
strokes. See strokes
tips, 342–343
transparency. See transparency
drawing or redrawing 
screen display, 55
drawing tools, 17, 18, 336
drawings
bitmap graphics. See
bitmap graphics
choosing file formats, 473–475
PostScript paths. See
paths (drawn)
vector graphics. See
vector graphics
dreaded pink highlights, 
242, 253, 304
dreaded red plus sign (+), 156
dreams of organizational 
goodness, 704
Dreamweaver, 755, 757, 759
driving cars, scripting and, 694
DRM (Digital Rights 
Management), 527–528
drop caps, 289–290, 296, 316, 447
Drop Caps and Nested Styles 
dialog box, 291
drop-down lists (forms), 725
drop shadows
creating, 380–383
display options, 477
movie frames and, 733
transparency and, 380–381, 679
DTPtools PageControl 
plug-in, 673
dull as rocks numbering, 309
dummy second-level entries, 567
dummy text, 173–175, 559
duotones, 660
Duplicate Master Spread 
command, 95
Duplicate Spread command, 83
duplicated names of fonts, 253
duplicating. See also copying
animation, 736
grids of objects, 596–597
master spreads, 95
multiple merged records, 
537, 539
objects, 349, 585
objects in states, 729
objects while transforming, 
581, 582
pages and page spreads, 83
ruler guides, 128
swatches, 620
duration of animated objects, 738
dynamic ranges of color, 639–640
Dynamic Spelling option, 
51, 216–217, 218
E
early days of page layout, 17
Ease In option, 734

782 e d de indein c6
E
eBooks. See EPUB files and eBooks
ECMA JavaScript standard, 695
edges, feathering, 384–387
Edit All Export Tags dialog 
box, 531, 749, 756
Edit Color Swatch dialog box, 618
Edit Custom Style Mapping 
icon, 497
Edit Glyph Set dialog box, 173
Edit Gradient Swatch 
dialog box, 618
Edit Header/Footer 
commands, 404
Edit Original feature, 489
Edit Stroke Style dialog box, 365
Edit Text Variable dialog box, 180
Edit Tint Swatch dialog box, 618
Edit With feature, 489
editable objects, copying, 61
editing
alternate layouts, 114
color sets, 624
colors, 618
compound paths, 348
Control panel options, 34
declarations, 754, 759
documents in Book 
panel, 548–549
eBook metadata, 753
effects, 388
embedded graphics, 490
Flash files, 745
folio properties, 762
glyph sets, 173
gradients, 371–372, 618
headers or footers, 404
HTML code, 765
hyperlink sources or 
destinations, 713–715, 716
images in PDF files, 523
layer properties, 138–140
master spreads, 99–100
menus, 32–33
metadata, 190
mixed ink groups, 617
motion paths, 736
multi-state objects, 729
notes, 212
object styles, 453
original graphic files, 489
page size, 79
parent linked objects, 493–494
PDF export presets, 530
print presets, 670
Quick Apply list items, 462
ruler guides, 124–125
scripts, 695–697
shortcuts, 29–32
slide shows, 729
stroke styles, 365
strokes, 362
style mappings, 531
style tags for HTML export, 756
table or cell styles, 426–427
text. See editing text
text variables, 180, 183
text wrap boundary, 431, 432
tints, 618
tracking changes, 209–210, 211
editing text. See also editing
character styles, 320
checking spelling, 213–218
cursor movement 
shortcuts, 204–205
deleting styled paragraphs, 236
drag and drop editing, 
41, 205–206
finding/changing 
formatting, 232–234
finding/changing text, 226–244
glyph sets, 173
headers and footers in 
tables, 404
index entries, 569–570
index page references, 570
moving text, 205–206
paragraph styles, 324–325
Story Editor, 206–209
tab stops, 284
table items, 401
tracking changes, 209–210, 211
EditWriters, 249
Effect path text options, 457–459
effects. See also animation
beveling, 383, 384
blurry text, 387–388
copying to other objects, 388
editing, 388
Effects panel, 11, 374, 
375, 377, 379
embossing, 383, 384
feathering, 384–387
glows, 383
removing, 388
text on a path options, 457–459
Effects dialog box, 379, 380
Effects panel, 11, 374, 375, 377, 379
elder evil space gods (Cthulhu, 
etc.), 308, 388
elements
eBook articles, 747
XML, 541, 542. See also XML 
and structured documents
Ellipse Frame tool, 17, 18
ellipses and Ellipse tool, 17, 
18, 22, 336–337, 354
em, defined, 257
Em Software, 533
<em> tags, 760
email
addresses, 240, 714
collecting form data, 722
embarrassment of hot pink 
dingbats, 325
Embed Fonts setting (EPS 
export), 514
Embed Page Thumbnails 
option, 518, 741
embedded audio in PDF 
files, 732–733
embedded color profiles, 512, 
633–634, 637–638, 643
Embedded CSS option, 759
embedded fonts, 514, 516, 
525–526, 755
embedded graphics
color profiles, 637–638
displaying on Links panel, 485
editing originals, 490
embedding/unembedding, 
489–490
in lines of text. See inline frames
overview, 484
page thumbnails, 518
size of publications 
and, 489–490
embedded movies in PDF files, 710
embedded OPI links, 480–481
embedded Preflight profiles, 689
embedded text files, 203
Emboss effect, 383, 384
embossing images, 383, 384
empowerment, 708
empty declarations, 754, 759
empty frames, fitting 
graphics into, 503
empty pages, deleting, 113
Emulate Adobe InDesign 2.0 
CMS Off preset, 631
emulsion, print settings for, 659
Enable Anti-Aliasing option, 57

index 783
E
Enable Color Management 
option, 479–480
Enable Dynamic Spelling 
option, 51, 217
Enable Floating Document 
Window Docking option, 39
Enable Layout Adjustment 
option, 89, 103–104
Enable Multi-Touch Gestures 
option, 38, 67
Enable Track Changes in 
Current Story option, 210
encoding
PDF files, 522
XML files, 543
encryption for PDF files, 527–528
End Indicator (text on 
paths), 454–455
End Nested Style Character 
option, 292
endnotes, 197, 223
ends of stories, searching to, 228
Engine pop-up menu, 635
entering text
creating text frames, 148–149
dummy text, 173–175
glyphs, 171–173
importing text or files, 194–201
non-Latin faces and, 42
special characters, 169–173
Type tool, 17, 18, 21
entries. See indexes and 
index entries
Entry Separators options, 573–574
envelopes, 87
environment for color 
management, 629
EPS graphics
choosing file formats, 473, 475
color management, 
628, 640, 644
display performance settings, 56
editing original, 489
exporting, 513–515
importing, 480–481, 667
listing fonts in, 275–276
metafiles, 472–473
OPI and, 667
strengths and weaknesses 
of, 473
transparency and, 374, 679
EPS Import Options dialog 
box, 480–481, 667
EPUB 3.0 with Layout option, 753
EPUB Export Options 
dialog box, 752–755
EPUB files and eBooks
animation, 733
Articles panel, 746–747
classes, 749
cover and title pages, 750
creating, 710, 745, 753–755
embedded fonts, 755
EPUB 2.0.1 format, 753
EPUB 3.0 format, 114, 
733, 753, 755
exporting, 554, 745, 
747, 753–755
HTML5 pagination options, 114
IDPF Web site info, 745
interactive features in, 711
layout options, 753
mapping styles for export, 748
order of items in, 746–747
page item tips, 749–753
pagination, 114
previewing, 753
resources for, 755
scripting in, 755
tags in PDF files, 518–519, 544
EPUB Secrets Web site, 755
equal-width columns, 121–122
equilateral polygons, 22
eras, text variables for, 179
Eraser tool, 18, 22, 350, 351
erasing paths, 350, 351
eReaders, 110, 112, 750, 751. 
See also devices (mobile, 
reading, tablet)
errors
Preflight warnings, 687–688
previewing before 
placing files, 202
escaping characters, 239
Escher, M. C., 706
espresso machines, end of 
civilization and, 334
ESTK (ExtendScript Toolkit), 695
Europe ISO Fogra27 setting, 633
Europe Prepress 2 setting, 631
even and odd pages, 553, 650–651
even-odd fills, 348–349
Even Pages Only option, 650–651
evenly-spaced columns, 121–122
evenly-spaced objects, 20, 598–601
events, 719, 720, 734, 737
evil space gods (Cthulhu, 
etc.), 308, 388
examples of scripts. See
scripting examples
Excel files, 194, 200–201, 397
exclamation mark (!), 485
Exclude Overlap path 
operation, 353
Expand All Footnotes 
command, 208
Expand/Collapse Notes, 212
expanded typefaces, faking, 262
expanding
footnotes, 208
layer display, 135–136
notes, 212
panels, 10, 14
text frames automatically, 
156–157
Expert versions of fonts, 265
Export Adobe Flash CS6 
Professional (FLA) 
dialog box, 745
Export Adobe PDF dialog box
color management 
and, 642–644
Compression pane, 520–523
General pane, 516–520
Ink Manager, 524, 525, 625
overview, 516
Security pane, 527–528
Export dialog box, 203
Export EPS dialog box, 
513–515, 625
export filters, 203, 246
Export JPEG dialog box, 511–512
Export SWF dialog box, 743–744
Export Tagging options, 748, 756
Export XML dialog box, 543
ExportAllStories script, 699
exporting
accessible tagged files, 530–531
Adobe Edge files, 756, 765
animation for PDF files, 738
Background Tasks info, 27
booklets, 675
books, 546, 554, 675
color management 
profiles and, 640
documents with hyperlinks, 717
eBook covers and title 
pages, 750
eBook footnotes, 750
eBook metadata, 754
EPS graphics, 513–515

784 e d de indein c6
F
EPUB files, 554, 745, 
750, 753–755
export options, saving, 528–530
Flash files, 745
HTML, 755–760
InDesign IDML files, 532
InDesign Markup 
Format files, 76
interactive PDF files, 710–711, 
738, 741–743, 745
interactive SWF files, 743–744
JPEG files, 511–512
mapping styles in tagged 
PDFs, 531
metadata, 504, 754
motion presets, 738
objects as snippets, 532–533
overview, 511
PDF export presets, 528–530
PDF files, 516–520, 554, 
675, 741–743
PDF forms, 724
PNG files, 511–512
PostScript files to disk, 647
print presets, 670
snippets, 756
stories from publications, 699
style groups and, 331
SWF files, 743–744
tagging options, 530–531, 
544, 748, 756
text files, 203
Word files, 331
XML files or tags, 543–544
Exposé, 409n
ExtendScript Toolkit, 695
Extensible Markup Language. 
See XML and structured 
documents
Extension Manager, 67
extensions, file, 76, 178
External CSS option, 759
Extra Carriage Returns 
setting, 200
Extra Spaces setting, 200
“extract label” method, 703
extracting metadata from files, 504
Extras submenu (View menu), 39
extraterrestrial plots, 388
eye icon, 136
Eyedropper Options 
dialog box, 24, 25
Eyedropper tool, 18, 24, 
25, 366, 369
EyeOne device, 629
F
F4V files, 729, 731, 732
facing pages, 70, 71, 84, 86
Facing Pages option, 70, 71, 84
Fade In animation, 734
fades (animated objects), 735
fake condensed or expanded 
type, 262
fake fractions, 271–272
fake italic type, 263, 264
fake Latin text, 173–175
Farrukh Imposition Publisher, 671
Fast Display setting, 477
fast hyperlinks, 712
Fast Saves option (Word), 199
fatigue, scripting and, 701
favorite shortcuts, 32
FDF data, 722
Feather Widths option, 386
feathering, 384–387, 477, 614
Fidelity slider, 350
fields
buttons as, 720
form data in PDFs, 722, 724–727
tab order, 722, 743
fiends, hardcore Find/Change 
shortcuts and, 231
figure elements, tagging, 530
figures
captions, 463–466
figure numbers, 176, 311, 313
lining figures, 274–275
numerals. See numbers
file control systems 
(workgroups), 550
file extensions, 76, 178
file formats. See also names 
of specific formats
compression and, 474
exporting text, 203
graphic file formats, 473–475
importing text, 194–195
sending files to printers, 
686–687
File Handling dialog box, 
59–61, 491–492
File Info dialog box, 504, 753
File Information dialog box, 754
file links. See linked graphics 
and text files
File Name variable, 175, 178
file paths, 491, 492
file size, folios, 764
files. See also publications
converting, 74–75, 484
creating links to, 60
exporting. See exporting
folios, 762, 764
hyperlinks to, 714
imagesetting, preparing 
for, 686–687
metadata in, 503–505
opening with button 
actions, 721
organizing in books, 548
packaging, 682, 690–691
preflight testing, 687–690
relinking to different 
files, 488–489
temporary, 59, 60
text variables in, 177
Fill Frame Proportionally 
option, 110, 500, 501, 539
Fill selector, 18, 26–27, 366, 607
Fill with Placeholder Text 
command, 173
fills
after path operations, 352
alternating, in tables, 421–422
applying, 366–367
applying effects to, 379
applying to text characters, 
276, 277
cell styles, 424
copying with Eyedropper 
tool, 24, 25
currently selected swatch, 607
default fill color, 607
displaying information 
about, 28
EPUB and HTML export, 750
Fill selector, 26–27, 366, 607
finding/replacing in 
objects, 144–146
gradient fills. See gradients 
and gradient fills
paths with even-odd 
fills, 348–349
removing fills, 27, 366–367
swapping fill and stroke 
colors, 607

index 785
F
table options, 424
table styles, 426
filtering Quick Apply list, 463
filters
export filters, 203, 246
import filters, 195–202, 246
Final positional form, 273
find and replace. See finding 
and replacing
Find/Change dialog box, 11, 
145–146, 226–244
Find Font dialog box, 275–276
Find Format Settings 
dialog box, 232
Find Missing Links Before 
Opening Document 
checkbox, 492
Find Missing Links Before 
Opening Document 
option, 60
Find Next button, 229
Find Object Format Options 
dialog box, 145
Find What field, 228
FindChange scripts, 699
finding
linked images on disk, 
490, 491, 492
metadata in files, 504–505
missing links, 60, 487, 492
words, 228
finding and replacing
defining range of searches, 228
Find/Change dialog box, 11, 
145–146, 226–244
finding next instances, 229
fonts, 275–276
formatting attributes, 232–234
index entries, 570
keyboard shortcuts, 231
metacharacters/wildcards, 
229–230
methods, 226–227
object formatting, 144–146
options and settings, 227–228
overview, 226–227
saving queries, 244
text
deleting text by style, 236
FindChange scripts, 699
glyphs, 242–245
GREP methods, 236–242
index entries, 570
metacharacters/wildcards, 
229–230
methods, 226–227
note text, 52
replacing text, 230–231
replacing with Clipboard, 234
Unicode text values, 235
Fire tablet, 760–766
Fireworks, 759
First Baseline Offset option, 221
First Baseline option, 437
first baselines, text, 
155–156, 221, 437
First Line Left Indent field, 279
first line of paragraphs
aligning to baseline grid, 289
first line indentation, 279–281
“first name, last name” 
order, 238–239, 242
First on Page option, 178, 186
First Page button, 3, 5
fission, single-cell tables and, 411
Fit Content Proportionally 
command, 500, 501, 596
Fit Content to Frame 
command, 500, 501
Fit Frame to Content command, 
500, 501, 502, 596, 730
Fit Page in Window 
view, 32, 63, 82
Fit Selection in Window 
command, 63–64
Fit Spread in Window view, 63
fitting
content in frames, 500, 
501–503, 596
data merge content, 539
frames to content, 167–169
objects on screen, 32, 63–65
video content in frames, 730
Fitting pop-up menu, 539
Fixed Column Width option, 150
fixed leading, 155–156, 437
FLA. See Flash and FLA files
flagging. See highlighting
Flash and FLA files
animation, 733–734
controllers, 731
editing, 745
exporting, 710, 711, 745
hyperlinks to, 714
interactive features in, 710, 711
limitations, 733
text in, 745
using motion presets 
in, 734, 738
Flash Classic Text option, 744
Flash Professional, 738
Flash TLF Text option, 745
Flatten Transparency option, 745
flattened Photoshop files, 474–475
flattener. See also transparency
Acrobat Reader and, 517
exporting EPS graphics, 515
exporting PDF files, 526
flattener presets, 681–683
flattening methods, 678–679
previewing settings, 684–685
resolution setting, 681–683
settings, 373
tricks and guidelines, 679–680
flattener presets, 681–683
Flattener Preview panel (Flattener 
Alert panel), 684–685
Fleishman, Glenn, 476
flexible column width options, 151
Flexible Columns option, 110, 157
flexographic printing, 653
Flip buttons, 582
Flip commands, 591
Flip option, path text, 458, 459
Flip pop-up menu, 659
flipping
arrows, 360, 361
buttons for, 582
objects, 591
output options, 659
pages automatically, 742
text on paths, 455, 456, 458, 459
floating panels, 3, 38
floating windows (documents), 39
floating windows (video), 732
floppy disk icon, 332
flowing text, 160–162, 164–167. 
See also linked text frames
fluorescent inks, 614
fluxoid plasma leaks, 753
FLV files, 729, 731, 732. See 
also Flash and FLA files
fly-out tool menus, 18
focus, 9–10, 719
Fogra setting, 631, 633
Folder Number display, 486
Folder options (metadata), 464
folders
displaying paths in 
metadata, 464

786 e d de indein c6
F
HTML-exported images, 
758, 759
paths in text variables, 178
relink folders, 492
searching for fonts, 691
Folio Builder panel, 761–2, 763
Folio Overlays panel, 710, 761, 763
Folio Preview option, 764
folio renditions, 764–765
Folio view, 763
folios
alternate layouts, 762
aspect ratios, 765
bloated size of, 764
creating, 762
interactivity, 763–764
multiple articles in, 762
previewing, 760, 764
renditions for, 764–765
source documents, 761, 762
transferring source files, 690
uploading to cloud, 762
Font Downloading 
settings, 664–665
font families and fonts
checking in Preflight, 687
Document Fonts folder, 691
downloadable fonts, 664–665
duplicated names, 253
embedded fonts, 514, 516, 
525–526, 755
embedding in eBooks, 755
embedding in EPS files, 514
finding/changing, 232–
234, 242–245
font preview size, 41
form fields, 726
glyphs. See glyphs; special 
characters
including with files, 690
kerning and, 258–359
letter and word spacing, 
301–303
mixing and matching 
characters, 173
Multiple Master fonts, 40
non-Latin fonts, 42
OpenType fonts, 270–275
ornament characters, 173
outline fonts, 432
PDF, PDF/X... files, 516
positional forms, 273
printer fonts, 432
publication folder for, 691
resident fonts, 664
searching directories for, 691
selecting, 251–253
special characters. See 
special characters
stylistic sets, 273
subsetting, 36, 525–526
substitution, 43, 242, 253
symbol fonts, 253
version numbers, 275
Font Preview Size option, 41
font subsetting, 36, 525–526
font substitution, 43, 242, 253
footers. See headers or footers
Footnote Options dialog 
box, 219–223
footnotes
creating, 218–223
deleting, 219
endnotes, 223
EPUB export, 750
finding text in, 228
HTML export, 757
limitations of, in InDesign, 218
rules above, 222
split columns and, 158
Story Editor view, 208
in Word files, 197
Footnotes/Endnotes option, 197
For Next # of Pages option, 564
For Next # of Paragraphs 
option, 564
For Position Only images, 488
force justified paragraph 
alignment, 278
forced line breaks, 494, 752
foreground color. See transparency
formats. See file formats
formatting. See also mapping 
styles; styles
after path operations, 352
attributes. See formatting 
attributes
characters. See character 
formatting; formatting text
Clipboard contents and, 234
compared to styles, 315, 316
CSS files and, 749
eBook exports and, 754
Eyedropper tool and, 24, 25
finding/replacing, 144–146
mapping styles, 497–498
paragraphs. See formatting text; 
paragraph formatting
paths, 338
Quick Apply feature, 460–463
retaining when pasting, 61
reusing. See styles
tables. See formatting tables
text. See formatting text
Formatting Affects Container 
button, 18, 27
Formatting Affects Text 
button, 18, 27, 277
formatting attributes
deleting text with specified 
styles, 236
finding and changing, 232–234
typesetting tags. See tagged 
text and documents
formatting tables. See also tables
alternating fills or 
strokes, 421–422
applying, 413
borders of tables, 421
cell options, 413–414
diagonal lines, 419–420
fills, 416–419
gradients, 418–419
strokes, 413–416
formatting text. See also tagged 
text and documents
characters. See character 
formatting
in containers, 27, 277
cross references, 192, 193–194
CSS files and, 754, 759
dates, 178
deleting text with specified 
styles, 236
email addresses, 240
entire text frames, 251
finding/changing 
attributes, 232–234
global, 315
local, 315, 319, 321, 323, 324
matching in eBooks, 754
paragraphs. See paragraph 
formatting
pasted text, 194
preserving in HTML files, 760
preserving/removing during 
import, 197, 202
removed during eBook 
export, 746
selecting text, 250–251, 255, 256
styles. See styles
tab leaders, 285–286

index 787
G
tables. See formatting tables
text between tags, 239–240, 243
typesetting tags. See tagged 
text and documents
forms
clearing with buttons, 721
collecting and submitting 
data, 722
creating for PDF files, 724–726
exporting, 743
fields, 726, 727
interactive file support, 711, 743
multiple selection lists, 727
passwords, 726
radio and check box 
defaults, 727
sample objects for, 726
sorting list and combo 
boxes, 727
tab order, 722, 743
tooltips for, 726
values exported from forms, 727
Forms And Media option, 743
formulas in fields, 16
forums
Digital Publishing Suite, 766
InDesign scripting, 697
fountains. See gradients 
and gradient fills
FPO images, 488
fractions, 171, 271–272
Frame Content option, 494
frame drawing tools, 148, 149
Frame Fitting Options dialog 
box, 110, 501–502, 503
frames (layout)
alternate layouts and fitting, 111
applying effects to, 379
button rollovers and 
states, 722–723
centering contents in, 502–503
converting clipping paths to, 510
converting to buttons, 719
converting to text frames, 148
corner options, 354–355, 356
drawing, 335, 336
fitting features, 111, 
500, 501–503
graphic place icons, 68
HTML export, 756
inline. See inline frames
liquid page rules, 109–110
for media files, 730
non-rectangular, 155
placing graphics in, 469
placing multiple files 
and, 471–472
removing objects from, 704–706
scaling and, 588
selecting frames or 
contents, 498–499
shrinking to fit contents, 
167–169
tagging with XML tags, 541, 542
text. See text frames
text flow icons and, 68
transforming contents, 
577–578, 580
XML element data and, 541, 542
frames (movies), 731
Fraser, Bruce, 476, 628
free DPS Tips app, 764
Free Transform tool, 17, 18, 
24, 585, 587, 589
Freedman, Matt, 706
freeform paths, 21–22, 340–342
“freezing” text variables, 183
frequency, screen, 521, 659–661
Friedl, Jeffrey E. F., 241
friends, impressing, 23
“friends” who bump your arm, 349
From Structure option, 530
full-height numerals, 274–275
full-page images in eBooks, 751
full screen mode (Acrobat), 742
full spectrum lighting, 629
“furi kuri,” 36
furlongs, 45
fuzzy graphics, 476
fx icon, 388
fx pop-up menu, 379, 380
G
gamuts, color, 604, 611, 
621, 635–636
Gap Color/Gap Tint pop-
ups, 360, 361
Gap setting, 652
Gap tool, 17, 18, 20, 599–601
gaps
between printed pages, 652
spacing objects, 599–601
in strokes, 359, 360, 361, 
362, 363–365
gate folds, 87
General pane (HTML Export 
Options dialog box), 758–759
General pane (Print dialog 
box), 648–651
General Preferences dialog 
box, 36–37
General Purpose option (color 
management preset), 631
Generate Index button or 
dialog box, 570–574
Generate Overset Text 
Report with Document 
Creation option, 537
generating
data merge reports, 537
embedded SWF file codes, 743
indexes, 570–574
tables of contents, 559
generosity of PeachPit Press, 301
gestures, 38, 67
ghosts, battling, 157
GIF files, 56, 472, 478–
480, 754, 759
Gill, Tim, 677, 678
global formatting, 315
Global Light option, 381
glow effect, 383, 699
Glyph Scaling option, 302–303
glyph sets, 173
glyphs. See also special characters
bullets, 307–309
entering in text frames, 171–173
finding and changing, 
226, 242–245
glyph sets, 173
Glyphs panel, 11, 242–245
highlighting substituted 
glyphs, 44
OpenType fonts and, 271
scaling, 302–303
subsetting characters 
in fonts, 36
substitution, 242
Glyphs panel, 11, 171–173, 
242–245
gnawing off legs, 631
Go Back/Go Forward 
commands, 67
Go to Bridge button, 4
Go to Destination action, 720
Go to Link button, 490
Go to Next Note/Go to Previous 
Note button, 212
Go to Next State action, 721
Go to Next View action, 721
Go to Note Anchor button, 212

788 e d de indein c6
G
Go to... Page action, 720
Go To Page command, 67
Go to Previous State action, 721
Go to Previous View action, 721
Go To Source command, 494
Go to State action, 721
Go to URL action, 720
Google Maps, 756, 765
Google Play, 760
Grabber hand, 18, 26, 39, 64, 65, 66
GRACoL setting, 633
Gradient and Mesh Resolution 
setting, 682–683
Gradient Feather effect, 
386–387, 614
Gradient Feather tool, 18, 26
Gradient panel, 11, 368, 369, 
371, 372, 606, 613
gradient ramps, 369
gradient stops, 369, 612
gradient swatches, 611–614
Gradient tool, 18, 26, 369
gradients and gradient fills
applying
basic techniques, 369, 
622–623
to characters, 276, 277
to multiple paths, 372, 373
to paths, 368–369
to table cells, 418–419
transparency to, 614
center points, 368, 369
changing gradient colors, 372
creating, 369–371, 611–614
editing, 371–372
feathering effects, 26, 
386–387, 614
gradient controls, 369
gradient swatches, 611–614
linear gradients, 367–368
radial gradients, 367–368
tools, 18
transparency and 
feathering, 614
transparency flattener 
and, 682–683
graphic display settings, 477–478. 
See also screen display
graphic file formats, 472–475. 
See also graphics; names 
of specific formats (bitmap 
graphics, TIFF images, 
vector graphics, etc.)
graphic frames, 148. See 
also inline frames
Graphic place icon, 68
graphics. See also names of specific 
formats (TIFF images, etc.)
alternate layouts, 110–114
anchoring, 749
button rollovers and 
states, 722–723
captioning, 175, 178, 
187–190, 463–466
checking in Preflight, 687
choosing file formats, 473–475
coloring, 622–623
conditional images, 727
contact sheets, 472
copying pathnames, 534
display settings, 55–58, 476–478
editing original files, 489
embedded. See embedded 
graphics
EPUB exports, 747, 749, 750, 754
EPUB ordering, 747
EPUB sizes, 754
fitting features, 500, 501–503
fonts in, 275–276
fuzzy, troubleshooting, 476
gathering linked images, 
491, 690–691
greeking while moving, 39
HTML exports, 749, 
756–757, 758
image pans, 764
image quality, 512
image sequences, 763–764
ImageCatalog script, 699
importing. See importing 
graphics
importing in merged 
data, 534, 535
importing with Word files, 198
InDesign INDD files, 
483–484 as
information about, 28
inline, 198
large or full-page in EPUB, 751
linked, 484–485, 491, 690–691
liquid page rules, 106–110
metadata, 176, 178, 187–190, 504
multi-state objects, 727–729
optimizing subsampling, 
662–664
panning, 500–501
placing. See placing graphics
preserving dimensions when 
relinking, 61, 492
printing as crossed-
out boxes, 664
printing proxy images, 664
rasterizing for EPUB, 750
redraw settings, 39
relinking, 61, 492
relinking to different 
files, 488–489
replacing with Clipboard, 234
resampling images, 521–522
resizing after layout 
adjustments, 105
resolution. See image resolution
scaling and, 475–476, 588
selecting frames or 
contents, 498–499
slide shows, 727–729
in table cells, 400, 402
troubleshooting, 476
wrapping text around. 
See text wrap
Graphics pane (Print dialog 
box), 662–666
Gravity path text option, 457, 458
gray boxes, displaying for 
graphics, 477, 664
Gray Out setting, 56
grayscale images, 512, 513, 
521, 522, 662–663
grayscale PDFs, 524
Greek Type Below field, 57, 58
Greek Vector Graphics on 
Drag option, 39
greeking, 39, 57, 58
GREP
finding/changing text, 
226, 236–242
nested GREP styles, 296–297
resources for mastering, 241
saving queries, 244
GREP panel, 236–242
GREP Styles dialog box, 296–297
Gridline Every option, 48
grids. See also guides
arranging objects in, 596–597
baseline grid, 47, 130–
131, 286–289
color of, 47
contact sheets, 472
custom baseline grids, 287
document grid, 47–48, 130–131

index 789
H
exporting PDF files 
containing, 520
Grid Mode, 596–597
leading and, 156
MakeGrid script, 699
overview, 130–131
positioning in back, 48
preferences, 47–48
printing, 651
snapping and, 131
spacing, 47–48
Grids in Back option, 48
Grids Preferences dialog 
box, 47–48
grizzled graybeards. See Blatner, 
David; Bringhurst, Bob; 
Kvern, Olav Martin
Group command, 142–143
groups
Content Collector and, 495
EPUB export options, 
650, 748, 751
figures and captions, 465
grouped panels, 13–14
grouping selected 
objects, 142–143
HTML export options, 756
layers and, 136, 142
mixed ink groups, 615–617
playing animated objects, 737
selecting in nested groups, 120
selecting objects in groups, 
20, 118–119, 120, 142
style groups, 329–331
transformations and, 579
transparency in, 377–378
troubleshooting EPUB 
export, 750
ungrouping objects, 143
grunge effects, 382
guide adornments, 108
Guide-Based page rule, 112
guides. See also grids
adding around objects, 124, 698
alternate layouts, 110–114
colors, specifying, 126
column guides, 78, 119, 
121–122, 123
copying, 128
creating, 123–124, 125
deleting, 128
displaying, 121, 126
document grid and, 121
editing, 124–125
exporting PDF files 
containing, 520
hiding, 121
layout adjustment settings, 105
liquid guides, 107–108, 119
locking and unlocking, 
122, 127–128
margin guides, 78, 119
moving between layers, 126
overview, 119–121
positioning in back, 49
preferences, 48–49
printing, 651
ruler guides, 3, 108, 
119, 123–128
selecting, 124
setting page layout 
options, 119–130
Smart Guides, 49, 50, 
119, 128–130
snapping and, 120–121, 124, 131
switching between ruler and 
liquid guides, 108
types of, 119
Guides and Pasteboard 
Preferences dialog box, 48–49
Guides in Back option, 49
Gutenberg, Johannes, 645
gutters, 71, 122, 123, 145, 150
H
H&J Violations option, 43
H.264 encoded videos, 729, 
731, 732, 752, 757
hairlines, 357
halftone screens, 476, 521, 615, 663
Hand tool, 18, 26, 39, 64, 65, 66
hand wringing, linked 
objects and, 494
handles. See control handles; 
selection handles
hanging indents, 280–281, 393
hanging punctuation, 333
hanging side heads, 439–440, 448
hanging text in margins, 290
Hard Light transparency 
mode, 376
hardware, optimizing 
for color, 629
headers or footers
dictionary-style headers, 
186, 189
eBook export options, 753
phone book style, 187, 189
table header or footer 
rows, 402–404
table styles and, 426
text variables and, 176, 
178, 185–187
headings
hanging side heads, 393, 
439–440, 448
in index entries, 562
in tables of contents, 555
headline type, 257
headlines, spanning 
columns, 157–159
heartache. See also madness
color policies and, 634
numbering and, 314
Hebrew typesetting, 273, 298
height
baseline characters, 155–156
scaling and, 586
table rows, 406–407
x height and leading, 257
Height field, 587
help, 19, 37
hexagons, drawing, 22
hidden buttons, 724
hidden cells in Excel, 
importing, 201
hidden characters, 205, 229–230. 
See also special characters
hidden layers
finding text in, 227
hiding, 136, 138
including in indexes, 572
including in tables of 
contents, 558–559
text wrap and, 139
hidden objects, 136, 602
hidden panels, 38
hidden tables of contents, 718
hidden tools, 18
Hide button, 3
Hide Guides command, 121
Hide Live Corners command, 355
Hide Others command, 136
hiding
animated objects, 735
baseline grid, 121
buttons or forms, 720, 724
Content Conveyor, 495, 496
Control panel items, 34
document grid, 121
eBook objects, 747

790 e d de indein c6
I
fields, 720
guides, 121
layers, 136, 138
master page items, 101
menu items, 33
multi-state objects, 729
objects, 602
panels, 10, 12
unused index topics, 569
High Quality display 
setting, 55, 477
High Resolution display setting, 56
High Resolution flattening, 
681, 682
high resolution images, 510, 731
Highlight Object Under 
Selection Tool option, 38
Highlight preferences 
settings, 42–44
highlighting
kerning, 44
objects under cursor, 38
simulating effect in 
text, 267–268
substituted fonts and 
glyphs, 43–44
tracking, 44
typographic problems, 
42–44, 304
Highlights for Children 
puzzles, 338
H&J violations, 43
holes in objects, 347–349, 
352, 353, 509
Honeycomb OS, 765
horizontal axis, reflecting 
objects, 591
horizontal folio layouts, 762
horizontal liquid guides, 107–108
Horizontal Margins field, 49
horizontal orientation, 
112, 652, 762
horizontal ruler, 3, 45
horizontal ruler guides, 3
Horizontal Scaling field, 586, 587
horizontal scroll bar, 3
horizontally distributing 
objects, 598–601
horizontally scaling 
characters, 262
hourly-wages, paragraph 
styles and, 322
hours, in text variables, 179
HTML code
in DPS folios, 765
pasting into snippets, 756
HTML editors, 746–747, 749, 
753–756, 758–760
HTML Export Options 
dialog box, 757–760
HTML files. See also tagged 
text and documents
Adobe Edge animation, 765
classes, 749
embedded SWF file codes, 743
exporting, 755–760
finding and changing text 
between tags, 239–240, 243
importing tables, 397
interactive features, 710, 711
liquid HTML articles, 762
mapping styles for export, 748
order of exported items, 746
HTML5 files, 114, 733, 
752, 757, 765
http://-style URLs, 731
Hue blending mode, 376
human visual color 
perception, 604
Hunspell dictionaries, 50, 214–215
hybrid files, 472–473. See also EPS 
graphics; Illustrator graphics; 
PDF graphics and files; PICT 
graphics; WMF graphics
hyperlinks
appearance, 715
character styles, 713
converting URLs to, 713
creating, 711, 715
creating from URLs, 716
cross references, 191–194
deleting or resetting, 716, 717
destinations for, 713–715
displaying, 716
in DPS files, 710
editing, 713–715
EPUB tables of contents, 751
exporting documents with, 717
fast hyperlinks, 712
in Flash files, 745
in HTML files, 757
interactive file support, 
711, 712–717
limitations, 733
named/unnamed, 
711–712, 715, 716
not exported to HTML, 757
in PDF files, 520, 712–717
previewing, 740–741
shared destinations, 714
styles for, 715
in SWF files, 743
updating, 717
in Word files, 715
Hyperlinks option, 520
Hyphenate button, 215
hyphenation
adding words to dictionary, 
215–216
consecutive hyphens, 300
controlling, 299–301
dictionaries, 50
discretionary hyphens, 301
exported text in Flash files, 745
hyphenation zone, 300
imported text, 200
language and character 
formatting, 263–264
multi-line composition, 298
paragraph formatting, 299–301
preventing reflow, 691
Hyphenation Settings 
dialog box, 299–301
Hyphenation Slider (“Nigel”), 300
hyphenation zone, 300
hyphens, 170, 300, 301
I
iBooks, 745, 750, 755. See also 
EPUB files and eBooks
iBookstore, 755, 760, 762
ICC (International Color 
Consortium), 524, 525, 628
icons
displaying panels as, 38
reducing panels to, 12
resizing, 79
IDE (ExtendScript Toolkit), 695
IDML files, 74, 75, 532
IDMS files, 532
IDPF Web site, 745
Ignore All button, 214
Ignore Linked Profiles policy, 637
Ignore Object and Layer 
Locks option, 105
Ignore Object Export 
Settings option, 754
Ignore Optical Margin feature, 334
Ignore Ruler Guide Alignments 
option, 105

index 791
I
Ignore Text Wrap option, 
133, 153, 431
Illustrator graphics
AI files, 628, 679
AICB setting, 468
color management and, 628
importing, 468, 481–483
layers in, 483
metadata from, 178, 190
metafiles, 472–473
optimizing images for 
HTML, 759
placing with captions, 466
transparency and, 679
Image Import Options dialog 
box, 478–484, 637
image pans, 764
Image place icon, 68
image resolution
best settings, 475–476
clipping paths and, 510
displaying in Info panel, 28
exporting EPS and, 514–515
image quality, 512
monochrome images, 521, 522
optimizing printed 
images, 662–664
posters, 731
resampling images, 521–522
image sequences, 763–4
ImageCatalog script, 699
images. See bitmap graphics; GIF 
files; graphics; JPEG files; 
TIFF images; vector graphics
images folder (HTML export), 758
Images pane (HTML Export 
Options dialog box), 758
imagesetters and service providers
designer and service bureau 
responsibilities, 686
draw-downs, 614
file formats for, 686–687
packaging files for, 682, 690–691
preflight file testing, 687–690
preparing files for, 686–687
printers’ sleep-talking 
habits, 610
screening settings and, 661
IME (Input Method Editor), 42
import filters
overview, 194–201
tagged text, 202, 246
Import Hidden Cells Not Saved 
in View option, 201
Import Inline Graphics 
option, 198, 201
Import Options dialog box
bitmap images, 478–480
EPS files, 480–481
Excel import options, 200–201
image import options, 478–484
RTF import options, 196–199
tagged text import options, 202
text import options, 199–200
Word import options, 196–199
Import Styles Automatically 
option, 199
Import Unused Styles option, 198
importing
audio or video files, 729–730
data. See importing data
graphics. See importing 
graphics
HTML files, 397, 755
master spreads and pages, 95–97
motion presets, 738
multiple files, 471–472
object styles, 454
PDF export presets, 530
print presets, 670
snippets, 60
stroke styles, 365, 366
tables, 397
text. See importing text
user dictionaries, 51
importing data. See also forms
blank lines in data file, 539
data file setup, 533–534
file metadata, 504
importing images with 
text, 534, 535
importing indexing 
with text, 569
limiting number of records, 539
master pages and, 536
merging data into 
InDesign, 533–540
multiple records on 
pages, 537, 539
overview, 533
template setup, 534–536
updating merged data, 540
importing graphics
AI graphics, 481–483
applying color to graphics, 
510–511
bitmap graphics, 478–480
charts, 200
color profiles, 637–638
copying and pasting, 468
with destination frame 
selected, 469
dragging and dropping, 468
embedding files, 484, 489–490
EPS graphics, 473, 480–481
graphic display settings, 
476–478
graphic file formats, 473–475
import methods, 468
InDesign INDD files, 483–484
inline graphics in Excel 
files, 201
inline graphics in Word 
files, 198
layer visibility, 480
linking to files, 60, 485–489
metadata and, 504
multiple files, 471–472
with no frame selected, 469, 470
object styles and, 454
overview, 468
path operations and, 352
PDF graphics, 475, 481–483
place icons, 68
placing files, 468
resizing imported 
graphics, 499–500
unembedding graphics, 490
video files, 729–730
importing text
cell and table styles, 428
embedding text files, 203
Excel data, 200–201, 397
HTML files, 397, 755
import filters, 194–195
index markers and, 569
inline graphics and, 198
linking to files, 60, 203
multiple files, 471–472
place icons, 68
placing text files, 194–196
quotation marks and, 197
replacing selected text, 195
RTF files, 196–199
tables, 397
tagged text, 202
text-only files, 199–200
text styles, 331–332
text variables, 180–181
updating imported text, 203
Word files, 196–199, 397, 569
XML files, 541, 542

792 e d de indein c6
I
imposition, 671–675
Imposition Publisher, 671
Impostrip, 671
impressing friends, 23
in ports, 159–160, 161–162
In-RIP Separations option, 658
in-RIP trapping, 659
In Use document status 
icons, 549, 550
inactive publication windows, 8
incandescent lighting, 629
inch measurement overrides, 16
Include Book Documents 
option, 572
Include Bookmarks 
option, 519–520
Include Deleted Text When 
Spellchecking option, 54
Include Document Metadata 
option, 754
Include Embeddable 
Fonts option, 755
Include Entire Folder Path 
option (text variables), 178
Include Entries on Hidden 
Layers option, 572
Include File Extension option 
(text variables), 178
Include Footnotes option, 228
Include Hidden layers option, 227
Include Index Section Headings 
option, 572–573
Include Interactive Page 
Curl option, 743
Include Locked Layers (Find 
Only) option, 227
Include Locked Stories (Find 
Only) option, 227
Include Master Pages option, 227
Include Note Content in Find/
Change Operations option, 52
Include Note Content When 
Checking Spelling option, 52
Include Style Definitions 
option, 754, 759
Include Text in Hidden Layers 
option, 558–559
InCopy, 210, 212–213, 227, 486
Increment Every field, 47
InData, 533
INDD files. See also publications
importing, 483–484
using extensions, 76
indenting. See also tabs 
and tab stops
bulleted lists, 308
hanging indents, 280–281, 393
HTML and EPUB exports, 749
indented (nested) index 
format, 572
paragraph formatting, 279–281
table of contents entry 
levels, 558
InDesign
online help, 4
plug-ins, 67–68
publications. See publications
saving for earlier 
versions, 76–77
scripting forum, 697
scripting philosophy, 700
windows and components, 2–9
InDesign Interchange (IDML) 
format, 74, 75, 532
InDesign Interchange (INX) 
format, 77, 532
InDesign Recovery folder, 77
InDesign Scripting Guide 
and Tutorial, 697, 703
InDesign Secrets templates, 76
InDesign Shortcut Sets folder, 30
InDesign Snippet command, 533
InDesign tagged text. See tagged 
text and documents
index entries. See indexes 
and index entries
Index panel, 11, 561. See also 
indexes and index entries
Index Style options, 573
Index Text option, 197
indexers
eternal affection towards 
David, Bob, and Ole, 574
whims of, 573–574
indexes and index entries
adding every instance of 
entries, 565–566
adding multiple entries, 
565–566
alpha section heads, 572–573
book documents and, 572
building indexes, 570–574
bypassing dialog box, 565
compared to concordances, 561
creating entries, 561–565, 568
cross-references, 566–568
deleting entries, 569
dummy, 567
editing entries, 569–570
finding entries, 570
forcing entry sort order, 
562, 570
hidden layers, entries on, 572
hyperlinked in PDF files, 520
importing topics, 569
importing Word/RTF 
files, 197, 569
Index panel, 561
markers not exported to 
HTML or EPUB, 757
nested or run-in format, 572
page number styles, 562
page range options, 562–565
page references, 568, 570
replacing existing indexes, 572
scope of entries, 562–565
separators, specifying, 573–574
sorting symbols or 
numbers, 570
styles, 573
titles, 571
INDS files, 533
INDT extension, 76
inferior formatting (subscript), 
42, 262–263, 269–270, 273
Info panel, 11, 27–28
inheritance
master spreads, 97, 98
parent-child style relationships, 
328–329, 451
Initial positional form, 273
Ink Black option, 639
Ink Limit option, 676, 677
ink lists, 605, 661
Ink Manager
exporting EPS files and, 515
exporting PDF files 
and, 524, 525
overview, 625–626
printing and, 662
inkjet printers, 630
inks
black inks, 58–59, 639–640, 677
black point compensation 
setting, 636
densities, 677
Ink Manager overview, 625
lists, 605, 661
matching, 58–59, 639–640
mixed ink swatches, 614–617
names, 675

index 793
J
overprinting black ink, 677
transparent objects 
and, 374–375
trapping. See trapping
turning on or off, 661
Inks list, 605, 661
Inline Background Color 
option, 52
inline frames. See also 
anchored objects
creating, 434–437
drop caps, 447
EPUB and HTML export, 750
hanging side heads, 
439–440, 448
limitations of, 436
moving, 436–437
removing, 441
selecting, 436, 441
inline graphics, imported, 198, 201
Inline Input for Non-Latin 
text option, 42
INMS files, 33
Inner Bevel effect, 383, 384
Inner Glow feature, 383
Inner Shadow effect, 383
Input Method Editor (IME), 42
insanity. See madness
Insert Anchored Object 
command, 436
Insert Break Character 
submenu, 169
Insert Column(s) dialog box, 408
Insert HTML option, 756
“insert label” method, 703
Insert Pages command/
dialog box, 83–84
Insert Row(s) dialog box, 407
Insert Special Character 
submenu, 92, 169
Insert Table dialog box, 396
Insert Variable submenu, 177
Insert White Space submenu, 169
Inset Spacing settings, 152
insets, 152
inside edges of clipping paths, 509
INST files, 366
instances of text variables, 
175, 177, 182–183. See 
also text variables
Integrated Development 
Environment (IDE) 
(ExtendScript Toolkit), 695
Intent pop-up menu, 762
Intent settings (documents), 
635–636
Intent settings (files), 70, 112
intents, rendering, 480
interactive features
animation, 733–734
audio and video files, 729–733
bookmarks, 718
buttons, 719–724
Digital Publishing 
Suite, 763–764
document intent settings, 70
exporting interactive 
files, 743–744
in Flash files, 745
hyperlinks, 712–717
interactive overlays, 763
interactivity after 
export, 710–711
Media panel, 731–733
multi-state objects, 727–729
overview, 710–711
page transition effects, 739
in PDF files, 520, 741–743
Presentation Mode, 740–741
previewing, 740–741
rollovers and states, 722–723
slide shows, 727–729
in SWF files, 743–744
interactive overlays, 763
Interactivity setting, 743–744
interchange formats, 195
Interface Preferences 
dialog box, 37–39
International Color Consortium 
(ICC), 524, 525, 628
International Digital Publishing 
Forum (IDPF), 745
Intersect path operation, 352, 353
intersecting objects, path 
operations and, 350–354
inverting
arrowheads, 360, 361
clipping paths, 509
path direction, 338, 361
text wrap, 430, 432
invisible animated objects, 735
invisible buttons, 724
INX files, 77, 532
IOS devices, 760–766. See 
also devices (mobile, 
reading, tablet)
iPads, 110, 112, 745, 752, 760–766
iPhones, 752, 760–766
irritation, scripting and, 701
ISBN numbers, 754
island spreads, 85
ISO standard PDF/X... 
formats, 516. See also
PDF graphics and files
Isolate Blending option, 377
Isolated positional form, 273
italic text, 263, 264, 755, 760
itchy palms, effects and, 379
Item Information dialog box, 28
iTunes, 729
J
Japan Color setting, 631
Japan Prepress 2 setting, 631
Japanese text, 42, 298
JavaScript, 695, 704, 755, 760
JDF (Job Definition Format), 526
JGSoft RegixBuddy, 241
Join options, 358
joining paths, 346, 358
JPEG 2000 encoding, 522
JPEG files
bitmap files, 472
color spaces, 512
display performance settings, 56
EPUB images, 754
exporting documents 
as, 511–512
HTML export, 759
importing, 478–480
interactive document 
settings, 743
JPEG compression, 474
PDF specifications, 522
print settings, 662–664
resolution, 512
strengths and weaknesses 
of, 474
JPEG Quality pop-up menu, 743
JS files, 695
JScript, 697
JSX files, 695
Jump Object text wrap option, 429
Jump To Next Column option, 429
jumping. See navigating
justification
hyphenation and, 300
justified text, 44–45
last line indents, 279
letter spacing, 301–303

794 e d de indein c6
K
objects in middle of 
columns, 44–45
paragraph alignment, 278
really bad decisions and, 45
tracking and, 262
vertical justification, 153–154
word spacing, 301–303
Justification dialog box, 301–303, 
304, 439. See also justification
Justify option, 154
Justify Text Next to an 
Object option, 44–45
K
Kahrel, Peter, 241
Katakana, 36
Keep Layer Visibility 
Overrides option, 483
keep options, 43, 304–306
Keep Options dialog box, 
43, 304–306
Keep Violations option, 43
Keep within Top/Bottom Column 
Bounds option, 446
Kent, Clark, 602
kerning. See also tracking 
(spacing)
automatic kerning, 258–260
drop caps and, 290
highlighting manual 
kerning, 44
keyboard shortcuts, 47
manual kerning, 44, 257–258
Metrics method, 258–259
multi-line composition, 297–299
negative kerning, 290
Optical method, 259–260
overview, 257
pair kerning, 257, 258–260
preferences, 47
range kerning, 257, 260
removing, 258
in text outside text frames, 290
word spacing, 260
Key objects, 597
Keyboard Increments 
settings, 46–47
keyboard shortcuts. See shortcuts
Keyboard Shortcuts 
dialog box, 30, 31
keyword metadata in eBooks, 753
Kindle devices, 110, 112, 
745, 755, 760–766
Knockout Group option, 377–378
Kodak PREPS, 671
Korean text, 42
Kuler panel, 623–624
Kvern, Olav Martin
accidents involving creation 
dates and chapter 
numbers, 180
cross references and 
tiny hearts, 191
descent towards madness 
with even-odd fills, 348
difficulties spelling 
“paragraph,” 217
dreams about formatting 
and organizational 
goodness, 704
as driven batty by Smart 
Guides, 130
early childhood schoolward-
bound treks in freezing 
cold weather, 347
equation-related panic, 694
favoritism towards furlongs 
and stones, 45
gloomy outlook on life, 347
great expectations for 
ragged lines, 303
as heartless towards 
inoffensive controls, 34
indexer’s eternal affection 
towards, 574
irritating and pedantic views 
on drop caps, 447
K family name obsessions 
of, 187
“Kvern” as common 
household word, 215
left-leaning yet flattening-far-
right tendencies of, 682
as middle-of-the-road guy, 55
Mystic Rose script, 708
nightmares about PageMaker 
3.0 documentation, 389
nights at The Rocket, 249
as not getting out enough, 704
obsession for geometric art, 706
obsolete esoteric 
knowledge of, 184
old style numeral disagreements 
with David, 274
on risky but not criminal 
glyph behaviors, 303
as scriptmeister supreme, 694
side head self-experimentation 
and, 448
as spending way too much time 
digging in INMS files, 33
strong feelings about 
subsetting fonts, 526
strong stomach of, save 
for runts, 300
as subselector, 118
tab tzarism of, 282
uncaring attitude towards text 
wrap and object effects, 34
unreasonable need to spell 
“furi kuri,” 36
L
LAB color model, 605, 621. 
See also color models
Label property, page 
items, 702–703
labels
figure captions, 463–466
master and layout pages, 81
Lake Minnetonka, 75
landscape orientation, 
70, 112, 652, 762
language
character formatting, 263–264
dictionaries, 50
right-to-left composition, 298
versions of documents, 223
last line of paragraphs, 
aligning, 278
Last Line Right Indent field, 279
“last name, first name” 
order, 238–239, 242
Last on Page option, 178, 186
Last Page button, 3, 5
Last Page Number variable, 
175, 178, 184
Late Night Software, 696
Latin text, fake, 173–175
Layer Comps command, 506
Layer Options dialog box, 138–140
Layer Visibility setting, 480
layered objects. See stacking 
order of objects
layered strokes, 359–360
layers. See also stacking 
order of objects
Acrobat layers, 742
AI and PDF files, 483
captions on, 465

index 795
L
copying between files, 140–141
copying or moving objects 
to other layers, 138, 
139, 140–141
creating, 133–134, 135
deleting, 135, 140
editing layer properties, 
138–140
expanding/collapsing 
view, 135–136
finding text in hidden 
or locked, 227
groups and, 136, 142–143
hidden layers, 136, 138, 139, 227
Layers panel, 11, 135–138
locked layers, 137, 139, 227, 601
master page items and, 141–142
merging, 140, 142
moving guides to other 
layers, 126
multi-state object stacks, 727
naming, 135, 136, 138
pasting objects, 140
PDF files and, 505, 519, 554
Photoshop files and, 474–475
printing options, 651
ruler guides on, 126, 127
selecting objects behind 
other objects, 117
selection colors, 136, 138
Selection Proxy, 138
showing, 136, 138
stacking order of layers, 140
stacking order of objects, 
131–133
target layer, 137
text wrap and, 133, 139
unlocking, 137
unused layers, 140
visibility options, 480, 
483, 505–506
Layers panel, 11, 135–138
Layout Adjustment command 
and dialog box, 103–105
Layout view, 763
layouts. See alternate layouts; 
page layouts; pages
LayoutZone script, 484
leaders (tab leaders), 285–286
leading
applying to entire 
paragraphs, 254
Auto paragraph leading, 
255, 303
baseline grid and, 156, 286–289
changing, 46–47
character vs. paragraph 
attribute, 40, 255
characters and, 40
custom baseline grids and, 287
first baseline positioning, 
155–156
keyboard shortcuts, 46–47, 256
leading creep, avoiding, 287
overview, 254–255
paragraph settings, 40, 254
Skip by Leading option, 45
solid, 257
space before and after 
paragraph adjustments, 
154–155, 286, 287
text wrap and, 45
tips and tricks, 257
troubleshooting, 255–256
vertically-justified text and, 154
Leading method, baseline 
positioning, 155
Leave Unchanged option 
(color), 513
left double quotes (“), 
39–40, 50, 197
left-hand pages, 553
Left Indent field, 279
left paragraph alignment, 278
left single quotes (‘), 39–40, 50
left tab stops, 282–283
legal document numbering 
schemes, 184
legs, gnawing off, 631
Let InDesign Determine 
Color option, 640–641
letter spacing, 44, 260, 301–303. 
See also kerning; tracking
letterhead, 87
Level option, 558
Level Style option, 573
libraries, 28, 332, 606, 610
Library panel, 28
licenses, Digital Publishing 
Suite, 760
ligatures, 171, 226, 269, 271, 272
Lighten transparency mode, 376
lighting, optimizing for color, 629
Limit to Primary Text 
Frames option, 41
Lincoln, Abraham, 306
line art, 476, 523, 682
Line Art and Text Resolution 
setting, 682
line breaks
auto-sizing text frames and, 157
balancing ragged lines, 304
eBooks and, 752
manual breaks, 298
multi-line composition, 298
preventing, 270
removing, 494
soft returns, 277
story window, 206
text variables and, 176
Line tool, 17, 18, 22, 336
line weight for strokes, 356–357
linear gradients, 367–368
lines and line segments. See 
also paragraph rules; paths 
(drawn); points; strokes
adding points to, 343
Bezier paths, 337
button rollovers and 
states, 722–723
control handles. See 
control handles
corner or curve points, 339
curves of, 339–340, 343, 344
dashed lines, 359
drawing, 22, 340–342
drop shadows, 380–383
erasing segments, 350, 351
feathering, 384–387
gradients. See gradients 
and gradient fills
Line tool, 17, 18, 22, 336
not exported to HTML, 757
overview, 338
removing points from, 344
stroke styles and patterns, 
363–366
stroke weight, 356–357
under text, 266–267
thinking like a line, 338
through text, 268–269
transforming, 576–577
lines of text. See also line breaks
last line indents, 279
line counts, 27
line length, leading and, 257
nested line styles, 295–296
selecting, 40
lines per inch, 475
lining figures, 274–275
link icon, 162

796 e d de indein c6
L
Link Options dialog box, 494
Link Stories option, 113
Link To pop-up menu, 713–715
Link to Server Path option, 759
Link Type checkbox, 486
linked graphics and text files. 
See also linked text frames; 
child items; parent items
alternate layouts, 113, 332
checking before opening 
files, 60
checking in Preflight, 687
color profiles, 637–638
Content Conveyor and, 
19, 495–497
Content Placer and, 485
copying for HTML export, 758
default relink folder, 492
editing original graphics, 489
embedded graphics, 485
file information, 486
finding linked images, 
490, 491, 492
finding missing links, 60, 492
imported text files, 203
limitations of text updates, 203
linking to different file 
types, 488–489
linking to Web sites, 486
Links panel, 11, 143, 485–489
listing fonts in, 275–276
metadata in, 504
missing graphics, 485, 487
modified (out-of-date) files, 485
opening files with, 
484–485, 491–492
overview, 484
parent/child linked objects, 496
placing files, 60, 468, 493–494
preferences, 491–492
preserving dimensions 
when relinking, 61
relinking to different 
files, 61, 487–488
styles in alternate layouts, 332
updating, 61, 203, 486–487
XMP information, 490
linked text frames
adding new text frames, 
164, 165
alternate layouts, 113, 332
copying and pasting, 
163–164, 165
creating, 159–164
deleting linked frames, 163
displaying linked frames, 
148, 160–161
flowing text, 164–167
formatting, 250
in and out ports, 159–
160, 161–162
link icon, 162
merging stories, 160–161, 162
order of frames, 163
overset text, 160, 162
overview, 159–160
styles in alternate layouts, 332
text flow icons, 164, 166
unlinking, 162–163, 164, 165
links
alternate layouts and, 114, 332
bookmarks in PDF files, 718
buttons in PDF and SWF 
files, 719–724
hyperlinks. See hyperlinks
link behaviors, 494
to master page items, 102–103
OPI links. See OPI images 
and workflows
between text and style 
definitions, 316, 319, 453
to Web site videos, 731
Links folder, 484
Links panel, 11, 143, 
485–489, 491–492
Liquid Adjustment dialog 
box, 103–105
liquid articles, 733, 762
liquid guides, 107–108, 119
Liquid HTML5 formats, 
114, 733, 762
Liquid Layout panel, 103, 106
liquid page rules
alternate layouts and, 111, 112
DPS folios and, 762
layout adjustment vs., 103
overview, 106–110
list boxes (forms), 725, 727
List view, Library panel, 28
lists. See also tables of contents
bulleted and numbered, 
305–314
eBook export, 752, 753
of fonts, 275–276
hanging indents in, 280–281
HTML export, 757, 758
named lists, 311–314
technical-style numbering, 311
lithography, invention of, 645
live captions, 463, 464, 504
Live Corners feature, 39, 354–355
Live Distribute feature, 599
Live Screen Drawing option, 39
Load All Text Styles 
command, 331
Load Character Styles 
command, 331
Load Conveyor option, 496
Load Master Pages Alert 
dialog box, 96
Load Object Styles command, 454
Load Paragraph Styles 
command, 331
Load Table and Cell Styles 
command, 428
Load Table Styles command, 428
Load Text Variables dialog 
box, 180–181, 182
loading. See also importing; 
opening
character styles, 331
Content Conveyor objects, 496
Eyedropper tool, 24, 25
master pages, 95
object styles, 454
paragraph styles, 331
stroke styles, 366
table and cell styles, 428
text styles, 331
text variables, 180–181
workspaces, 34–35
XML tags, 542
local flattener presets, 684
local formatting and overrides
cell formatting, 427
character styles, 319, 321
deleting styles and, 321
exported eBooks, 755
local vs. global formatting, 315
master page items, 100, 102–103
object formatting, 452–453
organizational goodness 
and, 704
paragraph styles, 323, 324, 704
preserving in CSS, 759
preserving in imported text, 197
preserving in linked objects, 494
removing, 319, 323, 
324, 453, 704
synchronizing book 
files and, 551
table formatting, 421, 427

index 797
M
text formatting, 197, 
323, 324, 704
locations
coordinates in panels, 580–581
printer’s marks, 670–671
Lock command, 127, 143–144
Lock Guides command, 
127–128, 139
Lock Layer icon or option, 137
Lock Others command, 137
Lock/Unlock icon, 137
Lock Zero Point command, 7
locking
guide positions, 127–128
guides, 122, 127–128, 139
layers, 105, 137, 139, 601
lock icons, 68, 137, 
143–144, 549, 550
objects, 105, 143–144, 601
PDF files, 527–528
positions, 143–144
selecting locked objects, 36
stories, 227
zero point, 7
logging text file errors, 202
long documents
books. See books
indexes. See indexes and 
index entries
table of contents. See 
tables of contents
lookaheads/lookbehinds 
(GREP), 238
Looney Farm, 575. See 
also madness
looping
animation, 737
movie files, 731
sound files, 732
Lorum Ipsum text, 173–175
lossless and lossy compression, 
474, 522, 754
Low Resolution flattener 
style, 681, 682
lpi (lines per inch), 475
Luminosity transparency 
mode, 377
LZW compression, 474
M
m shortcut, 463
Macintosh scripting 
systems, 695–696
macros. See scripts and scripting
madness
even-odd fills and, 348
final pages of financial and 
legal documents and, 184
next odd page and, 553
non-linear and non-modal 
software and, 575
press operators faced 
with maximum ink 
coverages and, 375
previewing anchored 
objects and, 444
printing tiles and, 655
screening angles and 
frequencies and, 660
magazines, 760, 762, 765
magical nested styles, 293
Magnet button, 283
Magnification field, 4, 65
magnifying view. See 
zooming in or out
mailto hyperlinks, 714, 722
Maivald, James, 544
“Make It Look Good” option, 481
MakeGrid script, 699
Manage Presets dialog box, 738
manual kerning, 257–258
manual line breaks, 298
manual page breaks in 
Word file, 198
manual text flow, 68, 166
Manual Tiling option, 654
manual trapping, 626–627
Map Tags to Styles dialog box, 541
Map to Ordered List 
option, 754, 758
Map to Static Ordered 
List option, 758
Map to Unordered List 
option, 754, 758
mapping styles
with Content Conveyor, 
496, 497–498
from Content Placer objects, 332
eBook export, 748–749
HTML export, 756
tagged PDF styles, 531
from Word to InDesign, 199
XML tags, 541
margin guides, 48–49, 
105, 119, 520, 651
margins
alternate layouts, 110–114
EPUB and HTML 
export, 750, 753
guides, 48–49, 105, 119, 520, 651
insets, 152
layout adjustment settings, 105
liquid page rules, 106–110
master spread settings, 94
optical margin alignment, 333
page layout options, 82
setting, 70, 71
Margins and Columns dialog 
box, 82, 122, 123
markers
anchor markers, 436, 446
cross references, 191
footnote reference markers, 219
index markers, 569
page number markers, 92–93
section markers, 92
text variable instances, 175
marking GREP subexpressions, 
237–240
Marks and Bleeds pane (Print 
dialog box), 655–657
marks, printer’s, 655–657, 670–671
markup tags. See tagged 
text and documents
markups (change tracking), 
198, 210, 211
marquees (selection), 115, 124
master documents, in books, 551
Master Options dialog box, 100
master page items. See also 
master spreads and pages
alternate layouts, 110–114
applying edits, 99–100, 103–105
Content Conveyor and, 497
in converted PageMaker files, 75
excluded in eBook export, 745
excluded in HTML export, 757
finding text in, 227
hiding, 101
hyperlinks, 717
layers and, 141–142
links to, 102–103
liquid page rules, 106–110
overriding, 100, 102–103
Master Page Overlay option, 88, 89
master pages. See master 
spreads and pages
Master Password setting 
(Permissions Password 
setting), 527

798 e d de indein c6
M
master spreads and pages. See 
also master page items
alternate layouts, 79, 
80, 81, 110–114
applying edits, 99–100, 103–105
applying to pages, 83, 84, 97–99
basing on other spreads, 97, 98
changing or moving, 79–81, 83
color labels, 81
copying from other files, 97
creating, 94–96
deleting, 100
dividers in Pages panel, 79
duplicating, 83, 95
editing, 99–100
excluded in EPUB/HTML 
export, 745, 757
hiding items from, 101
importing, 95–97
inheritance, 97
layout options, 77–78, 100
Liquid HTML5 pagination, 114
liquid page rules, 106–110
master page icons, 79
merged data templates, 536
multiple page sizes, 88, 89
None master page, 83
overriding, 100, 102–103
Pages panel, 79–81, 83
primary text frames, 
71, 100–101
printing master pages, 651
QuarkXPress users and, 95
reapplying, 103
sections and, 93–94
text wrap and, 432
master text frames (primary), 
71, 100–101
Mastering Regular 
Expressions, 241
matching
color. See color management
finding/changing text with 
GREP, 236–242
font characters, 173
style names in groups, 330
math, anxiety about, 580–581
Matt’s Matrix, 474, 475
Maximize button, 3
Measure tool, 18, 24, 25
measurements
Measure tool, 18, 24, 25, 26
overriding in panels, 16, 46
preferences and settings, 45–47
rulers, 6
measures. See columns on pages
media. See also audio 
files; video files
eBook export options, 752
interactivity in exported 
files, 710, 711
Media panel, 731–733
Medial positional form, 273
medication, color 
management and, 628
Medium Resolution 
flattener style, 681
megillahs, downloading, 518
memories, bad, Block 
cursors and, 55
memory, printer, downloadable 
fonts and, 665
menu bar, 3
Menu Customization 
dialog box, 32–33
menus and menu items, 
29, 32–33, 462
Merge Cells command, 410–411
Merge Identically Named Layers 
on Export option, 554
Merge Layers command, 140, 142
Merge User Dictionary into 
Document setting, 51
merging
dictionaries, 51
layers, 140, 142, 554
objects, 350–354
panels, 13–14
stories, 160–161, 162
swatches, 619–620
table cells, 410–411
Mesh Resolution setting, 682–683
Mesopotamian printing, 645
Messages section, 674
metacharacters. See also 
special characters
escaping, 239
Find/Change dialog 
box, 229–230
GREP methods and, 236–242
in nested styles, 292
Posix metacharacters, 239
metadata
Alt Text options, 530
captions, 175, 178, 
187–190, 463, 464
creating, 503–505
defined, 187–188
DPS folios and articles, 762–763
editing, 190
exporting for eBooks, 754
JDF (Job Definition 
Format), 526
searching for in files, 504–505
text variables, 175, 178, 187–190
troubleshooting messages, 466
Metadata Caption variable, 
175, 178, 187–190
metallic inks, 614
Method pop-up menu, 224
Metrics kerning method, 258–259
Microsoft Excel, 194, 200–201, 397
Microsoft scripting systems, 696
Microsoft Word files
columns in, 198
endnotes in, 197
exporting as HTML, 760
footnotes in, 197
graphics in, 198
importing, 194, 196–199, 
397, 569
indexes in, 197
manual page breaks in, 198
styles in, 198, 332
tables in, 197
troubleshooting placing 
files, 199
Min field, 156
Mini Bridge, 6
Minimize button, 3
Minimum Space Before First 
Footnote option, 220
Minimum Vertical Offset field 
(Pasteboard Options field), 49
Minus Back path operation, 353
minutes, in text variables, 179
mirrored pages, printing, 659
missing files, 60, 485, 492, 549, 550
Missing link icon, 485
Missing Profiles setting, 634
misspelled words, 51–52, 213–218
Miter Join option, 358–359
Miter Limit setting, 358–359
Mixed Ink Group Options 
dialog box, 617
mixed ink groups, 615–617
mixed ink swatches, 614–617
MOBI format, 745, 755
mobile devices. See devices 
(mobile, reading, tablet)
modeless dialog boxes, 747

index 799
N
Modification Date 
variable, 175, 178
modified files, 485, 549–550
modifier keys, 204–205
moiré patterns, 615, 660
Monitor Color option (color 
management preset), 631
monitors. See screen display
monochrome images (bi-level), 
476, 521, 522, 663
months, in text variables, 179
motion paths, 734, 735, 736
motion presets, 734, 738
Motorola Xoom, 765
mounted beggars, 544
mouse events, 67
mouse pointing devices, 204, 719
MOV files, 729
Move dialog box, 585
Move Pages command, 86, 97
Moved Text option, 53
movies. See video files
moving. See also navigating; 
transformations
around interface. See navigating
documents in books, 547
fonts to other computers, 691
inline frames, 436–437
items
arrow keys, 585
by dragging, 584
Free Transform tool, 585
Gap tool, 600
between layers, 138, 
139, 140–141
Move dialog box, 585
Transform or Control 
panels, 584
while duplicating, 585
layers between files, 140–141
linked files, 484–485
pages in files, 84–86
points, 342, 344
ruler guides, 124–126
text on paths, 454–455
zero point, 6–7, 45
MP3 files, 729, 732
MP4 files, 729, 731
MPEG files, 729, 732
MRK files, 671. See also PMD files
Multi-file place icon, 68
multi-issue viewer apps, 762
multi-level numbering, 311
multi-line composition, 297–299
multi-line form fields, 727
multi-line World Ready 
composers, 298
multi-state objects
button actions for, 721
converting to independent, 729
creating states, 728–729
DPS files, 710
interactive file support, 711
slide shows, 727–729
multi-stroke patterns, 359–360
multi-touch gestures, 38, 67
Multichannel mode 
(Photoshop), 474
multiline GREP searches, 238
Multiline option, 727
multimedia. See interactive 
features
multiple column headlines, 
157–159
multiple files, combining. 
See books
Multiple Intersecting Links 
warning, 466
Multiple Master fonts, 40
multiple page sizes in files, 87–89
multiple paragraph rules, 393–394
Multiple Record Layout 
setting, 537, 539
Multiple Selection option, 727
multiple users, Book 
panel and, 550
multiple windows, opening, 7–9
Multiply blending mode, 375, 377
Murphy, Chris, 628
Mystic Rose script, 708
N
Nadesico, 378
Name metadata, 464
named colors, 604–605, 609. 
See also swatches
named hyperlinks, 711–712, 716
named lists, 311–314
names
buttons, 719
colors, 604–606, 609
displaying in text variables, 187
fonts, 252, 253
indexing, 565
layers, 135, 136, 138
lists, 311–314
matching in style groups, 330
mixed ink groups, 615
swapping first and last, 
238–239, 242
text variables, 177
nanotranscapacitors, 753
nauseousness, last word 
hyphenation and, 300
nav bars on devices, 765
navigating
to another note, 212
to another page, 5, 67
Content Conveyor 
collections, 495
eBook options, 751
keyboard shortcuts, 67
moving around on pages, 18, 26
pages in SWF Preview 
panel, 740
through slide images, 729
via bookmarks in PDF files, 718
via hyperlinks, 717
video navigation points, 732
“nearest neighbor” 
interpolation, 683
negative creep values, 673
Negative option, 659
Neo-Atlantean super science, 155
Neon script, 699
nested bookmarks, 718
nested groups, 120
nested index format, 572
nested objects, 495, 583
nested ordered <ol> lists, 752
nested styles, 290–297, 328
.NET VB, 696
networked workgroups, 550
networks, collecting form 
data on, 722
New Book dialog box, 546
New Cell Style dialog 
box, 423–424
New Character Style dialog 
box, 317–318
New Color Swatch dialog box, 
608, 609. See also swatches
New Condition dialog box, 224
New Cross Reference dialog 
box, 191–193
New Doc Sizes.txt file, 71
New Document dialog 
box, 70–73, 84
New Entry button, 561
New Glyph Set command, 174

800 e d de indein c6
N
New Gradient Swatch dialog 
box, 370, 371, 611–614
New Grep Style button, 296
New Hyperlink dialog box, 715
New Layer dialog box, 
135, 136, 138–140
New Master dialog box, 95, 96
New Mixed Ink Group 
dialog box, 615–616
New Mixed Ink Swatch 
dialog box, 615
New Note button, 211, 212
New Object Style dialog 
box, 449–451
New Page Reference dialog 
box, 561–565
New Paragraph Style button 
or dialog box, 322
New Paragraph Style pane, 316
New PDF Export Preset 
dialog box, 529
New Print Preset dialog 
box, 668, 669
new publications
converting older files to, 74–75
creating, 70–73
document defaults, 70–73
New Section dialog box, 91
New Set button or dialog box, 31
New Stroke Style dialog 
box, 363–366
New Style Group button, 329
New Style Mapping 
command, 497–498
New Table Style dialog 
box, 424–427
New Tag button, 541
New Text Variable dialog box, 181
New Tint Swatch dialog box, 611
New Window feature, 208
New Workspace dialog box, 35
Newsprint profile, 641–642
Next Page button, 3, 5
Nigel, of Spinal Tap, 300
NINAs, 706–708
Nirvana, negative creep 
values and, 673
No Break option or command, 270
No Breaks option or 
command, 198
No Color Conversion option, 642
No CSS option, 759
No Data From Link warning, 466
No Intersecting Link warning, 466
No Line Breaks option, 157
“no pub state,” 62
No Text Wrap option, 429
Noise feather corner option, 385
noise in drop shadows, 382
non-breaking hyphens, 170
non-breaking spaces, 170
non-facing pages, 70
non-Latin text, 42
non-PostScript printers, 66
non-printing objects
buttons and form fields, 726
exporting PDF files 
containing, 520
frames, 559
including in table of 
contents, 559
printing, 651
special characters, 229–230
non-rectangular frames, 155
non-Roman alphabets, 298
None master page, 83
None object style, 451, 452
None page number entry, 557
Nook devices, 745. See also Digital 
Publishing Suite; EPUB 
files and eBooks; eReaders
Normal blending mode, 375
Normal View Mode indicator, 18
North American Prepress 
2 setting, 631
Note tool, 17, 18, 21, 211
notes
Adobe InCopy and, 211
checking spelling, 52
color, 52
converting to or from text, 212
creating, 210–212
deleting, 212
endnotes, 223
Library items and, 28
navigating through, 212
Note tool, 18, 21, 211
preferences and settings, 52
Tooltips and, 52
users and, 211
Notes panel, 210–212
Notes Preferences dialog box, 52
nudge keys (arrow keys), 46, 585
Num Lock key, 204
Number of Characters field, 289
Number of Lines field, 289
number of pages, setting, 71
Number of Recent Items to 
Display option, 60
Number of Sides field, 22
numbered lists
continuing numbers, 309
converting to normal text, 314
creating, 307, 309–311
eBook export options, 752, 753
hanging indents in, 280–281
HTML export, 757, 758
named lists, 311–314
removing numbers, 314
starting list numbers, 309
Numbered Paragraphs option, 559
numbering
absolute numbers, 650
across multiple documents, 314
chapters, 175, 178, 553–554
figures, 176, 311, 313
footnote styles, 219
lists. See numbered lists
lurking fonts and, 276
order of frames on 
pages and, 312
pages. See page numbers
paragraph styles and, 314
paragraphs, 559
sections, 36, 552, 553, 650
styles, 178
tables, 311
tables of contents and, 559
updating numbers, 553–554
Numbering & Section Options 
dialog box, 91, 552, 553–554
numbering pages. See
page numbers
Numbering Style option, 178, 219
numbers
Arabic numerals, 90, 92
converting CMYK or 
RGB, 523–524, 642
converting to paths, 434
full-height numerals, 274–275
lining figures, 274–275
lists. See numbered lists
numerals, 263, 274–275, 310
old style numerals, 274–275
ordinal numbers, 272
pages. See page numbers
prefixes, page numbers, 90, 92
preserving CMYK or RGB, 523–
524, 634, 637, 639, 641–642
removing, 314
roman numerals, 90, 92, 310

index 801
O
sorting in indexes, 570
text variables, 179
updating, 553–554
numerator characters, 274
O
OAM files, 756, 765
object-based page rules, 
108–109, 112
Object Export Options dialog 
box, 530–531, 747–748, 757
Object Export Settings 
dialog box, 756
Object Layer Options dialog 
box, 505–507
object states, 711, 721, 727–729
Object States panel, 727–729
object styles. See also objects
applying, 452–453
basing on existing styles, 451
breaking links to objects, 453
creating, 449–451
default, 451
deleting, 453
editing, 453
importing from other 
documents, 454
local object formatting 
and, 452–453
Quick Apply feature, 460–463
rearranging in panel, 452
shortcuts for, 451
updating, 449
Object Styles panel, 11, 
449, 450, 452
objects. See also object styles
aligning, 597–598
aligning to Key objects, 597
alternate layouts, 110–114
applying effects to, 379–380
converting to motion paths, 736
converting to shapes, 353–354
copying between layers, 140–141
deselecting, 116–117
distributing, 598–601
drop shadows, 380–383
duplicating with Step 
and Repeat, 585
excluded in HTML export, 757
exporting as snippets, 532–533
finding/replacing 
formatting, 144–146
fitting on screen, 63–65
flipping or reflecting, 
458, 459, 591
frequently-used, 28
grids of, 596–597
grouping or ungrouping, 
142–143
hiding, 602
highlighting under cursor, 38
liquid page rules, 106–110
location, 28
locking object positions, 
143–144
moving. See moving
multi-state objects, 721, 727–729
object-based page rules, 108–109
object states, 711, 721, 727–729
pasting to original layers, 140
pinning while resizing, 108–109
positioning ruler guides 
around, 124
removing from frames, 704–706
resizing. See resizing
rotating. See rotating objects
screen display of, 55
selecting. See selecting objects
sets in Content Conveyor, 
496, 497
stacking order. See stacking 
order of objects
subselecting, 118–119, 142
transforming multiple, 579
wrapping text around. 
See text wrap
Objects Move with Page option, 89
odd and even pages, 553, 650–651
odd-even fills, 348–349
Odd Pages Only option, 651
Off page rule, 107
Offset setting (leading), 156
Offset setting (printer’s 
marks), 657
Offset setting (printing), 652
offsets
captions, 465
leading, 156
printer’s marks, 657
printer’s paper offset, 652
text wrap, 429
<ol> tags, 752, 758
old style numerals, 274–275
Omit For OPI setting, 
515, 526, 666
On Blur event, 719
On Focus event, 719
On Page Load event, 734
On Roll Off event, 724
On Roll Over event, 724, 734
on-screen colors, 606
On Self Click event, 734
online files, 518
online help, 4
Only Align First Line to 
Grid feature, 289
opacity. See also transparency
animated objects, 735, 738
drop shadows, 381
gradient stops and, 614
Open a File dialog box, 72, 73
open (<) angle bracket, 247
Open Copy option, 74
Open document status icons, 549
Open Documents as 
Tabs option, 38
Open File action, 721
Open In Full Screen Mode 
option, 742
Open Original option, 74
Open Path button, 354
open paths
arrowheads and tailfeathers, 
360, 361
closing, 344–346, 354
erasing line segments, 350, 351
opening
closed paths, 344–346
copies of files, 74
documents as tabs, 38
documents with links, 60, 
484–485, 491–492
files, 73–75, 721
multiple windows, 7–9
original files, 73–74, 489
Reader to view PDF files, 519
stationery, 74
templates, 73–74
OpenType fonts
character settings, 36
finding glyphs, 242–245
fractions, 271–272
glyphs in, 172
ligatures, 269, 271, 272
numbers of characters in, 36
numerals, 274–275
OpenType submenu, 252
overview, 269, 270–275
positional forms, 273
stylistic sets, 273
OpenType submenu, 252

802 e d de indein c6
P
operating system failures, 77
OPI Image Replacement 
setting, 515, 666–667
OPI images and workflows
exporting EPS graphics, 515
exporting PDF graphics, 526
image links, 480–481
importing EPS graphics, 
480–481
printer settings, 666–667
transparency issues, 680
Optical kerning method, 259–260
optical margin adjustment, 290
optical size in multiple 
master fonts, 40
Optimize for Fast Web 
View option, 518
Optimized Display setting, 55
Optimized option, 759
Optimized Subsampling 
option, 662–664
optimizing
images for printing, 662–664
images for Web display, 518, 759
screen display, 55, 477
optional pages, 114
order of items
in animation, 737
in eBooks, 746, 753
in HTML export, 756, 758
linked text frames, 160–162
on pages. See stacking 
order of objects
tab order in PDF files, 722, 743
ordered lists, 754, 758
ordinal numbers, formatting, 272
organizational goodness, local 
formatting and, 704
orientation
articles, 762
document pages, 78, 104
folios, 761
mixing in books, 546
output pages, 652
tablet device screen 
layouts, 112, 762
Orientation setting, 652
original files, opening, 73–74, 489
ornamental characters, 
173, 242–245, 316
orphans, preventing, 304–306
OSA/AppleEvents, 697
OSA JavaScript, 697
out-of-date linked objects, 
493–494
out-of-gamut colors, 611, 
621, 635–636
Out of Gamut warning, 611, 621
out ports, 159–160, 161–162
Outer Bevel effect, 383, 384
Outer Glow feature, 383
outline fonts, 432–434
outlines. See also compound paths
converting strokes to 
outlines, 683
converting text to outlines, 
432–434, 683
not exported to HTML, 757
transparency flattener and, 683
output. See also exporting; 
printing
black inks and, 58–59
dates on, 176, 178, 184
output providers. See 
imagesetters and 
service providers
PDF export options, 523–525
print options, 657–662
profile information, 524
resolution and, 521–522
settings for, 657–662
Output All Blacks Accurately 
option, 59
Output All Blacks As Rich 
Blacks option, 59
Output Condition Name field, 525
Output Date variable, 176, 178, 184
output destination profiles, 525
Output Intent Profile 
Name option, 525
output options (PDF 
export), 523–525
Output pane (Print dialog 
box), 657–662
output providers. See imagesetters 
and service providers
oval dots in stroke patterns, 363
overflow text. See overset text
overlapping objects. See 
stacking order of objects
Overlay Assets folder, 690
Overlay blending mode, 376
overlays
animation, 765
creating interactivity, 763–764
“DPS Tips” app, 764
previewing interactive 
features, 740
transferring, 690
Overprint [Black] Swatch 
at 100% option, 59
Overprint Preview command, 269
overprinting. See also trapping
black inks, 59, 677
previewing, 677
simulating, 512, 524, 662
strokes, 360
transparency issues, 680
overrides. See also local 
formatting and overrides
graphic display settings, 
477–478
layer visibility and, 
483, 506–507
linked object preferences, 494
master page items, 100, 102–103
measurement overrides, 16
removing, 319, 323, 
324, 453, 704
synchronizing book 
files and, 551
units of measurement, 16, 46
overset text
+ sign, out port, 156, 160
applying text formatting to, 250
auto-sizing frames, 156–157
from data merges, 537
finding text in, 229
HTML exports and, 758
placing, 162, 163
Smart Text Reflow option, 41
in table cells, 398
overwriting older book 
documents, 548
P
p shortcut, 463
<p> tags, 759
Package Book for Print 
command, 554
Package Publication 
dialog box, 692
packaging
folio source files, 690
publications, 554, 692
padding, EPUB and HTML 
export, 750
padlocks, 68, 137, 143–
144, 549, 550

index 803
P
page breaks
converting to column 
breaks, 198
eBook export and, 750, 754
imported Word files, 198
Keep options, 43, 304–306
Page field and Page pop-up 
menu, 3, 5
Page Information option, 656
page items
alternate layouts, 110–114
applying master edits 
to, 103–105
applying transparency, 374
feathering, 384–387
Label property, 702–703
liquid page rules, 106–110
on master spreads, 94–95
Page Layout option, 758
page layout rules, 106–110, 762
page layouts
adjusting layouts, 100–
101, 103–105
alternate layouts, 110–114
applying master edits 
to, 103–105
arranging pages in 
spreads, 84–86
columns, 119, 121–122, 123
document defaults, 70–73
drag and drop text, 41, 205–206
eBook exports, 745
grids, 130–131
grouping objects and, 142–143
guides, 119–130
layers, 133–142
liquid guides, 119
liquid page rules, 106–110, 762
locking object positions, 
143–144
margin guides and settings, 119
master spreads, 94–102
mixing in books, 546
overriding master items, 
100, 102–103
page orientation, 78, 104
page size, 70, 71, 78, 
103–105, 650
previewing for DPS, 764
ruler guides, 119, 123–128
sections, 90–92
setting layout options, 
70–73, 77–78
Smart Guides, 119
XML in layout process, 540–541
Page Limit Per Document 
setting, 539
Page Number options (tables 
of contents), 557
Page Numbering preferences, 36
page numbers. See also 
page references
absolute numbers, 650
books and, 546, 548, 
549, 552–553
excluded in eBook export, 745
index references, 561–
565, 568, 570
index styles, 562
markers, 92–93
numbering pages, 90–93
odd and even numbers, 553
Page X of Y schemes, 184
preferences, 36
prefixes, 90, 92
printing page ranges, 649–650
renumbering, 546, 548, 549
sections and, 90–92
starting numbers, 71
systems, 92–93
tables of contents styles, 557
text variables for, 176
page orientation, 78, 104
Page Position pop-up menu, 653
page ranges
alternate layouts, 112
exporting PDF files, 517–518
index entries, 562–565
printing, 649–650
page references (indexes), 
561–565, 568, 570
page size
alternate layouts, 110–114, 112
editing, 79
layout adjustment 
settings, 103–105
liquid page rules, 106–110
mixing sizes in books, 546, 650
setting up, 70, 71, 78
Page tool, 17, 18, 20
page transitions
DPS issues, 763
exporting to Flash files, 745
exporting to PDF files, 742
exporting to SWF files, 743–744
interactive file support, 711
not exported to HTML, 757
Page Transitions panel, 739
playing sounds, 732
previewing, 740–741
Page Transitions option, 742
Page Transitions panel, 739
Page X of Y numbering 
schemes, 184
Page zero point option, 45
PageControl plug-in, 673
PageMaker 3.0 
documentation, 389
PageMaker files, 74, 75, 247–248
PageMaker shortcuts, 31
pages. See also Pages panel
adding or removing 
automatically, 113
adding to publications, 82–84
alternate layouts, 110–114
applying master edits 
to, 103–105
applying master pages or 
spreads, 83, 84, 97–99
arranging in Pages panel, 79–81
arranging in spreads, 84–86
breaks, 43, 198, 304–306
color labels, 81
coordinates on, 580–581
creating, 79
curled page effect, 743
defaults for, 62
deleting, 79
duplicating, 83
flexible column widths, 151
flipping automatically, 742
hiding master items, 101
HTML5 pagination options, 114
hyperlinks to, 714, 716
icons, 81–82, 83
illustrated, 3
information about, 656
items on. See page items
jumping to with buttons, 720
layers, 133–142
layout. See page layouts
liquid page rules, 106–110
multiple sizes in files, 87–89, 650
navigating through, 5, 62–67
numbering. See page numbers
optional, in alternate 
layouts, 114
orientation, 78, 104
overriding master items, 
100, 102–103
pasteboard and, 4–5

804 e d de indein c6
P
PDF export options, 740–741
playing media on 
display, 731, 732
selecting, 81–82
setting number of, 71
setting up, 77–78
shuffling, 86
size. See page size
Smart Text Reflow 
option and, 41
targeting, 81
thumbnails of, 80
transition effects, 739
zero point setting, 45
Pages panel
adding pages to 
publications, 82–83
alternate layouts in, 79, 80, 81
applying masters, 97, 99
arranging pages, 79–81
creating master spreads, 
95, 97, 98
dividers in, 79
options, 80
overview, 79–82
selecting pages or 
spreads, 81–82
shortcuts, 11
Pages Panel Options dialog box, 80
Pages setting (EPS export), 513
Pages setting (PDF 
import), 481–482
pain relievers, typography 
and, 206
pair kerning, 257, 258–260
panels. See also names of 
specific panels
bringing to front, 10
closing, 10
combining and 
separating, 13–14
display options, 12, 38
displaying as icons, 38
dragging objects under, 66
floating panels, 3
focus in, 9–10
formulas and arithmetic in, 16
hiding, 10, 12, 38
overriding measurement 
units, 16
overview, 9–17
panel groups, 13–14
reducing to icons, 12
resizing, 12
saving workspaces, 34–35
small or large panel rows, 15
snapping into position, 13
stacking, 13–14
tabbed panels, 13–14
zipping and unzipping, 10
panic, pre-deadline, 213
panning graphics, 500–501
panoramas, 763
pans, image, 764
Pantone inks, 610
Pantone swatch books, 629–630
Pantone swatch libraries, 606
Pantone Two-Color Selector, 614
paper
color, 612, 639, 640
offset, specifying, 652
orientation, 652
stock, 629, 636
Paper Size pop-up menu, 652
Paper swatch, 612
Paper White option, 639
Paragraph Composer, 
278, 298, 303
paragraph counts, 27
paragraph formatting. See also 
character formatting; 
paragraph styles
alignment, 278, 289
applying to all characters, 277
Auto paragraph leading, 
255, 303
baseline grid and, 286–289
boxes around paragraphs, 
411, 412
bulleted lists, 307–309
carriage returns and 
leading, 256
column breaks, 304–306
drop caps, 289–290
Eyedropper tool and, 24, 25
first line alignment, 289
first line indentation, 279–281
hanging indents, 280–281
hanging text outside 
text frames, 290
highlighting composition 
issues, 304
hyphenation controls, 299–301
indents, 279–281
justification, 301–303
keep options, 304–306
last line alignment, 278
leading. See leading
letter spacing, 301–303
multi-line composition, 297–299
numbered lists, 307, 309–314
overview, 276–277
page breaks and, 304–306
Paragraph panel, 11, 278
paragraph rules. See 
paragraph rules
selecting text for 
formatting, 277
spaces between words, 41
spacing between paragraphs, 
154–155, 158, 286
styles. See paragraph styles
tabs and tab stops, 281–286
tinting paragraphs, 392–393
widows and orphans, 304–306
word spacing, 301–303
Paragraph panel, 11, 278. See 
also paragraph formatting
paragraph rules. See also
liquid page rules
applying, 390
converting text to 
outlines and, 434
footnotes and, 222
hanging indents and, 393
options and guidelines, 390–394
tinting paragraphs 
with, 392–393
Paragraph Rules dialog 
box, 390–392
Paragraph Spacing Limit 
setting, 154–155
Paragraph Style Export 
Tags option, 754
Paragraph Style option, 220
Paragraph Style Options 
dialog box, 531, 756
paragraph style tags 
(PageMaker), 247–248
paragraph styles. See also 
Paragraph Styles panel; tables
alternate layout style groups, 113
alternate layouts, 111, 332
applying to index entries, 573
applying to text, 316, 323–324
Basic Paragraph style, 321–322
basing on example text, 322
basing on existing 
styles, 328–329
bullets and numbers in, 314
captions, 465

index 805
P
copying from other 
files, 331–332
creating, 322–323
deleting, 327
deleting text with specified 
styles, 236
eBook page breaks and, 751
external CSS files and, 760
floppy disk icon, 332
fonts in, 275–276
footnote styles, 220
imported text styles, 202
links to text, 316, 319
mapping for HTML export, 756
mapping with Content 
Conveyor, 332, 
496, 497–498
modifying, 324–325
names out of order, 316
nested GREP styles, 296–297
nested styles, 290–297, 328
Next Style feature, 325–327
organizational goodness 
and, 704
PageMaker tags, 247–248
paragraph rules. See 
paragraph rules
parent-child relationships, 
328–329
Quick Apply feature, 460–463
removing from text, 324
removing overrides, 704
resetting to base styles, 329
saving in libraries, 332
setting defaults, 62
split columns, 159
Story Editor and, 209
style groups, 329–331
styles, defined, 315
synchronizing book 
files, 551–552
tables of contents and, 555
tagged PDFs, 531
text variables and, 176
unused styles, 327
Paragraph Styles panel, 11, 315, 
323–327, 331–332, 748. See 
also paragraph styles
paragraphs
counting, 27
as cross reference 
destinations, 191
formatting. See paragraph 
formatting
numbered, in tables of 
content, 559
page ranging for index 
entries, 564
re-ragging, 303–304
selecting, 40
sorting, 700
styles. See paragraph styles
tinting, 392–393
paranoia, practicality and, 527
parent layouts, 114
parent linked objects, 
493–494, 496
parent master spreads, 97, 98
parent pages in alternate 
layouts, 112
parent stories in alternate 
layouts, 113
parent style documents, 497
parent style relationships, 
328–329, 451
parentheses, 114, 239
passwords, 527–528, 726
Paste In Place command, 349
Paste Remembers Layers 
option, 140
pasteboard
Content Conveyor 
objects and, 497
contents falling off of, 501
increasing size of, 49
indexed text on, 565
items in converted files, 75
objects not exported to 
HTML, 757
overview, 4–5
ruler guides and, 123
Pasteboard Options field, 49
Pasteboard XTension, 49
pasting. See also copying
content into HTML editors, 760
duplicating objects, 349
graphic files, 468
HTML code into snippets, 756
linked text frames, 163–164, 165
objects from Content 
Conveyor, 19
objects inside other objects, 20
objects into states, 729
objects to original layers, 140
paths or PDF data, 61
replacing with Clipboard, 234
retaining or losing 
formatting, 61
tables, 61
text, 61, 148, 194, 760
path operations, 350–354. 
See also paths (drawn); 
transformations
path text
creating, 454–460
Path Type tool, 17, 18, 21, 454
path type. See path text
Path Type tool, 17, 18, 21, 454
PathEffects script, 699
Pathfinder panel, 11, 350–354
paths (drawn). See also clipping 
paths; file paths; lines 
and line segments
arrowheads and tailfeathers, 
360, 361
clipping paths. See 
clipping paths
compared to frames, 335
compound paths, 347–349
contents of, 352, 577–578
control handles. See 
control handles
Convert Shape operations, 
350–354
converting text or strokes 
to, 432–434, 683
converting to motion paths, 736
copying from Illustrator 
files, 468
copying on Clipboard, 61
corner effects, 354–355, 356
corner or curve points, 339
direction of, 338
drawing, 17, 21–22, 340–349
drop shadows, 380–383
editing tools, 17, 18
erasing, 350, 351
feathering, 384–387
filling, 366–367
formatting attributes and, 338
freeform, 21–22
glow effect, 699
gradients. See gradients 
and gradient fills
holes in closed paths, 347–349
joining, 346
moving points, 344
open and closed paths, 
344–346, 354
order or winding, 335
path operations, 350–354
PathEffects script, 699

806 e d de indein c6
P
placing text on paths. 
See path text
points. See points
points on, 336
rasterizing, 756
reversing direction, 
338, 354, 361
selecting points, 344
smoothing, 349–350
strokes. See strokes
text on. See path text
text wrap around, 428
transforming, 577–578
winding, 338
paths (files)
copying full paths, 491, 534
font files, 691
HTML images, 759
paths (motion), 734, 735, 736
patience of PeachPit Press, xi, 301
patterns
patterning, avoiding 
in print, 660
stroke styles and patterns, 
363–366
pausing animation, 721
PB page number, 565
PDF export presets, 528–530
PDF graphics and files
accessibility, 518–519, 530–531
Acrobat layers, 742
Acrobat Reader 
compatibility, 517
active TOCs and indexes, 520
advantages of, 473
animation, 733, 738
audio and video in, 729–733
audio and video limitations, 733
bookmarks in, 519–520, 718
button tooltips in, 726
buttons in, 719–724
choosing graphic file 
formats, 473
color management, 483, 
628, 640, 642–644
color models, 516
compared to EPS 
graphics, 473, 475
compression options, 520–523
copying on Clipboard, 61
cropping images, 523
display performance settings, 56
embedded fonts, 525–526
encoding methods, 522
exporting
books as, 554
interactive files, 741–743
overview, 515–516
PDF export presets, 
516, 528–530
saving export options, 
528–530
XML structure tags 
to PDF, 544
forms, 722, 724–726
grayscale, 524
guides and grids in, 520
hyperlinks in, 520, 712–717
ICC profiles, 524, 525
importing
layers in, 483, 505
multiple pages, 481–482
placing as graphics, 481–483
imposition plug-ins, 671
interactivity, 520, 710, 
711, 729–733
layers in, 483, 505, 519
metadata in, 504, 505
multi-state objects in, 727–729
non-printing objects in, 520
OPI settings, 667
optimizing for online 
viewing, 518
page transition effects, 739
PDF/X-1a, PDF/X-3, and 
PDF/X-4 files, 516, 
524, 525, 642–644
placing graphics, 481–483
placing with captions, 466
Presentation Mode, 740–741
previewing, 740–741
printing imposed 
booklets to, 675
resampling images, 521–522
security and DRM, 527–528
simulating overprinting, 524
slide shows in, 727–729
tables of contents, 519–520
tagged PDF files, 518–519
thumbnails, 518
transparency and, 374, 679, 744
types of, 515–516
PDF place icon, 68
PDF Print Engine, 374, 
648, 665, 678
PDF/X options, 524, 525
PDF/X3 standard, 642
PeachPit Press, kind generosity 
and patience of, xi, 301
Pen tool, 17, 18, 21, 340–342, 750
Pencil tool, 17, 18, 21–22, 340, 341
pentagons, drawing, 22
percentages
in colors, 621
magnifying screen by, 65
in panel displays, 582, 587
scaling objects and, 588
Perceptual rendering 
intent, 480, 635
perfect-bound imposition, 
672, 673
performance and speed
downloadable fonts 
and, 664–665
dragging causes slowdown, 39
flattener preview and, 684
font preview size and, 41
graphic display settings, 477
plug-ins and, 68
printing speed, 662
screen display preferences, 55
Tool Tips and, 37
transparent objects and, 373
periods, 239
Perl scripts, 697
permissions for PDF, 528
Permissions Password 
settings, 527
pesky text, 323
Phillips, Matt, 387, 474, 475
philosophy of scripting, 
InDesign, 700
phone book style headers, 187, 189
Photoshop graphics
applying colors to, 622–623
characteristics of, 473–475
clipping paths, 478–479, 481
flattened files, 474–475
graphic file formats, 472, 475
imported bitmaps, 478–480
layer comps, 506
layer visibility, 480
layers in files, 474–475
metadata from, 178, 190
Multichannel mode, 474
optimizing for HTML, 759
transparency and, 374, 679
pi, 314
picas, 16, 46
PICT graphics, 473
Pillow Emboss effect, 383, 384

index 807
P
pink highlights, dreaded, 
43, 242, 253, 304
pinning objects while 
resizing, 108–109
pixels
alternate layouts and, 112
designing layouts for tablets, 110
document intent settings, 70
override abbreviation, 16
pixels per inch (ppi), 475–476
Place and Link command, 
485, 493–494
Place command or dialog 
box, 164, 166–167, 
195–196, 468, 469–472
Place End of Story Footnotes at 
Bottom of Text option, 221
place icons, 37, 68, 470–471
Place PDF dialog box, 481–483
placeholders
dummy text, 173–175
text variables, 184
Placeholder.txt file, 174
PlaceMultipagePDF 
script, 482, 699
placing graphics
AI graphics, 481–483
bitmap graphics, 478–480
coloring imported 
graphics, 510–511
contact sheets, 472
Content Conveyor 
options, 495–497
with destination frame 
selected, 469
display settings, 476–
478, 513–514
embedding files, 484
EPS graphics, 473, 475, 480–481
layer visibility, 480
linking to files, 484
multiple files, 471–472
with no frame selected, 469, 470
overview, 468
PDF graphics, 473, 475, 481–483
Place command, 469–472
place cursors, 37, 68, 470–471
placing and linking, 493–494
resizing imported 
graphics, 499–500
placing text. See also 
importing text
basics of, 195–196
Content Conveyor 
options, 495–497
multiple files, 471–472
on paths. See path text
place cursors, 37, 68, 470–471
PlaceMultipagePDF script, 699
placing and linking, 493–494
Plain point conversion, 354
plates, previewing, 675–677
Platform setting, 199
platforms
designating for imported 
text, 199
operating system failures, 77
scripting and, 695
specifying in tagged 
text files, 247
Play on Page Load option, 732
Play Together button, 737
playing animation, 721, 737
playing audio or video 
files, 729–733
plug-ins
Adobe InCopy, 212–213
InDesign scripting 
philosophy, 700
managing, 67–68
Package, 682, 690–691
Preflight, 687–690
plus signs (+), 156, 160, 
315–316, 325
PMD files, 671
PNG files, 511–512
Point/Pica Size settings, 46
point size of type
adjusting when scaling, 36–37
character formatting, 253–254
fonts with optical size axis, 40
greeking and, 57, 58
increasing and decreasing, 46
leading and, 257
measurement override 
abbreviation, 16
size of points, redefining, 46
super- and subscript, 269–270
tracking and, 261
points. See also lines and 
line segments
adding or deleting, 22, 
343–344, 698
Bezier paths, 337
changing position of, 342
control handles. See 
control handles
convert operations, 354
converting, 340, 342
corner and curve points, 339
moving, 344
paths. See paths (drawn)
in paths, 335
selecting, 20, 344
transforming, 576–577, 578
points per inch, 754
Polygon Frame tool, 17, 18
Polygon Settings dialog box, 22, 23
polygons and Polygon tool, 17, 
18, 22–23, 336, 354, 757
pop-up menus, 29
Portable Document Format. See 
PDF graphics and files
portrait orientation, 112, 652, 762
Position option, 220
Position tool. See Content 
Grabber tool; Page tool
positional forms (fonts), 273
positioning. See also moving
above line objects, 441–442
anchored objects, 444–446
baseline positioning, 155–156
Content Grabber, 500
footnotes, 220
inline frames, 436–437
Page tool, 18, 20
ruler guides around objects, 124
Posix metacharacters, 239
postcards, 110
posters (preview images), 
710, 731, 732–733, 765
PostScript fonts, 253, 691
PostScript interpreters. See RIPs
PostScript language and files
device-independent files, 647
InDesign support for, 513
levels, 513, 665–666
PPDs, 646–647
printing to disk, 647
transparency, support 
for, 677–678
PostScript Level setting, 665–666
PostScript Printer 
Descriptions, 646–647
PostScript Printer Determines 
Color option, 641
PostScript setting (EPS files), 513
Power Zoom shortcut, 64, 65
PPDs, 646–647
ppi (pixels per inch), 475–476

808 e d de indein c6
P
Prefer PDF When Pasting 
option, 61
Preferences dialog box
appearance of black, 58–59
Autocorrect, 52, 53
Clipboard, 61
composition, 42–45, 304
defaults, 62
dictionaries, 49–51
display performance, 55–58
file handling, 59–61
general preferences, 36–37
grids, 47–48
guides and pasteboard, 48–49
interface preferences, 37–39
link handling, 491–492
notes, 52
overview, 35–36
Smart preferences, 129–130
Story Editor, 54–55
track changes, 53–54
troubleshooting loss of 
settings, 35–36
type, 39–41
units and increments, 45–47
prefixes, page numbers, 90, 92
Preflight Options dialog box, 690
Preflight panel, 11, 687–690
Preflight pop-up menu, 5
Preflight profiles, 688–689
Preflight Profiles dialog 
box, 688–689
Preflight reports, 690
prepress files, 647
Prepress option, 631–632
Presentation Mode, 740–741
presentations, 727–729, 740–741
Preserve Appearance from 
Layout option, 759
Preserve Appearance option, 754
Preserve CMYK Numbers 
option, 639, 641–642
Preserve Embedded Profiles 
setting, 633–634
Preserve Facing-Page 
Spreads option, 41
Preserve Formatting option 
(object styles), 453
Preserve Image Dimensions 
When Relinking option, 61
Preserve Local Edits option, 494
Preserve Local Formatting 
option, 421
Preserve Local Overrides 
option, 197, 755, 759
Preserve Numbers (Ignore 
Embedded Profile) 
option, 634
Preserve Numbers (Ignore Linked 
Profiles) option, 642
Preserve Numbers option 
(PDF export), 523–524
Preserve Numbers policy, 637
Preserve Object-Level View 
Settings option, 55
Preserve Page Breaks option, 198
Preserve PDF Data At 
Quit option, 61
Preserve Styles and Formatting 
from Text and Tables 
option, 197
presets
color management 
presets, 630–632
document presets, 72–73
flattener presets, 681–683
motion presets, 734, 738
page size presets, 72–73
PDF export presets, 
516, 528–530
print presets, 668–670
saving, 72
styles compared to presets, 73
text variable presets, 177
preventing
line breaks in text, 270
orphans and widows, 304–306
reflow, 691
transformation, 601
preview images. See also proxies 
and proxy images
EPS files, 481, 513–514
linked graphics, 484
PDF files, 518
place cursors, 37
posters, 710, 731, 732–733, 765
saving, 60
Preview Mode indicator, 18
Preview panel (SWF Preview 
panel), 11, 740
Preview setting (EPS 
files), 513–514
previewing. See also 
preview images
Adobe Content Viewer, 740, 762
anchored object 
positioning, 444
apps in Content Viewer, 762
booklet imposition, 674
browser previews, 740
color separations, 675–677
DPS content, 740, 760, 764
eBooks, 753
effects, 379
flattener settings, 684–685
font preview size, 41
interactive documents, 740–741
interactive DPS overlays, 740
merged data, 536, 537
mixed ink groups, 616
overprinting and trapping 
effects, 677
problem tags in text import, 202
stroke styles, 363
target previews for folios, 764
text variables, 181
video controller skins, 732
Previous Page button, 3
previously immutable laws 
of physics, 466
Primary Text Frame option, 71
primary text frames, 71, 
100–101, 110, 111
Print as Bitmap option, 666
Print Blank Pages option, 651
Print Booklet dialog box, 671–675
Print Booklet to PDF 
command, 675
Print dialog box
Advanced pane, 666–668
Color Management 
pane, 640–642
General pane, 648–651
Graphics pane, 662–666
Ink Manager. See Ink Manager
Marks and Bleeds pane, 
655–657
for non-PostScript devices, 648
Output pane, 657–662
overview, 646–648
print presets, 668–670
Print Preview features, 648
printer driver settings, 647–648
saving settings as text file, 668
Setup pane, 652–655
Summary pane, 668
Print Form action, 722
Print Form button, 726
Print Intent setting, 70
Print Layers option, 651
Print Master Pages option, 651

index 809
P
Print Non-Printing Objects 
option, 651
print presets, 668–670
Print Presets dialog box, 668–670
Print Preview features, 648
Print Visible Guides and 
Baseline Grids option, 651
Printable option (buttons 
or forms), 726
printer fonts, 432
Printer Profile pop-up menu, 641
printer spreads, 518, 651, 671–675
printer styles (print 
presets), 668–670
printers. See also printing
color management, 627–628
color printers, 630
in-RIP trapping, 659
inkjet printers, 629, 630
PostScript level, 665–666
print presets, 668–670
printer driver settings, 647–648
profiles, 640–641
roll-fed printers, 652
saving settings as text file, 668
printer’s marks, 655–657, 670–671
printing. See also printers
animated objects, 734–735
bitmap image settings, 662–664
black inks, 58–59
blank pages, 651
blank space between pages, 652
bleed marks, 655, 657
booklets, 671–675
books, 546, 554
collating pages, 649
color
as black, 658–659
black inks, 58–59
color bars, 656
color profiles, 640–642
color separations, 657–658
composite color, 657–658
inks, turning on or off, 661
printing process and, 604
process colors, 604
spot colors, 604
covers, 650
crop marks, 655
custom time and date 
stamps, 184
document intent settings, 70
downloadable fonts, 664–665
even or odd pages, 650–651
file and page information, 656
flattener. See flattener
forms, 722
grayscale PDFs, 524
guides and grids, 651
halftone screening, 659–661
history of, 645
imposition, 671–675
in-RIP separations, 658
in-RIP trapping, 659
including instructions, 691
keyboard shortcut list, 32
layers, 651
master pages, 651
mirroring pages, 659
multiple page sizes, 650
negatives, 659
non-printing objects, 651
overprinting, simulating, 662
packaging files for, 682, 690–691
page position for, 653
page ranges, 649–650
pages in reverse order, 649
paper offset, 652
paper orientation, 652
paper size, 652
PDF files with transparency, 374
PostScript levels and, 665–666
preflight file testing, 687–690
presets, 668–670
previewing, 648
printer’s marks, 655–657, 
670–671
proxy images, 664
registration marks, 656
remote printing, preparing 
for, 686–687
resident fonts, 664
saving settings as text file, 668
scaling printer output, 653
spreads on single sheet, 651
thumbnails, 654
tiled output, 654–655
transparent objects, 373–374
trapping. See trapping
Printing Instructions dialog 
box, 690, 692
process colors. See also spot colors
choosing color model, 605
converting between spot 
and process, 617, 625
creating, 609
halftone screen settings, 660
in InDesign publications, 605
Ink Manager, 625
inks, turning on or off, 661
in mixed ink groups, 617
in mixed ink swatches, 615
printed color samples, 630
printing, 604
productivity increases, joy of, 226
Profile Inclusion Policy 
pop-up menu, 525, 643
Profile Mismatches settings, 634
Profile setting, 480
profiles. See color profiles; device 
profiles; Preflight profiles
Progressive JPEG images, 512
Projecting cap option, 358
Proof Colors command, 638–640
Proof Setup submenu, 638–640
Proof source spaces, 640
proofs and proofing. See also 
color management
optimized subsampling 
and, 662–664
soft-proofing, 638–640
using color printers, 630
Proportional Lining numeral 
formatting, 274
Proportional Oldstyle numeral 
formatting, 274
proportional resizing or 
scaling, 23, 579. 110
proxies and proxy images. See 
also preview images
center of rotation, 23
displaying imported 
graphics, 477
importing EPS graphics, 481
layers and, 138
mapping images to 
frames, 502–503
on-screen low-resolution 
images, 56
printing preview images, 664
Reference Point proxies, 444
selected objects and, 115, 116
Selection Proxy, 138
Transform and Control panels, 
576, 577, 580, 581
Proxy setting, 664
PS files (PostScript files), 647
PSD files. See Photoshop graphics
psychocybernetic illusions, 120
publications
adding pages, 82–84
alternate layouts, 111–113

810 e d de indein c6
Q
book features, 546, 548–549
chapter numbering, 553–554
CMYK settings, 639
conditional text, 223
converting other files to, 74–75
copying
layers from other 
files, 140–141
master pages from 
other files, 97
stroke styles from other 
files, 365, 366
styles from other 
files, 331–332
text into files, 148
creating, 70–73
defaults, 62, 70–73
displaying information 
about, 27–28
docked display, 39
Document Fonts folder, 691
document grid, 47–48, 
121, 130–131
document spaces (color 
management), 
636–637, 640
exporting. See exporting
file extensions, 76, 178
flattener presets, 683–684
fonts, 691
imagesetting, preparing 
for, 686–687
indexing, 561–574
ink list, 605, 661
intent settings, 70
layers. See layers
layout. See page layouts
limiting searches to, 228
liquid page rules, 106–110
metadata in, 503–505
multiple page sizes in, 87–89
multiple windows, 7–9
opening, 73–75
opening in tabs, 38
packaging for printing, 
682, 690–691
passwords for, 527–528
preferences, 35–36
preflight testing, 687–690
presets, 72–73
printing. See printing
rearranging pages, 84–86
recovery data and, 59–60, 77
saving, 75–77
setting up, 77–78, 82–87
tagging for accessibility, 
530–531
templates, 73–74, 76
XML features. See XML and 
structured documents
publish date metadata, 753
Publisher field, 754
publisher information 
in eBooks, 754
pulling of hair, QuarkXPress 
users, and character 
styles, 319
punctuation
finding/replacing with 
GREP, 239
hanging punctuation, 333
in index entries, 574
removing in text variables, 178
shortcuts, 170
Punk effect, 699
purifying waters of Lake 
Minnetonka, 75
purple highlights, substituted 
glyphs, 44
Python scripts, 697
Q
quad left and quad right, 278
Quality option, 512
QuarkXPress files, 31, 
74–75, 95, 318
question marks (?), 485
Quick Apply feature, 331, 460–463
Quite Imposing, 671
quotation marks (“)
double quotes option, 50
entering, 170
typesetters’, 39–40, 197, 200, 201
R
radial gradients, 367–368
radio buttons (forms), 725, 727
rags, 300, 303–304
Rainbow path text option, 457
Range field (PDF export), 518
range kerning. See tracking 
(spacing)
Ranges field, 649–650
raster images. See bitmap graphics
Raster Images slider, 56
Raster/Vector Balance 
slider, 681–682
Rasterize Pages option, 744
Rasterize the PostScript 
option, 481
rasterizing
bitmap graphics, 666
graphics, 750
graphics for SWF files, 744
objects for HTML, 756, 757
preview images, 481
previewing flattening, 684–685
vectors, 678, 681–682, 683, 748
Re-Center page rule, 106–107, 112
Read Embedded OPI Image 
Links option, 480–481, 667
Read Only fields, 726
reader’s spreads, 518, 651, 671
Real World Color 
Management, 628
Real World Photoshop, 476, 628
Real World Scanning and 
Halftones, 476
really bad justification 
decisions, 45
reapplying master pages, 103
rearranging pages, 84–86
Reassign To On Page Click 
command, 737
Reassign To On Page Load 
command, 737
Recompose All Stories When 
Modified setting, 51
recomposition, 51, 176, 183, 691
records in data merge, 536–537
recovering unsaved files, 59–60, 77
Rectangle Frame tool, 17, 18
rectangles and Rectangle tool
converting objects to, 353–354
drawing, 17, 22, 336–337
not exported to EPUB, 750
rounding corners, 354–355, 356
shortcuts, 18
recto pages, 71, 553
red circle with question 
mark icon, 485
red dots in tables, 398
red plus sign (+), 156
red stop-sign icon, 549, 550
Redefine Scaling as 100% 
option, 582
Redefine Style command, 
325, 426–427
redheads, fear of, 100

index 811
R
redrawing screen display, 
39, 55, 393
Reference Point proxies, 444
reflecting objects, 591
reflection angles, 591
reflow
adding pages automatically, 113
alternate layouts and, 111
eBook layouts and, 745
HTML5 pagination options, 114
hyphenation, 51, 691
preventing, 691
Smart Text Reflow, 41, 113
text variables and, 176, 183
refreshing flattener previews, 684
RegexBuddy tool, 241
registration marks, 656
Registration Marks option, 656
regular expressions. See GREP
Relative Colorimetric setting, 635
relative leading 
(QuarkXPress), 254
relative positioning, 584
Relative to Page option, 754
Relative to Spine option, 444
Release command, 441
Release Compound Path 
command, 433
Release State To Object 
command, 729
Relink dialog box, 487
Relink to Folder command, 488
relinking
default folders, 492
to different file types, 488–489
to missing files, 492
to multiple instances, 488
to new files, 487–488
preserving size/scale options, 61
relink folders, 492
remote printing. See imagesetters 
and service providers
Remove All Local Overrides 
command, 102
Remove Forced Line 
Breaks option, 752
Remove Notes from Story 
command, 212
Remove Selected Local 
Overrides command, 102
Remove Styles and Formatting 
from Text and Tables 
option, 197
Remove Text Formatting 
option, 202
Remove Text Style Conflicts 
Using option, 202
Removed Words list, 216
removing. See also deleting
bullets or numbers, 314
character styles, 323, 324
character styles from text, 319
Content Conveyor objects, 495
documents from books, 
547–548
effects, 388
formatting, 197, 202, 323, 324
frame-fitting options, 502
kerning, 258
line breaks, 494
object styles, 453
objects for eBook export, 747
optical margin adjustments, 334
overrides. See clearing overrides
paragraph styles from text, 324
strokes from paths, 362
styles, 197
table formatting, 197
text change tracking, 53
text formatting, 197, 202
text style conflicts, 202
tracking, 258
transparency, 388
unplaced graphics from 
cursor, 471
renaming master pages, 96
rendering images, 55–58, 480
rendering intents, 480, 635–636
renditions for devices, 764–765
renumbering pages, 546, 
548, 549, 552–553
reordering
pages, 84–86
stacked objects, 131–133
swatches, 618
repaginating books, 546, 
548, 549, 552–553
repeated words, spellchecking, 51
repeating elements
nested styles, 295
page elements, 94–95
repeating transformations, 
593–596
repeating values, mixed 
ink groups, 616
repetitive motion injuries, 701
Replace Document dialog 
box, 548, 550
Replace Existing Index option, 572
Replace Existing Table of 
Contents option, 559
Replace Selected Items option, 195
replacing. See also finding 
and replacing
documents, 547–548, 550
existing indexes, 572
existing tables of content, 559
FindChange support scripts, 699
fonts, 275–276
FPO images, 488
glyphs, 242–245
keyboard shortcuts, 30
master pages, 96
placed items, 471
saving find/replace queries, 244
selected items, 195
text, 230–231, 236–242
text variables, 182
reports, Preflight, 690
Required option (forms), 726
resampling images, 521–522
Reset All Warning Dialogs 
button, 37
Reset Menus command, 33
Reset to Base button, 329
resetting. See restoring
resident fonts, 664
resizing
alternate page layouts, 110–114
animated objects, 738
characters, 36–37, 262
clipping paths, 510
columns in tables, 406–407
device renditions and, 765
eBook exports and, 754
frame fitting features, 
500, 501–503
frames to fit text, 156–157
Free Transform tool 
and, 24, 587
Gap tool and, 600
glyphs, 302–303
graphics after layout 
adjustments, 105
HTML exports and, 757, 759
icons, 79
imported graphics, 499–500
keyboard shortcuts for, 588
layout adjustment 
settings, 103–105

812 e d de indein c6
R
linked objects, 494
liquid page rules, 106–110
movie frames, 730, 733
multiple objects, 579
objects, 36–37
Page panel areas, 80
pages, 79
panel percentages and, 582, 587
panels, 12
pasteboard, 49
preserving image size during 
relinking, 61, 492
printer output, 653
proportional scaling, 23
resampling images, 521–522
rows in tables, 406–407
Scale dialog box and, 587–588
Scale tool and, 23, 586
Selection tool and, 587
strokes, 588
SWF Preview panel, 740
tables, 404–409
text frames, 36–37, 156–157, 
167–169, 579, 580
text in frames, 253–254
Transform/Control panel 
options, 587
triggering link alerts, 494
resolution
clipping paths and, 510
display settings, 56
displaying in Info panel, 28
eBook export options, 754
exported EPS files, 514–515
flattener settings, 667–
668, 681–683
gradients, 682–683
graphics, 475–476
High Resolution flattening, 
681, 682
interactive document 
settings, 743
JPEG files, 512
monochrome images, 521, 522
optimized subsampling 
and, 662–664
optimizing printed 
images, 662–664
resampling images, 521–522
Resolution pop-up menu, 743
Restart Numbering Every 
option, 220
restoring
default menus, 33
losing unsaved changes, 77
multi-state objects, 729
original defaults, 62
resetting hyperlinks, 717
resetting zero point, 7
reverting to saved versions, 549
warning dialog boxes, 37
resulting colors in 
transparency, 374
resuming animation, 721
retaining formatting 
when pasting, 61
retina display, 762
retracting control handles, 343
return characters. See 
carriage returns
Reveal features, 490
Reveal in Bridge option, 491
Reveal in Explorer 
command, 275, 491
Reveal in Finder command, 
275, 491
Reverse on Roll Off event, 734
Reverse Order option, 649
Reverse Path button or 
command, 338, 361, 736
reversing
animation, 721
arrowheads, 361
path direction, 338, 
354, 361, 736
printed page order, 649
Revert to Saved function, 549
reverting
to original defaults, 62
to saved versions in books, 549
RGB color model. See also color 
management; color models
choosing models, 605–606
color management, 629, 631, 632
composites or separations, 
657–658
converting, 513, 523–524
document intent settings, 70
EPS files and, 513, 644
imported images and, 629
JPEG files and, 512
management policies, 633–634
PDF files and, 523–524, 643
presets, 631
RGB working space, 
632–633, 636
switching to, 621
rich blacks, 58–59
rich media. See interactive features
rich text format. See RTF files
right alignment
paragraphs, 278
tabs, 282–283, 286
right-click menus (context 
menus), 29
right double quotes (“), 
39–40, 50, 197
right-hand pages, 553
Right Indent field, 279
right justified paragraphs, 278
right single quotes (‘), 39–40, 50
right-to-left language 
composition, 298
RIPs, 658, 659, 678, 680
R’lyeh (elder evil space god), 308
The Rocket, 249
Role Map (Acrobat), 531
roll-fed printers, 652
rollovers, 722–723, 734
roman numerals, 90, 92, 310
Rotate 90 degrees buttons, 582
Rotate dialog box, 591
Rotate Spreads feature, 89–90
Rotate tool, 17, 18, 23, 589
rotating devices, 110, 114, 762
rotating objects
animated objects, 738
audio or video frames, 733
center of rotation, 23
Free Transform tool, 589
multiple objects, 591
preserving angles for 
HTML, 757, 759
preserving angles in 
eBooks, 754
retaining angles after 
relinking, 492
Rotate dialog box, 591
Rotate tool, 18, 23, 589
rotation angles, 588–589
Selection tool, 589
spreads, 89–90
table cells, 411, 412
Transform and Control 
panels, 590
rotation angles, 588–589
Roth, Steve, 476
Round Cap option, 358
Round Join option, 358
rounded corners, 22, 
354–355, 356, 358

index 813
S
Rounded feather corner 
option, 385
rows (grids), 596–597
rows (tables)
adding, 407–409
alternating fills or 
strokes, 421–422
colors, 421–422
defined, 395
deleting, 409–410
distributing height evenly, 405
eBook export options, 753
fills or strokes, 421–422
header/footer rows, 402–404
resizing, 406–407
selecting rows, 401
table styles and, 426
RTF files
exporting, 203, 331
exporting as HTML, 760
exporting style groups and, 331
importing, 194, 196–199
retaining formatting 
when pasting, 61
styles in, 332
RTF Import Options dialog 
box, 196–199
rtmp://-style URLs, 731
Rule Above option, 222
ruler guides, 3
copying, 128
creating, 119, 123–124, 125
deleting, 128
editing, 124–125
exporting in PDF files, 520
layout adjustment settings, 105
liquid guides, 107–108, 119
locking and unlocking, 127–128
moving between layers, 126
positioning around objects, 124
selecting, 124
Ruler Guides dialog box, 48, 126
rulers, 3, 6, 45–46. See 
also ruler guides
rules
footnotes and, 222
liquid page rules, 106–110
paragraph. See paragraph rules
strokes. See strokes
run-in formatting
indexes, 572
table of contents, 558
run-in headings, 290–297, 316
Run-in option, 558
Run Length encoding, 523
Running Header (Character 
Style) variable, 176, 178, 186
Running Header (Paragraph 
Style) variable, 176, 178, 186
running headers or footers. 
See headers or footers
runts, defined, 304
S
saddle-stitched imposition, 
672, 673
Sample Buttons and Forms 
option, 724
samples, color swatch 
books, 629–630
sampling colors, 24, 25
Samsung Galaxy Tab, 760–766
sans serif type, 257
Satin effect, 383
“satisfaction guaranteed or your 
money back” apps, 764
Saturation blending mode, 377
Saturation rendering intent, 635
Save As command, 75
Save command, 75
Save File As dialog box, 75
Save for Web & Devices 
option, 764
Save Query button, 244
Save Swatches for Exchange 
command, 611
saved data, 77
saving
color swatches, 611
converted books, 548
converted InDesign files, 74
document presets, 72
file recovery features, 59–60
files for prior InDesign 
versions, 76–77
find and replace queries, 244
glyph sets, 173
motion presets, 738
panels as workspaces, 34–35
Preflight reports, 690
preview images, 60
publications, 75–77
stroke styles, 365–366
unsaved document indicator, 4
workspaces, 35
Scale dialog box, 587–588
Scale page rule, 106–107, 112
Scale setting (printing), 653
Scale to Fit option, 653
Scale tool, 17, 18, 23, 499–500, 586
scaling. See resizing
scanned images, 475–476
scanners, 627–628
Scissors tool, 17, 18, 26, 346
Scitext RIPs, 680
scope of index entries, 562–565
Scope options (text variables), 178
Screen blending mode, 375–376
screen display
color management, 627–628
distrust of, 584
drawing/redrawing 
display, 55, 393
graphic display settings, 
477–478
matching black ink on 
screen, 58–59
monitor profiles, 631
preferences, 55–58
redrawing, 39
“soft proofing,” 629
tablets and readers. See devices 
(mobile, reading, tablet)
screen frequency, 476, 
521, 659–661
Screen Mode pop-up menu, 4
scribes, lamentations of, 645
Script Debugger, 696
script editors, 695–697
Script Label panel, 702–703
scripting examples
AddGuides, 124, 698
AddPoints, 698
AdjustLayout, 698
AlignToPage, 698
AnimationEncyclopedia, 698
BreakFrames, 698
CornerEffects, 698
CreateCharacterStyle, 318, 698
CropMarks, 699
CutContents, 704–706
Draw NINAs, 706–707
ExportAllStories, 699
FindChange support, 699
ImageCatalog, 699
MakeGrid, 699
Mystic Rose, 708
Neon, 699
PathEffects, 699
PlaceMultipagePDF, 699
removing style overrides, 704

814 e d de indein c6
S
SelectObjects, 699–700
SortParagraphs, 700
SplitStory, 700
TabUtilities, 700
Web site downloads, 704
working through, 703–704
Scripting Guide and 
Tutorial, 697, 703
scripts and scripting. See also 
scripting examples
aliases or shortcuts for, 701
AppleScript examples, 704
benefits of, 700–701
deleting scripts, 701
eBook support, 755
fear of, 694
InDesign scripting forum, 697
InDesign scripting 
philosophy, 700
JavaScript scripting, 704
keyboard shortcuts, 702
Macintosh systems, 695–696
order in Scripts panel, 702
overview, 694
in Quick Apply list, 462, 463
removing style overrides, 704
running scripts, 694
script editors, 695–697
Script Label panel, 702–703
Scripts panel, 11, 694, 701–702
Scripts Panel folder, 694
testing scripts, 706
user interfaces, 707–708
Visual Basic scripting, 696–697
Web site downloads, xi, 704
Windows scripting 
systems, 696–697
working through, 703–704
Scripts panel, 11, 694, 701–702
Scripts Panel folder, 694
scroll wheels, 67
Scrollable option, 727
scrolling and scroll bars, 3, 26
basic techniques, 5, 65–67
as enemy of productivity, 5
gestures, 38
long form fields, 727
through publications, 62
Search field, 4
Search for Missing Links 
command, 491
Search pop-up menu, 228
searching. See finding
Seattle Mariners, 544
second-level index entries, 568
seconds, in text variables, 179
Section 508-compliant 
files, 519, 530
section headings in 
indexes, 572–573
section markers, 91, 92, 93–94
Section Prefix field, 92
sections
absolute numbers, 650
creating, 90–92
page numbering, 36, 552, 650
page ranges, index entries, 564
section markers, 91, 92, 93–94
section prefixes, 90, 92
specifying ranges to print, 650
text in markers, 93–94
security, 527–528
Security pane (Export PDF 
dialog box), 527–528
See and See also cross-
references, 566–568
Select All command, 116
Select Container button, 120
Select Content button, 120
Selected by Default option, 727
selecting. See also selecting 
objects; selecting text
all items, 116
multiple check boxes 
in forms, 727
objects. See selecting objects
pages or spreads, 81–82
ruler guides, 127
Selection Proxy, 138
text. See selecting text
selecting objects
all objects, 116
anchored objects, 441
behind other objects, 117
clipping paths, 508–509
before deleting, 144
deselecting, 116–117
Direct Selection tool, 17, 
20, 118–119, 142
frames and contents, 498–499
grouping selected 
objects, 142–143
guides, 124
for HTML export, 758
inline frames, 436, 441
inside groups, 118–119, 142
keyboard shortcuts, 117–118
on layers, 138, 139
locked objects, 36
within other objects, 120
overlapping objects, 117
overview, 115–119
points, 344
selection handles, 115, 138
Selection Proxy, 138
selection rectangles, 115
Selection tool, 19–20
SelectObjects script, 699–700
subselecting, 20
subselecting objects, 142
table elements, 399–400
zooming into selected 
objects, 62–65
selecting text
cursor movement 
shortcuts, 204–205
before formatting, 
250–251, 255, 277
with mouse, 204
replacing with importing 
text, 195
table elements, 399–400
triple-clicking Type tool, 40
selection colors of layers, 136, 138
selection handles, 115, 138
Selection Proxy, 138
Selection tool
overview, 17, 19–20, 115–116
resizing objects, 587
rotating objects, 589
scaling graphics, 500
selecting frames and 
contents, 498–499
selecting text for 
formatting, 250
shortcuts, 18
subselecting, 120
SelectObjects script, 699–700
semi-automatic text flow, 
68, 166, 168
Send Backward command, 133
Send Data pop-up menu, 662–664
Send Data setting (EPS 
options), 514–515
Send to Back command, 132
Senefelder, Alois, 645
SEP files (device-independent 
PostScript files), 647
separating panels, 13
separations. See color separations
Separations option, 658
Separations panel, 675–677

index 815
S
separator bars in Pages panel, 79
Separator option, 220
separators for index 
entries, 573–574
sequential page numbering, 36
servers
collecting form data, 722
nervousness and, 550
paths to HTML images, 759
service providers. See imagesetters 
and service providers
Set Dictionary To setting, 200
Set Tab Order dialog box, 743
sets (Content Conveyor), 496, 497
Setup pane (Print dialog 
box), 652–655
Shadow Honors Other 
Effects checkbox, 383
shadows. See also drop shadows
Inner Shadow effect, 383
shadow cursors, 6
Shape pop-up menu, 386
shapes
converting to text frames, 148
corner options, 354–355, 356
drawing basic shapes, 336–337
EPUB and HTML export, 750
feathering, 386
fills. See fills
gradients. See gradients 
and gradient fills
transparency. See transparency
Share My Screen option, 741
shared destinations for 
hyperlinks, 714
Sharp feather corner option, 385
Shear dialog box, 593
Shear tool, 17, 18, 24, 592–593
shearing
audio or video frames, 733
as not just for wool, 592
objects, 24
Shear tool, 17
skewing characters, 263, 264
skewing path text, 457
Sheet setting, 201
Shoggoth (elder evil 
space god), 308
short words, hyphenation and, 299
shortcuts
applying colors, 607
baseline shift settings, 263
captioning figures, 463
Color panel, 620–621
contact sheets, 472
context menus, 29
creating, 29–32
cursor, moving through 
text, 204–205
Fill selector, 607
filtering Quick Apply list, 463
finding or replacing text, 231
focus in panels, 9–10
font styles, 253
Gap tool, 600
increasing/decreasing 
fonts, 253–254
kerning, 259
keyboard shortcuts, 1–2, 29–32
leading, 256
modifier keys, 204–205
most frequently-used 
shortcut, 32
object styles, 451
page navigation, 67
point size adjustments, 253–254
Presentation Mode, 741
previewing separations, 676
problems when entering text, 2
Quick Apply feature, 460–463
saving sets of, 30
scaling objects, 588
scripts, 702
selecting objects, 117–118
selecting text, 204–205
Stroke selector, 607
tables, 412–413
Tools panel, 18
type styles, 252
View menu shortcuts, 63
workspaces, 35
Show All Layers command, 136
Show Content Offset option, 583
Show Guides command, 121, 139
Show Hidden Characters 
command, 176, 205
Show/Hide Buttons and Forms 
actions, 720–721
Show/Hide Notes button, 211, 212
Show Import Options 
option, 195, 471
Show Layer icon or option, 
138, 505–506
Show List of Problem Tags 
Before Place option, 202
Show Master Page Overlay 
option, 89
Show menu, Glyphs panel, 172
Show Prefix/Suffix In option, 220
Show Subset button, 28
Show Tagged Frames 
command, 541
Show Text Snippets command, 541
Show Text Threads 
command, 148, 161
Show Thumbnails command, 80
Show Thumbnails on 
Place option, 37
Show Transformation 
Values option, 38
Show Vertically command, 80
showing. See displaying
Shrink animation, 734
shrinking
frames to fit text, 157
panels to title bars, 10
text frames, 167–169
shuffling pages, 84–86
side head self-
experimentation, 448
signature fields (forms), 725
Signature Size pop-up menu, 672
signatures, digital, 725
signing in to DPS, 762
Simulate Overprint option, 
512, 524, 658, 662
Simulate Paper Color option, 640
single-cell tables, 411
Single Edition license (DPS), 760
single-issue viewer apps, 762
Single Line Composer, 298
single-line World Ready 
composers, 298
single quotes (‘), 39–40, 50
Single Word Justification 
option, 303
Size and Shape option, 494
Size/Leading field, 46–47
size of panel rows, 15
size of type. See point size of type
SJIS encoding, 247
Skew path text option, 457
skewing. See shearing
skins, controller, 732
Skip button, 214
Skip by Leading option, 45
slanting type. See italic 
text; shearing
slashed zero characters, 272
slide shows, 721, 727–729, 
735, 740–741
Slug options, 70

816 e d de indein c6
S
slugs, 70, 72
small caps, 42, 261, 264–265, 272
Small Caps text effect, 42
small panel rows, 15, 135
small screens. See devices 
(mobile, reading, tablet)
smart cursors, 38, 128, 129
Smart Dimensions, 50, 129
Smart Guides, 49, 50, 119, 128–130
Smart Spacing, 129
Smart Text Reflow option, 41, 113
Smart transformations, 129
Smooth point operation, 354
Smooth tool, 17, 18, 22, 349–350
smoothing paths, 17, 22, 349–350
snakes, fear of, 100
Snap to Document Grid 
command, 131
Snap to Guides command, 
120–121, 131
Snap to Zone setting, 49
snapping objects
disabling, 121
to grid or guides, 120–121, 131
guides to objects, 124
layout adjustments and, 105
into position, 13, 49
Smart Guides, 128–130
snap zones, 49, 105
Snippet Import options, 60
snippets, 60, 532–533, 541, 765
sobbing, uncontrollable, over 
resizing text frames, 110
social gatherings, avoiding 
EPS at, 473
Soft Light blending mode, 376
“soft proofing,” 629, 638–640
softening
drop shadows, 381–383
feathering, 384–387
solid leading, 257
Sony Reader, 745
Sort Entries in Alphabetical 
Order option, 557
Sort Items option, 727
sorting
bookmarks in panel, 718
cell or table styles, 427
form list/combo box 
options, 727
index sort order, 562, 570
paragraph style names, 316
paragraphs, 700
tables of content, 557
SortParagraphs script, 700
Sound action, 721
sound files. See audio files
source color management 
profiles, 640
source cross references, 191
source files (DPS), 690, 761, 762
source pages for alternate 
layouts, 112
sources for accessibility 
tags, 530–531
Space Between Footnotes 
option, 221
Space Between Pages 
option, 673–674
spacebands, 302
spaces. See also spacing; 
tabs and tab stops
entering, 170
GREP removal, 240–241, 243
importing text files 
containing, 200
inserting special characters, 
169, 170
removing underlining, 266–267
showing hidden characters, 205
spaceship Nadesico, 378
spacing. See also spaces
before and after paragraphs, 
154–155, 158, 286
around above-line objects, 442
classes in HTML and EPUB, 749
between footnotes, 221
Gap tool, 20, 599–601
grids of objects, 596–597
HTML exports and, 756
images in eBooks, 754
inset spacing, text frames, 152
kerning, 258–260
leading adjustments and, 286
letter spacing, 301–303
multi-line composer, 297–299
multiple columns and, 158
between objects, 598–601
between pages, 673–674
Smart Spacing, 129
spacebands, 302
spaces between words, 41
in Story Editor, 54
word spacing, 260, 301–303
Span Columns dialog box, 145
spanned column headlines, 
157–159
special characters. See also glyphs
Align To Character 
tab stops, 283
discretionary hyphens, 301
displaying, 205
entering symbols, 170
escaping, 239
finding and replacing, 229–230
GREP methods and, 236–242
hanging punctuation, 333
hidden characters, 205, 
229–230, 236–242
inserting, 169–173
list of, 170
mixing or matching in 
glyph sets, 173
nested style metacharacters, 292
punctuation in index 
entries, 574
shortcuts for entering, 170
sorting index entries with, 570
symbol fonts, 253
wildcard metacharacters, 
229–230
Specify Formatting to 
Find button, 232
spectrum, color, 604
speed
animation, 734, 738
applications. See performance 
and speed
spellchecking. See 
checking spelling
Spelling Preferences 
dialog box, 51–52
spiders, fear of, 100
Spinal Tap’s Nigel, 300
Spine zero point option, 45
spines for book covers, 87
Spirograph drawings, 706–707
Split Cell Horizontally/
Vertically commands, 411
Split Document option, 751, 754
split footnotes, 222, 223
SplitStory script, 700
splitting
breaking pages in 
eBooks, 751, 754
columns under headlines, 
157–159
footnotes, 222, 223
paths, 26, 348
points, 26
stories, 700
table cells, 411

index 817
S
spot colors. See also process colors
aliasing, 625, 626
choosing color model, 605–606
converting to process, 
617, 625–626
creating, 605–606, 609
halftone screen settings, 660
in InDesign publications, 
605–606
Ink Manager, 625
inks, turning on or off, 661
mixed ink swatches, 614–617
printed color samples, 629–630
printing, 604
transparency issues, 680
Spread zero point option, 45
spreading drop shadows, 381–383
spreads (page spreads). See also 
master spreads and pages
alternate layouts, 110–114
arranging pages, 84–86
duplicating, 83
exporting in PDF files, 518
flattener presets, applying, 
683–684
hiding master items, 101
island spreads, 85
labels of, 82
layout options, 77–78, 103–105
liquid page rules, 106–110
pasteboard not shared 
between, 4
PDF export options, 740–741
printing on single sheet, 651
reader’s or printer’s, 518, 651
rotating, 89–90
ruler guides, creating, 
123–124, 125
selecting, 81–82
shuffling pages, 86
Smart Text Reflow 
option and, 41
zero point, 45
Spreads option, 518, 651
spreadsheets, 60, 200–201, 397, 492
spring-loaded tools, 19
Spry data sets, 757
square brackets ( [ ] ), 85, 271
squares, 22, 336, 354–355, 356
sRGB profile, 632, 641, 643
stacking order of objects
changing layer stacking 
order, 140
copying objects on multiple 
layers, 140
guides and, 49
master page items, 141
moving guides between 
layers, 126
multi-state objects, 727
pasting layers between 
files, 140–141
path operations and, 352
reordering stacks or 
objects, 131–133
selecting overlapping 
objects, 117
sending objects forward or 
backward, 131–133
text wrap and, 45, 133, 139
stacking panels, 13–14
Stair Step path text 
option, 457, 458
StandardSoundPoster.jpg file, 733
Star Inset field, 23
star targets, 670
Start At option, 219
Start field (grid), 47
Start Indicator (text on 
paths), 454–455
Start Paragraph pop-up menu, 306
starting list numbers, 309
starting page numbers, 71, 91
states
buttons, 722–723
multi-state objects, 727–729
static articles, 762
static captions, 463, 465–466
stationery, 73, 76, 87
status of stories, 486
Step and Repeat dialog 
box, 128, 585
stitching, avoiding, 683
stone measurement units, 45
Stop Color pop-up menu, 612
Stop on Page Turn option, 732
stopping animation, 721
stops. See tabs and tab stops
stories. See also linked text frames
adding new text frames, 
164, 165
Adobe InCopy and, 212–213
alternate layouts, 110–114
copying and pasting linked 
frames, 163–164, 165
deleting linked frames, 163
exporting, 203, 699
exporting to EPUB, 753–755
exporting to HTML, 756, 757
finding text in locked 
stories, 227
flowing text in frames, 
159–164, 166–167
InCopy stories, 486
limiting searches to, 228
linking in alternate layouts, 113
liquid page rules, 106–110
locked stories, 227
merging, 160–161, 162
page ranges for index 
entries, 564
selecting, 40
Smart Text Reflow 
option and, 41
status, 486
Story Editor, 54–55, 206–209
Story panel, 11
story windows, 54–55, 206–209
tables in, 395–396
threading, 159–164
Story Editor
drag and drop editing in, 41
notes in, 52, 210–212
overview, 206–209
preferences, 54–55, 208–209, 210
tracking changes, 53–54, 
209–210, 211
vertical depth display, 209
Story Editor Preferences dialog 
box, 54–55, 208–209, 210
Story panel, 11. See also stories
story windows, 54–55, 206–209
straddle heads, 157–159
straight lines, 22
straight quotes (“), 197
stream crossings, obstructed 
by battling ghosts, 157
streaming audio, 731
streaming video, 731
strikethrough formatting, 268–269
Strikethrough Options 
dialog box, 268
strings
defined, 226
formatting attributes, 232–234
GREP find and replace, 236–242
striped strokes, 360, 361, 
362, 363–366
Stroke button, 18
Stroke option, 46

818 e d de indein c6
S
Stroke panel, 11, 356–366. 
See also strokes
Stroke selector, 18, 26–27, 607
Stroke Styles dialog box, 363–366
strokes
0 setline-width strokes, 357
after path operations, 352
alignment, 357–358
alternating, in tables, 421–422
applying effects to, 380
applying to table cells, 413–416
arrowheads and tailfeathers, 
360, 361
cap options, 358
cell styles, 424
colors, 607
copying with Eyedropper 
tool, 24, 25
dashed lines, 359
displaying information 
about, 28
editing, 362
finding/replacing in 
objects, 144–146
gap color and tint, 360, 361
join options, 358
layered strokes, 359–360
line weight, 356–357
measurement units, 46
miter limit setting, 358–359
overprinting, 360
overview, 355–356
paragraph rules, 392
patterns, 363–366
removing from paths, 362
scaling, 23, 588
striped strokes, 360, 
361, 363–366
Stroke button, 18
Stroke panel, 11, 356–366
Stroke selector, 26–27, 607
stroke styles, 363–366
stroking characters, 276, 277
swapping stroke and 
fill colors, 607
table styles, 426
transparency flattener and, 683
Structure view, 541, 542. 
See also XML and 
structured documents
stupid things to do
with carriage returns, 286
pushing graphics off 
pasteboard, 501
really bad justification 
decisions, 45
with tabs, 282
talk-radio-style advice 
on tiling, 655
with text variables, 180
unnamed colors, 606
“With Power Comes 
Responsibility” 
speeches, 373, 379
style groups, 113, 329–331, 428
Style Mapping dialog box, 199
Style option (text variables), 178
Style pop-up menu (text 
variables), 186
Style Settings list, 451
style source documents, 551
styles. See also formatting
alternate layouts and, 111, 113
cell styles, 423–424
character. See character styles
compared to formatting, 
315, 316
compared to presets, 73
copying between files, 331–332
deleting text with specified 
styles, 236
in eBook CSS files, 755
eBook tables of contents, 751
in external CSS files, 760
finding/changing by 
style, 232–234
flattener presets, 681–683
floppy disk icons, 332
groups in alternate layouts, 113
HTML export, 756
hyperlinks, 715
in imported text, 197, 199, 202
importing from other 
files, 331–332
index page ranges, 562, 564
index style settings, 573
links between text and style 
definitions, 316, 319, 453
mapping
Content Conveyor, 
496, 497–498
eBook output, 748–749
imported files, 199
PDF tags, 531
XML tags, 541
nested, 290–297
object styles. See object styles
paragraph. See paragraph styles
parent-child relationships, 
328–329, 451
print presets, 668–670
Quick Apply feature, 460–463
saving in libraries, 332
stroke styles, 363–366
style groups, 329–331, 428
style source documents, 551
synchronizing book 
files, 551–552
table styles, 423–428
tables of contents, 559–560, 751
tagged PDFs, 531
unused, 198
stylistic sets, 273
sub-bookmarks, 718
sub-columns, 158
sub-lists, 311
subexpressions (GREP), 237–240
“Submit” buttons, 726
Submit Form action, 722
Submit Form button, 726
submitting PDF forms, 722, 726
subsampling images, 521
subscript formatting, 42, 
263, 269–270
subscriptions to Creative 
Cloud, 760
subselections, 118–119, 120, 142
Subset dialog box, 28
Subset Fonts Below option, 525
Subset Fonts option, 36
subsets of fonts, 36, 514, 525–526
subsets of libraries, 28
substituted fonts, 43, 253
substituted glyphs, 242
Subtract path operation, 352, 353
subtracting pieces of merged 
shapes, 352, 353
Suggested Corrections list, 214
summary of PDF export 
options, 528
Summary pane (Print 
dialog box), 668
Super Autoflow icon, 166, 167, 168
superscript formatting, 
42, 263, 269–270
Suppress Page Range option, 565
Swap Fill and Stroke icon, 18, 26
swapping. See switching
Swash feature, OpenType 
fonts, 272
swashes, 271
swatch books, 629–630

index 819
T
swatch libraries, 606, 610
Swatch Options dialog box, 617
swatches
adding colors
new unnamed colors, 609
from other files, 610–611
from swatch libraries, 610
applying colors
to objects, 622–623
to strokes or fills, 
366–367, 607
Color Picker, 621–622
color swatch books, 629–630
creating, 607–611
deleting from files, 532, 618–619
duplicating, 620
editing, 617
gradients, 369, 370, 611–614
libraries, 606, 610
merging, 619–620
mixed ink groups, 615–617
mixed ink swatches, 614–617
overview, 604–605
reordering in panel, 618
Swatches panel, 11, 607–611
tint swatches, 611, 612
using in other documents, 
610–611
Swatches panel, 11, 607–611
SWF files
animation, 733–734
audio and video in, 729–733
buttons in, 719–724
exporting, 743–744
exporting animation 
for PDF, 738
exporting to HTML, 757
hyperlinks to, 714
importing, 729
interactive features in, 710, 711
movie options, 731
page transition effects, 739
Presentation Mode, 740–741
previewing, 740–741
transparency in, 744
SWF Preview panel, 11, 740
switching
colors in mixed inks, 617
fill and stroke colors in 
panel, 18, 26
font stylistic sets, 273
to Hand tool, 65–66
between ruler and liquid 
guides, 108
to Selection tool, 19
Story Editor windows, 208
tools temporarily, 18, 19
SWOP profiles and inks, 
631, 633, 641
symbol fonts, 253
symbols. See special characters
symmetrical point operations, 354
Synchronize feature, 546, 551–552
synchronizing
Adobe Suite applications, 630
booked documents, 
546, 551–552
system failures, 77
T
T-squares, ancient page 
layout and, 17
T1 symbol in font names, 253
tab characters. See tabs 
and tab stops
tab-delimited text, 201, 533
tab key, 719, 722
tab order in PDF files, 722, 743
tabbed panels, 13–14
tabbed publication display, 38
table cells. See cells in tables
table numbers, 311
Table of Contents dialog 
box, 555–560. See also
tables of contents
Table of Contents Text option, 197
Table option, 201
Table Options dialog box, 
403, 413, 421–422
Table panel, 11
Table Styles panel, 427
tables
adding columns or 
rows, 407–409
borders of tables, 421
boxes around paragraphs, 
411, 412
cells. See cells in tables
columns. See columns in tables
components of, 395
Content Conveyor, 496, 497–498
context menu options, 401
Control panel options, 402
converting tables and text, 
197, 396, 398, 399
copying from other 
programs, 397
creating, 396–398
cursors for table editing, 401
deleting rows or columns, 
409–410
deleting tables, 409
eBook export options, 753
formatting, 197, 413–422
graphics, placing in 
cells, 400, 402
header and footer rows, 
402–404
HTML export options, 757
importing
Excel data, 201
from other programs, 
197, 397
preserving/removing 
formatting, 197
styles, 428
Word tables, 197
keyboard shortcuts, 412–413
local formatting, 421
mapping styles, 496, 497–498
merging cells, 410–411
numbering, 311
options, 403, 421–422
overriding styles, 427
overview, 395–396
resizing, 404–409
rotating cells, 411, 412
rows. See rows (tables)
selecting elements, 401
single-cell tables, 411
splitting cells, 411
style groups, 428
styles, 423–428, 496, 497–498
Table panel, 11
tables of contents. See also books
alphabetizing entries, 557
as bookmarks, 718
bookmarks in PDFs, 
519–520, 718
building, 559
characters before page 
number, 557
creating, 555–557
dummy text or tags in, 559
eBook options, 751
hyperlinking in PDF files, 520
importing in Word/
RTF files, 197
including entire books, 557
including hidden layers, 
558–559

820 e d de indein c6
T
indenting entry levels, 558
non-printing frames, 
including, 559
options, 555–560
overview, 555
page number options, 557
paragraph numbers in, 559
run-in headings, 558
updating, 559
tablet devices. See devices 
(mobile, reading, tablet)
tabs and tab stops
automating tab setting, 700
in bulleted lists, 307
centered tab stops, 282–283
decimal tab stops, 283
defined, 281–282
editing tab stops, 284
entering in table cells, 400
hanging indents and, 280–281
history of, 281
left tab stops, 282–283
overview, 281–282
removing tab stops, 284
repeating tab stops, 284–285
right tab stops, 282–283, 286
rules for using, 282
setting tab stops, 283–286
tab characters
Align To Character 
tab stops, 283
defined, 281–282
displaying, 205
entering in table cells, 400
importing Excel files 
containing, 201
importing text files 
containing, 200
showing hidden 
characters, 205
tab leaders, 285–286
tab order in PDF files, 722, 743
in tables of contents, 557
Tabs panel, 11, 14, 280, 283
TabUtilities script, 700
types of tab stops, 282–283
Tabs panel, 11, 14, 280, 283–286. 
See also tabs and tab stops
Tabular Lining numeral 
formatting, 274
Tabular Oldstyle numerals, 274
TabUtilities script, 700
Tag field, 748
tagged PDF files, 518–519, 530, 742
Tagged PDF pane, 530
tagged text and documents. 
See also XML and 
structured documents
accessibility requirements, 
530–531
exporting tagged text, 203
formatting text between 
tags, 239–240, 243
importing, 202
InDesign tagged text, 
195, 244–248
mapping EPUB styles, 748
PageMaker tags, 247–248
tables of contents and, 559
tag contents, 246–247
tag structure, 247
tagged PDF files, 518–
519, 530, 742
tagged text errors, listing, 202
uses for tagged text, 245–246
viewing in text editors, 246
Tagged Text Import Options 
dialog box, 202
Tagged Text.pdf file, 246
tagging paragraphs with 
styles, 316, 323–324
tags. See tagged text and 
documents; XML and 
structured documents
Tags panel, 541, 543. See also XML 
and structured documents
tailfeathers, 360, 361
talk-radio-style advice 
on tiling, 655
target color profiles, 640–641
target devices. See devices 
(mobile, reading, tablet)
Target Layer icon, 135, 137
target layers, 135, 137
target previews, 764
targeted dictionaries, 216
targeting pages, 81
tax season calculations, 17
TeacupSoftware, 533
technical-style numbering, 311
temperature of lighting, 629
templates
downloading from 
InDesignSecrets.com, 76
for merged data, 534–536
opening, 73–74
saving documents as, 76
temporary files, 59, 60
testing
button rollovers and states, 723
folio output, 764
scripts, 706
SWF Preview panel, 740
text. See also text files; text 
frames; text variables
Adobe InCopy and, 212–213
aligning. See aligning text
alternate layouts, 110–114
anchors for hyperlinks, 714
anti-aliasing setting, 57, 58
applying colors to, 622
applying effects to, 379, 380
attaching to paths. See path text
auto-sizing frames to 
fit, 156–157
baseline shift, 42, 47, 
262–263, 269–270
block level <p> text, 748
blurring, 387–388
in buttons, 722
captions, 463–466
character formatting. See 
character formatting
character styles. See 
character styles
characters. See characters
compressing, 523
conditional text, 223–225
Content Conveyor, 493
converting
notes to text, 212
tables to text, 398, 399
text to notes, 212
text to outlines, 432–434, 683
text to tables, 396, 398
variable instances to 
text, 182, 183
copying into HTML editors, 760
copying on Clipboard, 61
cross references, 191–194
custom text in text 
variables, 178
deleting text with specified 
styles, 236
display preferences, 55–58
dummy text, 173–175
eBook navigation, 752
editing. See editing text
embedding graphics in. 
See inline frames
endnotes, 223
entering. See entering text

index 821
T
exporting
to eBooks, 747, 752
to Flash files, 745
to HTML, 757
overview, 203
finding and replacing. See
finding and replacing
flowing in text frames, 
164, 166–167
form fields, 725, 726
formatting attributes, 232–234
glyphs, 44, 171–173, 
271, 302–303
GREP cleanup, 240–241, 243
highlight effect, 267–268
highlighting composition 
problems, 42–44, 304
as hyperlink destination, 716
importing. See importing text
indenting, 279–281, 558
insertion point, 169
kerning. See kerning
leading. See leading
linking stories in alternate 
layouts, 113
links to, 60
liquid page rules, 106–110
measurement units, 46
non-Latin, 42
outlines, 757
overset, 156–157
overview, 147–148
paragraph formatting. See 
paragraph formatting
pasting into publications, 
61, 148, 194
path text, 454–460
pesky, 323
placing, 164, 166–167, 195–196
printing colors as black, 
658–659
reflow. See reflow
removing formatting from, 202
replacing. See finding 
and replacing
selecting. See selecting text
size and scaling, 36–37, 
46, 253–254
Smart Text Reflow option, 41
spacing. See spacing
Story Editor, 54, 206–209
superscript and subscript, 
269–270
SWF file composition, 744
tables of contents. See
tables of contents
text frames. See text frames
tracking changes, 53–54
transparency flattener and, 683
unplaced text. See overset text
variables. See text variables
word, line, or paragraph 
counts, 27
XML tags, 541, 543
text anchors
as hyperlink destinations, 
714, 716
links in HTML, 757
Text As Black option, 658–659
Text Before and Text After 
options (captions), 463
Text Before and Text After 
options (text variables), 178
text blocks or boxes. See 
text frames
Text Display Options settings, 208
text editors, 246
text fields (forms), 725, 726
text files. See also Microsoft 
Word files; RTF files; tagged 
text and documents
creating links to, 492
dragging into publications, 148
formatting text in, 246
GREP cleanup, 240–241, 243
importing, 194–196, 199–200
InDesign Interchange (IDML) 
format, 74, 75, 532
InDesign Interchange 
(INX) format, 532
linked files, 203
PMD files, 671
snippets, 532–533, 541
XML files, 540–541
text flow. See also linked 
text frames
flowing text, 160–162, 166–167
icons, 166
primary text frames, 100–101
text formatting. See
formatting text
Text Frame Options dialog 
box, 110, 150–156, 437
text frames
adding to stories, 164, 165
after path operations, 352
alternate layouts, 110–114
auto-sizing, 110
balancing columns, 151
captions, 465–466
columns and column 
width, 150–151
Content Conveyor, 493, 496
converting frames to text 
frames, 39–40, 148, 149
copying and pasting, 
163–164, 165
creating, 21, 71, 148–149, 161
creating on master pages, 71
custom baseline grids, 287
deleting linked text frames, 163
dummy text in, 173–175
entering text, 168–175
EPUB and HTML export, 750
first baseline position, 155–156
flowing text, 160–162, 164–167
formatting text in, 250–251
hanging text outside frames, 290
importing text into, 196
including in eBook 
navigation, 752
inline. See inline frames
inset spacing, 152
linking, 160–162, 493
linking stories in alternate 
layouts, 113
liquid page rules, 106–110
merging stories, 160–161, 162
options, 150–156
order of linked frames, 163
in and out ports, 159–
160, 161–162
overset text, 156–157, 
160, 162, 163
placing text, 164–167, 166–167
primary text frames, 
71, 100–101
reflowing text. See reflow
replacing text with 
imported text, 195
resizing text in, 253–254
resizing to fit text, 156–157
scaling, and point size 
of type, 36–37
shrinking to fit contents, 
167–169
Smart Text Reflow 
option and, 41
tables in, 395–396
text wrap, 45, 153, 428–432
transformations and, 579, 580
unlinking, 162–163, 164

822 e d de indein c6
T
vertical justification 
settings, 153–154
Text Import Options dialog 
box, 196, 199–200
Text option, 744
text place icon
creating text frames, 148, 149
importing text, 68, 195
linking text frames, 160
overview, 164, 166–167
text reflow. See reflow
Text Size option, 46
text variables
captions, 175, 178, 187–190, 466
compared to autocorrect, 184
conflicting, 180–181
converting instances to 
text, 182, 183
copying, 180–181
creating, 175–176, 177, 181
customizing, 180, 184–190
deleting, 182
displaying, 176
examples, 184–190
exporting to HTML, 757
importing, 180–181
instances of, 175, 182, 183
loading, 180–181
placeholder text, 184
preset, 177, 178–179
previewing, 181
pronouncing aloud, 184
replacing, 182
updating book numbering 
with, 533
Text Variables dialog box, 
177, 180, 184–185
text wrap
anchored objects, 446–447
eBook support, 753
editing text wrap 
boundary, 431, 432
ignoring, 153, 431
inverting, 430, 432
layers and, 133, 139
leading and, 45
objects in middle of 
columns, 44–45
options, 428–432
text frames beneath, 45, 133
Text Wrap panel, 11, 428
Text Wrap Only Affects Text 
Beneath option, 45, 133
Text Wrap panel, 11, 428
TextWrangler, 671
Theme pop-up menu, 54
third-party tools for metadata, 753
threads, text, 160–163, 496. See 
also linked text frames
Three-D Ribbon path 
text option, 457
thresholds
clipping paths, 509
grid and guide view thresholds, 
47, 121, 122, 126, 128, 131
throwing computers out 
of windows, 449
Thumbnail view (Library 
panel), 28
thumbnails. See also proxies 
and proxy images
colors of, 81
exporting PDF files 
containing, 518
interactive PDF files, 741
Library panel, 28
pages, 80
place cursors, 37
printing, 654
Thumbnails setting, 654
TIFF images
applying colors to, 622–623
bitmap files, 472
display performance settings, 56
importing bitmaps, 478–480
print settings, 662–664
strengths and weaknesses 
of, 474
tildes (~), 216
Tile setting, 654–655
tiling
printing tiles, 654–655
windows, 7–9
time
text variables, 179, 184
time zones, 179
time machines, 753
time zones, 179
Timing panel, 735, 737
tints
creating, 611, 612
gaps in patterned strokes, 
360, 361
halftone screening settings, 660
mixed ink groups, 615–617
mixed ink swatches, 614–617
overview, 606
tint builds, 660
tint swatches, 611, 612, 619
tinting paragraphs, 392–393
title bars, 4, 10
Title option, indexes, 571
Title Page options, 750
title tab, 3
titles of DPS articles, 763
TLF text option, 745
To End of Document option, 565
To End of Section option, 565
To End of Story option, 565
To Next Style Change option, 564
To Next Use Of Style option, 564
To Path options, path 
text, 459, 460
tolerances for clipping paths, 509
Tool Hints panel, 19
tools, 18, 19. See also Tools panel
Tools panel, 3
changing layout, 38
display arrangements, 38
grand tour of, 17–27
hidden tools, 18
keyboard shortcuts, 18
preferences settings, 38
shortcuts, 11
tooltips, 37, 52, 726, 732
Top vertical justification 
method, 153
torus shapes, 347
Track Changes panel, 209–210, 211
Track Changes preferences, 53–54
tracking (spacing). See 
also kerning
highlighting custom 
tracking, 44
multi-line composition, 297–299
overview, 260–262
range kerning, 257, 260
removing, 258
tips and tricks, 261–262
tracking changes, 53–54, 
198, 209–210, 211
trademark symbols, 263
Transform Again commands, 
593–596
Transform Content option, 578
Transform panel. See also 
transformations
basic techniques, 576–583
math anxiety and, 580–581
moving with, 584
Proxy, 576, 577, 581
rotating with, 590

index 823
T
scaling with, 587
shearing with, 592–593
Transform Sequence Again 
commands, 594
transformations. See also 
Transform panel
aligning objects, 597–598
aligning objects to Key 
objects, 597
basic techniques, 576–583
buttons for, 582
centers of, 576, 577, 581
distributing objects, 598–601
duplicating while 
transforming, 581, 582
frames without contents, 
577–578
Free Transform tool, 17, 
18, 24, 585, 587, 589
hiding objects, 602
lines and line segments, 
576–577
locking object positions, 601
moving objects, 583–585
multiple objects, 579, 580
panel angles and 
percentages, 583
path or frame contents, 
577–578, 583
points, 576–577, 578
preventing transformation, 601
Proxy, selecting points on, 581
reflecting objects, 591
repeating transformations, 
593–596
rotating objects, 23, 588–591
scaling objects, 23, 579, 
580, 586–588
Selection tool, 587
shearing objects, 592–593
Smart Dimensions, 129
text frames and, 579, 580
transformation tools, 17
Transformations Are 
Totals option, 583
transitions
exporting to Flash files, 745
page transitions, 711, 739, 742
playing media on page 
load, 731, 732
transparency. See also flattener
Acrobat Reader and, 517
Adobe PDF Print Engine 
and, 374
AI files, 482–483
alpha channels in graphics, 479
animated objects, 735
applying, 374–375
audio or video frames, 733
background and foreground 
colors and, 374, 
375, 482–483
blending modes, 375–377, 380
choosing file formats and, 475
clipping paths and, 508
compared to Photoshop, 374
compromise and, 679
displaying on screen, 57, 477
drop shadows and, 380
eBook images, 754
Effects panel, 11, 374, 375, 377
EPS graphics and, 515
exporting graphics 
with, 515, 526
Flash files, 745
importing files with, 482–483
InDesign’s management 
of, 372–374
indicator, 79
Isolate Blending option, 377
Knockout Group option, 
377–378
PDF files and, 482–483, 526
PNG files, 511, 512
PostScript support for, 677–678
previewing settings, 684–685
printing transparent 
objects, 373–374
removing, 388
SWF files, 744
Transparency slider, 57
tricks and guidelines, 679–680
vector graphics and, 678
Transparency Blend Space 
setting, 374, 680
Transparency Flattener Presets 
Options dialog box, 681–683
Transparency Flattener settings, 
373, 515, 667–668
Transparency panel. See Effects 
panel; transparency
Transparency slider, 57
Transparent Background 
option, 482–483
Transverse setting, 652
trapping
overview, 626–627
previewing, 677
Print dialog box settings, 659
Trapping pop-up menu, 659
tri-fold brochures, 672–673
triangles
converting objects to 
triangles, 354
in ports and out ports, 160
in tool icons, 18
yellow triangle icon, 485
triggering
animation, 734
hidden buttons, 724
trims, cropping PDF files to, 482
Triple Click to Select a Line 
option, 40, 204
troubleshooting
Android device display, 765
Apple device display, 765
booklet imposition, 674
books, 549
caption metadata, 466
compressed PPDs, 647
converting bullets or 
numbers to paths, 434
converting text to paths, 434
corrupt data, removing 
from files, 532
deleting color swatches, 532
deleting index markers, 561
downloading fonts, 665
dragging causes slowdown, 39
embedding fonts, 514
external CSS styles, 760
finding transparent 
elements, 684
flexible columns and auto-size 
text frames, 110, 157
fuzzy graphics, 476
graphics in EPUB/HTML 
export, 749
imported media files, 729, 730
inline frame limitations, 436
leading, 255–256
lurking errant fonts, 275–276
Mac keyboard shortcuts, 409n
master page items and layer 
items, 141–142
moving Control panel, 14
moving Tabs panel, 14
numbering order, 312
out of space in table cells, 398
page transitions don’t 
appear, 739

824 e d de indein c6
U
paragraph rules and 
screen redraw, 393
placing Word files, 199
preferences settings change 
back, 35–36
recovery data, 59–60, 77
relinked graphics, 61
replacing special characters, 
229–230
resizing linked objects, 494
selecting objects, 117
streaming audio, 731
style groups, 330–331
style names in weird order, 316
styles not automatically 
applied, 318
synchronization, 551–552
text entry and keyboard 
shortcuts, 2
transparency and 
printing, 679–680
unnamed colors, 606–607
variables in running 
headers, 186, 187
VBScripts, 696–697
TrueType fonts, 253, 691
Trumatch swatch books 
and library, 630
TT symbol in font names, 253
tuchus, pains in the, 615
turkeys, etiquette and, 627
turning pages
curled page effect, 743
jumping to pages, 67
Page field and buttons, 5
Pages panel, 82
PDF/SWF page transitions, 732
Twilight Zone of page layout, 389
twisty triangle icon, 486
Twitter, 756, 765
two-position rollovers, 724
two-sided printing, 675
two-state buttons, 722–723
TXT files, 533
type. See text
Type 1 fonts, 691
type on a path. See path text
Type on a Path Options 
dialog box, 456–460
Type pop-up menu, 656
Type Preferences dialog 
box, 39–41
Type Style menu, 252–253
type styles, 251–253. See also
font families and fonts
Type tool, 18
converting frames, 
39–40, 148, 149
creating frames, 148, 149
creating notes, 211
entering text, 148, 168–169
overview, 17, 21
Type Tool Converts Frames to 
Text Frames option, 39–40
typefaces. See font families 
and fonts
typesetting systems
desktop publishing 
transition, 249–250
Ole’s late night stories 
about, 249
tagged text and, 244–245
typesetting tags. See tagged 
text and documents
Typical Display setting, 55, 477
typing. See entering text
typographer’s quotes, 
39–40, 197, 201
typography. See text
U
u symbol, 173
<ul> tags, 752
Ultimate Impostrip, 671
un-underlining spaces, 266
unanchoring anchored 
objects, 441
uncapitalized words or 
sentences, 51
uncoated papers, 629, 636
uncompiled AppleScripts, 696
uncontrollable sobbing over 
resizing text frames, 110
Underline Options dialog 
box, 267, 268
underlines, 266–267
unequal-width columns, 122, 123
unformatted tables or text, 197
ungrouping
EPUB export and, 750
objects, 143
Unicode, 27, 173, 235, 242, 247
unique identifiers, eBooks, 754
United States Rehabilitation 
Act, 530
Units & Increments Preferences 
dialog box, 6, 45–47, 253, 585
units of measurement. See
measurements
Unlink icon, 162
unlinking
linked objects, 494
text frames, 162–163, 164
Unlock All Layers command, 137
unlocking
column guides, 122
guide positions, 128
item positions, 601
layers, 137
ruler guides, 128
zero point, 7
Unmerge Cells command, 410
unnamed colors, 604–
606, 609, 619
unnamed hyperlinks, 711–712
unordered lists <ul>, 752, 754, 758
unplaced items, removing, 471
unplaced text. See overset text
unsaved documents, 4
unused index topics, hiding, 569
unused layers, deleting, 140
unused styles in imported 
files, 198
unzipping eBooks, 753
unzipping panels to full view, 10
Update All Numbers 
command, 533
Update Chapter & Paragraph 
Numbers command, 533
Update Content in Data 
Fields, 540
Update Data Source 
command, 540
Update Graphic Links in 
Package option, 690–691
Update Table of Contents 
command, 559
updater, DPS Desktop Tools, 761
updating
chapter numbers, 533
graphic links in packages, 
690–691
graphics, 61, 486–487
hyperlinks, 717
imported text, 203
indexes, 572
linked files, 203, 486–487
linked objects, 494
linking to new files, 487–488

index 825
V
merged data, 540
numbering, 533
object styles, 449
renumbering pages in books, 
546, 548, 549, 552–553
tables of contents, 559
uploading folios, 761, 762
uppercase characters, 239, 261. 
See also case of characters
URLs. See also Web sites
button actions for 
displaying, 720
collecting form data, 722
converting to hyperlinks, 713
creating hyperlinks from, 716
HTML images, 759
http or rtmp, 731
hyperlink destinations, 
713–715, 716
linking to videos on 
Web sites, 731
loading media files from, 731
named and unnamed 
hyperlinks, 711–712
U.S. Rehabilitation Act, 530
U.S. Web Coated or Uncoated 
setting, 633
U.S. Web Coated profile, 
631, 633, 641
U.S. Web Coated SWOP 
setting, 631
Use Black Point Compensation 
setting, 636
“Use Cruddy Preview” option, 481
Use Custom Baseline 
Grid option, 287
Use Document Hyphenation 
Exceptions Only option, 691
Use Document Profile option, 638
Use Embedded Profile option, 689
Use Global Light checkbox, 381
Use Inline Input for Non-
Latin text option, 42
Use option (text variables), 178
Use PDF’s Layer Visibility 
option, 507
Use Photoshop’s Layer 
Visibility option, 507
Use Photoshop’s/PDF’s Layer 
Visibility option, 507
Use pop-up menu (text 
variables), 186
Use Spacing field, 598
Use Structure for Tab 
Order option, 743
Use TIFF or PICT Preview 
option, 481
Use Typographer’s Quotes 
option, 39–40, 197, 201
User command, 211
user dictionary, 49–51, 215–217
User Dictionary preferences 
settings, 49–51
user interfaces, adding with 
scripts, 707–708
User Password setting (Document 
Open Password setting), 527
Utah, 62
V
V shapes, 354
vaguely offensive time zone 
indications, 179
value attributes, ordered 
lists and, 758
variables. See text variables
VB (Visual Basic), 696
VB5 CCE (Visual Basic 5 Control 
Creation Edition), 696
VBA (Visual Basic for 
Applications), 696
VB.NET, 696
VBS files, 697
VBScript, 696–697
vector graphics
color management and, 628
display options, 56
EPUB and HTML export, 750
graphic file formats, 472, 473
greeking while moving, 39
limitations of, 473
previewing flattening, 684–685
rasterizing, 678, 681–
682, 683, 748
transparency and, 678
Vector Graphics slider, 56
vendors, dictionaries, 50
versions of files. See also InCopy
creating with conditional 
text, 223
Links panel information, 491
verso pages, 71, 553
vertical axis
reflecting objects, 591
slanting type, 263, 264
vertical depth display, 209
vertical folio layouts, 762
vertical justification 
settings, 153–154
vertical liquid guides, 107–108
Vertical Margins field, 49
vertical orientation, 112, 652, 762
vertical ruler and guides, 
3, 45, 107–108
vertical scaling, 262, 586, 587
Vertical Scaling field, 586, 587
vertical scroll bar, 3
vertically distributing 
objects, 598–601
Video action, 721
video files
compressing in folios, 764
converting to importable 
formats, 729
displaying with button 
actions, 721
DPS publications, 763, 765
eBooks and, 752
exporting interactive 
documents, 743
exporting to Flash files, 745
exporting to HTML, 757
floating windows, 732
importing and playing, 729–733
interactive file support, 711
linking to Web site videos, 731
navigation points, 732
options for playing, 731–732
in PDF files, 520, 710
previewing, 740–741
streaming video, 731
tooltips, 732
Video action, 721
View and Layout option, 742
View menu shortcuts, 63
View Options pop-up menu, 4
View PDF after Exporting 
option, 519
View settings (Excel), 201
view thresholds
grids, 47, 131
guides, 121, 122, 126, 128
View Zoom action, 722
viewer apps, single-issue, 762
viewing options
automating in PDF 
files, 721, 722
Excel views, importing, 201
grid view thresholds, 47, 131

826 e d de indein c6
W
guides view thresholds, 
121, 122, 126, 128
rotating page view, 89–90
View menu shortcuts, 63
View Options pop-up menu, 4
vignettes. See gradients 
and gradient fills
Visibility icon, 138
visible spectrum, 604
Visual Basic (VB), 696
Visual Basic 5 Control 
Creation Edition, 696
Visual Basic for Applications 
(VBA), 696
Visual Basic .NET, 696
Visual Basic Script, 696–697
visual color perception, 604
W
warnings
linked objects, 494
Preflight warnings, 687–688
Print Booklet warnings, 674
Warnock, John, 677
WAV files, 729
waxers, ancient page layout and, 17
Web authoring tools, 746–747, 
749, 753–756, 758–760
Web browsers
browser-safe colors, 632
previewing interactive 
files in, 740
Web Coated Stock setting, 633
Web Intent documents, 112
Web/Internet option, 632
Web-only files
exporting InDesign pages as 
XHTML. See XHTML files
optimizing PDF files, 518
Web or Digital Publishing 
Intent setting, 70
web presses, 633
Web-safe colors, 632
Web site resources
acrobat.com servers, 762
Adobe Digital Editions, 753
Adobe EPUB resources, 755
Adobe IDs, 761
AppleScript, 695
Calibre, 755
Digital Publishing 
Suite, 765–766
eBook resources, 755
epubsecrets.com, 755
example DPS apps, 766
HTML text formatting 
tricks, 760
InDesign scripting forum, 697
International Color 
Consortium, 525
Late Night Software, 696
NINAs, 706
printers marks, 671
scripting examples, 704
trapping methods, 627
www.idpf.org, 745
XML information, 544
Web sites. See also XHTML files
button actions for 
displaying, 720
converting URLs to 
hyperlinks, 713
Digital Publishing 
Suite, 765–766
document intent settings, 70
exporting HTML, 755–760
HTML text formatting 
tricks, 760
hyperlinks to, 716
linking to videos, 731
loading media files from, 731
optimizing PDF files, 518
Web-safe colors, 632
weight
page marks, 657
stroke styles, 363
stroke weight, 356–357
Weight pop-up menu, 657
werewolves, 602
When Pasting Text and 
Tables from Other 
Applications option, 61
When Scaling options, 36–37
When Updating Link 
pop-up menu, 507
white space
inserting special characters, 
169, 170
showing hidden characters, 205
un-underlining spaces, 266
white text on black 
background, 261
Whole Word option, 228
widows, preventing, 304–306
width
feathering and, 384
line weight, 356–357
scaling and, 587
Width field, 587
Width option, 384
wildcard characters, 
229–230, 236–242
winding, 335, 338
windows
closing, 4, 9
InDesign windows and 
interface, 2–9
multiple open windows, 7–9
opening, 206
switching, 208
Windows eBook resolution, 754
Windows scripting 
systems, 696–697
winged pigs, 544
wipes, 739
“With Power Comes 
Responsibility” 
speeches, 373, 379
WMF graphics, 472–473
wool, shearing and, 592
Word. See Microsoft Word files
word and letter spacing, 
44, 260, 301–303
word counts, 27
Word Import Options 
dialog box, 196–199
word spacing. See kerning; 
tracking
words
adding to dictionary, 
215–216, 217
extra spaces between, 41
finding and replacing. See 
finding and replacing
hyphenating, 299–301
indexing, 561
last word hyphenation, 300–301
removing from dictionary, 
216–217
single word justification, 303
word and letter spacing, 44, 260
word counts, 27
workgroups, Book panel and, 550
Working CMYK setting, 638
working spaces (color 
management), 632–633, 
636–637, 640
Working Spaces pop-up 
menus, 632–633
Workspace pop-up menu, 4
workspaces, 4, 34–35

index 827
Z
World of Warcraft, 693
World Ready composers, 298
Wrap Around Bounding 
Box button, 429
Wrap Around Object 
Shape button, 429
Wrap Around Object text 
wrap, 430–431
Wrap To options, 431, 432
wrapping text. See text wrap
WYSIWYG publishing, tagged 
text and, 244–245
X
X-Acto knives, ancient 
page layout and, 17
X and Y fields, Transform and 
Control panels, 38, 580–581
x height, 155, 257
X Offset and Y Offset settings, 446
x-refs (index), 566–568
X Relative To and Y Relative 
To settings, 444
X-Rite EyeOne device, 629
XFL files, 710. See also 
Flash and FLA files
XHTML files, 755–760
XML and structured documents. 
See also tagged text 
and documents
accessibility tagging, 530
creating files, 540–541
creating tags, 540–541
displaying tag markers, 541, 543
elements, 541, 542
exporting motion presets, 738
exporting tags, 544
exporting to HTML, 
756, 757, 758
importing, 541, 542
InDesign Interchange (IDML) 
format, 74, 75, 532
InDesign Interchange 
(INX) format, 532
InDesign Markup format, 76–77
loading tags, 540–541
mapping styles and, 749
overview, 540–541
page layout process 
and, 540–541
snippets, 532, 541
Structure view, 541, 542
tab order in PDF files, 743
tagged PDF files and, 519
tagging frames, 541, 543
tagging text, 541, 543
tags, 540, 544
tags not exported to HTML, 757
Web site information, xi, 544
XML Import Options 
dialog box, 542
XMP information, displaying, 490
XMP standard, 503
Xoom, 765
Xtensions, converted files and, 75
Y
years, in text variables, 179
yellow highlighting, 43, 304
yellow triangle icon, 485
Yog-Sothoth (elder evil 
space god), 308
YouTube videos, 765
Z
zero characters, 272
zero point, 3, 6–7, 45, 581
Zero Winding Fill Rule, 348
Zip compression, 474, 522, 523
ZIP files, eBooks in, 753
zipping panels into title bars, 10
Zoom button, 3
Zoom In or Zoom Out 
command, 63
Zoom tool, 18, 26, 63
zooming in or out
Application Bar, 5
controlling with button 
actions, 722
defined, 62–65
Hand tool, 26
hyperlink jumps to 
pages and, 714
Power Zoom shortcut, 64, 65
shortcuts, 63
Zoom tool, 18, 26, 63

14-1
XML stands for “Extensible Markup Language.” What the heck does 
that mean? It’s easy to be scared off—XML is usually mentioned in 
the same breath as SOAP, DTDs, metadata, structured content, and 
schema. With all of the buzzwords and jargon surrounding the topic, 
it’s easy to lose track of something very basic: XML is simple. 
XML is a way to mark up (or tag) information in a text file. Any 
application that can write text files can be used to write XML. Like 
HTML, XML uses tags, such as “<h1>” to mark a piece of text. Unlike 
HTML, XML doesn’t have a limited set of predefined tags. That’s 
what the “extensible” part of the acronym means. You’re not limited 
to <h1>, <h2>, <p>, and so on, as you are in HTML.
It would be easy to fall into the trap of thinking that XML is 
something like an expanded version of HTML. This isn’t the case—
the two markup schemes are different in kind. HTML is about what 
things look like; XML is about what elements are. The formatting of 
XML data—if that data ever appears in a document—is up to you.
While we said that XML is simple (as opposed to complex), we 
never said that it couldn’t be complicated. Indeed, the biggest prob-
lem of implementing an XML publishing workflow is figuring out 
the design of the XML data structures you want to work with. You 
can easily end up paralyzed by the sheer number of possibilities—
there are a limitless number of ways to accomplish a given task.
In short, XML is as simple or complicated as you care to make it. 
Keep it simple, at least at first.
XML
B o n u s  C h a p t e r
14

14-2     c6
When you import XML into an InDesign document, it isn’t XML 
anymore. It gets turned into an InDesign representation of the XML 
structure. If you’re familiar with XML, this can be a major concep-
tual stumbling block. 
Working with XML outside InDesign, one becomes accustomed 
to certain things: finding a given element by its content using XPath, 
for example, or being able to use the content of a given XML element 
in multiple places in a web page generated from the XML You can’t 
do those things in InDesign—at least not directly.
When we talk about XML, we’ll be using a standard set of terms, for 
which we offer the following non-standard set of definitions.
Tag. A tag is a label for a piece of XML data a tag is not an XML ele-
ment. Tags are marked with angle brackets (also known as greater 
than and less than symbols), like “<title>”. Tags cannot contain space 
characters. XML must be “well formed,” which means that any “start” 
tag must be matched by an “end” tag. Something like this: 
<title>Revolutionary Girl Utena</title>
XML Element. XML elements are the fundamental building blocks 
of an XML file. The title just shown is an example of an XML element 
(containing the data “Revolutionary Girl Utena”). XML elements 
may contain other elements, as shown in the following example.
<author>
<name>Olav Martin Kvern</name>
<address>5207 Phinney Avenue North</address>
<city>Seattle</city>
<state>Washington</state>
<zip>98103</zip>
</author>
Here, the “author” XML element contains the other elements. 
Each element, in turn, can contain other elements. We could easily 
change the structure to change the way that the name information is 
stored, for example.
<author>
<name>
 
<first>Olav</first>
 
<middle>Martin</middle>
 
<last>Kvern</last>
</name>
<address>5207 Phinney Avenue North</address>
<city>Seattle</city>
<state>Washington</state>
When XML Isn’t XML
XML Vocabulary

Bu Chpt: XML 14-3
<zip>98103</zip>
</author>
XML elements are sometimes referred to as “nodes.” Every 
InDesign document includes at least one XML element—by default, 
that’s the “Root” element.
Using “White Space” Characters. Both of the examples above use 
tabs to show the nesting of elements in the file and returns to separate 
each XML element. This is not necessarily the best way to write XML 
for import into InDesign—it depends on the XML import options 
you choose. If you need to include white space characters, every char-
acter in the XML file will be imported as text (which only makes sense 
if you really do want tab characters in those locations).
XML Attribute. One way to attach data to an XML element is to add 
an element inside the element—an XML attribute is another way of 
doing the same thing. In general, you use attributes to add informa-
tion about the element (or “metadata”). 
In our example, we might want to store the last time that the XML 
element was updated. We can do that by adding an XML attribute to 
the “author” tag. XML attributes do not appear in the layout when 
you place the containing XML element on a page.
<author last_update="12/29/08">
XML Structure. The structure of an XML document is nothing more 
than the way that the elements fit together. Don’t let anyone tell you 
otherwise.
DTD. This is simply a description of what elements can appear, and 
in which order, in a defined XML structure. DTDs are not required 
by InDesign, but you might want to use them. 
XML Comments. These just give you a way to add a comment to your 
XML. Like XML attributes, comments will not appear in a layout. 
You can think of them as notes for XML.
XML Processing Instructions. These tell an application to do some-
thing with the XML data, but you don’t really need to worry about 
them—InDesign does not use XML processing instructions in any 
way. Actually, very few applications use processing instructions. If, 
however, you have one of these rare beasts, you can add, edit, and 
delete any processing instructions in the XML structure.

14-4     c6
Given that InDesign gives you a way to add, delete, and rearrange 
XML elements in the XML structure of a document, you might think 
that you could take care of all XML creation and editing tasks with-
out ever leaving the friendly confines of the program.
We urge you, however, not to do this. While InDesign’s XML edit-
ing tools can be used in this fashion, they’re really intended more for 
quick-and-dirty touch-up work than for serious XML editing.
Instead, if you must create XML files from scratch, find yourself 
a good XML editing program. Ole likes Oxygen for cross-platform 
XML editing, and XSLT debugging.
If you can’t find an XML editor you like, you can always use a text 
editor, such as BBEdit, Notepad, or even InDesign to enter and then 
save the text of an XML file (as we said, it’s just a simple text file).
At the moment, the system platforms (Windows and the Mac OS) 
are adding to their XML support. There are far more system tools for 
working with XML (such as the MSXML parser for Windows from 
Microsoft) outside InDesign than there are inside InDesign.
But we expect that, most of the time, you probably won’t be writ-
ing the XML yourself. Instead, you’ll be getting your XML docu-
ments from some automated process, such as an Excel VBA macro, 
an export from FileMaker or Access, or from an InDesign document 
you’ve exported as XML.
Before we dive into the details of working with the XML structure, 
we’d better explain how we think XML fits into a page layout pro-
cess. As usual, we risk getting ahead of ourselves by presenting a con-
ceptual overview before we talk about the details of the feature, but 
there’s just no other way to do it. The following is an outline of one 
approach we see for working with XML in an InDesign document. 
This approach does not include validation of the imported XML 
using a DTD (see the section on DTDs, later in this chapter).
1. Create an InDesign document. You can use empty placeholder 
frames, dummy text, fixed text (text you don’t expect to have in 
the XML data file), or you can mark up an existing document.
2. Load XML tags from an XML file. This doesn’t have to be the file 
containing your data, and it doesn’t even have to be an XML file 
with the same structure as you’ll be using. All it needs to include 
are the names of the elements you expect to have in the XML 
data you plan to import.
Alternatively, you can create XML tags from scratch. You’ll 
have to remember to make sure that the XML tag names match 
the element names for the XML files you’ll be importing.
Where Should You 
Work with XML?
About XML Workflow

Bu Chpt: XML 14-5
3. Apply XML tags to frames and text in your template document.
4. Map styles to XML tags using the Map Tags to Styles dialog box.
5. Import XML into the document. When you do this, the data 
in your XML file (including any graphics specified in the XML 
structure) will appear in your layout.
When you import a new XML file and choose to replace the exist-
ing structure, InDesign will apply the formatting you’ve already 
applied. This makes this workflow particularly useful for setting 
up a document with a repeating publication schedule (newsletters, 
product data sheets, and so on). To make certain that new XML files 
match the layout, you might want to export the XML from the docu-
ment to use as a template (see “Exporting XML Tags”) for the next 
iteration of the publication, or for use in a Web site or database.
Inside the Structure View
It’s all about structure. No matter how crazy and free-form your 
layout, your brain—and the brains of your audience—impose a 
structure on the content of your document. This is true, whether 
you’re conscious of it or not. So don’t be afraid of the word “structure” 
or try to deny that your documents have it. It’s there. You can choose 
to work with it or not. Once you’re out of your “denial” phase, you’ll 
find InDesign’s Structure view a powerful ally.
Using the options in the Structure view, you can create XML ele-
ments and attributes, associate elements with InDesign page items or 
text, rearrange XML elements, and delete XML elements (see Figure 
14-1). Even if you don’t work with XML you’ve probably already 
found the Structure view—it’s all too easy to expand it by accident 
when you’re trying to add a ruler guide or reposition the zero point. 
The Structure view uses icons to give you clues about the elements 
in the document’s XML structure, as shown in Table 14-1.
Showing/Hiding Text Snippets. To see a short passage of the text 
associated with the XML elements, choose Show Text Snippets from 
the Structure view menu (see Figure 14-2). To hide text snippets, 
choose Hide Text Snippets.
Tagged Frames and Tag Markers. Want to see which frames are 
associated with XML elements? Turn on the Show Tagged Frames 
option on the View menu (see Figure 14-3). To see text that’s been 

14-6     c6
Figure 14-2
Showing Text Snippets
Without being able to see a 
bit of the text in each text 
element, it can be difficult to 
tell which element is which.
Choose Show Text Snippets 
from the Structure menu 
and InDesign displays the 
first few characters of the 
text in each text element.
Figure 14-1
Structure View
Structure view menu.
Structure view displaying 
several elements.
These frames have been   
associated with an element 
in the XML structure.
Structure view buttons
Add Attribute
Add Element
Delete Element
Validate
associated with an XML element, choose Show Tag Markers from 
the View menu (see Figure 14-4).
When you’re working with text you’ve tagged with XML tags, editing 
the text in the layout can become something of a chore. It can be very 
hard to see where one range of tagged text ends, where another tag 
begins, and the ways that the tags relate to each other. It can also be 
XML Tags in   
the Story Editor
Figure 14-3
Viewing Frame Tags
Choose Show Tagged Frames 
from the Structure submenu 
of the View menu, and 
InDesign highlights tagged 
frames with the tag color.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-7
Table 14-1
Structure View Icons
Icon Representing
What it means
The Root XML element
The Root element is the base, 
or top-level, XML element 
in your XML structure. All 
XML elements are contained 
by the Root element.
Story element
An InDesign story.
Text element
A range of text.
Graphic element
A graphic.
Unplaced text element
A text element that has not 
yet been associated with a 
page item.
Unplaced graphic element
A graphic element that has 
not yet been associated with 
a frame.
Empty element
An element associated with 
an empty frame.
Attribute
An attribute of an ele-
ment. Attributes are always 
optional, and are only visible 
in the Structure window.
Collapse/Expand
Click this icon to collapse 
or expand an element. If 
you hold down Command/
Ctrl as you click this icon, 
InDesign will expand all ele-
ments contained within the 
element.
Figure 14-4
Viewing Tag Markers
Some of this text must   
be tagged, right?   
How can you tell?
Choose Show Tag Markers 
from the Structure submenu of 
theView menu, and InDesign 
displays tag markers (brackets in 
the tag color) around text associ-
ated with an XML element.

14-8     c6
Figure 14-5
Viewing XML Tag 
Markers in the  
Story Editor
far too easy to delete tags inadvertently. The solution? View and edit 
the text in the Story Editor, which provides a better view of the text 
elements (see Figure 14-5).
There are many ways to add a new XML element to a document. 
Our favorite method is to use the Context menu in the Structure 
view. Select the element you want as the container for the new ele-
ment, then choose New Element from the Context menu (or click the 
New Element button). Select a tag in the associated submenu, and 
InDesign adds an empty element inside the element you selected (see 
Figure 14-6). You can also click the New Element button.
When you add an XML element using the Structure view, it’s natural 
to assume that you can somehow enter the data for the element in 
that window. You can’t. Remember: the data for an XML element in 
InDesign is stored in the page item or text object that the element 
is associated with. The only case in which you can have element 
data that’s not associated with a frame on your page is when you’ve 
imported XML and have not yet assigned an element to a page item, 
or when you’ve deleted the object the element was originally associ-
ated with.
To change the data in an XML structure, simply edit the text or 
the frame that the element is associated with.
To duplicate an XML element (and any elements it contains), select 
the element in the Structure view and copy the element. Select another 
XML element (such as the Root element) and paste. InDesign pastes 
the copied element into the selected element.
To move an element in the XML structure (including all of the ele-
ments it contains), simply drag the element up or down in the Struc-
ture view (see Figure 14-7). To move the element inside another 
element (and thereby change the hierarchy of elements), drag the ele-
ment inside another element.
Adding XML Elements
Changing XML   
Element Data
Duplicating   
XML Elements
Moving XML Elements

Bu Chpt: XML 14-9
To delete an element in the XML structure, select the element and 
choose Delete Element from the Context menu (or click the Delete 
Element button).
To move an existing XML element into a new parent XML element, 
select an element or series of elements and choose New Parent Ele-
ment from the Context menu. Select a tag from the associated sub-
menu, and InDesign moves the selected element (or elements) into a 
new element (see Figure 14-8).
XML attributes are what’s called “metadata”—they’re information 
about the information in the XML element they’re associated with. 
You can’t really do much with attributes in InDesign, but you might 
want to add an attribute if the XML is destined to appear in a situa-
tion in which attributes are necessary.
To add an attribute to an element, select the element and choose 
New Attribute from the Structure view menu. InDesign displays the 
New Attribute dialog box. Enter a name (like XML element names, 
attribute names cannot contain spaces) and value for the attributes, 
then click OK to save the attribute (see Figure 14-9).
Deleting   
XML Elements
Applying a Parent 
XML Element
Working with   
XML Attributes
Figure 14-6
Adding an  
XML Element
Select an XML element.
Choose New Element 
from the Context 
menu and select a 
tag. 
InDesign adds a new 
element to the selected 
element.
Figure 14-7
Moving an  
XML Element
You can move elements in 
the XML structure without 
changing their parent  
element, or you can change 
the parent element by  
dragging an element into 
another element.
Select the element and 
drag it up or down in 
the Structure view. 
Stop dragging, and 
InDesign moves the 
element in the XML 
structure.

14-10     c6
To change an attribute, double-click the attribute. InDesign dis-
plays the Edit Attribute dialog box. Change the name or text of the 
attribute and click the OK button.
To delete an attribute, select the attribute press Delete, or choose 
Delete Attribute from the Structure view menu.
To add an XML comment to an element, select the element and 
choose New Comment from the Context menu (or from the Struc-
ture menu). InDesign displays the New Comment dialog box. Enter 
the text of your comment in the dialog box and click the OK button. 
InDesign adds the XML comment to the structure (see Figure 14-10). 
To edit a comment, double-click the comment in the Structure view. 
To delete a comment, select the comment and press Delete.
To add an XML processing instruction to an element, select the 
element and choose New Processing Instruction from the Context 
menu (or from the Structure menu). InDesign displays the New Pro-
cessing Instruction dialog box. Enter the name of the target applica-
tion in the Target field. Enter the text of the instruction in the Data 
field. Click the OK button to close the dialog box. InDesign adds the 
XML processing instruction to the structure (see Figure 14-11). Dou-
ble-click a processing instruction to edit it, or select the processing 
instruction and press Delete to remove it from the structure.
Adding an   
XML Comment
Adding an XML   
Processing Instruction
Figure 14-8
Creating a Parent  
XML Element
Select an XML element or 
series of elements in the 
Structure view, then choose 
New Parent Element from 
the Context menu and   
select a tag.
InDesign creates a new 
XML element. The element 
contains the XML ele-
ments you selected.
Figure 14-9
Adding an Attribute to 
an XML Element
Select an element and click 
the Add Attribute button.
Enter a name and a value for 
the attribute and click the OK 
button. InDesign adds the   
attribute to the element.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-11
Figure 14-10
Adding an  
XML Comment
Select an element, then 
choose New Comment from 
the Context menu.
Select an element, then 
choose New Processing 
Instruction from the Context 
menu. Enter the processing 
instructino in the Target and 
Data fields.
Enter the text of the comment in the Value 
field of the New Comment dialog box.
InDesign adds the 
comment to the 
XML structure.
Figure 14-11
Adding an XML  
Processing Instruction
XML Tags and the Tags Panel
XML tags provide the connection between the general name of an 
XML element and a specific instance of that element in the XML 
structure. It’s important to understand that the XML tag and the 
XML element are different things. Associating a tag with a frame or a 
text object adds an instance of the element type to the structure, but 
the tag itself has nothing to do with the structure.
The Tags panel is the key to applying and managing XML tags in 
InDesign (see Figure 14-12).
To create an XML tag, follow these steps (see Figure 14-13).
1. Display the Tags panel, if it’s not already visible (choose  
Tags from the Utilities submenu on the Window menu).
2. Click the New Tag button at the bottom of the panel (or  
choose New Tag from the Tags panel menu).
3. Enter a name for the tag. You can do this by typing into the 
name field in the Tags panel. To change the color assigned to the 
Creating an XML Tag

14-12     c6
tag, double-click the tag. InDesign opens the Tag Options dialog 
box. Choose a new color from the Color pop-up menu. Choose 
Other to display a color picker to define the color.
4. If you did not go to the Tag Options dialog box to change  
the color, press Enter. If you did, click the OK button to close  
the dialog box. InDesign adds the tag to the list of tags in the 
Tags panel.
To delete an XML tag, select the tag and choose Delete Tag from 
the Tags panel menu. When you delete a tag, InDesign displays the 
Delete Tag dialog box, which asks you which other tag you’d like to 
apply to the elements corresponding to the deleted tag.
Figure 14-12
Tags Panel
Click the Untag button to 
remove a tag from a tagged 
object.
Click the New Tag button 
to add a tag.
Double-click any tag to edit 
its name or tag color.
Click the Delete Tag button to 
delete the selected tag or tags.
Tag colors give you 
a way of telling 
which tags are   
associated with 
which objects.
When you select a tagged 
item, InDesign activates the 
Retag button.
When you select 
an untagged item, 
InDesign activates 
the Add Tag 
button.
Click the AutoTag button to   
apply tags to the selected table   
or table cell (based on the tags 
specified in the Tagging Preset 
Options dialog box).
Figure 14-13
Adding a New Tag
Click the New 
Tag button.
InDesign creates 
a new tag.
Enter a name  
for the tag.
Alternatively, you can select the 
tag and choose Tag Options to 
edit the name and/or color in 
the Tag Options dialog box.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-13
To load tags from an XML file, follow these steps.
1. Choose Load Tags from the Tags panel menu. InDesign  
displays the Open dialog box.
2. Select an XML file and click the OK button. InDesign loads the 
element names from the XML file and creates a tag for each.
To save tags to an XML file, follow these steps.
1. Choose Save Tags from the Tags panel menu. InDesign displays 
the Save Tags as XML dialog box.
2. Enter a name for the file and click the Save button. InDesign 
writes the tags to an XML file.
Tagging Objects
You use the Tags panel to manage XML tags, and to apply tags to 
frames and text. To apply a tag, select something—a frame or a range 
of text—and click a tag in the Tags panel (see Figure 14-14). If the 
object you’re tagging is not contained by an object associated with 
an XML element, InDesign will ask you which element you want to 
associate with the selection. When you apply a tag, InDesign creates 
an element in the XML structure. Alternatively, you can choose Tag 
Text or Tag Page Item from the Context menu to apply a tag to the 
selection (see Figure 14-15). You can also tag objects by simply drag-
ging them into the Structure view (see Figure 14-16).
You’ve probably noticed the Add Tag and Retag options at the top 
of the Tags panel—what do they do? They answer a question: What 
should InDesign do when you have selected text that’s already tagged 
and then click a tag in the Tags panel? When the Add Tag option is 
on, clicking a tag assigns the tag to the selected text. When the Retag 
option is active, InDesign switches the tag from the current tag to 
the tag you clicked.
To remove a tag from an object, select the object, or the corre-
sponding element in the Structure view and then click the Untag 
button in the Tags panel.
When you apply a tag to text, and have not yet applied a tag to the 
text frame containing the text, InDesign applies a default tag to the 
text frame and adds a corresponding XML element to the document 
structure. You can use the Tagging Preset Options dialog box to 
specify the tag you want to apply as the default (see Figure 14-17).
Loading XML Tags
Exporting XML Tags
Tagging Preset Options

14-14     c6
Figure 14-14
Tagging Frames  
and Text
Click a tag in   
the Tags panel.
InDesign tags the frame 
and adds a corresponding   
element to the XML   
structure of the document. 
When Show Tagged Frames 
is on, InDesign highlights   
the frame.
Select a frame.
Click a tag in   
the Tags panel.
InDesign tags the text   
and adds a corresponding   
element to the XML   
structure of the document. 
In this example, the text 
element is added to the XML 
element corresponding to the 
frame containing the text. 
The brackets around the text 
are tag markers.
To tag a range of text,   
select the text.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-15
Figure 14-15
Tagging a Frame Using 
the Context Menu
You can use the Context 
menu to apply tags to frames 
and text (when you have text 
selected, the Context menu 
option will read “Tag Text”).
To apply a tag to the selection using the 
Context menu, choose a tag from the   
Tag Frame (or Tag Text) submenu.
InDesign applies the tag   
you selected, and creates a   
corresponding XML element.
The Tagging Preset Options dialog box also gives you a way to 
automate the tagging of tables and table cells. Choose the tags you 
want to apply from the Tables and Cells pop-up menus, and InDesign 
will apply those tags when you tag a table, cell, or text frame (see 
Figure 14-18).
You’ve got an XML structure and a set of XML tags, and a docu-
ment full of text. The task of tagging each paragraph with a specific 
XML tag is daunting—or is it? Not if you’ve used paragraph styles 
and character styles to format your text. If you’ve used styles, you can 
“map” those styles to XML tags, and automate the whole process.
To map XML tags to paragraph and character styles, follow these 
steps (see Figure 14-19).
1. Choose Map Tags to Styles from the Tags panel menu. The pro-
gram displays the Map Tags to Styles dialog box.
2. For each XML tag, you can select a corresponding paragraph 
style or character style. You don’t have to map each style to a 
tab, and you can map multiple styles to a single XML tag. To 
Mapping XML Tags to 
Paragraph Styles

14-16     c6
Figure 14-16
Tagging a Frame 
Using Drag and Drop
Drag objects out of your 
layout and drop them in the 
Structure view.
InDesign asks which tag you 
want to apply to the new 
XML element. Select a tag…
…and InDesign tags the 
objects and creates a new 
XML element.
Figure 14-17
Tagging Preset Options
Choose Tagging Preset Options 
from the Structure menu, then 
select the default tag you want to 
apply to each type of object (text 
frames, tables, and table cells).
…InDesign tags the text 
frame with the default tag 
you specified.
When you apply a tag to a 
text selection in an untagged 
text frame, for example…

Bu Chpt: XML 14-17
Figure 14-18
Tables and Tagging  
Preset Options
The Tagging Preset Options 
dialog box gives you a way to 
specify the default tag applied to 
tables and table cells.
When you apply a tag to a 
cell in an untagged table…
InDesign applies the default 
tag to the table and the cells 
in the table. If the text frame 
containing the table is also 
untagged, InDesign will 
apply the default tag to the 
text frame.
automatically map tags to styles of the same name, click the 
Map By Name button. This mapping is case sensitive—the style 
names “Body_Text” and “body_text” will be mapped to different 
XML tags. Note, also, that tag names cannot contain spaces or 
punctuation (avoid using those characters in your style names).
3. When you’ve created as many tag-to-style correspondences as 
you want, click the OK button. InDesign applies the paragraph 
style to all paragraphs tagged with the corresponding XML tag.
You’ve formatted all of the text in your InDesign document using 
paragraph and character styles, and you’ve imported or created a set 
of XML tags. Since you’ve already told InDesign what all of the text 
Mapping Styles   
to XML Tags

14-18     c6
Figure 14-19
Mapping XML  
Tags to Styles
You’ve imported XML, 
and you’ve tagged frames 
and text objects. So why 
does your text look so…
unformatted? It’s because 
you haven’t yet created a 
“mapping” between the 
XML tags and the styles   
in the document.
To do that, choose Map Tags 
to Styles from the Structure 
menu. InDesign displays   
the Map Tags to Styles   
dialog box.
For each tag you want to  
associate with a style, 
choose a style name from 
the pop-up menus in the 
Style list.
If the tags and paragraph styles   
have the same names, you can click   
the Map By Name button to have 
InDesign do most of the work for you.
Once you’ve set 
up the mapping 
the way you want 
it, click the OK 
button. 
InDesign applies the formatting specified 
in the character and paragraph styles to 
the corresponding text elements.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-19
objects are (by way of the paragraph and character styles), shouldn’t 
you be able to do so with the document’s XML structure? You can, by 
following the steps below (see Figure 14-20).
1. Select the Map Styles to Tags option from the Tags panel menu. 
InDesign displays the Map Styles to Tags dialog box.
2. Select an XML element for each style for which you want to 
establish a mapping. If some or all of your XML tag names are 
the same as the names of your styles, you can click the Map By 
Name button to automatically match tags and styles with the 
same names (this matching is case sensitive).
3. When you’ve created as many style-to-tag correspondences  
as you want, click the OK button. InDesign creates an XML  
element for all text tagged with the styles you’ve specified.
Importing and Exporting XML
To import XML into the structure of an InDesign document, follow 
these steps. If you want to import the XML into a specific XML ele-
ment, select the element first.
1. Choose Import XML from the File menu (or from the Structure 
menu or Context menu in the Structure view). InDesign displays 
the Import XML dialog box.
2. Locate and select an XML file to import.
3. Turn on the Show Import Options option (most of the time, we 
think you’ll want to have this option turned on). To import the 
XML into the selected element, turn on the Import Into Selected 
Element option.
4. Click the Open button. InDesign displays the XML Import 
Options dialog box (see Figure 14-21).
5. Make any changes you need in the XML Import Options dialog 
box (see “XML Import Options,” later in this chapter).
6. Click the OK button. InDesign adds the XML data to  
the document.
When you import XML for the first time, the incoming XML data 
will appear in any page items that have been tagged with the Root 
XML element.

14-20     c6
Figure 14-20
Mapping Styles  
to XML Tags
All of the paragraphs in   
your document have been 
tagged with paragraph styles. 
Isn’t there some easy way 
to add all of the text to the 
XML structure?
Select Map Styles to Tags 
from the Structure menu.
InDesign displays the Map 
Styles to Tags dialog box.
For each style you want 
to add, select a tag from 
the pop-up menus in the 
Tag list. 
If you’ve named the tags 
using the same names as the 
paragraph and character 
styles, you can click the Map 
By Name button and save a 
lot of time. (Hint: This is very 
much worth doing.)
Turn on options in the 
Include section to direct 
InDesign to map stories on   
master pages, on the paste-
board, or empty stories.
Once you’ve finished 
creating a mapping, 
click the OK button. 
InDesign adds elements   
to the XML structure   
of the document based   
on the mapping.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-21
Figure 14-21
XML Import Options 
Dialog Box
The options in the XML Import Options dialog box control the way 
that InDesign imports XML into the XML structure in your docu-
ment. The following is a brief summary of the options.
Mode. If you’re importing XML into a document that already con-
tains an XML structure, you can choose to replace the existing struc-
ture, or add the incoming XML to the existing structure. To specify 
the former, choose Merge Content from the Mode pop-up menu; for 
the latter, choose Append Content. These options mirror the options 
of the same name in the Import XML dialog box, but it’s nice to be 
able to change your mind once you get here.
Create Link. When this option is turned on, InDesign will create a 
link to the imported XML data file. When the original file is modi-
fied, you’ll have the option of updating the link. This comes with 
the same advantages and disadvantages (mainly disadvantages, in 
our opinion) as creating links to text files, as discussed in Chapter 7, 
“Importing and Exporting.”
Apply XSLT. You can apply an XSLT stylesheet to the incoming XML. 
For more on this topic, see “Applying XSLT Stylesheets on Import/
Export,” and “Transforming XML with XSLT,” later in this chapter.
Clone Repeating Text Elements. It’s almost impossible to understate 
the importance of this control. With it turned on, and with a prop-
erly-constructed layout template, you can automate the placement of 
thousands of fully-formatted XML elements, including inline graph-
ics. When it’s turned off, you’ll be stuck placing and formatting ele-
ment after element by hand. But that all has to do with the template. 
Take a look at “Creating Placeholders for Repeating Content,” later 
in this chapter.
XML Import Options

14-22     c6
Only Import Elements That Match Existing Structure. When 
you’ve turned on this option, InDesign attempts to match XML ele-
ments in the incoming XML structure with the structure in the file. 
If an elements in the incoming data does not match an element in the 
existing structure, InDesign does not import that element.
Import Text Elements into Table if Tags Match. When this option 
is on, and if the incoming XML data replaces an existing table, 
InDesign will import the contents of the XML elements into the table.
Do Not Import Contents of Whitespace-Only Elements. Are the 
returns, tabs, and other “whitespace” characters in the incoming 
XML important? If so, turn this option off. If, on the other hand, you 
have created a template that provides returns, tabs, and static text, 
turn this option on.
Delete Elements, Frames, and Content That Do Not Match 
Imported XML. When you turn this option on, InDesign will delete 
any frames, graphics, or text that do not have a match in the XML file 
you’re importing. It’s something like the logical opposite of the Only 
Import Elements That Match Existing Structure option, as applied 
to layout items.
Import CALS Tables as InDesign Tables. CALS stands for “Con-
tinuous Acquisition and Life-cycle Support,” a U.S. Department of 
Defense (you know, where the Web came from) initiative/standard 
for documentation markup. The CALS specification for tables was 
adopted for use in SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language). 
It’s a standard for marking up tables. We’ve never seen it, but we 
understand others might have. If you think that the incoming XML 
file contains some tables formatted using this standard, turn this 
option on.
You can have InDesign apply an XSLT stylesheet as you import or 
export an XML file. To do this on import, choose an option from the 
Apply XSLT pop-up menu in the XML Import Options dialog box. 
On export, use the corresponding control in the Export XML dialog 
box.
This is very important because, as we mentioned earlier, the order 
in which XML elements appear in an InDesign layout might not be 
the ideal arrangement of the same elements in your XML data file. 
An XSLT transformation can fix that for you. 
Applying XSLT 
Stylesheets on   
Import/Export

Bu Chpt: XML 14-23
XSLT can rearrange elements, add or duplicate elements, and add 
or remove static text to make the incoming XML structure match 
the needs of your layout. On export, you can transform the outgoing 
XML to match the structure to other needs. For more on using XSLT, 
see “Transforming XML with XSLT,” later in this chapter.
To replace an XML structure with elements from another XML file, 
follow these steps (see Figure 14-22).
1. If you want to replace any element other than the Root element, 
select an element in the Structure view.
2. Choose Import XML from the File menu. InDesign displays the 
Import XML dialog box.
3. Turn on the Replace Content option. If you want to replace the 
selected element, turn on the Import Into Selected Element 
option. 
Replacing XML
Figure 14-22
Replacing XML
Select an element.
Choose Import XML from 
the File menu. InDesign   
displays the Import XML 
dialog box (which we won’t 
show in its entirety—what’s 
important are the options at 
the bottom of the dialog).   
Locate and select an   
XML file.
Turn on the Merge   
Content option.
Turn on the Import Into 
Selected Element option.
Click the Open button, 
and InDesign replaces the 
existing elements with the 
corresponding elements from 
the imported XML file.

14-24     c6
4. Click the Open button, and InDesign replaces the XML elements 
with the elements in the XML file.
Once you’ve created an XML structure in an InDesign document, 
you can export structure to an XML file. This is a good thing, because 
you can then use the exported XML file as a template for future files.
To export XML, follow these steps (see Figure 14-23).
1. If you want to export a selected element (and all of the elements 
it contains), select the XML element you want to export in the 
Structure view.
2. Choose Export from the File menu. InDesign displays the 
Export dialog box.
3. Choose XML from the Format pop-up menu and enter a  
name for the XML file.
Exporting XML
Figure 14-23
Exporting XML
Use the options in the General 
panel to specify file encoding, 
whitespace options, and other 
export options.
Click the Export button, 
and InDesign exports the 
specified XML elements 
to a file. You can view this 
file using any text editor, 
or you can open the file 
using a Web browser.
If you want to export only 
the selected XML element, 
turn on the Export from 
Selected Element option.
After you’ve set a file name 
and location for the XML 
file, InDesign displays the 
Export XML dialog box.
Use the Images tab to set  
image export options.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-25
4. Click the Save button. InDesign displays the Export XML  
dialog box.
5. Select an encoding for your exported XML document from the 
Encoding pop-up menu. If you want, you can choose to view 
the XML after exporting (and the browser you want to use for 
that purpose). If you want to export the selected element (if any), 
turn on the Export from Selected Element option.
6. Click the Export button to export the XML file. 
Acrobat 5 PDF documents (PDF version 1.4 and above) can include 
eBook structure data. In essence, these are a defined set of XML tags 
that have a specific meaning to Acrobat.
The easiest way to tag the elements in your document with these 
tags is to choose the Add Untagged Items option from the Structure 
view menu. When you do this, InDesign automatically applies a tag 
named “Article” to untagged text frames and applies the tag “Figure” 
to untagged imported graphics.
You can create tags with these names and apply them. You can 
also use the tag name “Artifact” to mark page items you want to omit 
when the PDF is viewed on small-screen devices.
After you’ve applied these tags, turn on the Include eBook Tags 
option as you export PDF. The PDF will then be set up to reflow when 
displayed by the Acrobat Reader software.
Creating Placeholders for Repeating Content
All of the techniques we’ve discussed so far—tagging text and frames, 
importing XML, replacing XML—can be used to create and populate 
placeholder frames for XML content. A key point, however, is that 
InDesign will never create new frames or add pages to accommodate 
new XML elements. InDesign duplicates text items as you import 
XML elements into a placeholder story. So you can have InDesign 
repeat the arrangement of placeholder elements and static text for 
each corresponding element in an imported XML file.
You create placeholder text by creating an XML structure that 
matches the structure of the XML content you plan to import (see 
Figure 14-24). You then use the elements from the XML structure 
to mark up text. The structures do not need to be an exact match, 
but the sequence of elements in the template and the sequence of ele-
ments in the incoming XML file must match.
Exporting Structure 
Tags to PDF

14-26     c6
Figure 14-24
Creating Placeholders 
for XML Content
Make a text frame and 
use tags to create a series 
of XML placeholders.
In this example, the main 
repeating element—similar 
to a record in a database—
is the “show” element.
Choose Import XML from the Context 
menu, Structure menu, or the File menu.
As you select an XML file for import, check 
the Show XML Import Options option to 
display the XML Import Options dialog box.
Choose Merge Content.
Check Clone Repeating Text Elements 
Turn this option on to preserve 
any static text you have added
InDesign flows the XML 
data into the story, repeat-
ing the XML elements that 
match the structure of the 
placeholder elements.
Each “show” element is laid 
out according to the format of 
the placeholder elements.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-27
We know that we said that InDesign won’t create new frames, but 
there is a way to incorporate graphics in your XML placeholder—
and that is to create inline frames. Inline graphic frames can be filled 
in with a graphic just like XML placeholder text, (see Figure 14-25).
Figure 14-25
Inline Placeholders  
for Graphics
Again, set up the structure 
using placeholder XML 
elements. This time, add an 
anchored graphic and apply 
an XML tag to it.
Add graphic elements to 
the structure of the XML 
file you plan to export. For 
each graphic element,add 
the location of the graphic 
you want inserted for that 
element.
When you import the XML, 
InDesign will duplicate the 
graphic placeholder, and will 
import the graphic specified 
in the corresponding   
XML element.
The new graphics replace the 
placeholder graphic in each 
duplicate of the placeholder text.

14-28     c6
Working with DTDs
A Document Type Definition (DTD) is a text file that contains the 
“rules” for an XML file. There’s nothing magical about these rules—
they’re just a formal version of the things you think about as you 
design and lay out a document. Heading levels, for example, follow 
a particular order; a numbered list must have at least two list items; 
last name data fields in directory data do not include middle names, 
and so on. Laying out documents is all about applying a structure to 
the data in the document (in addition to making it pretty to look at).
If, as we said earlier, an XML file can contain any data, in any 
order, how the heck can you work with other people? Most of us have, 
at one point or another, had some success training the writers and 
editors we work with to provide text files that are reasonably close 
to what we want. We’ve done this by giving them a detailed set of 
instructions on the way that they should prepare the text. And, at 
least for some of us, we’ve come up with a system that produces files 
that we can work with.
A DTD is something like a set of instructions for preparing a 
text file for page layout. But it’s much more than that, and somewhat 
more restrictive. At their best, DTDs provide an agreed-upon set of 
tags and XML data structures that work seamlessly with your publi-
cation processes.
Given that there are entire books larger than this one on the topic of 
writing DTDs, you’ll have to forgive us for not going into great detail 
on the care and feeding of these files. (Besides, we’re still learning 
how to write them ourselves.)
The following are a few ground rules, however.
▶A DTD can exist as a separate file, or it can be inside an XML file. 
It’s most likely you’ll want to keep your DTDs as separate files, 
as it makes sense to work with a small set of DTDs (one or two) 
and apply them to a much larger number of XML files.
▶DTDs have four basic parts (called declarations): document type, 
comments, elements, and attributes.
▶If a DTD is included in a file containing XML data, the DTD is 
enclosed within the DOCTYPE declaration. This specifies the 
name of the top level (or “root”) element in the XML file. If the 
DTD is a separate file, it does not use the DOCTYPE declaration
▶Element declarations specify the name of each element—and 
therefore each tag—in an XML document.
DTD Basics

Bu Chpt: XML 14-29
▶Attribute declarations usually contain information about the 
information in an element (“metadata”), but they sometimes 
contain other data.
As we mentioned above, DTDs have four basic parts: the DOCTYPE 
declaration, elements, attributes, and comments. The following sec-
tions provide a a bit more detail on each part.
Document type. If the DTD appears in a file containing XML data, 
the DOCTYPE declaration appears at the beginning of the file, 
immediately following the XML declaration. The skeleton of this 
type of file looks something like this (in the following, the XML ele-
ment “author” is the root element):
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes" ?>
<!DOCTYPE author [
<!-- DTD for author -->
]>
<author>
<!-- XML data-->
</author>
If the DTD is not included in an XML file, then you can omit 
the DOCTYPE declaration. We’re not exactly sure why you would 
include the DTD with the XML file, but you have the option to do so, 
should you so desire.
Comments. Once you venture beyond simple DTDs (such as the 
examples in this book), you’ll find that it gets difficult to keep track of 
all of the elements and attributes in a DTD file. When this happens, 
you’ll want to add a note to yourself—or to anyone else who might 
happen to be reading the DTD—explaining what, exactly, you’re 
trying to do with a specific line or section of the file. Comments are 
preceded by “<!--”, end with “-->”, and can be span multiple lines. 
Here’s an example comment:
<!-- No more than one social security number per author -->
Elements. Elements are the heart of the DVD. They specify the struc-
ture of the data used by the DTD, and they correspond to the XML 
tags in InDesign. Each element declaration contains the name of the 
element and the data that the element contains. A simple element 
declaration looks like this:
<!ELEMENT first (#PCDATA)>
A (Very Brief)   
DTD Primer

14-30     c6
This declares that the element is named “first,” and that the ele-
ment contains text (that’s what “PCDATA” means).
A slightly more complex element is shown below.
<!ELEMENT name (first middle? last)>
This element is named name, and is made up of three elements, 
“first,” “middle,” and “last.” The question mark after the element 
“middle” means that this element is optional. Other marks specify 
other things about the content of the element—see Table 14-2.
Attributes. An attribute contains additional information about an 
element. Attibutes are generally used for storing metadata (again, 
that’s data about the data in the element, not necessarily data you 
want to print out—the date the element was created or updated 
would be examples of element attributes).
An example attribute looks like this:
<!ATTLIST address updated CDATA #IMPLIED>
Attribute declarations are lists with four parts: the element 
name, the attribute name, the attribute type, and whether or not it’s 
required. In the above example, the attribute is associated with the 
“address” element, the attribute is named “updated,” the attribute 
contains the data type CDATA (text), and it’s optional.
The attribute options for the last parameter (“required”) are:
▶#REQUIRED means the attribute is required.
▶#IMPLIED means the attribute is optional.
▶#FIXED is always followed by a value; if the attribute is missing, 
then it’s assumed to be this value.
▶Some default value. This is really the same as #FIXED, above, in 
that the value provides the default value.
Given our very simple XML database example, we can construct a 
DTD to use for validating new versions of the database. It would look 
something like the following.
<!-- DTD for author -->
<!ELEMENT author (name, address, city, state, zip)>
<!ELEMENT name (first, middle, last)>
<!ELEMENT first (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT middle (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT last (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT address (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT city (#PCDATA)>
An Example DTD

Bu Chpt: XML 14-31
Symbol
What it Means
+
Required, and may repeat (one or more of these  
elements may appear in the parent element).
?
Optional, but may not repeat (only one of these  
elements can appear in the parent element).
*
Optional, and may repeat.
no mark
Required, and cannot repeat.
,
Followed by. Controls the order of appearance of 
elements in an element. If an element name is fol-
lowed by a comma, elements following the comma 
must appear after the element.
|
Or. When this mark appears between element 
names, it means that either or both of the elements 
can appear; if one of the element names is required, 
then one or both elements must appear.
Table 14-2
Element Codes
<!ELEMENT state (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT zip (#PCDATA)>
To import a DTD file into an InDesign document, follow these steps 
(see Figure 14-26).
1. Display the Structure view, if it’s not already visible (choose 
Show Structure from the Structure submenu of the View menu, 
or click the Show Structure button at the lower-left corner of the 
InDesign window).
2. Chose Load DTD from the Structure menu. InDesign displays 
the Load DTD dialog box.
3. Locate and select the DTD you want to import, then click the 
Open button. InDesign imports the DTD.
When you import a DTD, InDesign adds the tags in the DTD file 
to the list of tags in the Tags panel. The tags defined in the DTD are 
locked—you can change the tag’s color, but not the tag’s name.
To view the DTD, choose View DTD from the Structure menu. 
InDesign opens the DTD in the View DTD dialog box—some-
thing like a very simple text editor (see Figure 14-27). You can scroll 
through the text, and you can select and copy text out of the DTD. 
We’re not exactly certain how useful this feature is, though we admit 
that it might come in handy during an “am I losing my mind or is 
that XML element really messed up” moment.
Importing DTDs

14-32     c6
Figure 14-26
Importing a DTD
After you’ve chosen Import 
DTD from the Structure 
menu and have located the 
DTD file in the Load DTD 
dialog box, the DTD appears 
in the Structure panel.
InDesign adds XML  
tags corresponding to 
the elements defined in 
the DTD.
Before you take on the task of creating a DTD from scratch, take 
a look at the DTD links http://www.xml.com/pub/rg/DTD_Reposi-
tories.html—you might find one there that will work for you, or at 
least find a good example. If you work in the newspaper industry, 
you might want to take a look at NewsML and SportsML, two DTDs 
developed by International Press Telecommunications Council 
(IPTC), at http://www.newsml.org.
Now we get to the fun part—checking an XML file to make certain it 
conforms to the DTD we’ve loaded. To validate XML elements, select 
the element and then click the Validate button at the top of the Struc-
ture view (see Figure 14-28). To validate a specific element, select the 
element and choose Validate From Selected Element from the Struc-
ture menu.
After InDesign has validated the XML, a new pane appears at the 
bottom of the Structure view. In this pane, InDesign displays the 
result of the validation. If there are errors in the XML (relative to the 
DTD’s specifications), then InDesign displays the offending element 
names in red, and lists the errors and possible solutions—the solu-
tions are shown in blue, and are underlined. 
To apply a solution, click it. This will not always solve the problems 
with the XML file, and it will sometimes introduce new problems. 
“Off the Shelf” DTDs
Validating XML
Figure 14-27
Viewing a DTD

Bu Chpt: XML 14-33
Figure 14-28
Validating XML
To validate an XML   
element using the   
current DTD, select the   
element and choose Validate 
from Selected Element from 
the Context menu.
InDesign displays the 
result of the valida-
tion at the bottom of 
the Structure view.
When the XML in the file 
changes, it’s a good idea to 
validate again. You never 
know what you might find.
In this example, 
InDesign found 
errors in the XML—
the DTD did not al-
low for the possibility 
that David would 
have added children.
InDesign highlights 
the unexpected  
elements in red.
InDesign lists errors in the XML at the 
bottom of the Structure view.Click the 
underlined blue text to attempt to fix the 
XML validation problem.
Luckily, this action can be undone—which means that you can 
experiment with different solutions to find which works for you.
By the time a file gets to you, it’s already too late. It needs to be laid 
out, proofed, and the final version printed by the deadline—and the 
editors, writers, and everyone else have already gone home for the 
night. If there’s an error in the copy you’ve been given, you don’t have 
time to go through proper channels—you just have to fix it. If the text 
files use the wrong styles, or if the graphics are in the wrong format, 
you can fix them and still have a chance of meeting your deadline. 
If, on the other hand you, a file doesn’t conform to the DTD you’re 
required to use, you have a painful choice: you can start editing the 
XML file itself (painful and slow for all but the simplest XML files), 
you can turn off DTD validation and attempt to make sense of the 
XML structure, or you can stick to the “letter of the law” and reject 
the XML file because it didn’t conform to the DTD.
Real World DTDs

14-34     c6
Publishing is about deadlines, more deadlines, and output. Keep-
ing a press waiting is an expensive business, as the authors know to 
their bitter experience. We can add all of the formal handoffs, review 
processes, and conform to every standard that’s ever been formu-
lated, but, in the end, we sometimes have to throw it all out the 
window in order to get the pages out the door. 
We’re not saying that you shouldn’t use DTDs. But we did want to 
caution you—if you’re going to commit to a particular DTD, make 
certain that you build plenty of time into your process for validation 
and for fixing XML files that won’t validate.
Transforming XML with XSLT
Putting all of your data into XML presents a problem—how the 
heck do you get it into a form that people can look at it? InDesign is 
certainly one answer, but there’s another, and that’s XSLT. XSLT, or 
Extensible Stylesheet Language, exists to transform XML into other 
formats.
Once upon a time, many moons ago, there was only one Web 
browser (Mosaic), which ran on a single type of device (a computer). 
HTML did a reasonably good job of displaying data (Web pages) 
in that browser on that device. But the Web grew. These days, we 
have multiple browsers (Internet Explorer, Firefox, Safari) running 
on multiple platforms. An HTML format that works well for one of 
these viewing environments probably won’t work for all of the others. 
So Web site developers faced a problem: how could they avoid writ-
ing and maintaining multiple versions of their HTML pages?
The answer lies in the combination of XML and XSLT. When you 
use XSLT, you can store the data that makes up your Web pages as 
XML and transform it into HTML appropriate for viewing on what-
ever device and browser happens to be connecting to your Web site. 
If you do this, you need to write and maintain the XSLT templates, 
but the templates change far less frequently than your Web pages.
XSLT is made up of two main parts: Transformations, which com-
prise the transformation language itself and XML Path Language (or 
XPath), a way to locate data in XML.
At this point, you’re probably scratching your head and wonder-
ing just exactly what a language for transforming XML into HTML 
has to do with InDesign. It’s this: XSLT can transform XML into 
any text format, including plain text, PDF, PostScript, HTML, other 
forms of XML, and, our favorite, InDesign tagged text.

Bu Chpt: XML 14-35
Why use XSLT to transform XML before placing it in an InDesign 
document? Well, that depends on your workflow. If you need to 
import lots of tabular data from your XML files, converting to tagged 
text first can speed things up, because tables imported from XML 
appear in InDesign’s default table formatting. This usually means 
that you’ll have to select and reformat each table—a task that can be 
time-consuming, to say the least. If you transform the same XML 
file to tagged text using XSLT, you can specify every attribute of the 
tables in the file. Another point about tables—InDesign tagged text 
supports tables-within-tables; InDesign’s XML import does not.
Here is a (very simple) XML fragment that we’ll use in all of the 
following examples. Note that we’re asking you to use your imagi-
nation a bit—if the XML files you are working with are really this 
small and simple, then you do not need the XSLT techniques we’ll 
talk about. But if you’re looking at XML files several orders of magni-
tude larger and more complex—as you probably are, if you’re work-
ing with XML—then you probably do.
<author>
<name>
 
<first>Olav</first>
 
<middle>Martin</middle>
 
<last>Kvern</last>
</name>
<address>5207 Phinney Avenue North</address>
<city>Seattle</city>
<state>Washington</state>
<zip>98103</zip>
</author>
InDesign’s XML import frequently requires that the elements in the 
XML structure match the order of the appearance elements in the 
layout (this almost always true of text elements), which means that 
you might find that you need to re-order the elements in an XML file 
before you import it. The following is an example XSLT template that 
can change the position of an element in our example XML file.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<xsl:stylesheet version="2.0" 
xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">
<xsl:output method="xml" version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"  
indent="yes"/>
<xsl:template match="/">
<xsl:element name="author">
<xsl:element name="name">
<!--Rearrange the order of the name elements, placing
the last name first-->
<xsl:copy-of select="author/name/last"/>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/name/first"/>
Changing Element 
Order with XSLT

14-36     c6
<xsl:copy-of select="author/name/middle"/>
</xsl:element>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/address"/>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/city"/>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/state"/>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/zip"/>
</xsl:element>
</xsl:template>
</xsl:stylesheet>
Transform the example XML using the XSLT template above, and 
you’ll get the following output XML.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<author>
<name>
 
<last>Kvern</last>
 
<first>Olav</first>
 
<middle>Martin</middle>
</name>
<address>5207 Phinney Avenue North</address>
<city>Seattle</city>
<state>Washington</state>
<zip>98103</zip>
</author>
It’s fairly natural to expect that you could use one piece of XML data 
in multiple places in an InDesign layout—but that’s not at all the way 
that InDesign works. Once you’ve imported XML, there is a one-to-
one correspondence between the elements in the Structure view and 
their expression in the layout. If you want an element to appear mul-
tiple times, you’ve got to duplicate the element for each appearance 
on a document page. (Obviously, you can get around this in some 
cases by placing the XML element on a master page.)
Our layout requires (for whatever reason) that the author’s last 
name appear twice. How can we duplicate the last name field? Try 
the following XSLT template.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<xsl:stylesheet version="2.0" 
xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform" >
<xsl:output method="xml" version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" 
indent="yes"/>
<xsl:template match="/">
<xsl:element name="author">
<!--Create a copy of the last name element  
with a different element name-->
<xsl:element name="last_name"><xsl:value-of select="author/name/
last"/></xsl:element>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/name"/>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/address"/>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/city"/>
Duplicating   
Elements with XSL

Bu Chpt: XML 14-37
<xsl:copy-of select="author/state"/>
<xsl:copy-of select="author/zip"/>
</xsl:element>
</xsl:template>
</xsl:stylesheet>
When you transform the example XML file with the XSLT tem-
plate above, you’ll get the following output XML.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<author>
<last_name>Kvern</last_name>
<name>
 
<first>Olav</first>
 
<middle>Martin</middle>
 
<last>Kvern</last>
</name>
<address>5207 Phinney Avenue North</address>
<city>Seattle</city>
<state>Washington</state>
<zip>98103</zip>
</author>
As we mentioned earlier, transforming XML into tagged text for 
import can offer some significant advantages for some workflows and 
publications. If you don’t care about maintaining the XML structure 
in your InDesign documents, or if your use of XML involves adding 
text data from XML elements to other text, you might want to con-
sider this approach.
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<xsl:stylesheet version="2.0" 
xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">
<xsl:output method = "text"/>
<xsl:template match="author">&lt;ASCII-WIN&gt;&#10;&#13;
&lt;Version:4&gt;&lt;FeatureSet:InDesign-Roman&gt;&lt;ColorTable:=&l
t;Black:COLOR:CMYK:Process:0,0,0,1&gt;&gt;
&lt;DefineParaStyle:heading&gt;
&lt;DefineParaStyle:body_text&gt;
&lt;DefineCharStyle:name&gt;
&lt;ParaStyle:heading&gt;<xsl:value-of select="name/
first"/>&#32;<xsl:value-of select="name/middle"/>&#32;<xsl:value-of 
select="name/last"/>
&lt;ParaStyle:body_text&gt;Once upon a time, there was an 
author named &lt;CharStyle:name&gt;<xsl:value-of select="name/
first"/>&#32;<xsl:value-of select="name/middle"/>&#32;<xsl:value-
of select="name/last"/>&lt;CharStyle:&gt; who lived in a strange 
little house at <xsl:value-of select="address"/> in <xsl:value-of 
select="city"/>, <xsl:value-of select="state"/>.
</xsl:template>
</xsl:stylesheet>
When you process the XML example file using the above XSL 
template, you’ll get the following tagged text output.
Transforming XML   
to Tagged Text

14-38     c6
<ASCII-WIN>
<Version:4><FeatureSet:InDesign-Roman><ColorTable:=<Black:COLOR:CMYK
:Process:0,0,0,1>>
<DefineParaStyle:heading>
<DefineParaStyle:body_text>
<DefineCharStyle:name>
<ParaStyle:heading>Olav Martin Kvern
<ParaStyle:body_text>Once upon a time, there was an author named 
<CharStyle:name>Olav Martin Kvern<CharStyle:> who lived in a strange 
little house at 5207 Phinney Avenue North in Seattle, Washington.
InDesign Interchange Formats INX and IDML
INX and IDML are both XML formats you can export from InDesign, 
but they’re not the same as exporting XML from a document (which 
would only include the XML structure itself). These formats render 
everything in the InDesign file, including styles, page items, format-
ting, colors, page margins, and ruler guides. In a way, these formats 
are XML alternatives to the InDesign binary document (you know, 
what you get when you choose Save from the File menu).
INX is an older format, and is primarily used for saving docu-
ments back to the previous version of InDesign. IDML, for “InDesign 
Markup Language,” is a replacement for INX, and much more. IDML 
is a huge improvement over INX: it’s far more readable and robust.
The InDesign Snippet (.idms) format is essentially the same as 
IDML, but is limited to representing page items or collections of page 
items as XML. IDML is also the format of library items. Another 
variant of the IDML format is ICML, which is used for saving InCopy 
stories.
The reason we’re talking about IDML, when we’ve already talked 
about it in Chapter 7, “Importing and Exporting,” is that it’s XML. 
All of the things you can do with XML files, you can do with IDML. 
Yes, that means you can import them into the XML structure of a 
document. Don’t do that! That’s not what we’re getting at.
Think about it. With the XML in an IDML file (or snippet file), 
you can lay out InDesign documents without even having InDesign 
open. You’ll need to open your copy of InDesign to proof, print, and 
export the files you’ve created, but the work can be done for you 
while the file is in its XML form. The work can be done by a database, 
or by a script, on your local machine, or on a server.
We don’t have the space here to discuss the IDML format in detail, 
and, besides, Ole’s already done that in the official, 300-odd page 
IDML specification, which you can find at:
IDML Overview

Bu Chpt: XML 14-39
http://www.adobe.com/devnet/indesign/pdfs/idml-specification.pdf
First, IDML is not a simple text file. Instead, it’s a Zip archive 
containing a set of files and folders. We don’t think that this raises a 
signficant barrier to entry—after all, both platforms (Mac OS/Win-
dows) have native tools for uncompressing Zip files. 
We also believe that the way that the files are organized inside the 
archive really simplifies working with the XML content. The XML 
files in the archive each concentrate on a specific area.
This logical compartmentalization of the XML files that make up 
the IDML document makes sense. If you want to work with a story, 
for example, you can work with a relatively small XML file contain-
ing just that story, rather than editing a tiny and hard to find segment 
of an enormous XML document.
Spreads are also broken out into separate XML files in the IDML 
package, which makes it easy to swap and rearrange spreads inside a 
document or across a set of documents.
If you do a template-based publishing, where the main thing that 
changes in your documents is text, you should really consider look-
ing at IDML. Especially in combination with scripting, this approach 
can bring about tremendous productivity gains for repetitive layouts 
such as business cards or data sheets.
About XML Rules
XML rules are a great new feature in InDesign. Haven’t heard of 
them? That’s understandable—they’re a scripting-only feature. XML 
rules work in a fashion similar to XSLT—when a rule finds an XML 
element that matches the thing it’s looking for, it does something. 
XSLT changes the output; XML rules execute a script.
We won’t get into the details of how XML rules work here. For 
one thing, there’s really no way for us to provide a generic example, 
because XML rules (like XSLT) literally depend on the structure of 
your XML. For another, Ole’s already done that in the InDesign CS4 
Scripting Guide.
But the important thing you need to know about XML rules is 
that you can create (or have someone create) XML rules that can pro-
cess the XML in your InDesign file in an unlimited variety of ways. 
XML rules can create or remove layout elements, apply formatting, 
or change the structure of the XML in your document. While you 
could do all of this using scripting in earlier versions of InDesign, 
XML rules provide significant (like, several orders of magnitude) 
improvement in performance.

14-40     c6
Stay Tuned
As we’ve said, all of this is very new. Desktop publishing has not 
yet fully embraced XML as part of a page layout workflow, and 
InDesign’s XML features are only a small step in the right direction. 
We’ve got a lot of experimenting to do before we find the right fit for 
XML—a format that is explicitly not concerned about formatting—
and a page layout. We’re convinced that they can work together, in 
spite of their differences, and that we’ll see many more XML features 
work their way into InDesign in future versions.

15-1
In the printed version of Real World Adobe InDesign CS6, we cut a 
few sections from the Scripting chapter due to space constraints. If 
you’re interested in scripting—and we hope you are—you’ll want to 
check out this additional material.
While the printed book includes only JavaScript examples, we 
provide the AppleScript and VBScript examples here.
You can also learn about using the ExtendScript Toolkit and play 
around with more samples in the “Even More Fun with Scripting” 
section.
Enjoy!
More Scripting
B o n u s  A p p e n d i x

15-2     c6
Additional Scripting Examples
The chapter in the printed book provides a script example only 
in JavaScript. In this bonus chapter, we provide the example in 
AppleScript and VBScript examples as well.
When you want to get an object or series of objects out of a frame 
you’ve pasted them into, you end up doing a lot of selecting, cut-
ting, and pasting. A script that could remove all of the objects from a 
frame (while maintaining the positions they occupied in the frame) 
would save you time and trouble. Right? Let’s go!
This script assumes you have an object selected, and that the 
object contains at least one other object. The script will not ungroup 
a group as it processes the objects. 
AppleScript. To create the script, follow these steps.
1. Start the AppleScript Script Editor and InDesign.
2. Enter the following text or download the script from David’s 
web site (see “Where to Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” above). 
Note that ¬ indicates a long line—do not enter a line break in the 
Script Editor.
--CutContents.applescript
--An InDesign CS6 AppleScript.
set done to false
tell application "Adobe InDesign CS6"
activate
set mySelection to selection
if (count mySelection) = 1 then
set myPageItem to item 1 of mySelection
repeat while done is false
if class of myPageItem is not group and ¬
(count page items of myPageItem) is greater than 0 then
set myItem to page item 1 of myPageItem
copy geometric bounds of myItem to myBounds
set myX to item 2 of myBounds
set myY to item 1 of myBounds
   
select myItem
   
cut
   
paste
set myPageItem to item 1 of selection
tell myPageItem to move to {myX, myY}
 
else
 
 set done to true
 
end if
 end repeat
end if
end tell
A Short, But   
Useful, Example

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-3
3. Save the script in the Scripts Panel folder inside the Scripts 
folder in your InDesign folder. If you choose to save the file as 
an uncompiled AppleScript (a text file), give it the file extension 
“.applescript”.
JavaScript. To create the script, follow these steps.
1. Start the ExtendScript Toolkit and target InDesign. If InDesign 
is not already running, you’ll be prompted to start it.
2. Enter the following text or download the script from David’s 
web site (see “Where to Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier 
in this chapter). Don’t worry about the indents; they’re just here 
to make it easier for you to follow—JavaScript doesn’t need them.
//CutContents.jsx
//An InDesign CS6 JavaScript
//Cuts the contents of the selected page items and places
//them in the proper page position and stacking order.
var myObjectList = new Array;
if(app.documents.length != 0){
if(app.selection.length != 0){
for(var myCounter = 0; myCounter < app.selection.length;
  myCounter ++){
   switch(app.selection[myCounter].constructor.name){
    case "Rectangle":
    case "Oval":
    case "Polygon":
    case "GraphicLine":
//If the item contains a page item, 
//add the item to the list.
  
if(app.selection[myCounter].pageItems.length != 0){
  
 myObjectList.push(app.selection[myCounter]);
  
}
  
break;
  
}
  }
//If there were qualifying items in the selection, pass them
//on to the myCutContents routine for processing.
if(myObjectList.length != 0){
   myCutContents(myObjectList);
  }
}
}
function myCutContents(myObjectList){
var myPageItem;
var myGeometricBounds;
for(var myCounter = 0; myCounter < myObjectList.length; 
myCounter ++){
var myDone = false;
myPageItem = myObjectList[myCounter];
  do{

15-4     c6
 
 if((myPageItem.constructor.name != "Group")&&
 
 (myPageItem.pageItems.length != 0)){
 
 
myPageItem = myPageItem.pageItems.item(0);
 
 
app.select(myPageItem, SelectionOptions.replaceWith);
 
 
app.cut();
 
 
app.pasteInPlace();
 
 
myPageItem = app.selection[0];
 
 }
 
 else{
 
  myDone = true;
 
 }
} while(myDone == false);
}
}
3. Save the script as a plain text file with the file extension “.jsx” to 
the Scripts Panel folder inside the Scripts folder in your InDesign 
folder.
VBScript. To create the script, follow these steps.
1. Start InDesign and a text editor.
2. Enter the following text or download the script from David’s 
web site (see “Where to Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier 
in this chapter). Lines that end with an underscore (“_”) are long 
lines that had to be broken to fit the layout (the underscore is the 
continuation character in VBScript).
Rem CutContents.vbs
Rem An InDesign CS6 VBScript
Rem Cuts the contents of the selected page items and places
Rem them in the proper page position and stacking order.
ReDim myObjectList(0)
Set myInDesign = CreateObject("InDesign.Application.CS6")
If myInDesign.Documents.Count <> 0 Then
If myInDesign.Selection.Count <> 0 Then
For myCounter = 1 To myInDesign.Selection.Count
   Select Case TypeName(myInDesign.Selection.Item(myCounter))
Case "Rectangle", "Oval", "Polygon", "Graphic Line"
 
If Not (IsEmpty(myObjectList(0))) Then
 
 ReDim Preserve myObjectList(UBound(myObjectList) + 1)
 
End If
 
Set myObjectList(UBound(myObjectList)) = myInDesign. _
 
Selection.Item(myCounter)
 
End Select
 
Next
If Not (IsEmpty(myObjectList(0))) Then
 
 myCutContents myInDesign, myObjectList
 
End If
End If
End If
Function myCutContents(myInDesign, myObjectList)

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-5
For myCounter = 0 To UBound(myObjectList)
myDone = False
Set myPageItem = myObjectList(myCounter)
Do While (myDone = False)
If ((TypeName(myPageItem) <> "Group") And _
(myPageItem.PageItems.Count <> 0)) Then
 
Set myPageItem = myPageItem.PageItems.Item(1)
 
myInDesign.Select myPageItem, _
 
idSelectionOptions.idReplaceWith
 
myInDesign.Cut
 
myInDesign.PasteInPlace
 
Set myPageItem = myInDesign.Selection.Item(1)
 
Else
 
 myDone = True
 
End If
 Loop
Next
End Function
3. Save the script as a text file with the file extension “.vbs” to the 
Scripts Panel folder in the Scripts folder in your InDesign folder.
Now that you’ve saved the script, switch to InDesign. Select a path 
that contains one or more objects. Double-click the script name in 
the Scripts panel (or, if you’re using AppleScript, you can also run 
the script from the Script Editor). InDesign will remove each nested 
object inside the frame and paste it into the same position as it occu-
pied while inside the frame (see Figure 12-1).
If you’ve chosen VBScript as your InDesign scripting language, you 
need to have some way to debug (that is, step through) your scripts. 
VBScript, by itself, does not have this capability. Visual Basic for 
Applications (VBA), however, features an excellent debugging and 
development environment. You can use VBA to develop your scripts, 
then deploy them as VBScripts. The following steps show you how 
Testing the   
CutContents Script
Developing VBScripts 
with Visual Basic   
for Applications
Once you’ve entered and saved 
a script, select an object you’ve 
pasted other objects into.
Run the script, and InDesign 
will “un-nest” the objects while 
retaining their original positions.
Figure 12-1
CutContents Script

15-6     c6
to get started (this process is shown in more detail in the Adobe 
InDesign CS6 Scripting Tutorial).
1. Start InDesign and a Microsoft Office application that contains 
VBA We’ll use Excel, but other applications.
2. In Excel, choose Visual Basic Editor from the Macro submenu of 
the Tools menu. Excel displays the Visual Basic editor.
3. Choose References from the Tools menu. Visual Basic displays 
the References dialog box. Turn on the Adobe InDesign CS6 
Type Library option (in the Available References list), then click 
the OK button to add this reference to your project.
4. Create a new form by choosing User Form from the Insert menu.
5. Add a button to the form. To do this,  drag a Command Button 
from the Toolbox panel and drop the button in the form.
6. Double-click the button to display the Code window. 
Now you’re ready to add a VBScript for debugging. Paste or enter 
the main part of the script between the lines beginning with “Pri-
vate Sub” and ending with “End Sub” lines. If you want to debug the 
example script, you would paste the lines from the start of the script 
to the line beginning with “Function” in this area. You would then 
enter (or paste) any functions (such as the “myCutContents” func-
tion) following “End Sub.”
Now you can debug the script. To set a breakpoint on a specific 
line, you click in the column to the left of the line—a red circle will 
appear there. Click the Run button, then click the Command button 
you created earlier. Visual Basic runs the script up to the breakpoint 
and stops. At that point, you can display the Locals window (choose 
Locals Window from the View menu) to view the contents of the 
variables you’ve defined in the script (see Figure 12-2). Our example 
Figure 12-2
Debugging Scripts  
with VBA
When you debug, you can 
step through your script   
and examine the state of 
variables—this makes find-
ing problems much easier.

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-7
script shouldn’t have any problems in it, but you’ll need to use debug-
ging when you’re writing scripts of your own.
Once you’ve got your script working the way you want it to, copy 
the contents of the Code window to a text file, delete the lines begin-
ning with “Private Sub” and “End Sub”, and then save the file as a text 
file with the file extension “.vbs”.
Using the ExtendScript Toolkit
InDesign comes with an excellent JavaScript development tool, the 
ExtendScript Toolkit (ESTK). Scripters working in AppleScript or 
VBScript have always been able to use excellent script development 
environments—but, before the ESTK came along, InDesign scripters 
working with JavaScript had to edit the scripts using a text editor and 
then run and debug our scripts inside InDesign. We could debug a 
script using a built-in debugger, we couldn’t edit text there; and, back 
in our text editor, we couldn’t debug. It made for a very frustrating 
development process.
But a good IDE gives a scripter more than just a way to enter and 
debug a script—it should also provide editing features such as syntax 
coloring and file management. When you’re debugging, an IDE 
should provide a way to view the values of variables in your script, a 
way to step through the lines of the script, and an easy way to interact 
with the scripting environment through a “console.” The ESTK pro-
vides all of these features.
The best way to learn about a new piece of software, of course, is to 
use it for something, and, to do that, you’ve got to start it. While 
you can start the ESTK as you would start any other application, the 
quick way to do it is to select a JavaScript in the Scripts panel, then 
choose Edit Script from the Context menu. This starts the ESTK and 
opens the script for editing. The ESTK might not become the active 
application—if it doesn’t, you can Command-Tab (Mac OS) or Alt-
Tab (Windows) to it to bring it to the front.
At this point, you can create a new script, edit a script, run a 
script, or debug a script. Make certain that InDesign is selected as 
the target application—even experienced scripters often forget this 
step (see Figure 12-3).
As you run or debug InDesign scripts in the ESTK, InDesign’s 
screen display is turned off. This makes your scripts run faster. To 
examine the state of a document while debugging a script, turn on 
the Enable Redraw option in the Scripts panel menu.
Editing and Running 
Scripts in the ESTK

15-8     c6
The ESTK is a full-featured text editor, with keyboard navigation, 
drag and drop text editing, and standard find/change capabilities. 
Just as text editors can check the spelling and grammar of your text, 
the ESTK has a way to check the syntax of your script. This is a great 
way to find mismatched parentheses or brackets, missing quotation 
marks, and other little annoyances that gremlins have inserted into 
or removed from your code. Choose Check Syntax from the Edit 
menu to perform this check—if the ESTK finds a syntax error, it’ll 
highlight it and display an error message. 
We won’t cover using the ESTK in great detail here—that’s dis-
cussed in the Adobe JavaScript Tools Guide (choose JavaScript Tools 
Guide from the Help menu to open this PDF). We will, however, 
mention a few of our favorite things.
As you’re debugging your script, it can sometimes help a great deal to 
write log entries to the console window. In the ESTK, you can display 
information in the console using the $.write() method. If you need 
see a the value of a number of variables at once, you’ll probably use 
$.write() extensively during debugging.
Another way to view the values assigned to variables in your script 
as you debug is the ESTK Data Browser tab. To view the properties of 
an object, click the arrow to the left of the object name to expand the 
object. For each property, the ESTK will display the property’s value.
The ESTK provides a great way of looking at the objects, properties, 
and methods that comprise InDesign’s scripting object model: the 
Object Model Viewer.
To use the object model viewer, choose Object Model Viewer from 
the ESTK Help menu. The ESTK displays the Object Model Viewer. 
Choose Adobe InDesign CS6 (7.0) Object Model (the other listings 
for InDesign display previous versions of the scripting object model) 
to view the InDesign CS6 object model (see Figure 12-4).
Writing to the Console
Using the Data Browser
Object Model Viewer
Figure 12-3
Setting the  
Target Application
If you try to run an InDesign script 
from the ESTK and have not selected 
InDesign as the target application, 
you’ll get an error message. Everyone 
does this at least once.

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-9
Even More Fun with Scripting
Here are a few bonus examples that we didn’t print in the book.
We admit that we feel a thrill of pride when we look at our neatly 
ordered lists of paragraph styles in the Paragraph Styles panel. We 
don’t get out enough. But a “+” (plus sign, indicating a local format-
ting override) after a style name drives us crazy. What’s that doing 
there? Evil, local formatting is interfering with our dream of format-
ting and organizational goodness!
It doesn’t matter how the local formatting crept into the docu-
ment (be it something in a Word file or an errant co-worker)—it’s 
easy to get rid of, as long as you use the following script. It’s very 
short, but it can save you hours of work.
AppleScript. Follow the steps shown earlier in this chapter for creat-
ing an AppleScript, then enter the following code (or download the 
script from David’s web site—see “Where to Get the Scripts in this 
Chapter,” earlier in this chapter). 
tell application "Adobe InDesign CS6"
Overriding   
All Overrides
Figure 12-4
The ESTK Object  
Model Viewer
Choose Adobe InDesign CS6 
(7.0) Object Model from the 
Browser menu.
Select likely-looking objects 
in  the Classes list.
Browse the contents of the 
object using the Properties 
and Methods list.

15-10     c6
tell stories of document 1 to clear overrides
end tell
JavaScript. Follow the steps shown earlier in this chapter for creat-
ing a JavaScript, then enter the following text or download the script 
from David’s web site (see “Where to Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” 
earlier in this chapter).
app.documents.item(0).stories.everyItem().clearOverrides();
VBScript. Follow the steps shown earlier in this chapter for creat-
ing a VBScript, then enter the following text or download the script 
from David’s web site (see “Where to Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” 
earlier in this chapter). 
Set myInDesign = CreateObject("InDesign.Application.CS6")
Set myDocument = myInDesign.Documents.Item(1)
For myCounter = 1 myDocument.Stories.Count
myInDesign.Documents.Item(1).Stories.Item(myCounter).ClearOverrides
Next
If you’ve looked through Chapter 14, “XML,” you probably noticed 
the section on mapping paragraph styles to XML tags. It’s a very 
powerful method of converting your existing InDesign documents 
to an XML workflow.
If your documents contain a large number of styles, and if those 
styles contain spaces, you probably groaned aloud thinking about 
the amount of work you’d have to put in to map all of your paragraph 
styles to tags.
Automating this process is exactly the sort of thing that scripting 
is very good at. The following are two example scripts (one for each 
platform). The script creates tags that match each paragraph style in 
the document, replacing invalid characters in the style names as it 
does so. The script then associates each paragraph style with the cor-
responding tag.
AppleScript. Follow the steps shown earlier in this chapter for creat-
ing an AppleScript, then enter the following code (or download the 
script from David’s web site—see “Where to Get the Scripts in this 
Chapter,” earlier in this chapter). Note that ¬ indicates a long line in 
this layout—do not enter a line break in the Script Editor.
--MapStylesToTags.as
tell application "Adobe InDesign CS6"
if (count documents) > 0 then
if (count paragraph styles of active document) > 1 then
Automatically Creating 
Style-to-Tag Mappings

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-11
  my myMapStylesToTags(active document)
 end if
end if
end tell
on myMapStylesToTags(myDocument)
tell application "Adobe InDesign CS6"
  tell myDocument
repeat with myCounter from 1 to (count paragraph styles)
set myParagraphStyle to paragraph style myCounter
set myStyleName to name of myParagraphStyle
if myStyleName is not "[No paragraph style]" then
--Replace spaces. Search for other characters if necessary.
set myStyleName to my myReplaceCharacters(myStyleName, ¬ 
    
" ", "_")
set myTag to make XML tag with properties ¬ 
    
{name:myStyleName}
    
--Map styles to tags
set myMap to make XML export map with properties ¬ 
    
{markup tag:myTag, mapped style:myParagraphStyle}
--To map tags to styles, remove the comment from the 
--following line and comment out the line above.
--set myMap to make XML import map with properties ¬
  
 
--{markup tag:myTag, mapped style:myParagraphStyle}
  
 end if
  
end repeat
--Apply the mapping specified above.
 
auto tag
 end tell
end tell
end myMapStylesToTags
on myReplaceCharacters(myString, mySearchString, myReplaceString)
set AppleScript's text item delimiters to the mySearchString
set the myList to every text item of myString
set AppleScript's text item delimiters to the myReplaceString
set myString to the myList as string
set AppleScript's text item delimiters to ""
return myString
end myReplaceCharacters
JavaScript. Follow the steps shown earlier in this chapter for creating 
a JavaScript, and enter the code shown here.
//MapStylesToTags.jsx
if (app.documents.length != 0){
if (app.activeDocument.paragraphStyles.length > 1){
  myMapStylesToTags();
}
}
function myMapStylesToTags(){
var myDocument = app.activeDocument;
for(var myCounter = 0; myCounter < myDocument.paragraphStyles.
length; myCounter ++){
var myParagraphStyle = myDocument.paragraphStyles.
item(myCounter);
var myStyleName = myParagraphStyle.name;

15-12     c6
if (myStyleName != "[No paragraph style]"){
//Replace all spaces with underscore characters.
var myRegEx = new RegExp (' ', 'gi') ;
myStyleName = myStyleName.replace(myRegEx, '_');
var myXMLTag = myDocument.xmlTags.add(myStyleName)
var myMap = myDocument.xmlExportMaps.add(myParagraphStyle,  
  
myXMLTag)
//To map XML tags to styles, comment the line above
//and uncomment the following line.
//Set myMap = myDocument.xmlImportMaps.add(myxmlTag,  
 
//myParagraphStyle)
 }
}
myDocument.autoTag();
}
VBScript. Follow the steps shown earlier in this chapter for creating 
a VBScript, then enter the following code (or download the script 
from David’s web site—see “Where to Get the Scripts in this Chap-
ter,” earlier in this chapter). 
Rem MapStylesToTags.vbs
Set myInDesign = CreateObject("InDesign.Application.CS6")
If myInDesign.Documents.Count <> 0 Then
If myInDesign.ActiveDocument.ParagraphStyles.Count > 1 Then
  myMapStylesToTags (myInDesign.ActiveDocument)
End If
End If
Function myMapStylesToTags(myDocument)
For myStyleCounter = 1 To myDocument.ParagraphStyles.Count
Set myParagraphStyle = myDocument.ParagraphStyles.
Item(myStyleCounter)
myStyleName = myParagraphStyle.Name
If myStyleName <> "[No paragraph style]" Then
myStyleName = Replace(myStyleName, " ", "_")
Set myXMLTag = myDocument.XMLTags.Add(myStyleName)
Set myMap = myDocument.XMLExportMaps.Add(myParagraphStyle, _ 
  
myXMLTag)
Rem To map XML tags to styles, comment the line above
Rem and uncomment the following line.
Rem Set myMap = myDocument.XMLImportMaps.Add(myXMLTag, _ 
 
Rem myParagraphStyle)
 End If
Next
myDocument.AutoTag
End Function
Have you ever played with a Spirograph? Or been fascinated by one of 
the geometric patterns created by M. C. Escher? Both authors admit 
a fondness (well, more like an obsession) for geometric art. While 
writing this book, we stumbled across a very interesting web site: 
http://www.washington.edu/bibsys/mattf/nina/. Matt Freedman, at 
Drawing NINAs

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-13
the University of Washington, invented (or is it “discovered”?) a very 
nifty new algorithm for drawing shapes he’s named NINAs (NINA 
being an acronym for “Nina Is Not An Acronym”). NINAs are fasci-
nating shapes, and we had to see if we could write InDesign scripts 
that make use of the NINA algorithm (with Mr. Freedman’s permis-
sion). Figure 12-5 shows some of the NINAs drawn by our script.
Note: This script involves a small amount of trigonometry—so we’ve 
had to add some handlers (subroutines) to the AppleScript sec-
tion, because AppleScript has no built-in trigonometric functions. 
Figure 12-5
Various NINAs

15-14     c6
In addition, you should note that the Visual Basic functions return 
values in radians, rather than degrees, and that InDesign’s vertical 
axis is upside down relative to traditional geometric plotting.
The following script fragment shows the heart of our NINA drawing 
script—for the complete script, go to David’s web site (see “Where to 
Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier in this chapter). Note that ¬ 
indicates a long line in this layout—do not enter a line break in the 
Script Editor. Note, too, that this AppleScript can be very slow. If you 
have an AppleScript extension that supports sine and cosine func-
tions, you could use those functions to improve script performance. 
Once you’ve downloaded the script, you can experiment with fairly 
low values for the myNumberOfLines variable.
on myDrawNina(myNumberOfLines, a_pulse, b_pulse, myLength, ¬
myClosedPath)
set myList to {}
repeat with myCounter from 0 to (myNumberOfLines * 2)
--Note: the "*(180/pi)" part converts radians to degrees, 
--as the sine/cosine handlers expect degrees as their input.
set myAValue to ((-2 * pi * a_pulse * myCounter) / ¬
myNumberOfLines) * (180 / pi)
set myBValue to ((-2 * pi * b_pulse * myCounter) / ¬
myNumberOfLines) * (180 / pi)
set myASine to my sine_of(myAValue)
set myACosine to my cosine_of(myAValue)
set myBSine to my sine_of(myBValue)
set myBCosine to my cosine_of(myBValue)
set myX to (myACosine + myBCosine) * myLength
set myY to (myASine + myBSine) * myLength
copy {myX, myY} to end of myList
end repeat
tell application "Adobe InDesign CS6"
tell active page of active window
set myGraphicLine to make graphic line
set entire path of path 1 of myGraphicLine to myList
if myClosedPath is true then
set path type of path 1 of myGraphicLine to closed path
   else
set path type of path 1 of myGraphicLine to open path
  end if
 end tell
end tell
end myDrawNina
The following script fragment shows the heart of our NINA drawing 
script—for the complete script, go to David’s web site (see “Where to 
Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier in this chapter). 
function myDrawNina(myNumberOfLines, a_pulse, b_pulse, myLength,
AppleScript
JavaScript

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-15
myClosedPath){
var cur_x, cur_y;
var myAnchor = new Array(2);
var myArray = new Array;
//Rather than draw the entire path point-by-point, 
//we'll fill an array and then use it to fill in all of the point 
//locations at once using the entirePath property.
for (var myCounter = 0; myCounter < myNumberOfLines; myCounter++){
cur_x = (Math.cos((-2 * Math.PI * a_pulse * myCounter) /  
myNumberOfLines) + Math.cos((-2 * Math.PI * b_pulse * myCounter) 
/ myNumberOfLines)) * myLength;
cur_y = (Math.sin((-2 * Math.PI * a_pulse * myCounter) /  
myNumberOfLines) + Math.sin((-2 * Math.PI * b_pulse * myCounter)  
/ myNumberOfLines)) * myLength;
myAnchor = [cur_x, cur_y];
 myArray.push(myAnchor);
}
app.activeDocument.viewPreferences.horizontalMeasurementUnits = 
MeasurementUnits.points;
app.activeDocument.viewPreferences.verticalMeasurementUnits = 
MeasurementUnits.points;
var myPage = app.activeWindow.activePage;
var myGraphicLine = myPage.graphicLines.add();
myGraphicLine.move(undefined, ["1p","1p"]);
var myPath = myGraphicLine.paths.item(0);
//Now set the entire path to the contents of the array.
myPath.entirePath = myArray;
if(myClosedPath == true){
myPath.pathType = PathType.closedPath;
}
else{
myPath.pathType = PathType.openPath;
}
//Label the graphic line with the parameters used to create it.
myGraphicLine.label = "number_of_lines = " + myNumberOfLines + ",
a_pulse = " + a_pulse + ", b_pulse = " + b_pulse;
}
The following script fragment shows the heart of our NINA drawing 
script—for the complete script, go to David’s web site (see “Where to 
Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier in this chapter). As usual, “_” 
indicates a line break in this layout; do not break the line or type the 
character).
Function myDrawNina(myInDesign, myNumberOfLines, a_pulse, b_pulse, _ 
myLength, myClosedPath)
pi = 3.14159265358979 
Set myDocument = myInDesign.ActiveDocument
Set myPage = myInDesign.ActiveWindow.ActivePage
ReDim myArray(myNumberOfLines)
Rem Fill in an array with point locations.
For myCounter = 0 To (myNumberOfLines)
Visual Basic

15-16     c6
cur_x = (Cos((-2 * pi * a_pulse * myCounter) / myNumberOfLines) _ 
+ Cos((-2 * pi * b_pulse * myCounter) / myNumberOfLines)) * _ 
 
myLength
cur_y = (Sin((-2 * pi * a_pulse * myCounter) / myNumberOfLines) _ 
+ Sin((-2 * pi * b_pulse * myCounter) / myNumberOfLines)) * _ 
 
myLength
myArray(myCounter) = Array(cur_x, cur_y)
Next
Set myGraphicLine = myPage.GraphicLines.Add
Rem Move the graphic line a bit to clear up  
Rem page "ownership" issues.
myGraphicLine.Move , Array("1p", "1p")
Rem Set the points on the path to the array generated by the loop.
myGraphicLine.Paths.Item(1).EntirePath = myArray
Rem Label the NINA with settings.
myGraphicLine.Label = "number_of_lines = " & CStr(myNumberOfLines)_ 
& ", a_pulse = " & CStr(a_pulse) & ", b_pulse = " & CStr(b_pulse)
If myClosedPath = True Then
myGraphicLine.Paths.Item(1).PathType = idPathType.idClosedPath
Else
myGraphicLine.Paths.Item(1).PathType = idPathType.idOpenPath
End If
End Function
To test the NINA drawing script, move InDesign’s ruler zero point 
to the point at which you want to locate the center of the shape, then 
run the script (we recommend setting the publication’s measurement 
system to points before running the script). If all goes well, InDesign 
will draw a NINA. We urge you to experiment with the settings in 
the script—the number of different types of shapes you can draw is 
truly endless. Even very slight changes to the settings can produce 
wildly differing results.
InDesign scripts can create their own dialog boxes, and can populate 
those dialog boxes with static text labels, check box controls, pop-up 
menus, text entry fields, and a variety of number entry fields (mea-
surement units, integers, percentages, and real numbers). Previously, 
adding a user interface to a script meant you had to rely on addi-
tional user interface building software, such as FaceSpan, Real Basic, 
or AppleScript Studio on the Mac OS, or the full version of Visual 
Basic in Windows. Having to rely on these add-on products made 
your scripts larger, and complicated sharing scripts with others.
There’s good news and bad news about InDesign script dialog 
boxes. The good news is that InDesign takes care of all spacing and 
sizing issues. The bad news? InDesign takes care of all spacing and 
sizing issues. This means that you don’t have to worry about setting 
pixel coordinates for every control, but it also means that you have 
Testing the NINA 
Drawing Script
Adding a   
User Interface

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-17
very little control over the appearance of your dialog boxes. At the 
same time, it’s relatively easy to create a good-looking dialog box.
The NINA drawing script a good one to add a user interface 
to—all you need is a dialog box containing four text fields (to set the 
myNumberOf Lines, a_pulse, b_pulse, and myLength variables) and 
OK/Cancel buttons.
We’ve provided a version of the NINA drawing script with a user 
interface—you can download it from David’s web site (see “Where to 
Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier in this chapter). When you 
run the script, InDesign will display a dialog box (see Figure 12-6). 
Use the version with the user interface, and you won’t have to edit the 
script to draw different NINAs.
Mystic Rose
Another interesting geometric figure is the “Mystic Rose”—a poly-
gon where every point connects to every other point. Ole thought it 
would be fun to have a script that would draw these, so he wrote one 
(see Figure 12-7). We’ve included this script with the other scripts in 
InDesign dialog boxes can include a 
range of controls not shown in this 
example, including pop-up menus, 
check boxes, and a variety of other 
number and text entry fields (only 
measurement edit box controls and 
integer edit box controls are shown 
here). As in all other InDesign 
numeric entry fields, you can do 
arithmetic and enter measurement 
overrides in these fields.
Figure 12-6
NINA User Interface
By adding a user interface 
to your script, you can make 
it much easier to use. This 
example dialog box was gen-
erated by InDesign—no Dia-
logDirector, no AppleScript 
Studio, no Visual Basic 
form. How cool is that?
Figure 12-7
Mystic Rose

15-18     c6
the Zip archive you can download from David’s web site (see “Where 
to Get the Scripts in this Chapter,” earlier in this chapter).
Monitoring Events
“Events” are things that happen in InDesign. Opening a file, printing 
a file, importing a graphic, and moving an object are all examples of 
events. InDesign can watch for a certain set of events, and can run 
scripts when those events occur. The set of events that InDesign can 
respond to is, at present, rather limited. You can monitor the follow-
ing events (the event names are shown in parentheses).
▶Opening a document (beforeOpen, afterOpen)
▶Creating a new document (beforeNew, afterNew)
▶Saving a document (beforeSave, afterSave, beforeSaveACopy, 
afterSaveACopy, beforeSaveAs, afterSaveAs)
▶Closing a document (beforeClose, afterClose)
▶Exporting (beforeExport, afterExport)
▶Displaying a menu (beforeDisplay, afterDisplay, beforeInvoke, 
afterInvoke, onInvoke)
▶Printing a document (beforePrint, afterPrint)
▶Placing a file (beforeImport, afterImport)
▶Reverting a document (beforeRevert, afterRevert)
While this list is limited, there are a number of great places here 
to have scripts run automatically. You can use the beforePrint event, 
for example, to trigger a custom preflight script. A script attached to 
the afterNew event add XMP metadata (“file info”) to the document.
One important thing to note about event scripting: JavaScripts 
can process the events using functions inside the event handling 
script, but AppleScript and VBScript event scripts must call external 
scripts. That’s why the AppleScript and VBScript sample script fold-
ers include a folder containing three additional scripts (relative to the 
JavaScript version)—they make the LabelGraphicMenu script work.
Take a look at the “Events” chapter in the Adobe InDesign CS6 
Scripting Guide for more on attaching scripts to events.

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-19
Menu Scripting
InDesign scripting can run any menu item, and can associate scripts 
with new menu items. Thanks to the events mentioned in the pre-
vious section, scripts associated with menu items (most notably the 
Context menus) can check the selection to see whether they should 
display themselves or not. A script can check to see that a graphic 
is selected, for example, before it displays a menu items for working 
with a graphic.
Because the process of attaching a script to a menu item is fairly 
complicated, we’re not going to show an example here. We thought, 
however, that we’d mention it as something you should keep in mind. 
If you’re curious about what it takes to add a script to a menu item, 
take a look at the “Menus” chapter in the Adobe InDesign CS6 Script-
ing Guide for your preferred scripting language.
Startup Scripts
If you have a script you really like, and want to have the script run 
whenever you start InDesign, you can. There’s no real trick to it: just 
put the script inside a folder named “Startup Scripts” anywhere in 
the Scripts folder in your InDesign folder. When you do this, the 
script will run whenever you launch InDesign.
At the same time, some scripts will need modification to be run 
as startup scripts. Take, for example, the very useful sample script 
LabelGraphicMenu that comes with InDesign. This script installs 
a new menu item on the Context menu when you have a graphic 
selected. Choose the menu item, and you can easily add a caption to 
the graphic (see Figure 12-18).
The only trouble with this script is that it asks (politely) if it can do 
what it does whenever you run it. You don’t want to have to respond 
to this question every time you start InDesign, so you’d better make 
a change to the script before you put it in the Startup Scripts folder. 
If you’re using AppleScript or VBScript, you’ll also have to move 
a folder containing three “helper” scripts to the same folder as the 
script itself.
To convert the sample script LabelGraphicsMenu.applescript to a 
startup script, follow these steps.
1. Open the script with your script editor.
2. Locate the line:
AppleScript

15-20     c6
set myResult to display dialog myString buttons{"Yes", "No", 
default button: "Yes"}
3. Enter “--” before the start of the line to make it a comment.
4. Locate the line:
if button returned of myResult is "Yes" then
And change it to:
if true then
5. Save the script.
6. Put the edited version of the script and the LabelGraphic Support 
folder inside a folder named “Startup Scripts” in the Scripts 
folder inside your InDesign folder. Create the folder if it does not 
already exist.
To convert the sample script LabelGraphicMenu.jsx to a startup 
script, follow these steps.
1. Open the script with the ExtendScript Toolkit.
2. Locate the line:
var myResult = confirm("This script installs a new menu item 
'Label Graphic' \ron the context menu that appears when you 
select one or more graphics.\r\rClick the Yes button to add the 
menu item.");
And change it to:
var myResult = true;
3. Save the script.
4. Put the edited version of the script inside a folder named 
“Startup Scripts” in the Scripts folder inside your InDesign 
folder. Create the folder if it does not already exist.
To convert the sample script LabelGraphicMenu.vbs to a startup 
script, follow these steps.
1. Open the script with your script editor.
2. Locate the line:
myResult = MsgBox(myString, vbOKCancel, "Install Label Graphic 
menu item?")
JavaScript
VBScript

Bu Appx. M Scpt 15-21
And change it to:
myResult = vbOK
3. Save the script.
4. Put the edited version of the script and the LabelGraphic Support 
folder inside a folder named “Startup Scripts” in the Scripts 
folder inside your InDesign folder. Create the folder if it does not 
already exist.
End Script
Scripting is all about empowerment. Don’t just sit around telling 
yourself that the reason you’re working late is that InDesign can’t do 
something you’d like it to do. Sure, there are things in every program 
we’d like the manufacturer to fix, but, with InDesign’s scripting fea-
tures, we’ve finally got the tools we need to fix them ourselves.
By urging you to take up scripting, we’re urging you to take con-
trol of InDesign, your publications, your work, and your life. We 
know you can do it!

