!
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
Really Private 
Browsing: An 
Unofﬁcial User’s 
Guide to Tor 
Written by Gavin Phillips 
Published July 2017. 
Read the original article here: http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/really-private-browsing-an-
unofficial-users-guide-to-tor/ 
This ebook is the intellectual property of MakeUseOf. It must only be published in its original 
form. Using parts or republishing altered parts of this ebook is prohibited without permission 
from MakeUseOf.com. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
Table of contents 
Table Of Contents
4
§1– Let’s Talk About Tor 
4 
§2– How Tor Works 
4 
§3– Installing the TOR Browser 
4 
§4– Using Tor Safely 
4 
§5– Conﬁguring Tor 
4 
§6– The Deep Web 
4 
§7– Anonymous Services 
4 
§8– Support and Problems 
4 
§9– The Future of Tor 
4 
1. Let’s Talk About Tor
4
2. How Tor Works
5
2.1 Modern Cryptography in Brief 
5 
2.2 Onion Routing: Not Just for Vegetables 
6 
3. Installing the TOR Browser
9
3.1. Tor Browser Network Settings 
10 
4. Using Tor Safely
11
4.1 Tips for Safe Browsing 
12 
5. Conﬁguring Tor
13
5.1 Using Tor in a Restricted Country 
14 
5.2 Become a Node 
15 
5.3 Exit Nodes 
16 
6. The Deep Web
17
6.1 Deep Web, Dark Web, or Darknet? 
18 
6.2 Tor Hidden Services 
19 
6.3 Useful .onion Starting Points 
19 
7. Anonymous Services
21
7.1 Anonymous Messaging 
21 
7.2 Anonymous Email 
21 
7.3 Bitcoin 
22 
8. Support and Problems
23
9. The Future of Tor
24
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
Privacy on the internet is a constantly evolving battleground. And for good reason. Revelations 
concerning government spying programs, almost daily data breaches, and less-than-
transparent corporations are de rigueur. Tin foil hats abound; more and more citizens around 
the globe are taking note of their privacy… and where it is going. 
When Edward Snowden revealed the PRISM (NSA) and Tempora (GCHQ) global surveillance 
programs, shock was met with apathy. Those that suspected this level of surveillance found 
their suspicions vindicated. But the average man or woman on the street? Many didn’t even 
pause for thought. This sort of invasion of privacy makes a number of people very nervous; 
they’re not just criminals, dissidents, and terrorists, either. This level of surveillance directly 
aﬀects everyone. 
There are a number of tools focused on protecting the privacy of regular citizens, like you and I. 
One of the most powerful tools at our disposal is Tor. 
Table Of Contents 
§1– Let’s Talk About Tor 
§2– How Tor Works 
§3– Installing the TOR Browser 
§4– Using Tor Safely 
§5– Configuring Tor 
§6– The Deep Web 
§7– Anonymous Services 
§8– Support and Problems 
§9– The Future of Tor 
1. Let’s Talk About Tor 
Tor provides truly anonymous and untraceable browsing and messaging. Furthermore, Tor 
provides access to the so-called “Deep Web” — a network of untraceable, hidden websites 
providing everything from hard drugs to censored materials, and seemingly everything in-
between. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
Image Credit: g0d4ather vis Shutterstock.com 
There are few online privacy methods as resilient and all-encompassing as Tor. Until the FBI 
infected a number of Tor services with malware (exposing their users and the service owners), the 
service was seemingly impenetrable. The military-grade encryption, combined with the Onion 
Routing protocol, made individual users incredibly difficult to trace. Even better, Tor is 
incredibly easy to use, created to be simple enough to use without a technical background. If 
you can download and install a program, you’ll be able to use Tor. 
In a nutshell, Tor is a powerful, easy-to-use piece of software that lets you keep your online life 
private. This guide will provide a step-by-step guide to installing, configuring, and using Tor. 
2. How Tor Works 
Tor was initially created by individuals “on contract from DARPA and the U.S. Naval Research 
Laboratory’s Center for High Assurance Computer Systems.” Indeed, most of the funding for Tor 
has come from the U.S. Government in one form or another. 
Tor is an acronym. It stands for The Onion Router. 
One of Tor’s major strengths is accessibility. It isn’t necessary to understand the technology to 
use and benefit from it. However, I’m going to explain how it works in this section because it is 
actually quite interesting. If you’re not interested in the technical details, feel free to skip to the 
next section on Installing the TOR Browser Bundle. 
2.1 Modern Cryptography in Brief 
Most modern cryptographic tools use asymmetric encryption. Asymmetric encryption allows 
you to use two different “keys” to encode and decode information. Here is the clever bit: the 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
encoding and decoding key are linked so they only work with one another. However, there exists 
no efficient way of uncovering one key given the other. 
Consequently, you can distribute your encode key — typically referred to as a “public” key — 
while keeping the matching decode key — the “private” key — secret. In turn, this means that 
anyone who wants to communicate with you in secret can use your public key to encode a 
message. When the message arrives, you use your private key to decode it. 
 
Any communication taking place using Tor utilizes HTTPS. In practice, this means you and the 
person/site/service you’re communicating with initially exchange your public keys; this allows 
both of you to talk to the other securely (even over a tapped line). A third-party listening in 
would see the public key exchange. But everything after that would be undecipherable 
gibberish that they cannot decode. 
Sounds good, right? Tor takes this even further using the onion routing protocol discussed 
above. 
2.2 Onion Routing: Not Just for Vegetables 
Even if two people are talking in a language you don’t understand, you can still deduce a lot by 
watching who talks to who. That’s where onion routing steps in. Onion routing is as it sounds: 
routing through many layers, like an onion. This process obscures the message content, as well 
as where the message has been and is going. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
To understand how Tor keeps your identity private, it is necessary to understand a few 
underlying principles. 
• All Tor users distribute a copy of their public key and IP address using an integrated peer-
to-peer network. 
• Tor network anonymity uses a system of relays, also known as nodes. The more nodes that 
are running, the more robust the Tor network is. 
• The only piece of data decrypted in transmission is the forwarding IP address. 
• Received data carries the IP address of the “exit node” — the final link in the encryption 
chain 
• While Tor is an excellent anonymity tool, the exit node can be compromised. 
 
Bearing those things in mind, the following is an abstract example of how sending a private 
and encrypted message on Tor actually works. 
1.
You open your Tor-enabled browser (client). The client encrypts all data packets sent from 
your computer. 
2.
Your computer sends a data packet to Node A. 
3.
Node A encrypts the already encrypted data packet, and sends it to Node B. 
4.
Node B encrypts the already encrypted data packet, and sends it to Node C. 
5.
This cycle continues until the data packet reaches Node Z — the “exit node.” 
6.
Node Z decrypts all the layers of encryption on the data packet, and delivers it to its final 
destination. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
 
And when someone returns your message, it follows the same process, albeit via a different 
route. The multiple layers of encryption make decrypting intercepted (sniffed) data packets 
extremely difficult. The data transmits in a vault within a vault within a vault within a vault, 
and so on. 
 
Image Credit: Harrison Neal via Wikimedia Commons 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
3. Installing the TOR Browser 
Installing Tor Browser is easy. It’s available for Windows, Mac, and Linux, but we’ll go through 
the process for Windows. First, head to https://www.torproject.org/ . The ‘s’ after ‘http’ is 
important, as it means (among other things) that your computer is verifying that the website 
you’re talking to is what it claims to be. Then, click the large Download Tor button, and, when 
the website loads of new page, click the large Download Tor Browser button. (Tor isn’t the only 
browser focused on privacy… it just does a lot more than the others.) 
The download will begin. On completion, head to your download folder, and run the installer. If a 
Security Warning appears, select Run. 
 
Select the language you’d like, followed by the directory where you’d like to install the Tor 
Browser. Select Install. The browser will now extract and install. On completion, you’ll have two 
options: Run Tor Browser, and Add Start Menu & Desktop Shortcuts. Ensure both of these are 
checked, and select Finish. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
 
3.1. Tor Browser Network Settings 
When you open Tor browser for the first time, you’ll need to select your network settings. In this 
instance, select Connect. (We’ll explore the Configure button in a moment.) You’ll spot a small 
loading bar. You’ll arrive upon the Welcome to Tor Browser page when it completes. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
 
If the client requires an update, do so before moving on. This is very important. If not, please 
head on to the next section of the tutorial. 
4. Using Tor Safely 
One of the things you’ll immediately note is the Tor browser’s similarity to Mozilla Firefox. Tor 
browser is based on Firefox, but features the TorLauncher, TorProxy, and the TorButton, as well 
as the NoScript and HTTPS Everywhere Firefox extensions. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
 
For the most part, it is a completely normal browser. That said, you’ll have to slightly tweak the 
way you browse, and you might find some of your most used features “broken.” (This is due to the 
limitation on trackers and scripts). Tor protects your privacy out-of-the-box. 
4.1 Tips for Safe Browsing 
Tor does an enormous amount of leg-work on the privacy front. But if you want it to be 
completely effective, you’ll have to adjust the way you use the internet. 
A good start is being aware of the limitations of Tor and the Tor browser. 
• Tor is not a VPN. Tor is a proxy. It only protects traffic routed through the Tor browser. 
• Tor cannot protect you if the person you’re communicating with is taking a physical log. It 
can protect your IP address and, if you use a pseudonym for anonymous communication, 
your identity will be protected, too. 
• Tor cannot control the actions of third-party browser extensions, hence their very strong 
suggestion that you don’t add any to the base installation (unless you really know what 
you’re doing). Both malicious and non-malicious extensions can reveal your identity 
without you realizing. 
• Tor cannot strictly enforce HTTPS. The HTTPS Everywhere extension attempts to force HTTPS 
support on every site, and while many sites support the standard by default, Tor cannot 
take account for those that don’t. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
In addition, Tor doesn’t connect to Google, by default. Google keeps extensive logs on all searches 
made using it, as well as tracking your in-browser internet activities. There are arguments 
against Google tracking, and of course, arguments for. Regardless, the Tor welcome page uses 
anonymity focused internet search tool, DuckDuckGo, by default. DDG search results are a 
compilation of “over 400 sources.” Some users don’t like the DDG search results, preferring to 
use StartPage instead (StartPage acts more as an anonymizing proxy delivering actual Google 
search results). 
One of the side-effects of these privacy measures is that some sites will not work, while others 
will require additional sign-in verification. Notable sites include YouTube, some airline sites 
(they love tracking you!), online banking portals, and more. Furthermore, any site that relies on 
Flash will cease to function, as Tor steers well clear of that security and privacy nightmare. (This 
problem is slowly alleviating as more sites switch to the vastly more secure HTML5). 
Finally, there are a number of document types that can contain resources that circumvent Tor. 
These files — for example, an .exe, PDF, or .doc — may innocently disclose about your browsing 
activity. As with most modern browsers, Tor will offer a warning when you download a potential 
security risk. In this case, it is wise to pay attention. 
5. Configuring Tor 
As stated in the previous section, Tor protects your privacy out-of-the-box. You don’t need to 
fiddle with security settings, or download additional extensions to begin browsing the internet 
anonymously. Tor once allowed all users greater autonomy in their access to security and 
privacy settings. Unfortunately, it meant a great deal of curious (and well-meaning) individuals 
actually opened themselves up to the internet, defeating the purpose of Tor. There is now a 
single security settings slider instead, keeping things extremely simple. 
To change the security level, select the Onion icon alongside the address bar. It will open a 
dropdown menu; select Security Settings. You can then choose Low, Medium, or High security. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
 
Low security (the default setting) enables all browser features, while still routing and 
encrypting traffic. 
Medium security disables JavaScript on non-HTTPS sites, turns all HTML5 media into click-to-
play (rather than autoplay), and disables some other scripts. 
High security disables JavaScript on all sites, turns all HTML5 media into click-to-play, and 
disables a significant number of scripts. As such, some font rendering features will fail, as well 
as images and icons. 
The level of security you require is, of course, subjective. If you’re just looking to encrypt your 
browsing traffic, and be a little less forthcoming with identifying data on the internet, 
choose Medium. It strikes a happy balance between a comprehensive internet experience, and 
anonymity. 
5.1 Using Tor in a Restricted Country 
Of course, one of the major benefits of Tor is keeping your internet browsing private from an 
oppressive government regime (or otherwise). Unfortunately, censors have found ways to block 
Tor. In these cases, restricted users can use a bridge. A bridge creates an obfuscated relay on 
the Tor network that isn’t listed in the main directory. The hope is that even if your ISP is 
monitoring all known TOR relays, they cannot block all the obfuscated bridges, in turn 
delivering an extra connection option to those in need. 
To use a bridge, select the onion icon alongside the address bar, and select Tor Network 
Settings. Then, check My Internet Service Provider blocks connections to the Tor network. A 
new panel will appear. You now have a couple of options: 
• Connect with provided bridges. The preconfigured Tor bridges are easy to use, and the 
majority of the time, will allow you to connect to the Tor network. However, because they are 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
easily accessible, there is a chance that they’re already censored. obfs4 is the current 
recommended bridge, but depending on your location, another option may work better. 
• Enter custom bridges. If you know the address of a Tor bridge you’d like to specifically 
connect to, enter it here (one per line). If you don’t know how to find a Tor bridge address, 
but you’re sure you need one (autobridge settings don’t work), 
visit bridges.torproject.org and follow the instructions. 
 
5.2 Become a Node 
By default, Tor will run in client mode, using the Tor network, but not actively contributing to its 
operation. This means your privacy is maintained, but other users cannot use you as a node. 
Which for the many, suits just fine. If you have a comfortable internet connection, however, you 
might consider contributing a small amount of bandwidth to the Tor network. It’ll help keep the 
network operational. 
Becoming a Tor relay is slightly more difficult than it used to be. Previously (I’m talking several 
Tor browser iterations back, now), there was a simple toggle to switch between client and relay 
mode. However, we’ll show you how to do it manually. First up, this works best using an up-to-
date Linux distribution. I’ll be using Ubuntu 17.04 32-bit. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
Start by installing the latest version of Tor Browser for Linux using the following command: 
sudo apt install tor
Once installed, use a text editor to open the Tor configuration file. I’m using Vim. 
sudo vim /etc/tor/torrc
Torrc is the Tor configuration file. The configuration file uses “#” to comment out potential 
commands. Deleting the “#” toggles the command. We need to enable the following commands: 
• #Log notice file /var/log/tor/notices.log — turns on logging for your Tor relay 
• #ORPort 9001 — sets the Tor relay port. Change this to a port of your liking, but remember 
to update your firewall and router 
• #Nickname — add a nickname for your Tor relay 
• #RelayBandwidthRate xxxx Kbytes — sets the data rate for your Tor relay during non-peak 
times 
• #RelayBandwidthBurst xxxx Kbytes — sets the data rate for peak “bursts” 
• #AccountingMax xx Gbytes — the amount data you can offer the Tor network. Switch 
to Mbytes or Kbytes if required. Threshold applies to incoming and outgoing e.g. if you set 5 
Gbytes, up to 10GB is available 
When you’ve set your data rates, save the configuration using the “:x” command. I’ve made a 
short video detailing the process, to clarify things. 
Watch the YouTube video here: Configure a Tor Exit Relay 
You can check the global Tor relay stats, including the Top 10 relays, over at globe.rndm.de. 
5.3 Exit Nodes 
Those who are more ambitious may choose to run a Tor exit node. The exit node is the final hop 
between the Tor network and your computer — you use one every time you use Tor. Exit nodes 
are absolutely vital to the operation of the Tor network but, unfortunately, there are some risks 
to running one. 
Some jurisdictions will attempt to hold an Exit Node operator responsible for the data 
transiting their node. Unfortunately, this can include illicit activity like piracy, illegal black-
market dealings, and more. I’m not going to advise running an exit node unless you’re 
genuinely prepared for the serious consequences of doing so. If you do want to run a Tor exit 
node, please read the following documents before proceeding: 
• Tips for Running an Exit Node 
• Exit Node abuse issues 
• Typical Exit Node abuses 
Running an exit connection isn’t a terrifying ordeal. But it does require extra precautions. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
6. The Deep Web 
We’ve touched upon the Deep Web a couple of times in this article, and you’ve probably heard 
about it in the news, too. It isn’t as immediately peril-filled as some publications would lead you 
to believe. That said, certain precautions are necessary, and part of that is understanding how 
to find and use Tor Hidden Services. 
To understand why hidden services are important, we should talk about one of Tor’s major 
weaknesses: exit nodes. At the time of writing, there were just under 7,000 active relays. 
 
Image Credit: The Tor Project 
Of those 7,000 relays, under 1,000 are exit nodes. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
 
Image Credit: The Tor Project 
Furthermore, there are over 2 million Tor users, sending traffic through those exit nodes. That 
traffic heads back to the “outside” internet. And while HTTPS Everywhere encrypts your data, once 
it leaves the Tor network, it is open to interception. If a single source can gather enough 
information about the flow of traffic through the network, it might be possible to deduce 
identifying information by completing timing analysis of the behavior of individuals, and the 
behavior of Tor exit nodes. 
The top-level (sometimes referred to as the “clearnet” or “surface web”) internet makes it very 
difficult to conceal both the physical location and ownership of a particular website server. Tor 
doesn’t change that. The viewer is safely anonymous, but not the provider. This is where a Tor 
hidden service steps in. 
A hidden service works just as a relay in the Tor network, but allows for the introduction of 
private, anonymous servers. When you access a hidden service, both you and the server are 
anonymous nodes on the Tor network. The traffic between you never leaves the Tor network and 
is therefore never exposed to prying eyes. In addition, understanding the physical location of a 
hidden service is equally difficult (though not impossible). Server anonymity makes serving 
subpoenas, blocking, or even removing a service extremely difficult. This is the reason there are 
some dubious and notorious Tor hidden services. 
6.1 Deep Web, Dark Web, or Darknet? 
The Deep Web is vast. But the majority of it is useless. Or, rather, useless to you and I, filled with 
millions of archives, web-service back-ends, databases, bots, and much more. There are several 
specialist search engines that can delve into the Deep Web. There is a little confusion 
surrounding Deep Web terminology. 
• Deep Web. The deep web, as mentioned above, is a place full of unindexed databases, 
private networks, search engine crawlers, botnet command and control servers, and more. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
• Darknet. A darknet is something like Tor: an encrypted network built on top of the existing 
internet, only accessible using special software. Other darknet examples include I2P, Riﬀle, 
and Freenet. 
• Dark Web. The dark web is essentially the “WWW” of darknets. 
These terms are increasingly used in the correct context, but major publications still, at times, 
use deep web, darknet, and dark web interchangeably. 
6.2 Tor Hidden Services 
It should go without saying that due to the nature of Tor, and the protections offered to hidden 
services, some extremely unscrupulous individuals and groups lurk there. It is easy to stumble 
across any number of things: drug dealers, pedophiles, terrorists, dissidents, hardcore fascists 
(and antifa)… the list is basically endless. 
Watch the YouTube video here: TOR Hidden Services - Computerphile 
Just in case: the author and makeuseof.com do not endorse any illegal activity committed by 
the reader, of any kind. This is education on anonymity and privacy. 
Tor hidden service addresses use the following format: https://[16-character hash].onion. For 
example, this is the current link to The Hidden Wiki (uncensored!): 
http://zqktlwi4fecvo6ri.onion/wiki/index.php/Main_Page 
Note this service isn’t using HTTPS. Technically, it doesn’t matter as The Hidden Wiki is a 
repository for other .onion links. You won’t be entering or leaving any personally identifying 
information. 
 
The .onion suffix is a special top-level domain that signifies an anonymous hidden service. The 
16-character hash address is automatically generated, based upon a public key created when 
the service is configured. It can become more than a little tricky keeping track of .onion 
addresses, so we suggest bookmarking your favorites. 
6.3 Useful .onion Starting Points 
The Hidden Wiki is a pretty handy place to start your Tor experience. The service has gone 
through various guises over the years, not least because at one point it was compromised and 
redirected users to a malicious site. The link provided above is safe. But that could change, 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
given the nature of the service. Regardless, The Hidden Wiki archives and centralizes 
popular .onion links. It is somewhat moderated to remove some really horrific things, like illegal 
images of children, but you can rapidly find some pretty dark stuff. 
As such, read the description of what you’re about to click on. 
Another extremely useful site is Torch. Torch claims to be the largest hidden service search 
engine, with over 1 million indexed results. 
 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
7. Anonymous Services 
Out of the box, Tor allows you to browse the internet anonymously. Alone, this is extremely 
powerful, for users the world over. But beyond the immediate boost in privacy and anonymity, 
Tor hosts some pretty cool services, too. Here are three services you can use straightaway. 
7.1 Anonymous Messaging 
With the majority of global internet activity monitored and logged, an increasing number of 
people are turning to encrypted messaging services. Now, using Tor to chat isn’t as critical as 
one was. 
The advent of mobile apps featuring end-to-end to encryption, such as WhatsApp, Telegram, Silent, 
and Signal, have seen more “regular” users taking advantage of additional privacy (sometimes 
without even realizing!). 
Bitmessage is an anonymous P2P messaging service that uses public key cryptography. 
Furthermore, they bunch encrypted messages together during the send process, before 
redistributing to the end user (not unlike Bitcoin tumbling). This makes it extremely difficult to 
decipher the source and destination of a single message. They have detailed tutorials on 
downloading, installing, and configuring Bitmessage for Tor. 
7.2 Anonymous Email 
One of the most useful hidden services is fully anonymous email. There are only a few providers 
actually worth using, in that their service is consistent and actually functions. 
One option is Protonmail, who operate a Tor login portal, oﬀering strong end-to-end encryption. 
However, their servers are in Switzerland. And while Switzerland offers some of the strongest 
privacy protection in the world for individuals, they’re not absolved. Furthermore, Protonmail 
requires JavaScript. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
 
There is also Secmail.pro. Secmail is another hidden email service, using SquirrelMail. The 
service is relatively young (around seven months old at the time of writing), and as such, is still 
experiencing some teething problems. 
Finally, there is TorBox. TorBox is available only through Tor, and can only send messages to 
other users within the TorBox service. In that sense, it keeps all TorBox mail and users extremely 
secure. 
 
7.3 Bitcoin 
Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies have flourished in recent years. This is in no small part due to 
their anonymity. As such, there are countless Tor services offering to duplicate, expand, and 
embiggen your Bitcoin wallet. The vast majority are scams. In amongst the scams, however, 
are some useful services. For instance, Bitcoins are largely touted as being completely 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
anonymous. But in reality, due to the blockchain record, tracing the users involved in an 
individual transaction is entirely possible. 
If you want truly anonymous Bitcoin (and other cryptocurrency), they need tumbling. Tumbling 
is the crypto-equivalent of money laundering. It works (roughly) like so: you put your Bitcoin 
into a shared “pot” with other users. The tumbler assigns users the same amount of Bitcoins, 
but from a different initial user, breaking down or combining Bitcoins in the process. Everyone 
ends up with the same amount as they started. 
Essentially, everyone switches coins, and everyone is a winner. 
Many Bitcoin users are switching to TumbleBit, a new, open-source tumbler. TumbleBit is set to 
introduce full Tor support in 2017, and already has Hidden Wallet integration. Which leads me 
nicely onto… 
Watch the YouTube video here: TumbleBit is an anonymous payments system for Bitcoin 
The Hidden Wallet. The Hidden Wallet understands that privacy and anonymity breaking Bitcoin 
feature. As such, they offer cold storage security while tumbling your Bitcoin using their 
internal service. Their current tumbling charge is 0.001 BTC. 
8. Support and Problems 
Sometimes, software doesn’t work. If Tor is giving you problems, there is a reason why. One of 
the first things to do is ensure you’re using the most up to date version of the Tor client. Tor 
Browser checks for updates when you open it. If there is an update available, install it. 
Next, check that your firewall or router isn’t blocking Tor. You may need to setup port forwarding, 
or create a firewall exception. If you’re still struggling, consider reinstalling the Tor software. 
Tor has extensive documentation, and a very active community. If all else fails, you can directly 
email one of the developers at help@rt.torproject.org. Please bear in mind that Tor is not 
commercial software. So, while there is an active and helpful community, everyone is working 
for free, for the good of privacy and anonymity. As such, it might take a little while for them to 
respond to something viewed (to them, at least) as non-critical. Alternatively, 
the .onions subreddit has some helpful individuals. The same goes for TOR. 
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

!
9. The Future of Tor 
Tor remains incredibly important to privacy and anonymity for regular internet users, like you and I. 
The number of Tor users has expanded significantly throughout the last few years. Continued 
speculation and revelations regarding invasive surveillance practices by governments and 
corporations alike swell the Tor network. Moreover, the reaction to intrusive surveillance and 
escalating use of Tor illustrates that the service is for much, much more than the drug trade 
and dissident communications. It seems extremely likely that the Tor network will continue to 
grow. 
But that doesn’t mean Tor is clean sailing. For the same reasons as I’ve just listed, the service is 
the recipient of ceaseless attack. The same institutions that helped bring Tor to life — 
particularly the U.S. government — understand the dangers of privacy. In particular, encrypted 
services are on the chopping block, with many governments around the globe seeking special 
backdoors into encrypted services. It doesn’t take a genius to workout that a backdoor for one 
person will never stay that way. 
Indeed, in 2017, hacking group named The Shadow Brokers “liberated” a number of extremely 
powerful NSA hacking tools and previously unrealized zero-day exploits. They initially put their 
trove up for sale, asking for hundreds of millions of dollars worth of Bitcoin. Nobody stumped 
up the astronomical figure, so The Shadow Brokers did the next best thing: released the entire 
repository, for free. 
Edward Snowden commented that the “Leak of Top Secret NSA tools reveals it’s nowhere near 
the full library.” Still, the damage was plain to see: the WannaCryptor ransomware that surged 
around the globe was a direct result of the exploits making their way into the wild. What is clear 
is that Tor is the tool needed to keep discourse open when those oppressors would have it 
dismantled. 
In its current guise, Tor will remain an extraordinarily important mouthpiece 
against all regimes for decades to come. 
Read more stories like this at
Copyright © 2017 MakeUseOf. All Rights Reserved ®.

