arXiv:math.MG/0010071 v1   7 Oct 2000
Real Analysis, Quantitative Topology, and
Geometric Complexity
Stephen Semmes
This survey originated with the John J. Gergen Memorial Lectures at
Duke University in January, 1998. The author would like to thank the Math-
ematics Department at Duke University for the opportunity to give these
lectures.
See [Gro1, Gro2, Gro3, Sem12] for related topics, in somewhat
diﬀerent directions.
Contents
1
Mappings and distortion
3
2
The mathematics of good behavior much of the time, and
the BMO frame of mind
10
3
Finite polyhedra and combinatorial parameterization prob-
lems
17
4
Quantitative topology, and calculus on singular spaces
26
5
Uniform rectiﬁability
36
5.1
Smoothness of Lipschitz and bilipschitz mappings . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Smoothness and uniform rectiﬁability . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
A class of variational problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Appendices
A Fourier transform calculations
54
The author was partially supported by the National Science Foundation.
1

B Mappings with branching
56
C More on existence and behavior of homeomorphisms
59
C.1 Wildness and tameness phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C.2 Contractable open sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
C.2.1
Some positive results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.2.2
Ends of manifolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C.3 Interlude: looking at inﬁnity, or looking near a point
. . . . .
72
C.4 Decomposition spaces, 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
C.4.1
Cellularity, and the cellularity criterion . . . . . . . . .
81
C.5 Manifold factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.6 Decomposition spaces, 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C.7 Geometric structures for decomposition spaces . . . . . . . . .
89
C.7.1
A basic class of constructions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.7.2
Comparisons between geometric and topological prop-
erties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.7.3
Quotient spaces can be topologically standard, but ge-
ometrically tricky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
C.7.4
Examples that are even simpler topologically, but still
nontrivial geometrically
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
C.8 Geometric and analytic results about the existence of good
coordinates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
C.8.1
Special coordinates that one might consider in other
dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
C.9 Nonlinear similarity: Another class of examples
. . . . . . . . 118
D Doing pretty well with spaces which may not have nice co-
ordinates
118
E Some simple facts related to homology
125
References
137
2

1
Mappings and distortion
A very basic mechanism for controlling geometric complexity is to limit the
way that distances can be distorted by a mapping.
If distances are distorted by only a small amount, then one might think
of the mapping as being approximately “ﬂat”. Let us look more closely at
this, and see what actually happens.
Let δ be a small positive number, and let f be a mapping from the
Euclidean plane R2 to itself. Given two points x, y ∈R2, let |x −y| denote
the usual Euclidean distance between them. We shall assume that
(1 + δ)−1 |x −y| ≤|f(x) −f(y)| ≤(1 + δ) |x −y|
(1.1)
for all x, y ∈R2. This says exactly that f does not ever shrink or expand
distances by more than a factor of 1 + δ.
What does this really mean about the behavior of f? A ﬁrst point is that
if δ were equal to 0, so that f does not distort distances at all, then f would
have to be a “rigid” mapping. This means that f could be expressed as
f(x) = A(x) + b,
(1.2)
where b is an element of R2 and A is a linear mapping on R2 which is either a
rotation or a combination of a rotation and a reﬂection. This is well known,
and it is not hard to prove. For instance, it is not hard to show that the
assumption that f preserve distances implies that f takes lines to lines, and
that it preserve angles, and from there it is not hard to see that f must be
of the form (1.2) as above.
If δ is not equal to zero, then one would like to say that f is approximately
equal to a rigid mapping when δ is small enough. Here is a precise statement.
Let D be a (closed) disk of radius r in the plane. This means that there is a
point w ∈R2 such that
D = {x ∈R2 : |x −w| ≤r}.
(1.3)
Then there is a rigid mapping T : R2 →R2, depending on D and f, such
that
r−1 sup
x∈D
|f(x) −T(x)| ≤small(δ),
(1.4)
where small(δ) depends only on δ, and not on D or f, and has the property
that
small(δ) →0
as
δ →0.
(1.5)
3

There are a number of ways to look at this. One can give direct construc-
tive arguments, through basic geometric considerations or computations. In
particular, one can derive explicit bounds for small(δ) in terms of δ. Re-
sults of this kind are given in [Joh]. There are also abstract and inexplicit
methods, in which one argues by contradiction using compactness and the
Arzela–Ascoli theorem. (In some related but diﬀerent contexts, this can be
fairly easy or manageable, while explicit arguments and estimates are less
clear.)
The presence of the factor of r−1 on the left side of (1.4) may not make
sense at ﬁrst glance, but it is absolutely on target, and indispensable. It
reﬂects the natural scaling of the problem, and converts the left-hand side of
(1.4) into a dimensionless quantity, just as δ is dimensionless. One can view
this in terms of the natural invariances of the problem. Nothing changes here
if we compose f (on either side) with a translation, rotation, or reﬂection,
and the same is true if we make simultaneous dilations on both the domain
and the range of equal amounts. In other words, if a is any positive number,
and if we deﬁne fa : R2 →R2 by
fa(x) = a−1f(ax),
(1.6)
then fa satisﬁes (1.1) exactly when f does. The approximation condition
(1.4) is formulated in such a way as to respect the same kind of invariances
as (1.1) does, and the factor of r−1 accounts for the dilation-invariance.
This kind of approximation by rigid mappings is pretty good, but can we
do better? Is it possible that the approximation works at the level of the
derivatives of the mappings, rather than just the mappings themselves?
Here is another way to think about this, more directly in terms of dis-
tance geometry. Let us consider a simple mechanism by which mappings
that satisfy (1.1) can be produced, and ask whether this mechanism gives
everything. Fix a nonnegative number k, and call a mapping g : R2 →R2
is k-Lipschitz if
|g(x) −g(y)| ≤k |x −y|
(1.7)
for all x, y ∈R2. This condition is roughly equivalent to saying that the
diﬀerential of g has norm less than or equal to k everywhere. Speciﬁcally,
if g is diﬀerentiable at every point in R2, and if the norm of its diﬀeren-
tial is bounded by k everywhere, then (1.7) holds, and this can be derived
from the mean value theorem.
The converse is not quite true, however,
because Lipschitz mappings need not be diﬀerentiable everywhere.
They
4

are diﬀerentiable almost everywhere, in the sense of Lebesgue measure. (See
[Fed, Ste1, Sem12].) To get a proper equivalence one can consider derivatives
in the sense of distributions.
If f = S + g, where S is a rigid mapping and g is k-Lipschitz, and if
k ≤1/2 (say), then f satisﬁes (1.1) with δ = 2k. (More precisely, one can
take δ = (1 −k)−1 −1.) This is not hard to check. When k is small, this
is a much stronger kind of approximation of f by rigid mappings than (1.4)
is. In particular, it implies that the diﬀerential of f is uniformly close to the
diﬀerential of S.
To what extent can one go in the opposite direction, and say that if f
satisﬁes (1.1) with δ small, then f can be approximated by rigid mappings
in this stronger sense? Let us begin by looking at what happens with the
diﬀerential of f at individual points. Let x be some point in R2, and assume
that the diﬀerential dfx of f at x exists. Thus dfx is a linear mapping from
R2 to itself, and
f(x) + dfx(y −x)
(1.8)
provides a good approximation to f(y) for y near x, in the sense that
|f(y) −{f(x) + dfx(y −x)}| = o(|y −x|).
(1.9)
One can also think of the diﬀerential as the map obtained from f by “blowing
up” at x. This corresponds to the formula
dfx(v) = lim
t→0 t−1(f(x + tv) −f(x)),
(1.10)
with t taken from positive real numbers.
It is not hard to check that dfx, as a mapping on R2 (with x ﬁxed),
automatically satisﬁes (1.1) when f does. Because the diﬀerential is already
linear, standard arguments from linear algebra imply that it is close to a
rotation or to the composition of a rotation and a reﬂection when δ is small,
and with easy and explicit estimates for the degree of approximation.
This might sound pretty good, but it is actually much weaker than some-
thing like a representation of f as S + g, where S is a rigid mapping and g
is k-Lipschitz with a reasonably-small value of k. If there is a representation
of this type, then it means that the diﬀerential dfx of f is always close to
the diﬀerential of S, which is constant, i.e., independent of x. The simple
method of the preceding paragraph implies that dfx is always close to being
a rotation or a rotation composed with a reﬂection, but a priori the choice
5

of such a linear mapping could depend on x in a strong way. That is very
diﬀerent from saying that there is a single linear mapping that works for
every x.
Here is an example which shows how this sort of phenomenon can happen.
(See also [Joh].) Let us work in polar coordinates, so that a point z in R2
is represented by a radius r ≥0 and an angle θ. We deﬁne f : R2 →R2 by
saying that if x is described by the polar coordinates (r, θ), then
f(x) has polar coordinates (r, θ + ϵ log r).
(1.11)
Here ϵ is a small positive number that we get to choose. Of course f should
also take the origin to itself, despite the fact that the formula for the angle
degenerates there.
Thus f maps each circle centered at the origin to itself, and on each such
circle f acts by a rotation. We do not use a single rotation for the whole
plane, but instead let the rotation depend logarithmically on the radius, as
above. This has the eﬀect of transforming every line through the origin into a
logarithmic spiral. This spiral is very “ﬂat” when ϵ is small, but nonetheless
it does wrap around the origin inﬁnitely often in every neighborhood of the
origin.
It is not hard to verify that this construction leads to a mapping f that
satisﬁes (1.1), with a δ that goes to 0 when ϵ does, and at an easily com-
putable (linear) rate. This gives an example of a mapping that cannot be
represented as S +g with S rigid and g k-Lipschitz for a fairly small value of
k (namely, k < 1). For if f did admit such a representation, it would not be
able to transform lines into curves that spiral around a ﬁxed point inﬁnitely
often; instead it would take a line L to a curve Γ which can be realized as
the graph of a function over the line S(L). The spirals that we get can never
be realized as a graph of a function over any line. This is not hard to check.
This spiralling is not incompatible with the kind of approximation by
rigid mappings in (1.4). Let us consider the case where D is a disk centered
at the origin, which is the worst-case scenario anyway. One might think that
(1.4) fails when we get too close to the origin (as compared to the radius
of D), but this is not the case. Let T be the rotation on R2 that agrees
with f on the boundary of D. If ϵ is small (which is necessary in order for
the δ to be small in (1.1)), then T provides a good approximation to f on
D in the sense of (1.4). In fact, T provides a good approximation to f at
the level of their derivatives too on most of D, i.e., on the complement of a
6

small neighborhood of the origin. The approximation of derivatives breaks
down near the origin, but the approximation of values does not, as in (1.4),
because f and T both take points near the origin to points near the origin.
This example suggests another kind of approximation by rigid mappings
that might be possible. Given a disk D of radius r and a mapping f that
satisﬁes (1.1), one would like to have a rigid mapping T on R2 so that (1.4)
holds, and also so that
1
πr2
Z
D ∥dfx −dT∥dx ≤small′(δ),
(1.12)
where small′(δ) is, as before, a positive quantity which depends only on δ
(and not on f or D) and which tends to 0 when δ tends to 0. Here dx refers
to the ordinary 2-dimensional integration against area on R2, and we think
of dfx −dT as a matrix-valued function of x, with ∥dfx −dT∥denoting its
norm (in any reasonable sense).
In other words, instead of asking that the diﬀerential of f be approxi-
mated uniformly by the diﬀerential of a rigid mapping, which is not true in
general, one can ask only that the diﬀerential of f be approximated by the
diﬀerential of T on average.
This does work, and in fact one can say more. Consider the expression
P(λ) = Probability({x ∈D : ∥dfx −dT∥≥small′(δ) · λ}),
(1.13)
where λ is a positive real number. Here “probability” means Lebesgue mea-
sure divided by πr2, which is the total measure of the disk D. The inequality
(1.12) implies that
P(λ) ≤1
λ
(1.14)
for all λ > 0. It turns out that there is actually a universal bound for P(λ)
with exponential decay for λ ≥1. This was proved by John [Joh] (with
concrete estimates).
Notice that uniform approximation of the diﬀerential of f by the diﬀer-
ential of T would correspond to a statement like
P(λ) = 0
(1.15)
for all λ larger than some ﬁxed (universal) constant. John’s result of expo-
nential decay is about the next best thing.
7

As a technical point, let us mention that one can get exponential decay
conditions concerning the way that ∥dfx −dT∥should be small most of the
time in a kind of trivial manner, with constants that are not very good (at
all), using the linear decay conditions with good constants, together with the
fact that df is bounded, so that ∥dfx −dT∥is bounded. In the exponential
decay result mentioned above, the situation is quite diﬀerent, and one keeps
constants like those from the linear decay condition. This comes out clearly
in the proof, and we shall see more about it later.
This type of exponential decay occurs in a simple way in the example
above, in (1.11). (This also comes up in [Joh].) One can obtain this from
the presence of ϵ log r in the angle coordinate in the image. The use of the
logarithm here is not accidental, but ﬁts exactly with the requirements on
the mapping. For instance, if one diﬀerentiates log r in ordinary Cartesian
coordinates, then one gets a quantity of size 1/r, and this is balanced by the
r in the ﬁrst part of the polar coordinates in (1.11), to give a result which is
bounded.
It may be a bit surprising, or disappointing, that uniform approximation
to the diﬀerential of f does not work here. After all, we did have “uniform”
(or “supremum”) bounds in the hypothesis (1.1), and so one might hope
to have the same kind of bounds in the conclusion. This type of failure of
supremum bounds is quite common, and in much the same manner as in the
present case. We shall return to this in Section 2.
How might one prove (1.12), or the exponential decay bounds for P(λ)?
Let us start with a slightly simpler situation. Imagine that we have a rec-
tiﬁable curve γ in the plane whose total length is only slightly larger than
the distance between its two endpoints. If the length of γ were equal to the
distance between the endpoints, then γ would have to be a straight line seg-
ment, and nothing more. If the length is slightly larger, then γ has to stay
close to the line segment that joins its endpoints. In analogy with (1.12), we
would like to say that the tangents to γ are nearly parallel, on average, to
the line that passes through the endpoints of γ.
In order to analyze this further, let z(t), t ∈R, a ≤t ≤b, be a parame-
terization of γ by arclength. This means that z(t) should be 1-Lipschitz, so
that
|z(s) −z(t)| ≤|s −t|
(1.16)
for all s, t ∈[a, b], and that |z′(t)| = 1 for almost all t, where z′(t) denotes
8

the derivative of z(t). Set
ζ = z(b) −z(a)
b −a
=
1
b −a
Z b
a z′(t) dt.
(1.17)
Let us compute
1
b −a
Z b
a |z′(s) −ζ|2 ds,
(1.18)
which controls the average oscillation of z′(s). Let ⟨·, ·⟩denote the standard
inner product on R2, so that
|x −y|2 = ⟨x −y, x −y⟩
=
⟨x, x⟩−2⟨x, y⟩+ ⟨y, y⟩
(1.19)
=
|x|2 −2⟨x, y⟩+ |y|2
for all x, y ∈R2. Applying this with x = z′(s), y = ζ, we get that
1
b −a
Z b
a |z′(s) −ζ|2 ds = 1 −2
1
b −a
Z b
a ⟨z′(s), ζ⟩ds + |ζ|2,
(1.20)
since |z′(s)| = 1 a.e., and ζ does not depend on s. The middle term on the
right side reduces to
2⟨ζ, ζ⟩,
(1.21)
because of (1.17). Thus (1.20) yields
1
b −a
Z b
a |z′(s) −ζ|2 ds = 1 −2|ζ|2 + |ζ|2 = 1 −|ζ|2.
(1.22)
On the other hand, |z(b) −z(a)| is the same as the distance between the
endpoints of γ, and b −a is the same as the length of γ, since z(t) is the
parameterization of γ by arclength.
Thus |ζ| is exactly the ratio of the
distance between the endpoints of γ to the length of γ, by (1.17), and 1−|ζ|2
is a dimensionless quantity which is small exactly when the length of γ and
the distance between its endpoints are close to each other (proportionately).
In this case (1.22) provides precise information about the way that z′(s) is
approximately a constant on average. (These computations follow ones in
[CoiMe2].)
One can use these results for curves for looking at mappings from R2 (or
Rn) to itself, by considering images of segments under the mappings. This
does not seem to give the proper bounds in (1.12), in terms of dependence
on δ, though. In this regard, see John’s paper [Joh]. (Compare also with
9

Appendix A.) Note that for curves by themselves, the computations above
are quite sharp, as indicated by the equality in (1.22). See also [CoiMe2].
The exponential decay of P(λ) requires more work.
A basic point is
that exponential decay bounds can be derived in a very general way once
one knows (1.12) for all disks D in the plane. This is a famous result of
John and Nirenberg [JohN], which will be discussed further in Section 2. In
the present situation, having estimates like (1.12) for all disks D (and with
uniform bounds) is quite natural, and is essentially automatic, because of
the invariances of the condition (1.1) under translations and dilations. In
other words, once one has an estimate like (1.12) for some ﬁxed disk D and
all mappings f which satisfy (1.1), one can conclude that the same estimate
works for all disks D, because of invariance under translations and dilations.
2
The mathematics of good behavior much
of the time, and the BMO frame of mind
Let us start anew for the moment, and consider the following question in
analysis. Let h be a real-valued function on R2. Let ∆denote the Laplace
operator, given by
∆= ∂2
∂x2
1
+ ∂2
∂x2
2
,
(2.1)
where x1, x2 are the standard coordinates on R2. To what extent does the
behavior of ∆h control the behavior of the other second derivatives of h?
Of course it is easy to make examples where ∆h vanishes at a point but
the other second derivatives do not vanish at the same point. Let us instead
look for ways in which the overall behavior of ∆h can control the overall
behavior of the other second derivatives.
Here is a basic example of such a result. Let us assume (for simplicity)
that h is smooth and that it has compact support, and let us write ∂1 and
∂2 for ∂/∂x1 and ∂/∂x2, respectively. Then
Z
R2 |∂1∂2h(x)|2 dx ≤
Z
R2 |∆h(x)|2 dx.
(2.2)
This is a well-known fact, and it can be derived as follows. We begin with
the identity
Z
R2 ∂1∂2h(x) ∂1∂2h(x) dx =
Z
R2 ∂2
1h(x) ∂2
2h(x) dx,
(2.3)
10

which uses two integrations by parts. On the other hand,
Z
R2 |∆h(x)|2 dx =
Z
R2(∂2
1h(x) + ∂2
2h(x))2 dx
(2.4)
=
Z
R2(∂2
1h(x))2 + 2 ∂2
1h(x) ∂2
2h(x) + (∂2
2h(x))2 dx.
Combining this with (2.3) we get that
Z
R2 |∆h(x)|2 dx −2
Z
R2 |∂1∂2h(x)|2 dx
(2.5)
=
Z
R2(∂2
1h(x))2 + (∂2
2h(x))2 dx.
This implies (2.2), and with an extra factor of 2 on the left-hand side, because
the right side of (2.5) is nonnegative. (One can improve this to get a factor
of 4 on the left side of (2.2), using the right-hand side of (2.5).)
In short, the L2 norm of ∆h always bounds the L2 norm of ∂1∂2h. There
are similar bounds for Lp norms when 1 < p < ∞. Speciﬁcally, for each p in
(1, ∞), there is a constant C(p) such that
Z
R2 |∂1∂2h(x)|p dx ≤C(p)
Z
R2 |∆h(x)|p dx
(2.6)
whenever h is a smooth function with compact support. This is a typical
example of a “Calder´on–Zygmund inequality”, as in [Ste1]. Such inequalities
do not work for p = 1 or ∞, and the p = ∞case is like the question
of supremum estimates in Section 1.
Note that the p = 1 and p = ∞
cases are closely connected to each other, because of duality (of spaces and
operators); the operators ∆and ∂1∂2 here are equal to their own transposes,
with respect to the standard bilinear form on functions on R2 (deﬁned by
taking the integral of the product of two given functions). In a modestly
diﬀerent direction, there are classical results which give bounds in terms of
the norm for H¨older continuous (or Lipschitz) functions of order α, for every
α ∈(0, 1), instead of the Lp norm. To be explicit, given α, this norm for a
function g on R2 can be described as the smallest constant A such that
|g(x) −g(y)| ≤A |x −y|α
(2.7)
for all x, y ∈R2. One can view this as a p = ∞situation, like the L∞
norm for g, but with a positive order α of smoothness, unlike L∞. There is
11

a variety of other norms and spaces which one can consider, and for which
there are results about estimates along the lines of (2.6), but for the norm in
question instead of the Lp norm.
The p = ∞version of (2.6) would say that there is a constant C such
that
sup
x∈R2 |∂1∂2h(x)| ≤C sup
x∈R2 |∆h(x)|
(2.8)
whenever h is smooth and has compact support. In order to see that this is
not the case, consider the function h(x) given by
h(x) = x1x2 log(x2
1 + x2
2),
(2.9)
x = (x1, x2). It is not hard to compute ∆h and ∂1∂2h explicitly, and to see
that ∆h is bounded while ∂1∂2h is not. Indeed,
∂1∂2h(x) = log(x2
1 + x2
2) + bounded terms,
(2.10)
while the logarithm does not survive in ∆h, because ∆(x1x2) ≡0.
This choice of h is neither smooth nor compactly supported, but these
defects can be corrected easily. For smoothness we can consider instead
hϵ(x) = x1x2 log(x2
1 + x2
2 + ϵ),
(2.11)
where ϵ > 0, and then look at what happens as ϵ →0. To make the support
compact we can simply multiply by a ﬁxed cut-oﬀfunction that does not
vanish at the origin. With these modiﬁcations we still get a singularity at
the origin as ϵ →0, and we see that (2.8) cannot be true (with a ﬁxed
constant C that does not depend on h).
This is exactly analogous to what happened in Section 1, i.e., with a
uniform bound going in but not coming out. Instead of a uniform bound for
the output, we also have a substitute in terms of “mean oscillation”, just as
before. To be precise, let D be any disk in R2 of radius r, and consider the
quantity
1
πr2
Z
D |∂1∂2h(x) −AverageD(∂1∂2h)| dx,
(2.12)
where “AverageD∂1∂2h” is the average of ∂1∂2h over the disk D, i.e.,
AverageD(∂1∂2h) =
1
πr2
Z
D ∂1∂2h(u) du.
(2.13)
12

Instead of (2.8), it is true that there is a constant C > 0 so that
1
πr2
Z
D |∂1∂2h(x) −AverageD(∂1∂2h)| dx ≤C sup
x∈R2 |∆h(x)|
(2.14)
for every disk D in R2 of radius r and every smooth function h with compact
support. This is not too hard to prove; roughly speaking, the point is to
“localize” the L2 estimate that we had before. (More general results of this
nature are discussed in [GarcR, Jou, Ste2].)
Let us formalize this estimate by deﬁning a new space of functions, namely
the space BMO of functions of bounded mean oscillation, introduced by John
and Nirenberg in [JohN]. A locally-integrable function g on R2 is said to lie
in BMO if there is a nonnegative number k such that
1
πr2
Z
D |g(x) −AverageD(g)| dx ≤k
(2.15)
for every disk D in R2 of radius r. In this case we set
∥g∥∗= sup
D
1
πr2
Z
D |g(x) −AverageD(g)| dx,
(2.16)
with the supremum taken over all disks D in R2. This is the same as saying
that ∥g∥∗is the smallest number k that satisﬁes (2.15). One refers to ∥g∥∗
as the “BMO norm of g”, but notice that ∥g∥∗= 0 when g is equal to a
constant almost everywhere. (The converse is also true.)
This deﬁnition may look a little crazy, but it works quite well in practice.
Let us reformulate (2.14) by saying that there is a constant C so that
∥∂1∂2h∥∗≤C ∥∆h∥∞,
(2.17)
where ∥φ∥∞denotes the L∞norm of a given function φ. In other words,
although the L∞norm of ∂1∂2h is not controlled (for all h) by the L∞norm
of ∆h, the BMO norm of ∂1∂2h is controlled by the L∞norm of ∆h.
Similarly, one of the main points in Section 1 can be reformulated as
saying that if a mapping f : R2 →R2 distorts distances by only a small
amount, as in (1.1), then the BMO norm ∥df∥∗of the diﬀerential of f is
small (and with precise estimates being available).
In Section 1 we mentioned a stronger estimate with exponential decay
in the measure of certain “bad” sets. This works for all BMO functions,
13

and can be given as follows. Suppose that g is a BMO function on R2 with
∥g∥∗≤1, and let D be a disk in R2 with radius r. As in (1.13), consider the
“distribution function” P(λ) deﬁned by
P(λ) = Probability({x ∈D : |g(x) −AverageD(g)| ≥λ}),
(2.18)
where “Probability” means Lebesgue measure divided by the area πr2 of D.
Under these conditions, there is a universal bound for P(λ) with exponential
decay, i.e., an inequality of the form
P(λ) ≤B−λ
for λ ≥1,
(2.19)
where B is a positive number greater than 1, and B does not depend on g
or D. This is a theorem of John and Nirenberg [JohN].
Although we have restricted ourselves to R2 here for simplicity, everything
goes over in a natural way to Euclidean spaces of arbitrary dimension. In
fact, there is a much more general framework of “spaces of homogeneous
type” in which basic properties of BMO (and other aspects of real-variable
harmonic analysis) carry over. See [CoiW1, CoiW2], and compare also with
[GarcR, Ste2]. This framework includes certain Carnot spaces that arise in
several complex variables, like the unit sphere in Cn with the appropriate
(noneuclidean) metric.
The exponential decay bound in (2.19) helps to make precise the idea that
BMO functions are very close to being bounded (which would correspond to
having P(λ) = 0 for all suﬃciently large λ). The exponential rate of decay
implies that BMO functions lie in Lp locally for all ﬁnite p, but it is quite a
bit stronger than that.
A basic example of a BMO function is log |x|. This is not hard to check,
and it shows that exponential decay in (2.19) is sharp, i.e., one does not have
superexponential decay in general. This example also ﬁts with (2.10), and
with the “rotational” part of the diﬀerential of the mapping f in (1.11).
In general, BMO functions can be much more complicated than the loga-
rithm. Roughly speaking, the total “size” of the unboundedness is no worse
than for the logarithm, as in (2.19), but the arrangement of the singularities
can be more intricate, just as one can make much more complex singular
examples than in (2.9) and (1.11). There are a lot of tools available in har-
monic analysis for understanding exactly how BMO functions behave. (See
[GarcR, Garn, Jou, Ste2], for instance.)
14

BMO functions show up all over the place.
One can reformulate the
basic scenario in this section with the Laplacian and ∂1∂2 by saying that the
pseudodiﬀerential or singular integral operator
∂1∂2
∆
(2.20)
maps L∞to BMO, and this holds for similar operators (of order 0) much
more generally (as in [GarcR, Garn, Jou, Ste2]). This will be discussed a bit
further in Appendix A. Note that the nonlinear problem in Section 1 has a
natural linearization which falls into this rubric. (See Appendix A.)
Sobolev embeddings provide another class of linear problems in which
BMO comes up naturally. One might wish that a function g on Rn that
satisﬁes ∇g ∈Ln(Rn) (in the sense of distributions) were bounded or con-
tinuous, but neither of these are true in general, when n > 1. However,
such a function g is always in BMO, and in the subspace VMO (“vanish-
ing mean oscillation”), in which the measurements of mean oscillation (as
in the left side of (2.15) when n = 2) tend to 0 as the radius r goes to 0.
This is a well-known analogue of continuity in the context of BMO. (See
[BrezN, GarcR, Garn, Sem12, Ste2].)
BMO arises in a lot of nonlinear problems, in addition to the one in Sec-
tion 1. For instance, there are circumstances in which one might wish that the
derivative of a conformal mapping in the complex plane were bounded, and it
is not, but there are natural estimates in terms of BMO. More precisely, it is
BMO for the logarithm of the derivative that comes up most naturally. This
is closely related to BMO conditions for tangents to curves under certain
geometric conditions. See [CoiMe1, CoiMe2, CoiMe3, Davi1, JerK1, Pom1,
Pom2, Pom3], for instance. Some basic computations related to the latter
were given in Section 1, near the end. In general dimensions (larger than 1),
BMO shows up naturally as the logarithm of the density for harmonic mea-
sure for Lipschitz domains, and for the logarithm of Jacobians of quasiconfor-
mal mappings. See [Dah1, Dah2, JerK2, Geh3, Rei, Ste2] and the references
therein. In all dimensions, there are interesting classes of “weights”, posi-
tive functions which one can use as densities for modiﬁcations of Lebesgue
measure, whose logarithms lie in BMO, and which in fact correspond to open
subsets of BMO (for real-valued functions). These weights have good proper-
ties concerning Lp boundedness of singular integral and other operators, and
they also show up in other situations, in connection with conformal mappings
in the plane, harmonic measure, and Jacobians of quasiconformal mappings
15

in particular, as above. See [GarcR, Garn, Jou, Ste2, StrT] for information
about these classes of weights.
There is a simple reason for BMO functions to arise frequently as some
kind of logarithm. In many nonlinear problems there is a symmetry which
permits one to multiply some quantity by a constant without changing any-
thing in a signiﬁcant way. (E.g., think of rescaling or rotating a domain, or
a mapping, or multiplying a weight by a positive constant.) At the level of
the logarithm this invariance is converted into a freedom to add constants,
and this is something that BMO accommodates automatically.
To summarize a bit, there are a lot of situations in which one has some
function that one would like to be bounded, but it is not, and for which
BMO provides a good substitute. One may not expect at ﬁrst to have to
take measure theory into account, but then it comes up on its own, or works
in a natural or reasonable way.
Before leaving this section, let us return to the John–Nirenberg theorem,
i.e., the exponential decay estimate in (2.19). How might one try to prove
this? The ﬁrst main point is that one cannot prove (2.19) for a particular
disk D using only a bound like (2.15) for that one disk. That would only
give a rate of decay on the order of 1/λ. Instead one uses (2.15) over and
over again, for many diﬀerent disks.
Here is a basic strategy. Assume that g is a BMO function with ∥g∥∗≤1.
First use (2.15) for D itself (with k = 1) to obtain that the set of points x
in D such that
|g(x) −AverageD(g)| ≥10,
(2.21)
is pretty small (in terms of probability). On the bad set where this happens,
try to make a good covering by smaller disks on which one can apply the
same type of argument. The idea is to then show that the set of points x in
D which satisfy
|g(x) −AverageD(g)| ≥10 + 10
(2.22)
is signiﬁcantly smaller still, and by a deﬁnite proportion. If one can repeat
this forever, then one can get exponential decay as in (2.19). More precisely,
at each stage the size of the deviation of g(x) from AverageD(g) will increase
by the addition of 10, while the decrease in the measure of the bad set will
decrease multiplicatively.
This strategy is roughly correct in spirit, but to carry it out one has to be
more careful in the choice of “bad” set at each stage, and in the transition
16

from one stage to the next. In particular, one should try to control the diﬀer-
ence between the average of g over one disk and over one of the smaller disks
created in the next step of the process. As a practical matter, it is simpler to
work with cubes instead of disks, for the way that they can be decomposed
evenly into smaller pieces. The actual construction used is the “Calder´on–
Zygmund decomposition”, which itself has a lot of other applications. See
[JohN, GarcR, Garn, Jou, Ste2, Sem12] for more information.
3
Finite polyhedra and combinatorial param-
eterization problems
Let us now forget about measure theory for the time being, and look at a
problem which is, in principle, purely combinatorial.
Fix a positive integer d, and let P be a d-dimensional polyhedron. We
assume that P is a ﬁnite union of d-dimensional simplices, so that P has
“pure” dimension d (i.e., with no lower-dimensional pieces sticking oﬀon
their own).
Problem 3.1 How can one tell if P is a PL (piecewise-linear) manifold? In
other words, when is P locally PL-equivalent to Rd at each point?
To be precise, P is locally PL-equivalent to Rd at a point x ∈P if there
is a neighborhood of x in P which is homeomorphic to an open set in Rd
through a mapping which is piecewise-linear.
This is really just a particular example of a general issue, concerning
existence and complexity of parameterizations of a given set. Problem 3.1 has
the nice feature that ﬁnite polyhedra and piecewise-linear mappings between
them can, in principle, be described in ﬁnite terms.
Before we try to address Problem 3.1 directly, let us review some prelim-
inary matters. It will be convenient to think of P as being like a simplicial
complex, so that it is made up of simplices which are always either disjoint
or meet in a whole face of some (lower) dimension. Thus we can speak about
the vertices of P, the edges, the 2-dimensional faces, and so on, up to the
d-dimensional faces.
Since P is a ﬁnite polyhedron, its local structure at any point is pretty
simple. Namely, P looks like a cone over a (d−1)-dimensional polyhedron at
every point. To make this precise, imagine that Q is some ﬁnite polyhedron
17

in some Rn, and let z be a point in Rn which is aﬃnely-independent of Q,
i.e., which lies in the complement of an (aﬃne) plane that contains Q. (We
can always replace Rn with Rn+1, if necessary, to ensure that there is such
a point.) Let c(Q) denote the set which consists of all rays in Rn which
emanate from z and pass through an element of Q. We include z itself in
each of these rays. This deﬁnes the “cone over Q centered at z”. It does
not really depend on the choice of z, in the sense that a diﬀerent choice of z
leads to a set which is equivalent to the one just deﬁned through an invertible
aﬃne transformation.
If x is a “vertex” of P, in the sense described above, then there is a
natural way to choose a (d −1)-dimensional polyhedron Q so that P is the
same as the cone over Q centered at x in a neighborhood of x. Let us call Q
the link of P at x. (Actually, with this description Q is only determined up
to piecewise-linear equivalence, but this is adequate for our purposes.)
Now suppose that x is not a vertex. One can still realize P as a cone
over a (d−1)-dimensional polyhedron near x, but one can also do something
more precise. If x is not a vertex, then there is a positive integer k and
a k-dimensional face F of P such that x lies in the interior of F. In this
case there is a (d −k −1)-dimensional polyhedron Q such that P is locally
equivalent to Rk × c(Q) near x, with x in P corresponding to a point (y, z)
in Rk × c(Q), where z is the center of c(Q). This same polyhedron Q works
for all the points in the interior of F, and we call Q the link of F.
Basic Fact 3.2 P is everywhere locally equivalent to Rd if and only if all of
the various links of P (of all dimensions) are piecewise-linearly equivalent to
standard spheres (of the same dimension).
Here the “standard sphere of dimension m” can be taken to be the bound-
ary of the standard (m + 1)-dimensional simplex.
Basic Fact 3.2 is standard and not hard to see. The “if” part is immediate,
since one knows exactly what the cone over a standard sphere looks like, but
for the converse there is a bit more to check. A useful observation is that
if Q is a j-dimensional polyhedron whose cone c(Q) is piecewise-linearly
equivalent to Rj+1 in a neighborhood of the center of c(Q), then Q must
be piecewise-linearly equivalent to a standard j-dimensional sphere. This
is pretty easy to verify, and one can use it repeatedly for the links of P of
codimension larger than 1. (A well-known point here is that one should be
careful not to use radial projections to investigate links around vertices, but
18

suitable pseudo-radial projections, to ﬁt with the piecewise-linear structure,
and not just the topological structure.)
A nice feature of Basic Fact 3.2 is that it sets up a natural induction in
the dimensions, since the links of P always have dimension less than P. This
leads to the following question.
Problem 3.3 If Q is a ﬁnite polyhedron which is a k-dimensional PL man-
ifold, how can one tell if Q is a PL sphere of dimension k?
It is reasonable to assume here that Q is a PL-manifold, because of the
way that one can use Basic Fact 3.2 and induction arguments.
Problem 3.3 is part of the matter of the Poincar´e conjecture, which would
seek to say that Q is a PL sphere as soon as it is homotopy-equivalent to a
sphere. This has been established in all dimensions except 3 and 4. (Com-
pare with [RouS].) In dimension 4 the Poincar´e conjecture was settled by
M. Freedman [Fre] in the “topological” category (with ordinary homeomor-
phisms (continuous mappings with continuous inverses) and topological man-
ifolds), but it remains unknown in the PL case. The PL case is equivalent
to the smooth version in this dimension, and both are equivalent to the or-
dinary topological version in dimension 3. (A brief survey related to these
statements is given in Section 8.3 of [FreQ].) Although the Poincar´e conjec-
ture is known to hold in the PL category in all higher dimensions (than 4), it
does not always work in the smooth category, because of exotic spheres (as
in [Mil1, KerM]).
If the PL version of the Poincar´e conjecture is true in all dimensions, then
this would give one answer to the question of recognizing PL manifolds among
ﬁnite polyhedra in Problem 3.1. Speciﬁcally, our polyhedron P would be a
PL manifold if and only if its links are all homotopy-equivalent to spheres
(of the correct dimension).
This might seem like a pretty good answer, but there are strong diﬃculties
concerning complexity for matters of homotopy. In order for a k-dimensional
polyhedron Q to be a homotopy sphere, it has to be simply connected in
particular, at least when j ≥2. In other words, it should be possible to
continuously deform any loop in Q to a single point, or, equivalently, to take
any continuous mapping from a circle into Q and extend it to a continuous
mapping from a closed disk into Q.
This extension can entail enormous
complexity, in the sense that the ﬁlling to the disk might have to be of much
greater complexity than the original loop itself.
19

This is an issue whose geometric signiﬁcance is often emphasized by Gro-
mov. To describe it more precisely it is helpful to begin with some related
algebraic problems, concerning ﬁnitely-presented groups.
Let G be a group.
A ﬁnite presentation of G is given by a ﬁnite list
g1, g2, . . ., gn of generators for G together with a ﬁnite set r1, r2, . . . , rm of
“relations”.
The latter are (ﬁnite) words made out of the gi’s and their
inverses. Let us assume for convenience that the set of relations includes the
inverses of all of its elements, and also the empty word. The rj’s are required
to be trivial, in the sense that they represent the identity element of G. This
implies that arbitrary products of conjugates of the rj’s also represent the
identity element, and the ﬁnal requirement is that if w is any word in the gi’s
and their inverses which represents the identity element in G, then it should
be possible to obtain w from some product of conjugates of the rj’s through
cancellations of subwords of the form g−1
i gi and gig−1
i .
For instance, the group Z2 can be described by two generators a, b and
one relation, aba−1b−1. As another concrete example, there is the (Baumslag–
Solitar) group with two generators x, y and one relation x2yx−1y−1.
Suppose that a group G and ﬁnite presentation of G are given and ﬁxed,
and let w be a word in the generators of G and their inverses. Given this
information, how can one decide whether w represents the identity element
in G? This is called “the word problem” (for G). It is a famous result that
there exist ﬁnite presentations of groups for which there is no algorithm to
solve the word problem. (See [Man].)
To understand what this really means, let us ﬁrst notice that the set of
trivial words for the given presentation is “recursively enumerable”. This
means that there is an algorithm for listing all of the trivial words. To do
this, one simply has to have the algorithm systematically generate all possible
conjugates of the relations, all possible products of conjugates of relations,
and all possible words derived from these through cancellations as above.
In this way the algorithm will constantly generate trivial words, and every
trivial word will eventually show up on the list.
However, this does not give a ﬁnite procedure for determining that a given
word is not trivial. A priori one cannot conclude that a given word is not
trivial until one goes through the entire list of trivial words.
The real trouble comes from the cancellations. In order to establish the
triviality of a given word w, one might have to make derivations through
words which are enormously larger, with a lot of collapsing at the end. If one
had a bound for the size of the words needed for at least one derivation of the
20

triviality of a given word w, a bound in terms of an eﬀectively computable
(or “recursive”) function of the length of w, then the word problem would
be algorithmically solvable. One could simply search through all derivations
of at most a computable size.
This would not be very eﬃcient, but it would be an algorithm. As it is,
even this does not always work, and there are ﬁnitely-presented groups for
which the derivations of triviality may need to involve words of nonrecursive
size compared to the given word.
One should keep in mind that for a given group and a given presentation
there is always some function f(n) on the positive integers so that trivial
words of length at most n admit derivations of their triviality through words
of size no greater than f(n).
This is true simply because there are only
ﬁnitely many words of size at most n, and so one can take f(n) to be the
maximum size incurred in some ﬁnite collection of derivations. The point is
that such a function f may not be bounded by a recursive function. This
means that f could be really huge, larger than any tower of exponentials, for
instance.
The same kind of phenomenon occurs geometrically, for deciding whether
a loop in a given polyhedron can be continuously contracted to a point.
This is because any ﬁnite presentation of a group G can be coded into a
ﬁnite polyhedron, in such a way that the group G is represented by the
fundamental group of the polyhedron. This is a well-known construction in
topology.
Note that while the fundamental group of a space is normally deﬁned in
terms of continuous (based) loops in the space and the continuous deforma-
tions between them, in the case of ﬁnite polyhedra it is enough to consider
polygonal loops and deformations which are piecewise-linear (in addition to
being continuous). This is another standard fact, and it provides a convenient
way to think about complexity for loops and their deformations.
Although arbitrary ﬁnite presentations can be coded into ﬁnite polyhedra,
as mentioned above, this is not the same as saying that they can be coded
into compact manifolds. It turns out that this does work when the dimension
is at least 4, i.e., for each n ≥4 it is true that every ﬁnite presentation can be
coded into a compact PL manifold of dimension n. This type of coding can be
used to convert algorithmic unsolvability results for problems in group theory
into algorithmic unsolvability statements in topology.
For instance, there
does not exist an algorithm to decide when a given ﬁnite presentation for a
group actually deﬁnes the trivial group, and, similarly, there does not exist
21

an algorithm for deciding when a given manifold (of dimension at least 4) is
simply-connected. See [BooHP, Mark1, Mark2, Mark3] for more information
and results.
Let us mention that in dimensions 3 and less, it is not true that arbitrary
ﬁnitely-presented groups can be realized as fundamental groups of compact
manifolds. Fundamental groups of manifolds are very special in dimensions
1 and 2, as is well known. The situation in dimension 3 is more compli-
cated, but there are substantial restrictions on the groups that can arise
as fundamental groups. As an aspect of this, one can look at restrictions
related to Poincar´e duality. In a diﬀerent vein, the fundamental group of a
3-dimensional manifold has the property that all of its ﬁnitely-generated sub-
groups are ﬁnitely-presented. See [Sco], and Theorem 8.2 on p70 of [Hem1].
See also [Jac]. In another direction, there are relatively few abelian groups
which can arise as subgroups of fundamental groups of 3-dimensional mani-
folds. See [Eps, EvaM], Theorems 9.13 and 9.14 on p84f of [Hem1], and p67-9
of [Jac]. At any rate, it is a large open problem to know exactly what groups
arise as fundamental groups of 3-dimensional manifolds.
See also [Thu] and Chapter 12 of [Eps+] concerning these groups. The
book [Eps+] treats a number of topics related to computability and groups,
and not just in connection with fundamental groups of 3-manifolds. This
includes broad classes of groups for which positive results and methods are
available. See [Far] as well in this regard.
Beginning in dimension 5, it is known that there is no algorithm for
deciding when a compact PL manifold is piecewise-linearly equivalent to a
standard (PL) sphere.
This is a result of S. Novikov. See Section 10 of
[VolKF], and also the appendix to [Nab]. (Note that in dimensions less than
or equal to 3, such algorithms do exist. This is classical for dimensions 1,
2; see [Rub1, Rub2, Tho] concerning dimension 3, and related problems and
results.) Imagine that we have a PL manifold M of some dimension n whose
equivalence to a standard sphere is true but “hard” to check. According to
the solution of the Poincar´e conjecture in these dimensions, M will be equiv-
alent to an n-sphere if it is homotopy-equivalent to Sn. For standard reasons
of algebraic topology, this will happen exactly when M is simply-connected
and has trivial homology in dimensions 2 through n −1. (Speciﬁcally, this
uses Theorem 9 and Corollary 24 on pages 399 and 405, respectively, of [Spa].
It also uses the existence of a degree-1 mapping from M to Sn to get started
(i.e., to have a mapping to which the aforementioned results can be applied),
and the fact that the homology of M and Sn vanish in dimensions larger
22

than n, and are equal to Z in dimension n. To obtain the degree-1 mapping
from M to Sn, one can start with any point in M and a neighborhood of that
point which is homeomorphic to a ball. One then collapses the complement of
that neighborhood to a point, which gives rise to the desired mapping.) The
vanishing of homology can be determined algorithmically, and so if the equiv-
alence of M with an n-sphere is “hard” for algorithmic veriﬁcation, then the
problem must occur already with the simple-connectivity of M. (Concerning
this statement about homology, see Appendix E.)
To determine whether M is simply-connected it is enough to check that a
ﬁnite number of loops in M can be contracted to a point, i.e., some collection
of generators for the fundamental group. If this is “hard”, then it means
that the complexity of the contractions should be enormous compared to the
complexity of M. For if there were a bound in terms of a recursive function,
then one could reverse the process and use this to get an algorithm which
could decide whether M is PL equivalent to a sphere, and this is not possible.
If M is a hard example of a PL manifold which is equivalent to an n-
sphere, then any mapping from M to the sphere which realizes this equiv-
alence must necessarily be of very high complexity as well. Because of the
preceding discussion, this is also true for mappings which are homotopy-
equivalences, or even which merely induce isomorphisms on π1, if one includes
as part of the package of data enough information to justify the condition
that the induced mapping on π1 be an isomorphism. (For a homotopy equiva-
lence, for instance, one could include the mapping f from M to the n-sphere,
a mapping g from the n-sphere to M which is a homotopy-inverse to f, and
mappings which give homotopies between f ◦g and g ◦f to the identity
on the n-sphere and M, respectively.) This is because one could use the
mapping to reduce the problem of contracting a loop in M to a point to
the corresponding problem for the n-sphere, where the matter of bounds is
straightforward.
Similar considerations apply to the problem of deciding when a ﬁnite
polyhedron P is a PL manifold.
Indeed, given a PL manifold M whose
equivalence to a sphere is in question, one can use it to make a new poly-
hedron P by taking the “suspension” of M. This is deﬁned by taking two
points y and z which lie outside of a plane that contains M, and then taking
the union of all of the (closed) line segments that go from either of y or z
to a point in M. One should also be careful to choose y and z so that these
line segments never meet, except in the trivial case of line segments from y
and z to the same point x in M, with x being the only point of intersection
23

of the two segments. (One can imagine y and z as lying on “opposite sides”
of an aﬃne plane that contains M.)
If M is equivalent to a sphere, then this operation of suspension produces
a PL manifold equivalent to the sphere of 1 larger dimension, as one can
easily check. If M is not PL equivalent to a sphere, then the suspension P
of M is not a PL manifold at all. This is because M is the link of P at the
vertices y and z, by construction, so that one is back to the situation of Basic
Fact 3.2.
Just as there are PL manifolds M whose equivalence with a sphere is
hard, the use of the suspension shows that there are polyhedra P for which
the property of being a PL manifold is hard to establish. Through the type
of arguments outlined above, when PL coordinates exist for a polyhedron P,
they may have to be of enormous complexity compared to the complexity
of P itself. This works more robustly than just for PL coordinates, i.e., for
any information which is strong enough to give the simple-connectivity of
the links of P. Again, this follows the discussion above.
We have focussed on piecewise-linear coordinates for ﬁnite polyhedra for
the sake of simplicity, but similar themes of complexity come up much more
generally, and in a number of diﬀerent ways. In particular, existence and
complexity of parameterizations is often related in a strong manner to the
behavior of something like π1, sometimes in a localized form, as with the
links of a polyhedron. For topology of manifolds in high dimensions, π1 and
the ﬁlling of loops with disks comes up in the Whitney lemma, for instance.
This concerns the separation of crossings of submanifolds through the use
of embedded 2-dimensional disks, and it can be very useful for making some
geometric constructions. (A very nice brief review of some of these matters is
given in Section 1.2 of [DonK].) Localized π1-type conditions play a crucial
role in taming theorems in geometric topology. Some references related to
this are [Bin5, Bin6, Bin8, Bur, BurC, Can1, Can2, Dave1, Dave2, Edw1,
Moi, Rus1, Rus2].
In Appendix C, we shall review some aspects of geometric topology and
the existence and behavior of parameterizations, and the role of localized
versions of fundamental groups in particular.
As another type of example, one has the famous “double suspension”
results of Edwards and Cannon [Can1, Can3, Dave2, Edw2]. Here one starts
with a ﬁnite polyhedron H which is a manifold with the same homology as
a sphere of the same dimension, and one takes the suspension (described
above) of the suspension of H to get a new polyhedron K. The result is
24

that K is actually homeomorphic to a sphere. A key point is that H is not
required to be simply-connected. When π1(H) ̸= 0, it is not possible for the
homeomorphism from K to a standard sphere to be piecewise-linear, or even
Lipschitz (as in (1.7)). Concerning the latter, see [SieS]. Not much is known
about the complexity of the homeomorphisms in this case. (We shall say a
bit more about this in Section 5 and Subsection C.5.)
Note that if J is obtained as a single suspension of H, and if π1(H) ̸= 0,
then J cannot be a topological manifold at all (at least if the dimension of H
is at least 2). Indeed, if M is a topological manifold of dimension n, then for
every point p in M there are arbitrarily small neighborhoods U of p which are
homeomorphic to an open n-ball, and U\{p} must then be simply-connected
when n ≥3. This cannot work for the suspension J of H when π1(H) ̸= 0,
with p taken to be one of the two cone points introduced in the suspension
construction.
However, J has the advantage over H that it is simply-connected. This
comes from the process of passing to the suspension (and the fact that H
should be connected, since it has the same homology as a sphere). It is for
this reason that the cone points of K do not have the same trouble as in J
itself, with no small deleted neighborhoods which are simply-connected. The
singularities at the cone points in J lead to trouble with the codimension-2
links in K, but this turns out not to be enough to prevent K from being a
topological manifold, or a topological sphere. It does imply that the home-
omorphisms involved have to distort distances in a very strong way, as in
[SieS].
In other words, local homeomorphic coordinates for K do exist, but
they are necessarily much more complicated than PL homeomorphisms, even
though K is itself a ﬁnite polyhedron. As above, there is also a global home-
omorphism from K to a sphere. The ﬁrst examples of ﬁnite polyhedra which
are homeomorphic to each other but not piecewise-linearly equivalent were
given by Milnor [Mil2]. See also [Sta2]. This is the “failure of the Hauptver-
mutung” (in general). These polyhedra are not PL manifolds, and it turns
out that there are examples of compact PL manifolds which are homeomor-
phic but not piecewise-linearly equivalent too. See [Sie2] for dimensions 5
and higher, and [DonK, FreQ] for dimension 4. In dimensions 3 and lower,
this does not happen [Moi, Bin6]. The examples in [Mil2, Sta2, Sie2] involved
non-PL homeomorphisms whose behavior is much milder than in the case of
double-suspension spheres. There are general results in this direction for PL
manifolds (and more broadly) in dimensions greater than or equal to 5. See
25

[Sul1, SieS]. Analogous statements fail in dimension 4, by [DonS].
Some other examples where homeomorphic coordinates do not exist, or
necessarily have complicated behavior, even though the geometry behaves
well in other ways, are given in [Sem7, Sem8].
See [DaviS4, HeiS, HeiY, M¨ulˇS, Sem3, Tor1, Tor2] for some related topics
concerning homeomorphisms and bounds for their behavior.
One can try to avoid diﬃculties connected to π1 by using mappings with
branching rather than homeomorphisms. This is discussed further in Ap-
pendix B.
Questions of algorithmic undecidability in topology have been revisited
in recent years, in particular by Nabutovsky and Weinberger. See [NabW1,
NabW2], for instance, and the references therein.
4
Quantitative topology, and calculus on sin-
gular spaces
One of the nice features of Euclidean spaces is that it is easy to work with
functions, derivatives, and integrals. Here is a basic example of this. Let f
be a real-valued function on Rn which is continuously diﬀerentiable and has
compact support, and ﬁx a point x ∈Rn. Then
|f(x)| ≤1
νn
Z
Rn
1
|x −y|n−1 |∇f(y)| dy,
(4.1)
where νn denotes the (n −1)-dimensional volume of the unit sphere in Rn,
and dy refers to ordinary n-dimensional volume.
This inequality provides a way to say that the values of a function are
controlled by averages of its derivative. In this respect it is like Sobolev and
isoperimetric inequalities, to which we shall return in a moment.
To prove (4.1) one can proceed as follows (as on p125 of [Ste1]). Let v be
any element of Rn with |v| = 1. Then
f(x) = −
Z ∞
0
∂
∂tf(x + tv) dt,
(4.2)
by the fundamental theorem of calculus. Thus
|f(x)| ≤
Z ∞
0
|∇f(x + tv)| dt.
(4.3)
26

This is true for every v in the unit sphere of Rn, and by averaging over these
v’s one can derive (4.1) from (4.3).
To put this into perspective, it is helpful to look at a situation where
analogous inequalities make sense but fail to hold. Imagine that one is inter-
ested in inequalities like (4.1), but for 2-dimensional surfaces in R3 instead of
Euclidean spaces themselves. Let S be a smoothly embedded 2-dimensional
submanifold of R3 which looks like a 2-plane with a bubble attached to it.
Speciﬁcally, let us start with the union of a 2-plane P and a standard (round)
2-dimensional sphere Σ which is tangent to P at a single point z. Then cut
out a little neighborhood of z, and glue in a small “neck” as a bridge between
the plane and the sphere to get a smooth surface S.
If the neck in S is very small compared to the size of Σ, then this is bad
for an inequality like (4.1). Indeed, let x be the point on Σ which is exactly
opposite from z, and consider a smooth function f which is equal to 1 on most
of Σ (and at x in particular) and equal to 0 on most of P. More precisely,
let us choose f so that its gradient is concentrated near the bridge between
Σ and P. If f makes the transition from vanishing to being 1 in a reasonable
manner, then the integral of |∇f| on S will be very small. This is not hard
to check, and it is bad for having an inequality like (4.1), since the left-hand
side would be 1 and the right-hand side would be small. In particular, one
could not have uniform bounds that would work for arbitrarily small bridges
between P and Σ.
The inequality (4.1) is a relative of the usual Sobolev and isoperimetric
inequalities, which say the following. Fix a dimension n again, and an ex-
ponent p that satisﬁes 1 ≤p < n. Deﬁne q by 1/q = 1/p −1/n, so that
p < q < ∞. The Sobolev inequalities assert the existence of a constant
C(n, p) such that
 Z
Rn |f(x)|q dx
 1
q ≤C(n, p)
 Z
Rn |∇f(x)|p dx
 1
p
(4.4)
for all functions f on Rn that are continuously diﬀerentiable and have com-
pact support. One can also allow more general functions, with ∇f interpreted
in the sense of distributions.
The isoperimetric inequality states that if D is a domain in Rn (which is
bounded and has reasonably smooth boundary, say), then
n-dimensional volume of D
(4.5)
≤C(n) ((n −1)-dimensional volume of ∂D)
n
n−1.
27

This is really just a special case of (4.4), with p = 1 and f taken to be the
characteristic function of D (i.e., the function that is equal to 1 on D and 0
on the complement of D). In this case ∇f is a (vector-valued) measure, and
the right-hand side of (4.4) should be interpreted accordingly. Conversely,
Sobolev inequalities for all p can be derived from isoperimetric inequalities,
by applying the latter to sets of the form
{x ∈Rn : |f(x)| > t},
(4.6)
and then making suitable integrations in t.
The sharp version of the isoperimetric inequality states that (4.5) holds
with the constant C(n) that gives equality in the case of a ball. See [Fed].
One can also determine sharp constants for (4.4), as on p39 of [Aub].
Note that the choice of the exponent n/(n −1) in the right side of (4.5)
is determined by scaling considerations, i.e., in looking what happens to the
two sides of (4.5) when one dilates the domain D by a positive factor. The
same is true of the relationship between p and q in (4.4), and the power n−1
in the kernel on the right side of (4.1).
The inequality (4.1) is a basic ingredient in one of the standard methods
for proving Sobolev and isoperimetric inequalities (but not necessarily with
sharp constants).
Roughly speaking, once one has (4.1), the rest of the
argument works at a very general level of integral operators on measure
spaces, rather than manifolds and derivatives. This is not quite true for the
p = 1 case of (4.4), for which the general measure-theoretic argument gives
a slightly weaker result. See Chapter V of [Ste1] for details. The slightly
weaker result does give an isoperimetric inequality (4.5), and it is not hard
to recover the p = 1 case of (4.4) from the weaker version using a bit more
of the localization properties of the gradient than are kept in (4.1). (See also
Appendix C of [Sem9], especially Proposition C.14.)
The idea of these inequalities makes sense much more broadly than just
on Euclidean spaces, but they may not always work very well, as in the
earlier example with bubbling. To consider this further, let M be a smooth
Riemannian manifold of dimension n, and let us assume for simplicity that
M is unbounded (like Rn). Let us also think of M as coming equipped with
a distance function d(x, y) with the usual properties (d(x, y) is nonnegative,
symmetric in x and y, vanishes exactly when x = y, and satisﬁes the triangle
inequality). One might take d(x, y) to be the geodesic distance associated
to the Riemannian metric on M, but let us not restrict ourselves to this
28

case. For instance, imagine that M is a smooth submanifold of some higher-
dimensional Rk, and that d(x, y) is simply the ambient Euclidean distance
|x −y| inherited from Rk. In general this could be much smaller than the
geodesic distance.
We shall make the standing assumption that the distance d(x, y) and the
Riemannian geodesic distance are approximately the same, each bounded by
twice the other, on suﬃciently small neighborhoods about any given point
in M. This ensures that d(x, y) is compatible with quantities deﬁned locally
on M using the Riemannian metric, like the volume measure, and the length
of the gradient of a function. Note that this local compatibility condition
for the distance function d(x, y) and the Riemannian metric is satisﬁed au-
tomatically in the situation mentioned above, where M is a submanifold of
a larger Euclidean space and d(x, y) is inherited from the ambient Euclidean
distance. We shall also require that the distance d(x, y) be compatible with
the (manifold) topology on M, and that it be complete. This prevents things
like inﬁnite ends in M which asymptotically approach ﬁnite points in M with
respect to d(x, y).
The smoothness of M should be taken in the character of an a priori
assumption, with the real point being to have bounds that do not depend on
the presence of the smoothness in a quantitative way. Indeed, the smoothness
of M will not really play an essential role here, but will be convenient, so that
concepts like volume, gradient, and lengths of gradients are automatically
meaningful.
Suppose for the moment that M is bilipschitz equivalent to Rn equipped
with the usual Euclidean metric. This means that there is a mapping φ from
Rn onto M and a constant k such that
k−1|z −w| ≤d(φ(z), φ(w)) ≤k |z −w|
for all z, w ∈Rn.
(4.7)
In other words, φ should neither expand or shrink distances by more than
a bounded amount. This implies that φ does not distort the corresponding
Riemannian metrics or volume by more than bounded factors either, as one
can readily show. In this case the analogues of (4.1), (4.4), and (4.5) all
hold for M, with constants that depend only on the constants for Rn and
the distortion factor k. This is because any test of these inequalities on M
can be “pulled back” to Rn using φ, with the loss of information in moving
between M and Rn limited by the bilipschitz condition for φ.
This observation helps to make clear the fact that inequalities like (4.1),
(4.4), and (4.5) do not really require much in the way of smoothness for
29

the underlying space. Bounds on curvature are not preserved by bilipschitz
mappings, just as bounds on higher derivative of functions are not preserved.
Bilipschitz mappings can allow plenty of spiralling and corners in M (or
approximate corners, since we are asking that M that be smooth a priori).
Although bilipschitz mappings are appropriate here for the small amount
of regularity involved, the idea of a “parameterization” is too strong for
the purposes of inequalities like (4.1), (4.4), and (4.5). One might say that
these inequalities are like algebraic topology, but more quantitative, while
parameterizations are more like homeomorphisms, which are always more
diﬃcult. (Some other themes along these lines will be discussed in Appendix
D. Appendix C is related to this as well. See also [HanH].)
I would like to describe now some conditions on M which are strong
enough to give bounds as in (4.1), but which are quite a bit weaker than the
existence of a bilipschitz parameterization. First, let us explicitly write down
the analogue of (4.1) for M. If x is any element of M, this analogue would
say that there is a constant C so that
|f(x)| ≤C
Z
M
1
d(x, y)n−1 |∇f(y)| dV ol(y)
(4.8)
for all continuously diﬀerentiable functions f on M, where |∇f(y)| and the
volume measure dV ol(y) are deﬁned in terms of the Riemannian structure
that comes with M.
The next two deﬁnitions give the conditions on M that we shall consider.
These and similar notions have come up many times in various parts of
geometry and analysis, as in [Ale, AleV2, AleV3, As1, As2, As3, CoiW1,
CoiW2, Gro1, Gro2, HeiKo1, HeiKo2, HeiKo2, HeiY, Pet1, Pet2, V¨ai6].
Deﬁnition 4.9 (The doubling condition) A metric space (M, d(x, y)) is
said to be doubling (with constant L0) if each ball B in M with respect to
d(x, y) can be covered by at most L0 balls of half the radius of B.
Notice that Euclidean spaces are automatically doubling, with a con-
stant L0 that depends only on the dimension. Similarly, every subset of a
(ﬁnite-dimensional) Euclidean space is doubling, with a uniform bound for
its doubling constant.
Deﬁnition 4.10 (Local linear contractability) A metric space (M, d(x, y))
is said to be locally linearly contractable (with constant L1) if the following is
30

true. Let B be a ball in M with respect to d(x, y), and with radius no greater
than L−1
1
times the diameter of M. (Arbitrary radii are permitted when M is
unbounded, as in the context of the present general discussion.) Then (local
linear contractability means that) it should be possible to continuously con-
tract B to a point inside of L1 B, i.e., inside the ball with the same center as
B and L1 times the radius.
This is a kind of quantitative and scale-invariant condition of local con-
tractability.
It prevents certain types of cusps or bubbling, for instance.
Both this and the doubling condition hold automatically when M admits
a bilipschitz parameterization by Rn, with uniform bounds in terms of the
bilipschitz constant k in (4.7) (and the dimension for the doubling condition).
Theorem 4.11 If M and d(x, y) are as before, and if (M, d(x, y)) satisﬁes
the doubling and local linear contractability conditions with constants L0 and
L1, respectively, then (4.8) holds with a constant C that depends only on L0,
L1, and the dimension n.
This was proved in [Sem9]. Before we look at some aspects of the proof,
some remarks are in order about what the conclusions really mean.
In general one cannot derive bounds for Sobolev and isoperimetric in-
equalities for M just using (4.8). One might say that (4.8) is only as good
as the behavior of the volume measure on M. If the volume measure on M
behaves well, with bounds for the measure of balls like ones on Rn, then one
can derive conclusions from (4.8) in much the same way as for Euclidean
spaces. See Appendices B and C in [Sem9].
The doubling and local linear contractability conditions do not them-
selves say anything about the behavior of the volume on M, and indeed they
tolerate fractal behavior perfectly well. To see this, consider the metric space
which is Rn as a set, but with the metric |x −y|α, where α is some ﬁxed
number in (0, 1). This is a kind of abstract and higher-dimensional version
of standard fractal snowﬂake curves in the plane. However, the doubling and
local linear contractability conditions work just as well for (Rn, |x −y|α) as
for (Rn, |x −y|), just with slightly diﬀerent constants.
How might one prove Theorem 4.11?
It would be nice to be able to
mimic the proof of (4.1), i.e., to ﬁnd a family of rectiﬁable curves in M
which go from x to inﬁnity and whose arclength measures have approximately
the same kind of distribution in M as rays in Rn emanating from a given
31

point. Such families exist (with suitable bounds) when M admits a bilipschitz
parameterization by Rn, and they also exist in more singular circumstances.
Unfortunately, it is not so clear how to produce families of curves like
these without some explicit information about the space M in question. This
problem was treated in a special case in [DaviS1], with M a certain kind of
(nonsmooth) conformal deformation of Rn. The basic idea was to obtain
these curves from level sets of certain mappings with controlled behavior.
When n = 2, for instance, imagine a standard square Q, with opposing
vertices p and q. The boundary of Q can be thought of as a pair of paths α,
β from p to q, each with two segments, two sides of Q. If τ is a function on
Q which equals 0 on α and 1 on β (and is somewhat singular at p and q),
then one can try to extract a family of paths from p to q in Q from the level
sets
{x ∈R2 : τ(x) = t},
0 < t < 1.
(4.12)
For the standard geometry on R2 one can write down a good family of curves
and a good function τ explicitly. For a certain class of conformal deformations
of R2 one can make constructions of functions τ with approximately the same
behavior as in the case of the standard metric, and from these one can get
controlled families of curves.
These constructions of functions τ used the standard Euclidean geometry
in the background in an important way. For the more general setting of
Theorem 4.11 one needs to proceed somewhat diﬀerently, and it is helpful
to begin with a diﬀerent formulation of the kind of auxiliary functions to be
used.
Given a point x in Rn, there is an associated spherical projection πx :
Rn\{x} →Sn−1 given by
πx(u) = u −x
|u −x|.
(4.13)
This projection is topologically nondegenerate, in the sense that it has degree
equal to 1. Here the “degree” can be deﬁned by restricting πx to a sphere
around x and taking the degree of this mapping (from an (n−1)-dimensional
sphere to another one) in the usual sense. (See [Mas, Mil3, Nir] concerning
the notion of degree of a mapping.) Also, this mapping satisﬁes the bound
|dπx(u)| ≤C |u −x|−1
(4.14)
for all u ∈Rn\{x}, where dπx(u) denotes the diﬀerential of πx at u, and
C is some constant. One can write down the diﬀerential of πx explicitly,
32

and (4.14) can be replaced by an equality, but this precision is not needed
here, and not available in general. The rays in Rn that emanate from x are
exactly the ﬁbers of the mapping πx, and bounds for the distribution of their
arclength measures can be seen as a consequence of (4.14), using the “co-area
theorem” [Fed, Morg, Sim].
One can also think of πx as giving (4.1) in the following manner. Let ω
denote the standard volume form on Sn−1, a diﬀerential form of degree n−1,
and normalized so that
Z
Sn−1 ω = 1.
(4.15)
Let λ denote the diﬀerential form on Rn\{0} obtained by pulling ω back
using πx. Then (4.14) yields
|λ(u)| ≤C′ |u −x|−n+1
(4.16)
for all u ∈Rn\{x}, where C′ is a slightly diﬀerent constant from before.
In particular, λ is locally integrable across x (and smooth everywhere else).
This permits one to take the exterior derivative of λ on all of Rn in the
(distributional) sense of currents [Fed, Morg], and the result is that dλ is
the current of degree n which is a Dirac mass at x. More precisely, dλ = 0
away from x because ω is automatically closed (being a form of top degree
on Sn−1), and because the pull-back of a closed form is always closed. The
Dirac mass at x comes from a standard Stokes’ theorem computation, which
uses the observation that the integral of λ over any (n −1)-sphere in Rn
around x is equal to 1. (The latter is one way to formulate the fact that the
degree of πx is 1.)
This characterization of dλ as a current on Rn means that
Z
Rn df ∧λ = −f(x)
(4.17)
when f is a smooth function on Rn with compact support.
This yields
(4.1), because of (4.16). (A similar use of diﬀerential forms was employed in
[DaviS1].)
The general idea of the mapping πx also makes sense in the context of
Theorem 4.11. Let M, d(y, z) be as before, and ﬁx a point x in M. One
would like to ﬁnd a mapping πx : M\{x} →Sn−1 which is topologically
nondegenerate and satisﬁes
|dπx(u)| ≤K d(u, x)−1
(4.18)
33

for some constant K and all u ∈M\{x}. Note that now the norm of the
diﬀerential of πx involves the Riemannian metric on M. For the topological
nondegeneracy of πx, let us ask that it have nonzero degree on small spheres
in M that surround x in a standard way. This makes sense, because of the
a priori assumption that M be smooth.
If one can produce such a mapping πx, then one can derive (4.8) as a
consequence, using the same kind of argument with diﬀerential forms as
above. One can also ﬁnd enough curves in the ﬁbers of πx, with control on
the way that their arclength measures are distributed in M, through the use
of co-area estimates. For this the topological nondegeneracy of πx is needed
for showing that the ﬁbers of πx connect x to inﬁnity in M.
In the context of conformal deformations of Rn, as in [DaviS1], such
mappings πx can be obtained as perturbations to the standard mapping in
(4.13). This is described in [Sem10]. For Theorem 4.11, the method of [Sem9]
does not use mappings quite like πx, but a “stabilized” version from which
one can draw similar conclusions. In this stabilized version one looks for
mappings from M to Sn (instead of Sn−1) which are constant outside of a
(given) ball, topologically nontrivial (in the sense of nonzero degree), and
which satisfy suitable bounds on their diﬀerentials. These mappings are like
snapshots of pieces of M, and one has to move them around in a controlled
manner. This means moving them both in terms of location (the center of
the supporting ball) and scale (the radius of the ball).
At this stage the hypotheses of Theorem 4.11 may make more sense.
Existence of mappings like the ones described above is a standard matter
in topology, except for the question of uniform bounds. The hypotheses of
Theorem 4.11 (the doubling condition and local linear contractability) are
also in the nature of quantitative topology. Note, however, that the kind of
bounds involved in the hypotheses of the theorem and the construction of
mappings into spheres are somewhat diﬀerent from each other, with bounds
on the diﬀerentials being crucial for the latter, while control over moduli of
continuity does not come up in the former. (The local linear contractability
condition restricts the overall distances by which points are displaced in
the contractions, but not the sizes of the smaller-scale oscillations, as in a
modulus of continuity.) In the end the bounds for the diﬀerentials come
about because the hypotheses of Theorem 4.11 permit one to reduce various
constructions and comparisons to ﬁnite models of controlled complexity.
In the proof of Theorem 4.11 there are three related pieces of information
that come out, namely (1) estimates for the behavior of functions on our
34

space M in terms of their derivatives, as in (4.8), (2) families of curves in M
which are well-distributed in terms of arclength measure, and (3) mappings
to spheres with certain estimates and nondegeneracy properties. These three
kinds of information are closely linked, through various dualities, but to some
extent they also have their own lives. Each would be immediate if M had
a bilipschitz parameterization by Rn, but in fact they are more robust than
that, and much easier to verify.
Indeed, one of the original motivations for [DaviS1] was the problem of de-
termining which conformal deformations of Rn lead to metric spaces (through
the geodesic distance) which are bilipschitz equivalent to Rn. The deforma-
tions are allowed to be nonsmooth here, but this does not matter too much,
because of the natural scale-invariance of the problem, and because one seeks
uniform bounds. This problem is the same in essence as asking which (pos-
itive) functions on Rn arise as the Jacobian of a quasiconformal mapping,
modulo multiplication by a positive function which is bounded and bounded
away from 0.
Some natural necessary conditions are known for these questions, with a
principal ingredient coming from [Geh3]. It was natural to wonder whether
the necessary conditions were also suﬃcient. As a test for this, [DaviS1]
looked at the Sobolev and related inequalities that would follow if the nec-
essary conditions were suﬃcient. These inequalities could be stated directly
in terms of the data of the problems, the conformal factor or prospective
Jacobian. The conclusion of [DaviS1] was that these inequalities could be
derived directly from the conditions on the data, independently of whether
these conditions were suﬃcient for the existence of bilipschitz/quasiconformal
mappings as above.
In [Sem8] it was shown that the candidate conditions are not suﬃcient for
the existence of such mappings, at least in dimensions 3 and higher. (Dimen-
sion 2 remains open.) The simplest counterexamples involved considerations
of localized fundamental groups, in much the same fashion as in Section 3.
(Another class of counterexamples were based on a diﬀerent mechanism, al-
though these did not start in dimension 3.) These counterexamples are all
perfectly well-behaved in terms of the doubling and local linear contractabil-
ity properties, and in fact are much better than that.
Part of the bottom line here is that spaces can have geometry which
behaves quite well for many purposes even if they do not behave so well in
terms of parameterizations.
For some other aspects of “quantitative topology”, see [Ale, AleV2, AleV3,
35

Att1, Att2, BloW, ChaF, Che, Fer1, Fer2, Fer3, Fer4, Geh2, Gro1, Gro2,
HeiY, HeiS, Luu, Pet1, Pet2, TukV, V¨ai3, V¨ai5, V¨ai6]. Related matters of
Sobolev and other inequalities on non-smooth spaces come up in [HeiKo2,
HeiKo2, HeiKo+], in connection with the behavior of quasiconformal map-
pings.
5
Uniform rectiﬁability
A basic fact in topology is that there are spaces which are manifold factors
but not manifolds. That is, there are topological spaces M such that M × R
is a manifold (locally homeomorphic to a Euclidean space) but M is not.
This can even happen for ﬁnite polyhedra, because of the double-suspension
results of Edwards and Cannon. See [Dave2, Edw2, Kir] for more information
and speciﬁc examples. (We shall say a bit more about this in Appendix C.)
Uniform rectiﬁability is a notion of controlled geometry that trades topol-
ogy for estimates. It tolerates some amount of singularities, like holes and
crossings, and avoids some common diﬃculties with homeomorphisms, such
as manifold factors.
The precise deﬁnition is slightly technical, and relies on measure theory
in a crucial way. In many respects it is analogous to the notion of BMO from
Section 2. The following is a preliminary concept that helps to set the stage.
Deﬁnition 5.1 (Ahlfors regularity) Fix n and d, with n a positive integer
and 0 < d ≤n. A set E contained in Rn is said to be (Ahlfors) regular of
dimension d if it is closed, and if there is a positive Borel measure µ supported
on E and a constant C > 0 such that
C−1 rd ≤µ(B(x, r)) ≤C rd
(5.2)
for all x ∈E and 0 < r ≤diam E. Here B(x, r) denotes the (open) ball with
center x and radius r.
Roughly speaking, this deﬁnition asks that E behave like ordinary Eu-
clidean space in terms of the distribution of its mass. Notice that d-planes sat-
isfy this condition automatically, with µ equal to the ordinary d-dimensional
volume. The same is true for compact smooth manifolds, and ﬁnite polyhe-
dra which are given as unions of d-dimensional simplices (i.e., with no lower-
dimensional pieces sticking oﬀin an isolated manner). There are also plenty
36

of “fractal” examples, like self-similar Cantor sets and snowﬂake curves. In
particular, the dimension d can be any (positive) real number.
A basic fact is that if E is regular and µ is as in Deﬁnition 5.1, then µ is
practically the same as d-dimensional Hausdorﬀmeasure Hd restricted to E.
Speciﬁcally, µ and Hd are each bounded by constant multiples of the other
when applied to subsets of E. This is not hard to prove, and it shows that
µ is essentially unique. Deﬁnition 5.1 could have been formulated directly in
terms of Hausdorﬀmeasure, but the version above is a bit more elementary.
Let us recall the deﬁnition of a bilipschitz mapping. Let A be a set in
Rn, and let f be a mapping from A to some other set in Rn. We say that f
is k-bilipschitz, where k is a positive number, if
k−1 |x −y| ≤|f(x) −f(y)| ≤k |x −y|
(5.3)
for all x, y ∈A.
Deﬁnition 5.4 (Uniform rectiﬁability) Let E be a subset of Rn which
is Ahlfors regular of dimension d, where d is a positive integer, d < n, and
let µ be a positive measure on E as in Deﬁnition 5.1. Then E is uniformly
rectiﬁable if there exists a positive constant k so that for each x ∈E and
each r > 0 with r ≤diam E there is a closed subset A of E ∩B(x, r) such
that
µ(A) ≥9
10 · µ(E ∩B(x, r))
(5.5)
and
there is a k-bilipschitz mapping f from A into Rd.
(5.6)
In other words, inside of each “snapshot” E∩B(x, r) of E there should be
a large subset, with at least 90% of the points, which is bilipschitz equivalent
to a subset of Rd, and with a uniform bound on the bilipschitz constant.
This is like asking for a controlled parameterization, except that we allow for
holes and singularities.
Deﬁnition 5.4 should be compared with the classical notion of (count-
able) rectiﬁability, in which one asks that E be covered, except for a set of
measure 0, by a countable union of sets, each of which is bilipschitz equiva-
lent to a subset of Rd. Uniform rectiﬁability implies this condition, but it is
stronger, because it provides quantitative information at deﬁnite scales, while
the classical notion really only gives asymptotic information as one zooms in
37

at almost any point. See [Fal, Fed, Mat] for more information about classical
rectiﬁability.
Normally one would be much happier to simply have bilipschitz coor-
dinates outright, without having to allow for bad sets of small measure
where this does not work.
In practice bilipschitz coordinates simply do
not exist in many situations where one might otherwise hope to have them.
This is illustrated by the double-suspension spheres of Edwards and Can-
non [Can1, Can3, Dave2, Edw2], and the observations about them in [SieS].
Further examples are given in [Sem7, Sem8].
The use of arbitrary scales and locations is an important part of the story
here, and is very similar to the concept of BMO. At the level of a single snap-
shot, a ﬁxed ball B(x, r) centered on E, the bad set may seem pretty wild, as
nothing is said about what goes on there in (5.5) or (5.6). However, uniform
rectiﬁability, like BMO, applies to all snapshots equally, and in particular to
balls in which the bad set is concentrated. Thus, inside the bad set, there
are in fact further controls. We shall see other manifestations of this later,
and the same basic principle is used in the John–Nirenberg theorem for BMO
functions (discussed in Section 2).
Uniform rectiﬁability provides a substitute for (complete) bilipschitz co-
ordinates in much the same way that BMO provides a substitute for L∞
bounds, as in Section 2. Note that L∞bounds and bilipschitz coordinates
automatically entail uniform control over all scales and locations. This is
true just because of the way they are deﬁned, i.e., a bounded function is
bounded in all snapshots, and with a uniform majorant. With BMO and
uniform rectiﬁability the scale-invariance is imposed by hand.
It may be a little surprising that one can get anything new through con-
cepts like BMO and uniform rectiﬁability. For instance, suppose that f is a
locally-integrable function on Rk, and that the averages
1
ωk tk
Z
B(z,t) |f(w)| dw
(5.7)
are uniformly bounded, independently of z and t. Here ωk denotes the volume
of the unit ball in Rk, so that ωk tk is the volume of B(z, t). This implies
that f must itself be bounded by the same amount almost everywhere on
Rk, since
f(u) = lim
t→0
1
ωk tk
Z
B(z,t) f(w) dw
(5.8)
38

almost everywhere on Rk. Thus a uniform bound for the size of the snapshots
does imply a uniform bound outright. For BMO the situation is diﬀerent
because one asks only for a uniform bound on the mean oscillation in every
ball. In other words, one also has the freedom to make renormalizations by
additive constants when moving from place to place, and this gives enough
room for some unbounded functions, like log |x|. Uniform rectiﬁability is like
this as well, although with diﬀerent kinds of “renormalizations” available.
These remarks might explain why some condition like uniform rectiﬁabil-
ity could be useful or natural, but why the speciﬁc version above in particu-
lar? Part of the answer to this is that nearly all deﬁnitions of this nature are
equivalent to the formulation given above. For instance, the 9/10 in (5.5) can
be replaced by any number strictly between 0 and 1. See [DaviS3, DaviS5]
for more information.
Another answer lies in a theme often articulated by Coifman, about the
way that operator theory can provide a good guide for geometry. One of
the original motivations for uniform rectiﬁability came from the “Calder´on
program” [Cal2], concerning the Lp-boundedness of certain singular operators
on curves and surfaces of minimal smoothness. David [Davi2, Davi3, Davi5]
showed that uniform rectiﬁability of a set E implies Lp-boundedness of wide
classes of singular operators on E. (See [Cal1, Cal2, CoiDM, CoiMcM] and
the references therein for related work connected to the Calder´on program.)
In [DaviS3], a converse was established, so that uniform rectiﬁability of an
Ahlfors-regular set E is actually equivalent to the boundedness of a suitable
class of singular integral operators (inherited from the ambient Euclidean
space Rn). See also [DaviS2, DaviS5, MatMV, MatP].
Here is a concrete statement about uniform rectiﬁability in situations
where well-behaved parameterizations would be natural but may not exist.
Theorem 5.9 Let E be a subset of Rn which is regular of dimension d. If
E is also a d-dimensional topological manifold and satisﬁes the local linear
contractability condition (Deﬁnition 4.10), then E is uniformly rectiﬁable.
Note that Ahlfors-regularity automatically implies the doubling condition
(Deﬁnition 4.9).
Theorem 5.9 has been proved by G. David and myself. Now-a-days we
have better technology, which allows for versions of this which are localized
to individual “snapshots”, rather than using all scales and locations at once.
See [DaviS11] (with some of the remarks in Section 12.3 of [DaviS11] helping
39

to provide a bridge to the present formulation). We shall say a bit more
about this, near the end of Subsection 5.3.
The requirement that E be a topological manifold is convenient, but
weaker conditions could be used. For that matter, there are natural variations
of local linear contractability too.
One can think of Theorem 5.9 and related results in the following terms.
Given a compact set K, upper bounds for the d-dimensional Hausdorﬀmea-
sure of K together with lower bounds for the d-dimensional topology of K
should lead to strong information about the geometric behavior of K. See
[DaviS9, DaviS11, Sem6] for more on this.
To understand better what Theorem 5.9 means, let us begin by observing
that the hypotheses of Theorem 5.9 would hold automatically if E were
bilipschitz equivalent to Rd, or if E were compact and admitted bilipschitz
local coordinates from Rd. Under these conditions, a test of the hypotheses
of Theorem 5.9 on E can be converted into a similar test on Rd, where it
can then be resolved in a straightforward manner.
A similar argument shows that the hypotheses of Theorem 5.9 are “bilip-
schitz invariant”.
More precisely, if F is another subset of Rn which is
bilipschitz equivalent to E, and if the hypotheses of Theorem 5.9 holds for
one of E and F, then it automatically holds for the other.
Since the existence of bilipschitz coordinates implies the hypotheses of
Theorem 5.9, we cannot ask for more than that in the conclusions. In other
words, bilipschitz coordinates are at the high end of what one can hope for in
the context of Theorem 5.9. The hypotheses of Theorem 5.9 do in fact rule
out a lot of basic obstructions to the existence of bilipschitz coordinates, like
cusps, fractal behavior, self-intersections and approximate self-intersections,
and bubbles with very small necks. (Compare with Section 4, especially The-
orem 4.11 and the discussion of its proof and consequences.) Nonetheless, it
can easily happen that a set E satisﬁes the hypotheses of Theorem 5.9 but
does not admit bilipschitz local coordinates. Double-suspension spheres pro-
vide spectacular counterexamples for this (using the observations of [SieS]).
Additional counterexamples are given in [Sem7, Sem8].
We should perhaps emphasize that the assumption of being a topological
manifold in Theorem 5.9 does not involve bounds.
By contrast, uniform
rectiﬁability does involve bounds, which is part of the point. In the context
of Theorem 5.9, the proof shows that the uniform rectiﬁability constants for
the conclusion are controlled in terms of the constants that are implicit in
the hypotheses, i.e., in Ahlfors-regularity, the linear contractability condition,
40

and the dimension.
If bilipschitz coordinates are at the high end of what one could hope for,
what happens if one asks for less? What if one asks for homeomorphic local
coordinates with some control, but not as much? For instance, instead of
bounding the “rate” of continuity through Lipschitz conditions like
|f(x) −f(y)| ≤C |x −y|
(5.10)
(for some C and all x, y in the domain of f), one could work with H¨older
continuity conditions, which have the form
|f(x) −f(y)| ≤C′ |x −y|γ.
(5.11)
Here γ is a positive number, sometimes called the H¨older “exponent”. As
usual, (5.11) is supposed to hold simultaneously for all x and y in the domain
of f, and with a ﬁxed constant C′. When x and y are close to each other and
γ is less than 1, this type of condition is strictly weaker than that of being
Lipschitz. Just as f(x) = |x| is a standard example of a Lipschitz function
that is not diﬀerentiable at the origin, g(x) = |x|γ is a basic example of a
function that is H¨older continuous of order γ, γ ≤1, but not of any order
larger than γ, in any neighborhood of the origin.
Instead of local coordinates which are bilipschitz, one could consider ones
that are “bi-H¨older”, i.e., H¨older continuous and with H¨older continuous in-
verse. It turns out that double-suspension spheres do not admit bi-H¨older
local coordinates when the H¨older exponent γ lies above an explicit thresh-
old. Speciﬁcally, if P is an n-dimensional polyhedron which is the double-
suspension of an (n −2)-dimensional homology sphere that is not simply
connected, then there are points in P (along the “suspension circle”) for
which bi-H¨older local coordinates of exponent γ > 1/(n −2) do not exist.
This comes from the same argument as in [SieS]. More precisely, around
these points in P, there do not exist homeomorphic local coordinates from
subsets of Rn for which the inverse mapping is H¨older continuous of order
γ > 1/(n −2) (without requiring a H¨older condition for the mapping itself).
Given any positive number a, there are examples in [Sem8] so that local
coordinates (at some points) cannot have their inverses be H¨older continuous
of order a. These examples do admit bi-H¨older local coordinates (with a
smaller exponent), and even “quasisymmetric” [TukV] coordinates, and they
satisfy the hypotheses of Theorem 5.9. In [Sem7] there are examples which
satisfy the hypotheses of Theorem 5.9, but for which no uniform modulus of
41

continuity for local coordinate mappings and their inverses is possible (over
all scales and locations).
Related topics will be discussed in Appendix C.
5.1
Smoothness of Lipschitz and bilipschitz mappings
Another aspect of uniform rectiﬁability is that it provides the same amount of
“smoothness” as when there is a global bilipschitz parameterization. To make
this precise, let us ﬁrst look at the smoothness of Lipschitz and bilipschitz
mappings.
A mapping f : Rd →Rn is Lipschitz if there is a constant C so that
(5.10) holds for all x, y in Rd. The space of Lipschitz mappings is a bit
simpler than the space of bilipschitz mappings, because the former is a vector
space (and even a Banach space) while the latter is not. For the purposes of
“smoothness” properties, though, there is not really any diﬀerence between
the two. Bilipschitz mappings are always Lipschitz, and anything that can
happen with Lipschitz mappings can also happen with bilipschitz mappings
(by adding new components, or considering x+h(x) when h(x) has Lipschitz
norm less than 1 to get a bilipschitz mapping).
One should also not worry too much about the diﬀerence between Lips-
chitz mappings which are deﬁned on all of Rd, and ones that are only deﬁned
on a subset. Lipschitz mappings into Rn that are deﬁned on a subset of Rd
can always be extended to Lipschitz mappings on all of Rd. This is a stan-
dard fact. There are also extension results for bilipschitz mappings, if one
permits oneself to replace the image Rn with a Euclidean space of larger
dimension (which is not too serious in the present context).
For considerations of “smoothness” we might as well restrict our attention
to functions which are real-valued, since the Rn-valued case can always be
reduced to that.
Two basic facts about Lipschitz functions on Rd are that they are dif-
ferentiable almost everywhere (with respect to Lebesgue measure), and that
for each η > 0 they can be modiﬁed on sets of Lebesgue measure less than η
(depending on the function) in such a way as to become continuously diﬀer-
entiable everywhere. See [Fed].
These are well-known results, but they do not tell the whole story. They
are not quantitative; they say a lot about the asymptotic behavior (on aver-
age) of Lipschitz mappings at very small scales, but they do not say anything
about what happens at scales of deﬁnite size.
42

To make this precise, let a Lipschitz mapping f : Rd →R be given, and
ﬁx a point x ∈Rd and a radius t > 0. We want to measure how well f is
approximated by an aﬃne function on the ball B(x, t). To do this we deﬁne
the quantity α(x, t) by
α(x, t) = inf
A∈A
sup
y∈B(x,t)
t−1 |f(y) −A(y)|.
(5.12)
Here A denotes the (vector space) of aﬃne functions on Rd. The part on the
right side of (5.12) with just the supremum (and not the inﬁmum) measures
how well the particular aﬃne function A approximates f inside B(x, t), and
then the inﬁmum gives us the best approximation by any aﬃne function for
a particular choice of x and t. The factor of t−1 makes α(x, t) scale properly,
and be dimensionless. In particular, α(x, t) is uniformly bounded in x and t
when f is Lipschitz, because we can take A(y) to be the constant function
equal to the value of f at x.
The smallness of α(x, t) provides a manifestation of the smoothness of
f. For functions which are twice-continuously diﬀerentiable one can get es-
timates like
α(x, t) = O(t),
(5.13)
using Taylor’s theorem. If 0 < δ < 1, then estimates like
α(x, t) = O(tδ)
(5.14)
(locally uniformly in x) correspond to H¨older continuity of the gradient of f
of order δ. Diﬀerentiability almost everywhere of f implies that
lim
t→0 α(x, t) = 0
for almost every x.
(5.15)
This does not say anything about any particular t, because one does not
know how long one might have to wait before the limiting behavior kicks in.
Here is a simple example. Let us take d = 1, and consider the function
gρ(x) = ρ · sin(x/ρ)
(5.16)
on R. Here ρ is any positive number. Now, gρ(x) is Lipschitz with norm 1
no matter how ρ is chosen. This is not hard to check; for instance, one can
take the derivative to get that
g′
ρ(x) = cos(x/ρ)
(5.17)
43

so that |g′
ρ(x)| ≤1 everywhere. This implies that
|gρ(u) −gρ(v)| ≤|u −v|
(5.18)
for all u and v (and all ρ), because of the mean-value theorem, or the funda-
mental theorem of calculus. (One also has that |g′
ρ(x)| = 1 at some points,
so that the Lipschitz norm is always equal to 1.)
If ρ is very small, then one has to wait a long time before the limit in
(5.15) takes full eﬀect, because α(x, t) will not be small when t = ρ. In fact,
there is then a positive lower bound for α(x, t) that does not depend on x
or ρ (assuming that t is taken to be equal to ρ). This is not hard to verify
directly. One does not really have to worry about ρ here, because one can
use scaling arguments to reduce the lower bound to the case where ρ = 1.
Thus a bound on the Lipschitz norm is not enough to say anything about
when the limit in (5.15) will take eﬀect. These examples work uniformly in
x, so that one cannot avoid the problem by removing a set of small measure
or anything like that.
However, there is something else that one can observe about these exam-
ples. Fix a ρ, no matter how large or small. The corresponding quantities
α(x, t) will not be too small when t is equal to ρ, as mentioned above, but
they will be small when t is either much smaller than ρ, or much larger than
ρ. At scales much smaller than ρ, gρ(x) is approximately aﬃne, because the
smoothness of the sine function has a chance to kick in, while at larger scales
gρ(x) is simply small outright compared to t (and one can take A = 0 as the
approximating aﬃne function).
In other words, for the functions gρ(x) there is always a bad scale where
the α(x, t)’s may not be small, and that bad scale can be arbitrarily large or
small, but the bad behavior is conﬁned to approximately just one scale.
It turns out that something similar happens for arbitrary Lipschitz func-
tions. The bad behavior cannot always be conﬁned to a single scale — one
might have sums of functions like the gρ’s, but with very diﬀerent choices of
ρ — but, on average, the bad behavior is limited to a bounded number of
scales.
Let us be more precise, and deﬁne a family of functions which try to
count the number of “bad” scales associated to a given point x. Fix a radius
r > 0, and also a small number ϵ, which will provide our threshold for what
is considered “small”. We assume that a lipschitz function f on Rd has been
ﬁxed, as before. Given x ∈Rd, deﬁne Nr(x) to be the number of nonnegative
44

integers j such that
α(x, 2−j r) ≥ϵ.
(5.19)
These j’s represent the “bad” scales for the point x, and below the radius r.
It is easy to see that (5.15) implies that Nr(x) < ∞for almost all x. There
is a more quantitative statement which is true, namely that the average of
Nr(x) over any ball B in Rd of radius r is ﬁnite and uniformly bounded,
independently of the ball B and the choice of r. That is,
r−d
Z
B Nr(x) dx ≤C(n, ϵ−1∥f∥Lip),
(5.20)
where C(n, s) is a constant that depends only on n and s, and ∥f∥Lip denotes
the Lipschitz norm of f. This is a kind of “Carleson measure condition”.
Before we get to the reason for this bound, let us consider some examples.
For the functions gρ(x) in (5.16), the functions Nr(x) are simply uniformly
bounded, independently of x, r, and ρ. This is not hard to check. Notice
that the bound does depend on ϵ, i.e., it blows up as ϵ →0. As another
example, consider the function f deﬁned by
f(x) = |x|.
(5.21)
For this function we have that Nr(0) = ∞as soon as ϵ is small enough. This
is because α(0, t) is positive and independent of t, so that (5.19) holds for all
j when ϵ is suﬃciently small. Thus Nr(x) is not uniformly bounded in this
case. In fact it has a logarithmic singularity near 0, with Nr(x) behaving
roughly like log(r/|x|), and this is compatible with (5.20) for B centered at
0. If one is far enough away from the origin (compared to r), then Nr(x)
simply vanishes, and there is nothing to do.
In general one can have mixtures of the two types of phenomena. Another
interesting class of examples to consider are functions of the form
f(x) = dist(x, F),
(5.22)
where F is some nonempty subset of Rd which is not all of Rd, and dist(x, F)
is deﬁned (as usual) by
dist(x, F) = inf{|x −z| : z ∈F}.
(5.23)
It is a standard exercise that such a function f is always Lipschitz with norm
at most 1. Depending on the behavior of the set F, this function can have
45

plenty of sharp corners, like |x| has at the origin, and plenty of oscillations
roughly like the ones in the functions gρ. In particular, the oscillations can
occur at lots of diﬀerent scales as one moves from point to point. However,
one does not really have oscillations at diﬀerent scales overlapping each other.
Whenever the elements of F become dense enough to make a lot of oscilla-
tions, the values of f become small in compensation.
(One can consider
situations where F has points at regularly-spaced intervals, for instance.)
How might one prove an estimate like (5.20)? This is part of a larger
story in harmonic analysis, called Littlewood–Paley theory, some of whose
classical manifestations are described in [Ste1]. The present discussion is
closer in spirit to [Dor] for the measurements of oscillation used, and indeed
(5.20) can be derived from the results in [Dor].
There are stronger estimates available than (5.20).
Instead of simply
counting how often the α(x, t)’s are larger than some threshold, as in the
deﬁnition of Nr(x) above, one can work with sums of the form
 ∞
X
j=0
α(x, 2−j r)q
 1
q .
(5.24)
The “right” choice of q is 2, but to get this one should modify the deﬁnition
of α(x, t) (in most dimensions) so that the measurement of approximation of
f by an aﬃne function uses a suitable Lp norm, rather than the supremum.
(That the choice of q = 2 is the “right” one reﬂects some underlying orthog-
onality, and is a basic point of Littlewood–Paley theory. At a more practical
level, q = 2 is best because it works for the estimates for the α(x, t)’s and
allows reverse estimates for the size of the gradient of f in terms of the sizes
of the α(x, t)’s.)
In short, harmonic analysis provides a fairly thorough understanding of
the sizes of the α(x, t)’s and related quantities, and with quantitative esti-
mates. This works for Lipschitz functions, and more generally for functions
in Sobolev spaces.
There is more to the matter of smoothness of Lipschitz functions than
this, however. The α(x, t)’s measure how well a given function f can be
approximated by an aﬃne function on a ball B(x, t), but they do not say
too much about how these approximating aﬃne functions might change with
x and t.
In fact, there are classical examples of functions for which the
α(x, t)’s tend to 0 uniformly as t →0, and yet the derivative fails to exist at
almost every point. Roughly speaking, the aﬃne approximations keep spin-
ning around as t →0, without settling down on a particular aﬃne function,
46

as would happen when the derivative exists. (A faster rate of decay for the
α(x, t)’s, as in (5.14), would prevent this from happening.)
For Lipschitz functions, the existence of the diﬀerential almost everywhere
implies that for almost every x the gradients of the approximating aﬃne
functions on B(x, t) do not have to spin around by more than a ﬁnite amount
as t goes between some ﬁxed number r and 0. In fact, quantitative estimates
are possible, in much the same manner as before. Again one ﬁxes a threshold
ϵ, and one can measure how many oscillations of size at least ϵ there are in
the gradients of the aﬃne approximations as t ranges between 0 and r. For
this there are uniform bounds on the averages of these numbers, just as in
(5.20).
This type of quantitative control on the oscillations of the gradients of the
aﬃne approximations of f comes from Carleson’s Corona construction, as in
[Garn]. This construction was initially applied to the behavior of bounded
holomorphic functions in the unit disk of the complex plane, but in fact it
is a very robust real-variable method. For example, the type of bound just
mentioned in the previous paragraph (on the average number of oscillations of
the gradients of the aﬃne approximations as t goes from r to 0) is completely
analogous to one for the boundary behavior of harmonic functions given in
Corollary 6.2 on p348 of [Garn].
A more detailed discussion of the Corona construction in the context of
Lipschitz functions can be found in Chapter IV.2 of [DaviS5].
The Corona construction and the known estimates for aﬃne approxima-
tions as discussed above provide a fairly complete picture of the “smoothness”
of Lipschitz functions. They also provide an interesting way to look at “com-
plexity” of Lipschitz functions, and one that is quite diﬀerent from what is
suggested more naively by the deﬁnition (5.10).
5.2
Smoothness and uniform rectiﬁability
The preceding discussion of smoothness for Lipschitz and bilipschitz map-
pings has natural extensions to the geometry of sets in Euclidean spaces.
Instead of approximations of functions by aﬃne functions, one can consider
approximations of sets by aﬃne planes. Diﬀerentials of mappings correspond
to tangent planes for sets.
One can think of “embedding” the discussion for functions into one for
sets by taking a function and replacing it with its graph. This is consistent
with the correspondence between aﬃne functions and d-planes, and between
47

diﬀerentials and tangent planes.
How might one generalize the α(x, t)’s (5.12) to the context of sets? Fix
a set E in Rn and a dimension d < n, and let x ∈E and t > 0 be given. In
analogy with (5.12), consider the quantity β(x, t) deﬁned by
β(x, t) = inf
P ∈Pd sup{t−1 dist(y, P) : y ∈E ∩B(x, t)}.
(5.25)
Here Pd denotes the set of d-dimensional aﬃne planes in Rn, and dist(y, P)
is deﬁned as in (5.23). In other words, we take a “snapshot” of E inside
the ball B(x, t), and we look at the optimal degree of approximation of E by
d-planes in B(x, t). The factor of t−1 in (5.25) makes β(x, t) a scale-invariant,
dimensionless quantity. Notice that β(x, t) is always less than or equal to 1,
no matter the behavior of E, as one can see by taking P to be any d-plane
that goes through x. The smoothness of E is reﬂected in how small β(x, t)
is.
If E is the image of a bilipschitz mapping φ : Rd →Rn, then there is a
simple correspondence between the β(x, t)’s on E and the α(z, s)’s for φ on
Rd. This permits one to transfer the estimates for the α’s on Rd to estimates
for the β’s on E, and one could also go backwards.
It turns out that the type of estimates that one gets for the β’s in this
way when E is bilipschitz equivalent to Rd also work when E is uniformly
rectiﬁable. Roughly speaking, this because the estimates for the α’s and β’s
are not uniform ones, but involve some kind of integration, and in a way
which is compatible with the measure-theoretic aspects of the Deﬁnition 5.4.
This is very much analogous to results in the context of BMO functions,
especially a theorem of Str¨omberg. (See Chapter IV.1 in [DaviS5] for some
general statements of this nature.)
To my knowledge, the ﬁrst person to look at estimates like these for sets
was P. Jones [Jon1]. In particular, he used the sharp quadratic estimates
that correspond to Littlewood–Paley theory to give a new approach to the
L2 boundedness of the Cauchy integral operator on nonsmooth curves. Here
“quadratic” means q = 2 in the context of (5.24).
In [Jon3], Jones showed how quadratic estimates on the β’s could actually
be used to characterize subsets of rectiﬁable curves. The quadratic nature
of the estimates, which come naturally from orthogonality considerations
in Littlewood–Paley theory and harmonic analysis, can, in this context, be
more directly linked to the ordinary Pythagorean theorem, as in [Jon3]. A
completion of Jones’ results for 1-dimensional sets in Euclidean spaces of
48

higher dimension was given in [Oki].
Analogues of Jones’ results for (Ahlfors-regular) sets of higher dimen-
sion are given in [DaviS3]. More precisely, if E is a d-dimensional Ahlfors-
regular set in Rn, then the uniform rectiﬁability of E is equivalent to certain
quadratic Carleson measure conditions for quantities like β(x, t) in (5.25).
One cannot use β(x, t) itself in general, with the supremum on the right side
of (5.25) (there are counterexamples due to Fang and Jones), but instead one
can replace the supremum with a suitable Lp norm for a range of p’s that
depends on the dimension (and is connected to Sobolev embeddings). This
corresponds to the situation for sharp estimates of quantities like α(x, t) in
the context of Lipschitz functions, as in [Dor].
The problem of building parameterizations is quite diﬀerent when d > 1
than in the 1-dimensional case. This is a basic fact, and a recurring theme of
classical topology. Making parameterizations for 1-dimensional sets is largely
a matter of ordering, i.e., lining up the points in a good way. For rectiﬁable
curves there is a canonical way to regulate the “speed” of a parameteriza-
tion, using arclength. In higher dimensions none of these things are true,
although conformal coordinates sometimes provide a partial substitute when
d = 2. See [DaviS4, M¨ulˇS, HeiKo1, Sem3, Sem7]. In [DeTY] a diﬀerent
kind of “normalized coordinates” are discussed for d = 3, but the underlying
partial diﬀerential equation is unfortunately not elliptic. Part of the point
of uniform rectiﬁability was exactly to try to come to grips with the issue of
parameterizations in higher dimensions. (See also Appendix C in connection
with these topics.)
Although this deﬁnition (5.25) of β(x, t) provides a natural version of
the α(x, t)’s from (5.12), it is not the only choice to consider. There is a
“bilateral” version, in which one measures both the distance from points in
E to the approximating d-plane (as in (5.25)) as well as distances from points
in the d-plane to E. Speciﬁcally, given a set E in Rn, a point x ∈E, a radius
t > 0, and a d-plane P in Rn, set
Approx(E, P, x, t)
=
sup{t−1 dist(y, P) : y ∈E ∩B(x, t)}
(5.26)
+ sup{t−1 dist(z, E) : z ∈P ∩B(x, t)}
and then deﬁne the bilateral version of β(x, t) by
bβ(x, t) = inf
P ∈Pd Approx(E, P, x, t).
(5.27)
This takes “holes” in E into account, which the deﬁnition of β(x, t) does not.
For instance, β(x, t) = 0 if and only if there is a d-plane P0 such that every
49

point in E ∩B(x, t) lies in P0, while for bβ(x, t) to be 0 it should also be true
that every point in P0 ∩B(x, t) lies in E (assuming that E is closed, as in
the deﬁnition of Ahlfors regularity).
It turns out that the bβ(x, t)’s behave a bit diﬀerently from the β(x, t)’s,
in the following sense. Imagine that we do not look for something like sharp
quadratic estimates, as we did before, but settle for cruder “thresholding”
conditions, as discussed in Subsection 5.1. In other words, one might ﬁx an
ϵ > 0, and deﬁne a function N ′
r(x) which counts the number of times that
bβ(x, 2−j r) is greater than or equal to ϵ, with j ∈Z+ (as in the discussion
around (5.19)). For uniformly rectiﬁable sets one has bounds on the averages
of N ′
r(x) exactly as in (5.20), but now integrating over E instead of Rd. A
slightly surprising fact is that the converse is also true, i.e., estimates like
these for the bβ’s are suﬃcient to imply the uniform rectiﬁability of the set E,
at least if E is Ahlfors-regular of dimension d. This was proved in [DaviS5].
In the context of functions, this type of thresholding condition is too weak,
in that one can have the α(x, t)’s going to 0 uniformly as t →0 for functions
which are diﬀerentiable almost nowhere, as mentioned in Subsection 5.1.
Similarly, there are Ahlfors-regular sets which are “totally unrectiﬁable” (in
the sense of [Fal, Fed, Mat]) and have the β(x, t)’s tending to 0 uniformly as
t →0. (See [DaviS3].) For the bβ’s the story is simply diﬀerent. On the other
hand, the fact that suitable thresholding conditions on the bβ’s are suﬃcient
to imply uniform rectiﬁability relies heavily on the assumption that E be
Ahlfors-regular, while mass bounds are part of the conclusion (rather than
the hypothesis) in Jones’ results, and no counterpart to the mass bounds are
included in the above-mentioned examples for functions. One does have mass
bounds for the examples in [DaviS3] (of totally-unrectiﬁable Ahlfors-regular
sets for which the β(x, t)’s tend to 0 uniformly as t →0), and there the issue
is more in the size of the holes in the set. The bβ’s, by deﬁnition, control
the sizes of holes. Note that this result for the bβ’s does have antecedents
for the classical notion of (countable) rectiﬁability, as in [Mat].
There are a number of variants of the bβ’s, in which one makes compar-
isons with other collections of sets besides d-planes, like unions of d-planes,
for instance. See [DaviS5].
Perhaps the strongest formulation of smoothness for uniformly rectiﬁable
sets is the existence of a “Corona decomposition”. This is a geometric version
of the information that one can get about a Lipschitz function from the
methods of Carleson’s Corona construction (as mentioned in Subsection 5.1).
Roughly speaking, in this condition one controls not only how often E is well-
50

approximated by a d-plane, but how fast the d-planes turn as well. This can
also be formulated in terms of good approximations of E by ﬂat Lipschitz
graphs.
Although a bit technical, the existence of a Corona decomposition is
perhaps the most useful way of managing the complexity of a uniformly
rectiﬁable set. Once one has a Corona decomposition, it is generally pretty
easy to derive whatever else one would like to know. Conversely, in practice
the existence of a Corona decomposition can be a good place to start if one
wants to prove that a set is uniformly rectiﬁable.
In fact, there is a general procedure for ﬁnding a Corona decomposition
when it exists, and one which is fairly simple (and very similar to Carleson’s
Corona construction). The diﬃcult part is to show that this procedure works
in the right way, with the correct estimates. Speciﬁcally, it is a stopping-time
argument, and one does not want to have to stop too often. This is a nice
point, because in general it is not so easy to build something like a good
parameterization of a set, even if one knows a priori that it exists. In this
context, there are in principle methods for doing this.
See [DaviS2, DaviS3, DaviS5, DaviS10, Sem1] for more information about
Corona decompositions of uniformly rectiﬁable sets and the way that they
can be used. The paper [DaviS10] is written in such a way as to try to convey
some of the basic concepts and constructions without worrying about why the
theorems are true (which is much more complicated). In particular, the basic
procedure for ﬁnding Corona decompositions when they exist is discussed.
See [GarnJ, Jon1, Jon3] for some other situations in which Carleson’s Corona
construction is used geometrically.
5.3
A class of variational problems
Uniform rectiﬁability is a pretty robust condition. If one has a set which
looks roughly as though it ought to be uniformly rectiﬁable, then there is a
good chance that it is. This as opposed to sets which look roughly as though
they should admit a well-behaved (homeomorphic) parameterization, and do
not (as discussed before).
In this subsection we would like to brieﬂy mention a result of this type,
concerning a minimal surface problem with nonsmooth coeﬃcients.
Let
g(x) be a Borel measurable function on Rn, and assume that g is positive,
51

bounded, and bounded away from 0, so that
0 < m ≤g(x) ≤M
(5.28)
for some constants m, M and all x ∈Rn. Let Q0, Q1 be a pair of (closed)
cubes in Rn, with sides parallel to the axes, and assume that Q0 is contained
in the interior of Q1.
Let U be an open subset of Q1 which contains the interior of Q0. Consider
an integral like
Z
∂U g(x) dνU(x),
(5.29)
where dνU denotes the measure that describes the (n−1)-dimensional volume
of subsets of ∂U. This would be deﬁned as in calculus when ∂U is at least
a little bit smooth (like C1), but in general one has to be more careful.
One can simply take for dνU the restriction of (n −1)-dimensional Hausdorﬀ
measure to ∂U, but for technical reasons it is often better to deﬁne dνU using
distributional derivatives of the characteristic function of U, as in [Giu]. For
this one would work with sets U which have “ﬁnite perimeter”, which means
exactly that the distributional ﬁrst derivatives of the characteristic function
of U are measures of ﬁnite mass.
Here is one way in which this kind of functional, and the minimization
of this kind of functional, can come up. Let F be a closed subset of Rn.
Imagine that one is particularly interested in domains U which have their
boundary contained in F, or very nearly so. On the other hand, one might
also wish to limit irregularities in the behavior of the boundary of U. For this
type of situation one could choose g so that it is much smaller on F than on
the complement of F, and then look for minimizers of (5.29) to ﬁnd domains
with a good balance between the behavior of ∂U and the desire to have it be
contained (as much as possible) in F. (See [DaviS9] for an example of this.)
When do minimizers of (5.29) exist, and how do they behave? If one works
with sets of ﬁnite perimeter, and if the function g is lower semi-continuous,
then one can obtain the existence of minimizers through standard techniques
(as in [Giu]). That is, one takes limits of minimizing sequences for (5.29)
using weak compactness, and one uses the lower semi-continuity of g to get
lower semi-continuity of (5.29) with respect to suitable convergence of the
U’s. The latter ensures that the limit of the minimizing sequence is actually
a minimum. Note that the “obstacle” conditions that U contain the interior
of Q0 and be contained in Q1 prevents the minimization from collapsing into
something trivial.
52

As to the behavior of minimizers of (5.29), one cannot expect much in
the way of smoothness in general. For instance, if the boundary of U can
be represented locally as the graph of a Lipschitz function, then U in fact
minimizes (5.29) for a suitable choice of g. Speciﬁcally, one can take g to be
a suﬃciently small positive constant on ∂U, and to be equal to 1 everywhere
else. That such a choice of g works is not very hard to establish, and more
precise results are given in [DaviS9].
Conversely, minimizers of (5.29) are always Ahlfors-regular sets of dimen-
sion n −1, and uniformly rectiﬁable. This is shown in [DaviS9], along with
some additional geometric information which is suﬃcient to characterize the
class of sets U which occur as minimizers for functionals of the form (5.29)
(with g bounded and bounded away from 0). If a set U arises as the mini-
mizer for some g, it is also a minimizer with g chosen as above, i.e., a small
positive constant on ∂U and equal to 1 everywhere else.
The same regularity results work for a suitable class of “quasiminimizers”
of the usual area functional, and one that includes minimizers for (5.29) as
a special case.
Uniform rectiﬁability provides a natural level of structure for situations
like this, where stronger forms of smoothness cannot be expected, but quan-
titative bounds are reasonable to seek.
Note that properties of ordinary
rectiﬁability always hold for boundaries of sets of ﬁnite perimeter, regardless
of any minimizing or quasiminimizing properties. See [Giu].
Analogous results about regularity work for sets of higher codimension as
well, although this case is more complicated technically. See [DaviS11] for
more information. One can use this framework of minimization (with respect
to nonsmooth coeﬃcient functions g) as a tool for studying the structure of
sets in Rn with upper bounds on their d-dimensional Hausdorﬀmeasure
and lower bounds for their d-dimensional topology. This brings one back
to Theorem 5.9 and related questions, and in particular more “localized”
versions of it.
To put it another way, minimization of functionals like these can provide
useful means for obtaining “existence results” for approximate parameter-
izations with good behavior, through uniform rectiﬁability.
See [DaviS9,
DaviS11]. Part of the motivation for this came from an earlier argument
of Morel and Solimini [MoreS]. Their argument concerned the existence of
curves containing a given set, with good properties in terms of the distribu-
tion of the arc-length measure of these curves, under more localized condi-
tions on the given set (at all locations and scales). See Lemma 16.27 on p207
53

of [MoreS].
A
Fourier transform calculations
If φ(x) is an integrable function on Rn, then its Fourier transform bφ(ξ) is
deﬁned (for ξ ∈Rn) by
bφ(ξ) =
Z
Rn ei ⟨x,ξ⟩φ(x) dx.
(A.1)
Here ⟨x, ξ⟩denotes the usual inner product for x, ξ ∈Rn, and i = √−1.
Often one makes slightly diﬀerent conventions for this deﬁnition — with
some extra factors of π around, for instance — but we shall not bother with
this.
A key feature of the Fourier transform is that it diagonalizes diﬀerential
operators. Speciﬁcally, if ∂k denotes the operator ∂/∂xk on Rn, then
(∂kφ)b(ξ) = i ξk bφ(ξ),
(A.2)
i.e., diﬀerentiation is converted into mere multiplication. For this one should
either make some diﬀerentiability assumptions on φ, so that the left side can
be deﬁned in particular, or one should interpret this equation in the sense of
tempered distributions on Rn. The Fourier transform also carries out this
diagonalization in a controlled manner. That is, there is an explicit inversion
formula (which looks a lot like the Fourier transform itself), and the Fourier
transform preserves the L2 norm of the function φ, except for a multiplicative
constant, by the Plancherel theorem. See [SteW] for these and other basic
facts about the Fourier transform.
Using Plancherel’s theorem, it is very easy to give another proof of the
L2 estimate (2.2) from Section 2, and to derive many other inequalities of
a similar nature. One can also use the Fourier transform to give a precise
deﬁnition of the operator R = ∂j∂k/∆, where ∆is the Laplace operator
Pn
ℓ=1 ∂2
ℓ. Speciﬁcally, one can deﬁne it through the equation
(Rφ)b(ξ) = ξjξk
|ξ|2
bφ(ξ).
(A.3)
If m(ξ) is any bounded function on Rn, then
(Tφ)b(ξ) = m(ξ) bφ(ξ)
(A.4)
54

deﬁnes a bounded operator on L2(Rn). In general these operators are not
bounded on Lp for any other value of p, but this is true for many of the
operators that arise naturally in analysis. For instance, suppose that m(ξ)
is homogeneous of degree 0, so that
m(tξ) = m(ξ)
when t > 0,
(A.5)
and that m(ξ) is smooth away from the origin. Then the associated operator
T is bounded on Lp for all p with 1 < p < ∞. See [Ste1, SteW]. Note that
this criterion applies to the speciﬁc choice of m(ξ) in (A.3) above.
For a multiplier operator as in (A.4) to be bounded on L1 or L∞is
even more exceptional than for Lp boundedness when 1 < p < ∞. (See
[SteW].) For instance, if m is homogeneous, as above, and not constant,
then the corresponding operator cannot be bounded on L1 or L∞. However,
if m is homogeneous and smooth away from the origin, then the operator
T in (A.4) does determine a bounded operator from L∞into BMO. See
[GarcR, Garn, Jou, Ste2]. In fact, T determines a bounded operator from
BMO to itself.
Here is another example. Let φ now be a mapping from R2 to itself,
with components φ1, φ2. Consider the diﬀerential dφ of φ as a matrix-valued
function, namely,
 ∂1φ1 ∂1φ2
∂2φ1 ∂2φ2
!
.
(A.6)
(Let us assume that φ is smooth enough that the diﬀerential is at least some
kind of function when taken in the sense of distributions, although one can
perfectly well think of dφ as a matrix-valued distribution.) Let A and S
denote the antisymmetric and symmetric parts of dφ, respectively, so that
A = dφ −dφt
2
,
S = dφ + dφt
2
,
(A.7)
where dφt denotes the transpose of dφ.
In this case of 2 × 2 matrices, the antisymmetric part A really contains
only one piece of information, namely
∂1φ2 −∂2φ1.
(A.8)
It is not hard to check that this function can be reconstructed from the
entries of S through operators of the form (A.4), using functions m which
55

are homogeneous of degree 0 and smooth away from the origin. For this one
should add some mild conditions on φ, like compact support, to avoid the
possibility that S vanishes identically but A does not.
Under these conditions, we conclude that the Lp norm of A is always
bounded by a constant multiple of the Lp norm of S, 1 < p < ∞, and that
the BMO norm of A is controlled by the L∞(or BMO) norm of S. (For the
case of BMO norms, the possibility that S vanishes but A does not causes
no trouble, because A will be constant in that case.)
This example is really a “linearized” version of the problem discussed in
Section 1. Speciﬁcally, let us think of f : R2 →R2 as being of the form
f(x) = x + ϵ φ(x),
(A.9)
where ϵ is a small parameter. The extent to which f distorts distances is
governed by the matrix-valued function df t df, which we can write out as
df t df = I + 4 ϵ S + ϵ2 dφtdφ.
(A.10)
Thus the linear term in ϵ is governed by S, while A controls the leading
behavior in ϵ of the “rotational” part of df.
B
Mappings with branching
In general, there can be a lot of trouble with existence and complexity
of homeomorphisms (with particular properties, like speciﬁed domain and
range). If one allows mappings with branching, then the story can be very
diﬀerent.
As a basic example of this, there is a classical result originating with
Alexander to the eﬀect that any oriented pseudomanifold of dimension n
admits an orientation-preserving branched covering over the n-sphere. Let
us state this more carefully, and then see how it is proved.
Let M be a ﬁnite polyhedron. We assume that M is given as a ﬁnite
union of n-dimensional simplices that meet only in their boundary faces (so
that M is really a simplicial complex). To be a pseudomanifold means that
every (n −1)-dimensional face in M arises as the boundary face of exactly
two n-dimensional simplices. In eﬀect this says that M looks like a manifold
away from its codimension-2 skeleton (the corresponding statement for the
codimension-1 skeleton being automatic). For the present purposes it would
56

be enough to ask that every (n −1)-dimensional face in M arise as the
boundary face of at most two n-dimensional simplices, which would be like
a “pseudomanifold with boundary”.
An orientation for an n-dimensional pseudomanifold M means a choice
of orientation (in the usual sense) for each of the constituent n-dimensional
simplices in M, with compatibility of orientations of adjacent n-dimensional
simplices along the common (n −1)-dimensional face. In terms of algebraic
topology, this means that the sum of the n-dimensional simplices in M, with
their orientations, deﬁnes an n-dimensional cycle on M.
For the purposes of the Alexander-type result, it will be convenient to
think of the n-sphere as consisting of two standard simplices S1 and S2 glued
together along the boundary. This is not quite a polyhedron in the usual
(aﬃne) sense, but one could easily repair this by subdividing S1 or S2. We
also assume that S1 and S2 have been oriented, and have opposite orientations
relative to their common boundary.
To deﬁne a mapping from M to the n-sphere one would like to simply
identify each of the constituent n-dimensional simplices in M with S1 or S2
in a suitable manner. Unfortunately, this does not work, even when n = 2,
but the problem can be ﬁxed using a barycentric subdivision of M. Recall
that the barycenter of a simplex (embedded in some vector space) is the
point in the interior of the simplex which is the average of the vertices of
the simplex. The set of barycenters for M means the set of barycenters of
all of the constituent simplices in M (viewed as a simplicial complex), of all
dimensions, including 0. In particular, the set of barycenters for M includes
the vertices of M (which are themselves 0-dimensional simplices, and their
own barycenters). The barycentric subdivision of M is a reﬁnement of M as
a simplicial complex whose vertices are exactly the set of barycenters of M.
In other words, the set M as a whole does not change, just its decomposition
into simplices, which is replaced by a ﬁner decomposition.
Here is a precise description of the simplices in the barycentric subdivision
of M. Let s0, s1, . . ., sk be a ﬁnite sequence of simplices in M, with each si an
i-dimensional simplex which is a face of si+1 (when i < k). Let b(si) denote
the barycenter of si.
Then b(s0), b(s1), . . ., b(sk) are aﬃnely independent,
and hence determine a k-dimensional simplex. The simplices that arise in
this manner are precisely the ones used for the barycentric subdivision of M.
(See p123 of [Spa] for more details.)
Let eV denote the set of all vertices in the barycentric subdivision of M.
This is the same as the set of points which arise as barycenters of simplices
57

in the original version of M, and in particular we have a natural mapping
from eV to the integers {0, 1, . . . , n}, deﬁned by associating to each point b in
eV the dimension of the simplex from which it was derived.
If T is a k-dimensional simplex in the barycentric subdivision of M, then
the mapping from
eV to {0, 1, . . . , n} just described induces a one-to-one
correspondence between the k + 1 vertices of T and the set {0, 1, . . ., k}.
This follows easily from the deﬁnitions.
We are now ready to deﬁne our mapping from M to the n-sphere. There
are exactly n + 1 vertices in our realization of the n-sphere as the gluing of
S1 and S2. Let us identify these vertices with the integers from 0 to n. Thus
our mapping from eV to {0, 1, . . . , n} can now be interpreted as a mapping
from the vertices of the barycentric subdivision of M to the vertices of the
n-sphere.
This mapping between vertices admits a canonical linear extension to
each k-dimensional simplex, k < n, in the barycentric subdivision of M. For
the n-dimensional simplices the extension is uniquely determined once one
chooses S1 or S2 for the image of the simplex. Because of the orientations,
there is only one natural choice of S1 or S2 for each n-dimensional simplex
T, namely the one so that the linear mapping from T onto Sj is orientation-
preserving.
In the end we get a mapping from the barycentric subdivision of M to
the n-sphere which preserves orientations and which deﬁnes an aﬃne iso-
morphism from each n-dimensional simplex T in the domain onto one of S1
and S2. This uses the fact that our initial mapping between vertices was
always one-to-one on the set of vertices in any given simplex in the domain,
by construction.
This completes the proof.
We should emphasize that the singularities
of the mapping from M to the n-sphere — i.e., the places where it fails to
be a local homeomorphism — are conﬁned to the codimension-2 skeleton of
the barycentric subdivision of M. This is because of the orientation and
pseudomanifold conditions, which ensure that if a point in M lies in the
interior of an (n −1)-dimensional simplex in the barycentric subdivision of
M, then the (two) adjacent n-simplices at that point are not sent to the same
Sj in the image.
The idea of branching also makes sense for mappings that are not piecewise-
linear, and there are well-developed notions of “controlled geometry” in this
case, as with the classes of quasiregular mappings and mappings of bounded
length distortion. See [HeiKiM, MartRiV1, MartRiV2, MartRiV3, MartV,
58

Res, Ric1, V¨ai2, Vuo], for instance. In [HeiR1, HeiR2] there are examples
where branching maps of controlled geometry can be constructed but suitable
homeomorphisms either do not exist or must distort distances more severely.
Sullivan [Sul2, Sul3] has proposed some mechanisms by which the exis-
tence of local (controlled) branching maps can be deduced, and some ideas
for studying obstructions to controlled homeomorphic coordinates.
See [Gut+, HeiKi, MartRyV] for some recent results about branching and
regularity conditions under which it does not occur. A broader and more
detailed discussion of mappings with branching can be found in [HeiR2]. For
some real-variable considerations of mappings which may branch but enjoy
substantial geometric properties, see [Davi4, Jon2, DaviS4].
C
More on existence and behavior of home-
omorphisms
C.1
Wildness and tameness phenomena
Consider the following question. Let n be a positive integer, and let K be
a compact subset of Rn. If K is homeomorphic to the unit interval [0, 1], is
there
a global homeomorphism from Rn onto itself
(C.1)
which maps K to a straight line segment?
If n = 1, then K itself is a closed line segment, and the answer is “yes”.
When n = 2, the answer is also “yes”, but this is more complicated, and is
more in the spirit of the Sch¨onﬂies theorem in the plane. See [Moi], especially
Chapter 10.
When n ≥3, the answer to the question above can be “no”. An arc K
is said to be “tame” (or ﬂat) when a homeomorphism does exist as in (C.1),
and “wild” when it does not exist. See [Moi] for some examples of wild arcs
in R3.
Smooth arcs are always tame, as are polygonal arcs, i.e., arcs made up of
ﬁnitely many straight line segments. For these one can take the correspond-
ing homeomorphism to be smooth or piecewise-linear as well. (Compare with
Theorem 1 on p134 of [Moi], for instance.) In order for an arc to be wild,
some amount of inﬁnite processes are needed.
59

A simple closed curve in R3 might be smooth or polygonal and still knot-
ted, so that there does not exist a homeomorphism of R3 onto itself which
maps the curve onto a standard circle (inside a standard 2-dimensional plane
in R3). There are many well-known examples of this, like the trefoil knot.
Thus, for a closed curve, one deﬁnes “wildness” in a slightly diﬀerently way,
in terms of the existence of local ﬂattenings, for instance. This turns out to be
compatible with the case of arcs (for which there is no issue of knottedness),
and there are some other natural variants of this.
Here is another basic example, for sets of higher dimension. Suppose that
γ is a simple closed curve in R3, which is a polygonal curve, and which repre-
sents the trefoil knot. Consider the cone over γ, which gives a 2-dimensional
polyhedron in R4, and which is in fact piecewise-linearly equivalent to a
standard 2-dimensional cell. One can show that this embedding of the 2-cell
is not locally ﬂat at the cone point, i.e., it cannot be straightened out to
agree with a standard (geometrically ﬂat) embedding by a homeomorphism
deﬁned on a neighborhood in R4 of the cone point. Similar phenomena occur
for codimension-2 embeddings in Rn for all n ≥4, as in Example 2.3.2 on
p59-60 of [Rus1].
This phenomenon is special to codimension 2, however. Speciﬁcally, a
piecewise-linear embedding of a k-dimensional piecewise-linear manifold into
Rn is locally topologically ﬂat if n−k ̸= 2 (or if k = 1 and n = 3, as before).
See Theorem 1.7.2 on p34 of [Rus1].
In the context of piecewise-linear embeddings, one can also look for local
ﬂattenings which are piecewise-linear.
A similar remark applies to other
categories of mappings. We shall not pursue this here.
Wild embeddings of cells and spheres (and other manifolds) exist in Rn
for all n ≥3, and for all dimensions of the cells and spheres (from 1 to n−1).
This includes embeddings of cells and spheres which are not equivalent to
piecewise-linear embeddings in codimension 2.
We shall mostly consider
here issues of existence of topological ﬂattenings or local ﬂattenings, and
embeddings which are not normally given as piecewise-linear.
See [Bin6, Bur, BurC, Can1, Dave1, Dave2, Edw1, Moi, Rus1, Rus2]
for more information, and for further references. Let us also mention that
embeddings, although wild, may still enjoy substantial good behavior. For
instance, they may be bilipschitz, as in (4.7), or quasisymmetric, in the sense
of [TukV]. (Roughly speaking, an embedding is quasisymmetric if relative
distances are approximately preserved, rather than distances themselves, as
for a bilipschitz mapping.) See [Geh1, LuuV, V¨ai3] for some basic results
60

about this.
As another version of wildness for embeddings, imagine that one has
a compact set C in some Rn, and that C is homeomorphic to the usual
middle-thirds Cantor set. Can one move C to a subset of a straight line in
Rn, through a homeomorphism from Rn onto itself?
When n = 1 this is automatically true. It is also true when n = 2; see
[Moi], especially Chapter 13. In higher dimensions it is not true in general,
as is shown by a famous construction of Antoine (“Antoine’s necklaces”). See
Chapter 18 of [Moi] and [Bla].
How can one tell when a set is embedded wildly or not? As a simple
case, let us consider Cantor sets. If C is a compact subset of Rn which lies
in a line and is homeomorphic to the Cantor set, and if n is at least 3, then
the complement of C in Rn is simply-connected. This is not hard to see.
Basically, if one takes a loop in the complement of C and ﬁlls it with a disk
in Rn, and if that disk happens to run into C, then one can make small
perturbations of the disk to avoid intersecting C.
The complement of C is also simply-connected if there is a global home-
omorphism from Rn onto itself which maps C into a line. This is merely
because the homeomorphism itself permits one to reduce to the previous
case.
However, Antoine’s necklaces have the property that their complements
are not simply-connected. See [Moi, Bla]. Note that the homology of the
complement of a compact set in Rn is controlled through the intrinsic topol-
ogy of the set itself, as in Alexander duality [Spa]. In particular, while the
complement of an Antoine’s necklace may not be simply-connected, its 1-
dimensional homology does vanish.
Versions of the fundamental group play an important role for wildness
and taming in general, and not just for Cantor sets. For this one may not
take (or want to take) the fundamental group of the whole complementary
set, but look at more localized forms of the fundamental group. A speciﬁc
and basic version of this is the following. Suppose that F is a closed set inside
of some Rn. Given a point p ∈F, and a loop γ in Rn\F which lies close to
p, one would like to know whether it is possible to contract γ to a point in
Rn\F while staying in a small neighborhood of p. This second neighborhood
of p might not be quite as small the ﬁrst one; a precise statement would say
that for every ϵ > 0 there is a δ > 0 so that if γ lies in B(p, δ) ∩(Rn\F),
then γ can be contracted to a point in B(p, ϵ) ∩(Rn\F).
This type of condition is satisﬁed by standard embeddings of sets into
61

Rn, like Cantor sets, cells, and spheres, at least when the dimension of the
set is diﬀerent from n −2. For a point in R2, or a line segment in R3, etc.,
one would get Z for the corresponding localized fundamental group of the
complement of the set. (In the case of a line segment in R3, one should
restrict one’s attention to points p in the interior of the segment for this.)
Conversely, there are results which permit one to go backwards, and say
that localized fundamental group conditions for the complement like these
(localized simple-connectedness conditions in particular) lead to tameness of
a given set, or other kind of “standard” (non-wild) behavior. See [Bin5, Bin6,
Bin8, Bur, BurC, Can1, Can2, Dave1, Dave2, Edw1, Moi, Qui1, Qui2, Rus1,
Rus2] for more information about localized fundamental groups and their
role in wildness phenomena and taming theorems (and for related matters
and further references).
Fundamental groups and localized versions of them have a basic role in
geometric topology in general. Some aspects of this came up before in Section
3, and we shall encounter some more in this appendix.
One might wonder why π1 and localized versions of it play such an im-
portant role. Some basic points behind this are as follows. For homology (or
cohomology), one often has good information from data in the given situation
through standard results in algebraic topology, like duality theorems. This
deﬁnitely does not work for π1, as shown by many examples, including the
ones mentioned above, and others later in this appendix. In circumstances
with suitable simple-connectivity, one can pass from information about ho-
mology to information about homotopy (in general dimensions), as in the
Hurewicz and Whitehead theorems. See [Bred1, Spa]. For many construc-
tions, homotopy is closer to what one really needs.
Another basic point concerns the eﬀect of stabilization. A wild embedding
of a set into some Rn can become tame when viewed as an embedding into
an Rm with m > n (m = n + 1 in particular). The same is true for knotting.
For instance, a smooth loop may be knotted in R3, but when viewed as a
subset of R4, it is always unknotted. This is easy to see in explicit examples
(like a trefoil knot).
For some simple and general results about wild embeddings in Rn be-
coming tame in a larger Rm, see Proposition 4 on p84 of [Dave2], and the
corollaries on p85 of [Dave2]. These involve a famous device of Klee. In con-
crete examples, one can often see the taming in a larger-dimensional space
directly, and explicitly. Examples of wild sets are often made with the help
of various linkings, or something like that, and in a higher-dimensional space
62

one can disentangle the linked parts. This can be accomplished by taking in-
dividual pieces and pulling them into a new dimension, moving them around
freely there, and then putting them back into the original Rn in a diﬀerent
way.
This simplifying eﬀect of stabilization also ﬁts with the role of localized
versions of fundamental groups indicated before. Let F be a closed set inside
of some Rn, and imagine that one has a loop γ in Rn\F which lies in a small
ball centered at a point in F. In the condition that was discussed earlier, one
would like to contract γ to a point in the complement of F, while remaining
in a small ball. If one thinks of γ and F as being also inside Rn+1, then
it is easy to contract γ to a point in the complement of F in Rn+1, while
remaining in a small ball. Speciﬁcally, one can ﬁrst translate γ into a parallel
copy of Rn inside of Rn+1, i.e., into Rn × {a} for some a ̸= 0 rather than
Rn × {0} in Rn+1 (using the obvious identiﬁcations). This parallel copy is
then disjoint from F, and one can contract the loop in a standard way. Note
that this argument works independently of the behavior of F.
Using taming theorems based on localized fundamental group conditions,
and considerations like those in the previous paragraph, one can get stronger
results on tameness that occurs from stabilization than the ones on p84-
85 in [Dave2] mentioned above. More precisely, instead of needing k extra
dimensions in some cases, it is enough to go from Rn to Rn+1. Compare
with the bottom of p390 and the top of p391 in [Dave1], and the references
indicated there. (Compare also with the remarks on p452 of [Can1].)
At any rate, this type of phenomenon, of objects becoming more “tame”
or simple after stabilization, is a very basic one in geometric topology (as
well as other areas, for that matter). We shall encounter a number of other
instances of this in this appendix. As in the present setting, the eﬀect of
stabilization is also frequently related to conditions concerning localized fun-
damental groups. I.e., such conditions often become true, and in a simple
way, after stabilization.
C.2
Contractable open sets
Fix a positive integer n.
If U is a nonempty contractable open subset of Rn,
(C.2)
is U necessarily homeomorphic to the open unit ball in Rn?
63

For the record, to say that U is contractable means that the identity mapping
on U is homotopic to a constant, through (continuous) mappings from U into
itself. In particular, the homotopy and homology groups of U (of positive
dimension) would then vanish, just as for an n-dimensional ball.
When n = 1, the answer to the question in (C.2) is “yes”. In this case,
U is either the whole real line, an open segment in the real line, or an open
ray. Each of these is easily seen to be homeomorphic to the interval (−1, 1),
which is the unit ball in this case.
If n = 2, then the answer to the question in (C.2) is “yes” again. This is
a well-known fact, and we shall return to it later, in Subsection C.8.
Starting in dimension 3, the answer to the question in (C.2) is “no”.
We shall say something about examples for this in a moment, but let us
ﬁrst ask ourselves the following: how might one be able to tell that a given
contractable open set in Rn is not homeomorphic to an n-dimensional ball?
Here again a localized version of the fundamental group is important.
If n ≥3, then a necessary condition for a set U to be homeomorphic to
an n-dimensional ball is that U be “simply connected at inﬁnity”. Roughly
speaking, this means that if one takes a closed loop γ out near inﬁnity in U,
then it should be possible to contract γ to a point, while staying out near
inﬁnity too (although perhaps not as much as γ itself is).
Here is a more formal deﬁnition. For this we also include “connectedness
at inﬁnity” as a ﬁrst part.
Deﬁnition C.3 Let U be an open set in Rn, or a topological space more
generally. (Normally one might at least ask that U be locally compact.)
U is connected at inﬁnity if for each compact set K0 ⊆U there is a larger
compact set L0 ⊆U such that every pair of points in U\L0 is contained in
a connected set which is itself contained in U\K0. (One can deﬁne “arcwise
connectedness at inﬁnity” in a similar manner. The two notions are equiv-
alent under assumptions of local arcwise connectedness, and for topological
manifolds in particular.)
U is simply-connected at inﬁnity if it is connected at inﬁnity, and if for
every compact set K1 ⊆U there is a larger compact set L1 ⊆U so that if
γ is an arbitrary closed loop in U\L1 (i.e., an arbitrary continuous mapping
from the unit circle S1 into U\L1), then γ is homotopic to a constant through
continuous mappings from the circle into U\K1.
If U is the unit ball in Rn, n ≥3, then U is simply-connected at inﬁnity.
Indeed, let B(0, r) denote the open ball in Rn with center 0 and radius r,
64

and let B(0, r) denote the corresponding closed ball. Then every compact
subset of B(0, 1) is contained in B(0, r) for some r < 1. For each r < 1,
B(0, r) is a compact subset of B(0, 1), and B(0, 1)\B(0, r) is connected when
n ≥2, and simply-connected when n ≥3. This is because B(0, 1)\B(0, r)
is homeomorphic to Sn−1 × (r, 1), and Sj is connected when j ≥1, and
simply-connected when j ≥2.
The property of being simply-connected at inﬁnity is clearly preserved by
homeomorphisms. Thus to get a contractable open set U in Rn which is not
homeomorphic to an n-dimensional ball, it suﬃces to choose U so that it is
not simply-connected at inﬁnity.
If U is contractable, then it is simply-connected itself in particular. If
U is simply-connected, connected at inﬁnity, and not simply-connected at
inﬁnity, then it means that there is a compact set K ⊆U and loops γ in U
which lie as far towards inﬁnity as one would like (i.e., in the complement of
any given compact subset of U) such that (a) γ can be contracted to a point
in U, and (b) γ cannot be contracted to a point in U\K. To put it another
way, these loops γ can be contracted to points in U, but in doing this one
always has to pass through at least one element of the compact set K.
A mechanism for having this happen for a set U contained in R3 is given
by the construction of “the Whitehead continuum” [White]. (See also [Dave2,
Kir].) Here is an outline of the procedure.
Start with a standard smooth “round” solid torus T in R3. Here T should
be a compact set, i.e., it should contain its boundary.
Next one chooses another smooth solid torus T1 inside T. More precisely,
T1 should lie in the interior of T. One chooses T1 in a particular way, which
can be imagined as follows. (Pictures can be found on p68 of [Dave2] and p82
of [Kir].) First take a “small” solid torus in T, small enough to be contained
in a topological ball in T. One can think of grabbing hold of this small solid
torus at two ends, and then stretching them around the “hole” in the larger
torus T. One stretches them around the two diﬀerent sides of the hole in
T. To get T1, these two ends should hook around each other on the other
side of the hole. In other words, one might imagine having the two ends of
the small solid torus from before, stretched around opposite sides of T, and
then passing one across the other, until they do not touch any more, but are
clasped together, like two hooks, or two links in a chain. The conﬁguration
looks locally like two hooks or links clasped together, but in fact one has two
ends of the single solid torus T1, wrapped around the hole in T.
If T1 is chosen in this way, then it has the following two basic properties.
65

The ﬁrst is that it is homotopically trivial in T. That is, the identity mapping
on T1 is homotopic to a constant mapping through (continuous) mappings
from T1 into T. This follows exactly the description above; in making the
homotopy, one is allowed to stretch or move T1 around as much as one like,
and one is allowed to have diﬀerent parts of (images of) T1 cross each other in
T. To put it a bit diﬀerently, the mappings being deformed are not required
to be injective.
The second property is that T1 is not “isotopically trivial”. This means
that one cannot continuously deform T1 through an isotopy of T into a set
which lies in a ball contained in T. In eﬀect, this means that one cannot
continuously deform T1 inside T in such a way that T1 ends up in a ball in
T, and so that the deformations do not ever cross each other (unlike the
homotopy in the previous paragraph). If one could get T1 inside a ball in T,
then one could continue the deformation to get an isotopy into an arbitrarily
small ball. One would not ask for shrinking T1 to a point here, because this
is automatically prevented by injectivity (independent of clasping or not).
This explains how T and T1 should be chosen. Since T1 is a 3-dimensional
smooth solid torus in its own right, one can repeat the process to get another
smooth solid torus T2 contained in it, and in fact contained in the interior
of T1.
In other words, since T and T1 are both smooth solid tori, they
are diﬀeomorphic to each other in particular, and this can be used to make
precise the idea of “repeating the process”. Speciﬁcally, if φ : T →T1 is such
a diﬀeomorphism, then one can take T2 to be φ(T1).
One then repeats the process indeﬁnitely, getting smooth solid tori Tj for
j = 1, 2, . . . such that Tj+1 is contained in the interior of Tj for each j, and
so that Tj+1 is arranged in Tj in the same way as T1 is arranged in T.
Now let W be the intersection of all these solid tori Tj. This gives a
nonempty compact set in R3.
We can think of W as lying inside of S3,
and then take U = S3\W.
One can also rotate this around so that U
actually lies in R3. One can show that U is contractable, but not simply-
connected at inﬁnity. See [Dave2, Kir, White] for more information. (For the
purposes of looking at U, the complement of W, it can be convenient to use a
modestly diﬀerent description of the construction, in which one builds U up
from smaller pieces in an “increasing” manner, analogous to the “decreasing”
construction for W above.)
Although U is not homeomorphic to a 3-dimensional ball in this case, the
Cartesian product of U with a nonempty open interval is homeomorphic to
a 4-dimensional ball. This is attributed to Arnold Shapiro in [Bin3]; see also
66

Section 10 of [Bin4] and [Kir]. This is analogous to the eﬀect of stabilization
before, in Subsection C.1. In particular, one can check directly that taking
the Cartesian product with the interval gets rid of the problem that U itself
has with simple-connectivity at inﬁnity. This is a general phenomenon, which
is relevant as well for other situations mentioned in this appendix. A similar
point came up Subsection C.1.
Beginning in dimension 4, there are contractable open sets in Rn which
are not topological n-balls, and which have the additional feature that their
closures are compact manifolds with boundary.
This last does not work
in dimension 3, and, for that matter, the complement of the Whitehead
continuum in S3 cannot be realized as the interior of a compact manifold
with boundary, whether or not this compact manifold should occur as the
closure of the set in S3.
The reason is that if such a compact manifold
did exist, its boundary would be a 2-dimensional surface with the homology
of the 2-sphere. We shall say more about this in a moment. In this case
the boundary would have to be homeomorphic to the 2-sphere. This would
contradict the failure of simple-connectivity at inﬁnity for the original space,
since S2 is simply-connected.
The diﬀerence with n ≥4 is that the boundary can be a homology (n−1)-
sphere (i.e., a manifold with the same homology as Sn−1) which is not simply-
connected. The interior then fails to be simply-connected at inﬁnity again,
and is not homeomorphic to an n-ball in particular.
For some related information and references concerning these examples
in dimensions greater than or equal to 4, see [Dave2], including the top of
p94, and the discussion on p103-104.
C.2.1
Some positive results
For dimensions n ≥4, it is known that every contractable topological man-
ifold M which is simply-connected at inﬁnity is homeomorphic to Rn. See
[Sta1] for n ≥5, and Corollary 1.2 on p366 of [Fre] for n = 4. A related
reference is [McMZ]. Actually, [Sta1] is stated for the piecewise-linear cat-
egory; one can go from there to the topological category via [KirS]. The
four-dimensional result does not work in the smooth or piecewise-linear cate-
gories (which are equivalent in dimension 4), because of the existence of “fake
R4’s (smooth manifolds homeomorphic to R4, but not diﬀeomorphic to it).
Concerning the latter, see [FreQ] (p122 in particular) and [Kir] (Chapter
XIV).
67

These topics are also related to “McMillan’s cellularity criterion”, in
[McM]. A 4-dimensional version of this is given in [Fre], in Theorem 1.11
on p373. We shall discuss cellularity and this criterion further in Subsubsec-
tion C.4.1.
Now let us look more closely at the case of compact manifolds with bound-
ary. Suppose that N is an n-dimensional compact topological manifold with
boundary. Consider the following question:
If N is contractable and ∂N is a topological (n −1)-sphere,
(C.4)
is N homeomorphic to the closed unit ball in Rn?
This question is actually equivalent to the Poincar´e conjecture (in dimension
n, and in the topological category). This is a well-known fact. The main
points are the following. If one is given a compact n-dimensional topological
manifold without boundary which is a homotopy n-sphere, then one can get
an n-dimensional manifold N as in (C.4) from it by cutting out a topological
ball (with tame boundary). If this manifold N is homeomorphic to the closed
unit ball in Rn, then one can obtain that the original space was homeomor-
phic to the standard n-sphere, by gluing the ball which was removed back in.
(We shall say more about this in Remark C.5.) Conversely, given a manifold
N as in (C.4), one can get a homotopy n-sphere from it by gluing in a ball
along the boundary of N. To go from this and the Poincar´e conjecture to the
conclusion that N is homeomorphic to a closed ball, one can use the “gener-
alized Sch¨onﬂies theorem”, discussed later in this subsection (after Remark
C.5).
In particular, the answer to (C.4) is known to be “yes” when n ̸= 3, and
the problem is open for n = 3.
There are some analogous relationships between the Poincar´e conjecture
and contractable open manifolds. Namely, if one starts with a compact n-
dimensional topological manifold without boundary P which is a homotopy
n-sphere, then one can get an n-dimensional contractable open manifold by
removing a point x from P.
If n ≥3, then P\{x} will also be simply-
connected at inﬁnity, as one can check using the manifold structure of P
around x. If one knows that P\{x} is homeomorphic to Rn, then one can
deduce that P, which is topologically the same as the one-point compactiﬁ-
cation of P\{x}, is homeomorphic to Sn.
However, it is not as easy to go in the other direction, from contractable
open manifolds which are simply-connected at inﬁnity to compact manifolds
68

which are homotopy-equivalent to a sphere, as it is in (C.4). One can take
the one-point compactiﬁcation of the open manifold to get a compact space,
but it is not immediately clear that this space is a manifold. The simple-
connectivity at inﬁnity for the open manifold is a necessary condition for
this (when n ≥3), but the converse is more complicated. There are broader
issues concerning the behavior of open manifolds at inﬁnity, and we shall
mention some aspects of this in Subsubsection C.2.2 and Subsection C.3.
For the ﬁrst part, about going from P to an open manifold, suppose
that one is in a situation where there is a general result to the eﬀect that
an n-dimensional contractable open manifold which is simply-connected at
inﬁnity is homeomorphic to Rn for some ﬁxed n. As above, one can use this
to show that a compact n-dimensional manifold P (without boundary) which
is homotopy-equivalent to Sn is homeomorphic to Sn. A complication with
this type of argument is that one does not necessarily say too much about
the behavior of the homeomorphism at the point x which was removed and
added back again (in the notation before), even if one knows more about P
and the homeomorphism between P\{x} and Rn. In this respect, arguments
that go through compact manifolds with boundary, as in (C.4), can work
better; there are also some tricky aspects in this case, though, and we shall
say more about this next.
Remark C.5 There are some subtleties about gluing in balls in the context
of (C.4) and its correspondence with the Poincar´e conjecture in the smooth
category. If one takes two copies of the closed unit ball in Rn, and glues
them together using a homeomorphism between their boundaries, then the
resulting space is homeomorphic to a standard n-dimensional sphere. This is
a standard observation (which can be proved using the fact mentioned in the
next paragraph), and it works for any gluing homeomorphism. If the gluing
map is a diﬀeomorphism, then the resulting space is a smooth manifold in a
natural way, but it may not be diﬀeomorphic to a standard sphere. Exotic
spheres can be viewed in this manner, as gluings of standard closed balls
through (tricky) diﬀeomorphisms along their boundaries.
In the topological case, one can use the following fact. Let Bn denote
the closed unit ball in Rn. If h is a homeomorphism from ∂Bn onto itself,
then h can be extended to a homeomorphism from Bn onto itself. One can
do this by a straightforward “radial extension”. This method also works for
the analogous statement in the piecewise-linear category. However, in the
smooth category, a radial extension like this is not smooth in general at the
69

origin in Bn. An extension to a diﬀeomorphism may simply not exist (radial
or not).
In any of the three categories, once one has an extension like this, one can
use it to get an equivalence between the space obtained by gluing together
the two copies of Bn, and the standard n-dimensional sphere. The extension
unwinds the eﬀect of the gluing map, if the gluing map is not the standard
one. In the smooth case, this may not be possible, and this occurs with
exotic spheres.
Let us look some more at (C.4), in the topological category. If N happens
to be given as a subset of Rn, in addition to the conditions in (C.4), then N
is homeomorphic to the closed unit ball in Rn. This can be derived from the
“generalized Sch¨onﬂies theorem” [Brow1, Maz, Mors]. This result says that
if one has an embedding f of Sn−1 × [−1, 1] into Rn, then f(Sn−1 × {0}) can
be realized as the image of Sn−1 under a homeomorphism mapping all of Rn
onto itself. See also Theorem 6 on p38 of [Dave2].
Let us be a bit more precise about the way that the generalized Sch¨onﬂies
theorem is used here. The ﬁrst point is that the boundary of N is “collared”
in N. This means that there is a neighborhood of ∂N in N which is home-
omorphic to ∂N × [0, 1), and where the homeomorphism maps each point
z ∈N to (z, 0) ∈∂N × {0}. The assumption that N be a topological man-
ifold with boundary gives a local version of this at each point in ∂N, and
one can derive the existence of a global collaring from a result of Brown. See
[Brow2, Con] and Theorem 8 on p40 of [Dave2].
On the other hand, to apply the generalized Sch¨onﬂies theorem, one
needs a topological (n −1)-sphere in Rn which is “bicollared”, i.e., occurs as
f(Sn−1 × {0}) for some embedding f : Sn−1 × [−1, 1] →Rn. The boundary
of N is collared inside of N, but may not be bi-collared inside Rn. To deal
with this, one can use a parallel copy of ∂N in the interior of N, provided
by the collaring of ∂N inside N. This parallel copy is now bi-collared in the
interior of N, because of the collaring that we have for N.
If N lies inside Rn, then this parallel copy is also bi-collared inside Rn.
One can apply the generalized Sch¨onﬂies theorem, to get that the region
in Rn bounded by this parallel copy of ∂N, together with this copy of ∂N
itself, is homeomorphic to the closed unit ball in Rn. To get back to N in
its entirety, one uses the original collaring of ∂N inside N, to know that the
missing part of N is homeomorphic to the product of ∂N ∼= Sn−1 with an
interval, and to glue this to the other piece without causing trouble.
70

Thus one can get a positive answer to (C.4) when N lies inside Rn, using
the generalized Sch¨onﬂies theorem. This is simpler than the solutions of the
Poincar´e conjecture, and it does not require any restrictions on the dimension
n. The assumption of contractability of N is not needed for this either. (For
arbitrary manifolds, not necessarily embedded in Rn, this assumption would
be crucial.)
In general, if N is an n-dimensional compact topological manifold with
boundary which is contractable, then the boundary ∂N is always a homol-
ogy sphere (has the same homology groups as an (n−1)-dimensional sphere).
This is a well-known fact. One could use Theorem 9.2 on p357 of [Bred1],
for instance. Conversely, any compact (n −1)-dimensional topological man-
ifold without boundary which is a homology sphere can be realized as the
boundary of an n-dimensional compact topological manifold with boundary
which is contractable. This is elementary for n ≤3, where the homology
spheres are all ordinary spheres, and can be ﬁlled with balls. For n ≥5,
this is given in [Ker1], in the piecewise-linear category (for both the ho-
mology sphere and its ﬁlling by a contractable manifold). For n ≥6, one
can convert this into a statement about topological manifolds, through the
Kirby–Siebenmann theory [KirS]. See also the bottom of p184 of [Dave2].
For n = 5 in the topological category, see the corollary on p197 of [FreQ]. See
also Corollary 2B on p287 of [Dave2] for n ≥5 and the topological category.
(For the smooth category in high dimensions, there are complications which
come from the existence of exotic spheres, as in the discovery of Milnor.)
For n = 4, see [Fre, FreQ].
In particular, see Theorem 1.4’ on p367
of [Fre], and Corollary 9.3C on p146 of [FreQ]. In this case it can happen
that the ﬁlling by a contractable manifold cannot be given as a piecewise-
linear manifold. The boundary ∂N would always admit a unique piecewise-
linear structure, by well-known results about 3-dimensional manifolds (as in
[Moi]). Concerning the possible lack of piecewise-linear ﬁlling for a homology
3-sphere by a contractable 4-manifold, see [Fre, FreQ, Kir].
A famous example of a homology 3-sphere which is not simply-connected
is given by the “Poincar´e homology sphere”. This is a quotient of the stan-
dard S3 by the (ﬁnite) icosahedral group.
See Theorem 8.10 on p353 of
[Bred1].
This is a particular example where a contractable ﬁlling exists
among topological 4-manifolds, but not among piecewise-linear manifolds.
See [Fre, FreQ, Kir].
If H is a k-dimensional compact manifold (without boundary) which is
k-dimensional homology sphere, and if H is also simply-connected, then H is
71

homotopy-equivalent to the standard k-dimensional sphere. This is a stan-
dard fact from topology, which was also mentioned in Section 3. In this case,
the Poincar´e conjecture in dimension k would seek to say that H should be
homeomorphic to Sk.
Note that if N is a compact manifold with boundary, then ∂N is simply-
connected if and only if the interior of N is simply-connected at inﬁnity in
the sense of Deﬁnition C.3.
C.2.2
Ends of manifolds
Suppose that M is an n-dimensional manifold without boundary which is
“open”, i.e., not compact. What can one say about the “ends” of M?
In particular, when can M be realized as the interior of a compact man-
ifold with boundary? This would be a nice way of “taming” the end.
This type of issue is clearly related to the questions considered through-
out this subsection. It also makes sense in general, whether or not M is
contractable, or one expects it to be homeomorphic to a ball, or one expects
the end to be spherical.
Some suﬃcient conditions for realizing an open manifold as the interior of
a compact manifold with boundary in high dimensions are given in [BroLL].
A characterization for this is given in [Sie1]. See also [Ker2] concerning the
latter.
For dimension 5 (with 4-dimensional boundaries), see [Qui3] and Section
11.9 of [FreS]. For dimension 4 (with 3-dimensional boundaries), see Theorem
1.12 on p373 of [Fre], and Section 11.9 in [FreQ]. Concerning dimension 3,
see p216 of [FreQ].
In all of these, the fundamental group at inﬁnity plays an important role.
C.3
Interlude: looking at inﬁnity, or looking near a
point
Let M be a topological manifold of dimension n, and without boundary.
Assume that M is open, i.e., not compact.
Deﬁne c
M to be the one-point compactiﬁcation of M, through the usual
recipe. That is, one adds to M a special point q, the point at inﬁnity, and
the neighborhoods of q in c
M are given by sets of the form c
M\K, where K
is a compact subset of M.
72

Consider the following question:
Under what conditions is c
M a topological manifold?
(C.6)
One might look at this as a kind of local question, about the behavior of
a space at a given point, or as a question about large-scale behavior of M.
It is not hard to see that c
M will be a topological manifold exactly when M
looks like (is homeomorphic to) Sn−1 × [0, 1) outside of a set with compact
closure. Equivalently, c
M is a manifold exactly when M can be realized as
the interior of a compact manifold with boundary, where the boundary is
homeomorphic to Sn−1. (This uses Brown’s theorem about the existence of
collars for boundaries of manifolds with boundary, as in [Brow2, Con] and
Theorem 8 on p40 of [Dave2].)
The large-scale perspective of (C.6) is somewhat close in outlook to Sub-
section C.2, especially Subsubsection C.2.1, while the local view is perhaps
more like the perspective in Subsection C.1. Concerning the latter, one might
think of local taming properties of embedded sets in terms of existence of
“normal bundles” for the embedded sets. Similarly, one can think of (C.6)
as asking about the existence of a normal bundle for c
M at the point q. In
this regard, one might compare with the discussion in Section 9.3 in [FreQ],
especially Theorem 9.3A and Corollary 9.3B.
For the record, let us note that a necessary condition for
c
M to be a
manifold is that
M is simply-connected at inﬁnity,
(C.7)
at least if n ≥3. In “local” language, we can reformulate this condition as
follows: for every neighborhood U of q in c
M, there is a neighborhood V of q
such that V ⊆U,
every pair of points x, y ∈V \{q} lies in a connected set in U\{q},
(C.8)
and
every loop γ in V \{q} can be contracted to a point in U\{q}.
(C.9)
This is similar to the localized fundamental group conditions mentioned in
Subsection C.1.
Let us now think of c
M as being any topological space, and not necessarily
the one-point compactiﬁcation of an open manifold. For a given point q ∈c
M,
one can still ask whether c
M is an n-dimensional manifold at q, i.e., if there is
73

a neighborhood of q in c
M which is homeomorphic to an open ball in Rn. The
necessary condition in the preceding paragraph still applies (when n ≥3),
concerning local simple-connectivity of c
M\{q} near q (as in (C.8) and (C.9)).
For the rest of this subsection, let us assume that n ≥3. Note that there
are special results for detecting manifold behavior in a space of dimension 1
or 2. This is reviewed in the introduction of [Fer4].
As a special case, imagine now that c
M is a ﬁnite polyhedron of dimension
n. Let L denote the codimension-1 link of q in c
M, as discussed in Section 3.
Thus L is an (n −1)-dimensional ﬁnite polyhedron, and c
M looks locally at
q like a cone over L, as in Section 3. (As in Section 3, L is determined up to
piecewise-linear equivalence, but not as a polyhedron.)
In order for c
M to be an n-dimensional topological manifold in a neigh-
borhood of q, the link L should be fairly close to a standard (n −1)-sphere.
In particular, it is not hard to see that L should be homotopy-equivalent to
Sn−1. This implies that L should be connected and simply-connected, under
our assumption that n is at least 3.
In fact, in the case where c
M is a ﬁnite polyhedron, the connectedness
and simple-connectedness of the link L around q are equivalent to the local
connectivity and simple-connectivity conditions for c
M\{q} near q indicated
above, with (C.8) and (C.9). This is not hard to see, and it is also rather
nice. To put it a bit diﬀerently, imagine that one starts with the class of
ﬁnite polyhedra, and then tries to go to more general contexts of topological
spaces. The local connectivity and simple-connectivity conditions for c
M\{q}
at q as described above provide a way to capture the information in the
connectedness and simple-connectedness of the codimension-1 link at q in the
case where c
M is a polyhedron, in a manner that makes sense for arbitrary
topological spaces, without special structure as one has for ﬁnite polyhedra.
These local connectedness and simple-connectedness conditions for c
M\{q}
at q should be compared with local connectedness and simple-connectedness
conditions for c
M itself. If c
M is a polyhedron, then any point q in c
M auto-
matically has the feature that there are arbitrarily small neighborhoods U of
q in c
M which can be contracted to q while staying near q, and, in fact, while
staying in U itself. This is because c
M looks locally like a cone at q.
In the next subsection we shall look at another case of this kind of “local
manifold” question.
74

C.4
Decomposition spaces, 1
Let n be a positive integer, and let K be a nonempty compact subset of Rn.
One could also consider general manifolds instead of Rn here, but we shall
generally stick to Euclidean spaces for simplicity. The main ideas come up
in this case anyway.
Imagine shrinking K to a single point, while leaving the rest of Rn alone,
and looking at the topological space that results. This can be deﬁned more
formally as follows. Let us write Rn/K for the set which consists of the points
in Rn which do not lie in K, together with a single point which corresponds
to K itself. In other words, this is where we shrink K to a single point. This
set can be given a topology in a standard way, so that a subset U of Rn/K is
open if and only if its inverse image back in Rn is open. Here “inverse image”
uses the automatic quotient mapping Rn to Rn/K. (In concrete terms, the
inverse image of U in Rn means the set of points in Rn which correspond to
elements of U, where one includes all points in K if the element of Rn/K
associated to K lies in U.)
This type of quotient Rn/K is a special case of a “decomposition space”.
We shall discuss the general situation further in Subsection C.6, but this
special case already includes a lot of interesting examples and phenomena.
Now let us consider the following question:
Given K as above, when is Rn/K a topological manifold?
(C.10)
This is really a special case of the situation in Subsection C.3. For this
it is better to use Sn instead of Rn, so that Sn/K — deﬁned in the same
manner as above — is equivalent to the one-point compactiﬁcation of Sn\K.
Let us consider some basic examples. If K consists of only a single point,
then Rn/K is automatically the same as Rn itself, and there is nothing to
do. If K is a ﬁnite set with more than one element, then it is easy to see
that Rn/K is not a manifold. If we let q denote the point in Rn/K which
corresponds to K, then (Rn/K)\{q} does not enjoy the local connectedness
property that it should if Rn/K were a manifold at q, as in (C.8) in Subsec-
tion C.3. More precisely, this local connectedness property for the comple-
ment of {q} would be necessary only when n ≥2. When n = 1, one does
not have to have this local connectedness condition, but then (Rn/K)\{q}
would have too many local components near q for Rn/K to be a manifold at
q. (That is, there would be more than 2 such local components.)
75

Now suppose that K is a straight line segment in Rn.
In this event,
Rn\K is homeomorphic to Rn again. This is not hard to check. This would
also work if K were a standard rectangular cell of higher dimension in Rn.
More generally, this works if K is a tame cell in Rn, meaning the image of
a standard rectangular cell under a homeomorphism of Rn onto itself. This
follows automatically from the case of standard rectangular cells.
However, if one merely assumes that K is homeomorphic to a standard
rectangular cell, then it is not necessarily true that Rn/K is a manifold!
This is another aspect of wild embeddings, from Subsection C.1. We shall
say more about this as the subsection goes on. A concrete example is given
by taking K to be a copy of the Fox–Artin wild arc in R3. (Compare with
[Fer4].)
Note that we are not saying that Rn/K is always not a manifold when K
is wildly embedded. The converse is true, that K must be wildly embedded
when Rn/K is not a manifold (and K is a topological cell). This is just a
rephrasal of the remark above, that Rn/K is a manifold when K is a tamely
embedded cell.
Here is a slightly more foolish example, which one might view as a gener-
alization of the earlier comments about the case where K is a ﬁnite set with
more than a single point. Imagine now that K is a copy of the j-dimensional
sphere Sj, 1 ≤j ≤n −1. For this let us use a standard, smooth, round
sphere; it is not a matter of wildness that we want to consider.
In this case Rn/K is never a topological manifold. If j = n −1, then
Rn/K is homeomorphic to the union of Rn and an n-sphere, with the two
meeting at a single point.
This point is the one that corresponds to K
in Rn/K.
Let us denote this point by q again, as above.
In this case
(Rn/K)\{q} does not have the right local-connectedness property at q in
order for Rn/K to be a manifold, as in (C.8) in Subsection C.3.
If j = n −2, then one runs into trouble with local simple-connectivity
of (Rn/K)\{q} at q, as in (C.9) in Subsection C.3.
For this one might
think about the special case where n = 3, so that K is a standard circle
in R3. It is easy to take small loops in R3\K, lying close to K, which are
nonetheless linked with K. These loops then project down into (R3/K)\{q},
where they can be as close to the point q as one likes, but they are never
contractable in (R3/K)\{q} at all, let alone in small neighborhoods of q (as
in (C.9) in Subsection C.3). This is the same as saying that these loops are
not contractable inside of Rn\K, which is equivalent to (Rn/K)\{q}.
When j < n −2, then one has similar obstructions to Rn/K being a
76

manifold, but in terms of the failure of higher-dimensional forms of local
connectedness of (Rn/K)\{q} (using homology or homotopy). This is anal-
ogous to the cases already described, when j = n −1 or n −2. We shall
say more about this soon, but for the moment let us go on to some other
matters.
For this example, where K is taken to be a standard j-dimensional sphere,
note that Rn/K itself is locally contractable at q. This is as opposed to con-
nectedness properties of (Rn/K)\{q}, and it is analogous to what happens
in the case of ﬁnite polyhedra. Speciﬁcally, for ﬁnite polyhedra one always
has local contractability, but the behavior near a given point of punctured
neighborhoods around that point are another matter. The latter is connected
to the behavior of the codimension-1 link of the polyhedron around the given
point, as in Subsection C.3.
In the present case, where we have Rn/K with K a standard round j-
dimensional sphere, one can see the local contractability of Rn/K at the
point q (corresponding to K) as follows.
In Rn, one can take a tubular
neighborhood of K, which is homeomorphic to the Cartesian product of
the j-sphere K and an (n −j)-dimensional ball. This neighborhood can be
contracted onto K in a simple way, and this leads to the local contractability
of Rn/K at q.
Now let us consider the case of the Whitehead continuum, from Subsection
C.2. We should not really say the Whitehead continuum here, as there is
some ﬂexibility in the construction, which can lead to the resulting set W not
being pinned down completely. This ambiguity will not really cause trouble
for us here, and we can work with any compact set W in R3 which is obtained
as in the procedure described in Subsection C.2.
The set W has the feature of being cell-like, as in the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition C.11 (Cell-like sets) A compact set K in Rn is said to be cell-
like if K can be contracted to a point inside of any neighborhood U of itself
in Rn.
Compare with [Dave2], especially p120. That the Whitehead continuum
W is cell-like is not hard to see from the construction of W, as the intersection
of a decreasing sequence of solid tori with certain properties. Speciﬁcally, for
this the key point is that the ℓth solid torus can be contracted to a point
inside the previous one.
If K is a topological cell, then K is contractable to a point inside of itself,
without using the extra bit of room provided by a small neighborhood of
77

itself. This is also independent of the way that K might be embedded into
some Rn, i.e., wildly or tamely. In this respect, W is like a topological cell
(and hence the name “cell-like” for the property in Deﬁnition C.11).
For W, it is not true that R3/W is a topological manifold. If we let
q denote the point in R3/W corresponding to W, then (R3/W)\{q} is not
locally simply-connected at q (in the sense of the condition in Subsection
C.3, around (C.9)). In concrete terms, this means that there are loops in
R3\W (which is the same as (R3/W)\{q}) which lie as close to W as one
likes (in their entirety), but which cannot be contracted to a point in R3\W
while remaining reasonably close to W.
These loops can be described concretely, as meridians in the solid tori
whose intersection gives W. The loop from the solid torus Tj can be ﬁlled
with a disk inside Tj, but not without crossing the smaller torus Tj+1, or any
of its successors. This comes back to the way that each Tℓ+1 is “clasped”
inside of Tℓ. See [Dave2, Kir] for more information (including Proposition 9
on p76 of [Dave2]).
In any event, the failure of the local simple-connectivity of (R3/W)\{q}
at q is equivalent to S3\W not being simply-connected at inﬁnity, as in
Subsection C.2. This also follows the discussion in Subsection C.3, and the
comment just after (C.10).
This case is quite diﬀerent from the one of embedding round spheres in
Rn, as discussed before. More precisely, let us compare the situation with
W and the example before where K is a standard circle inside of R3. For
the latter, there are loops in R3\K which lie as close to K as one wants,
and which are not contractable to a point in R3\K at all, let alone in a
neighborhood of K. For W, one has that S3\W is contractable (as mentioned
in Subsection C.2), and this implies that R3\W is simply-connected. (This is
a straightforward exercise.) Thus these loops near W can be contracted to a
point in R3\W, if one allows oneself to go away from W for the contraction.
Here is another aspect of this. Although one has these loops in R3\W
which lie near W but cannot be contracted to a point in R3\W while staying
near W, these loops can be made homologically trivial in R3\W while staying
near W. That is, one can ﬁll the loops with surfaces inside R3\W while
staying close to W, if one allows the surfaces to have handles (rather than
simply being a disk, as in the case of homotopic triviality). This is something
that one can easily see from the pictures (as in [Dave2, Kir]). The basic idea
is that one can ﬁll the loops with disks, where the disks stay close to W, but
also pass through W (and so are not in R3\W). However, one can avoid the
78

intersection with W by cutting out a couple of small holes in the disk, and
attaching a handle to them which goes along the boundary of the solid torus
in the next generation of the construction. Then W will stay inside this next
solid torus, throughout the rest of the construction, and this surface gives a
way of ﬁlling the loop without intersecting W (or being forced to go far away
from it).
This kind of ﬁlling by surfaces does not work in the case where we take
K to be a standard circle in R3. In this situation, we have loops in R3\K
which lie close to K, and which are linked homologically with the circle
K. In other words, the linking number of the loop with K is nonzero, and
this linking number is a homological invariant which would vanish if the
loop could be ﬁlled with a surface without intersecting K. (For more about
“linking numbers”, see [BotT, Bred1, Fla, Spa].)
In this respect, the case of Whitehead continua is much more tame than
that of embedded circles and spheres of other dimensions, even if it is still
singular. We shall encounter other versions of this, now and further in this
appendix.
Here is another feature of W, which distinguishes it from ordinary circles
in R3 (or spheres in Rn more generally). Let us think of W now as lying in
R4 rather than R3, through the inclusion of R3 in R4 by taking the fourth
coordinate to be 0.
For R4, we have that R4/W is a topological manifold (homeomorphic to
R4). The basic point behind this is the following. In the realization of W
as the intersection of a decreasing sequence of solid tori in R3, the ℓth solid
torus was always “clasped” in the previous one (as in Subsection C.2, and
[Dave2, Kir]). In R4, the extra dimension provides a lot of extra room, in
such a way that this “clasping” is not really present any more. If T ′ is a solid
torus which is embedded and clasped inside of another solid torus T in R3,
one can “unclasp” T ′ in R4 by lifting one end up, bringing it around the hole
in T, and leaving the other end alone. This is a standard observation, and
it is analogous to the way that knots in R3 become unknotted in R4.
In other words, this procedure gives a way to make a deformation of R4,
in which the solid torus T ′ is mapped to a set of small diameter, while not
moving points some distance away at all. By contrast, back in R3, it is not
possible to make an isotopy which shrinks T ′ to a set of small diameter, while
leaving the points in the complement of the larger solid torus ﬁxed. This is
exactly because of the way that T ′ is “clasped” in T, so that it cannot be
“unclasped” by an isotopy in T. When one has the extra dimension in R4,
79

one can “undo” the clasping, by lifting one end up and moving it around, as
indicated above.
Once one has this kind of “shrinking” in R4, one can use this to show
that R4/W is homeomorphic to R4. One can do this directly, using shrinking
homeomorphisms like this, and combinations of them, to make a mapping
from R4 to itself which shrinks W to a point while remaining injective (and
continuous) everywhere else. One puts homeomorphisms like this on top of
each other, and deeper and deeper in the construction of W, until W itself is
shrunk all the way to a point. The various solid tori Tj in the construction,
of which W is the intersection, are made smaller and smaller in this process.
The trick is to do this without shrinking everything, so that the mapping
that results remains a homeomorphism on the complement of W.
This idea of shrinking can be given a general form, and is discussed in
detail in [Dave2]. See also [Edw2, Kir].
By contrast, let us consider the case of a circle K in R3. If one views
K as a subset of R4 in the same way, then R4/K is still not a topological
manifold. This follows from our earlier discussion about circles and spheres of
higher dimensions inside of Rn in general. One also does not get a manifold
by replacing R4 with Rm for larger m’s.
Notice, however, that there is a kind of “improvement” that occurs in
adding dimensions in this way.
If K is a circle in R3, and if q denotes
the point in R3/K which corresponds to K, then (R3/K)\{q} is not locally
simply-connected at q. For that matter, (R3/K)\{q} ∼= R3\K is not simply-
connected at all. When one considers K as a subset of R4, and asks analogous
questions for R4/K (or R4\K), then there is no longer any trouble with
simple-connectivity. The basic underlying problem continues, though, in the
form of 2-dimensional connectivity. This is not hard to see.
Similarly, if one views K as a subset of Rn for larger n, then the trouble
with connectivity in lower dimensions goes away, but (n −2)-dimensional
connectivity still does not work.
With the Whitehead continuum we are more fortunate.
The problem
with local simple-connectivity goes away when we proceed from R3 to R4,
but diﬃculties with higher-dimensional connectivity do not then arise in
their place. One should not be too surprised about this, since the Whitehead
continuum is cell-like, while circles or spheres of higher dimension are not at
all cell-like. In other words, with circles or spheres (and their complements
in Rn), there is some clear and simple nontrivial topology around, while the
Whitehead continuum is much closer to something like a standard cell, which
80

causes less trouble. (One can look at this more precisely, but we shall not
pursue this here.)
C.4.1
Cellularity, and the cellularity criterion
Now let us look at some general notions and results, concerning the possibility
that Rn/K be a topological manifold (and, in fact, homeomorphic to Rn).
Deﬁnition C.12 (Cellularity) A compact set K in Rn (or, more gener-
ally, an n-dimensional topological manifold) is said to be cellular if it can be
realized as the intersection of a countable family of sets Bi, where each Bi is
a topological n-cell (or, equivalently, homeomorphic to the closed unit ball in
Rn), and if each Bi+1 is contained in the interior of the preceding Bi.
Compare with [Dave2], especially p35, [Edw2], and p44 of [Rus1]. Alter-
natively, a compact set K is cellular if and only if any neighborhood of K
contains an open set which contains K and is homeomorphic to the standard
n-dimensional ball.
Theorem C.13 Let K be a compact subset of Rn. Then Rn/K is a topo-
logical manifold if and only if K is cellular in Rn. In this case, Rn/K is
homeomorphic to Rn.
See Exercise 7 on p41 of [Dave2] for the ﬁrst assertion, and Proposition 2
on p36 of [Dave2] for the second one. (Concerning the latter, see Section 5 in
[Dave2] too. Note that some of the notation in Exercise 7 on p41 in [Dave2]
is explained in the statement of Proposition 2 on p36 of [Dave2].) See also
[Edw2], especially the theorem on p114, and p44ﬀof [Rus1].
For the record, let us mention the following.
Proposition C.14 Let K be a compact subset of Rn. If K is cellular, then
K is cell-like. Conversely, if n is equal to 1 or 2, then K is cellular if it is
cell-like.
The fact that cellularity implies cell-likeness follows easily from the deﬁ-
nitions. When n = 1, the converse is very simple, since connectedness implies
that a set is an interval, and hence cellular. In R2, the argument uses special
features of plane topology. See Corollary 4C on p122 of [Dave2].
81

In higher dimensions, cell-like sets need not be cellular. Examples are
given by Whitehead continua, and some wild embeddings of cells. However,
there is an exact characterization of cellular sets among cell-like sets, which
is the following. Basically, the point is to include the same kind of localized
simple-connectivity of Rn\K around K as discussed before.
Theorem C.15 Let K be a compact set in Rn, with n ≥3. Then K is
cellular inside of Rn if and only if (a) it is cell-like, and (b) for every open
neighborhood U of K in Rn there is another open neighborhood V of K so
that every continuous mapping from S1 into V \K can be contracted to a point
inside of U\K.
This characterization of cellularity is stated in Theorem 5 on p145 of
[Dave2]. This uses also the deﬁnition of the cellularity criterion given on
p143 of [Dave2]. When n ≥4, this result works for subsets of general n-
dimensional topological manifolds, and not just Rn. When n = 3, there
is trouble with the general case of manifolds, related to the 3-dimensional
Poincar´e conjecture being unsettled; if the cellularity criterion holds for gen-
eral manifolds, then the 3-dimensional Poincar´e conjecture would follow, as
discussed on p145 of [Dave2]. See Theorem 1.11 on p373 of [Fre] concerning
the 4-dimensional case, and [McM] and Section 4.8 of [Rus1] for dimensions
5 and higher.
Corollary C.16 Let K be a compact subset of Rn, n ≥3. If K is cell-like
in Rn, then K × {0} is cellular in Rn+1.
See Corollary 5A on p145 of [Dave2].
Corollary C.16 is analogous to the fact that wild embeddings into Rn
can become tame when one passes from Rn as the ambient space to an Rm
with m > n. This was discussed brieﬂy in Subsection C.1, towards the end.
Similarly, Theorem C.15 is analogous to taming theorems for embeddings
mentioned in Subsection C.1.
Theorem C.15 and Corollary C.16 are also close to some of the matters
described in Subsection C.2.
The main point behind the derivation of Corollary C.16 from Theorem
C.15 is that by passing to a Euclidean space of one higher dimension, po-
tential trouble with local simple-connectedness of the complement of K goes
away. This ﬁts with basic examples, and the Whitehead continuum in par-
ticular.
82

We saw before that when K is a sphere, the passage from Rn to Rn+1
can get rid of the trouble with local simple-connectivity of the complement
of K, but that problems remain with higher-dimensional connectivity of the
complement. For cell-like sets, unlike general sets, it is only the localized 1-
dimensional connectivity of the complement which is needed to get cellularity.
This is shown by Theorem C.15.
In this regard, let us also notice the following simple converse to Corollary
C.16.
Lemma C.17 Suppose that K is a compact subset of Rn. If K × {0} is
cellular in Rn+1, then K is cell-like in Rn.
Indeed, if K × {0} is cellular in Rn+1, then it is also cell-like in Rn+1,
as in Proposition C.14. It is easy to check that cell-likeness for K × {0} in
Rn+1 implies cell-likeness for K inside Rn, just by the deﬁnitions. (Thus
cell-likeness, unlike cellularity, is not made more feasible by the extra room
of extra dimensions.) This implies Lemma C.17.
For concrete examples of cell-like sets, often the cellularity in higher-
dimensional spaces, as in Corollary C.16, can be seen in fairly direct and
simple terms. The room from the extra dimensions makes it easy to move
pieces of the set apart, without the claspings, knottings, etc., which occurred
originally. Some aspects of this came up earlier, concerning Whitehead con-
tinua.
Before leaving this subsection, let us observe that the localized simple-
connectivity conditions that are used here are a bit diﬀerent from those em-
ployed in the context of taming theorems, as in Subsection C.1. To make this
precise, let K be a compact subset of some Rn. The conditions that come
up in the present subsection involve the behavior of Rn\K, localized around
K (the whole of K). That is, one looks at the behavior of Rn\K within
arbitrarily-small neighborhoods of K in Rn. In the context of Subsection
C.1, one would look at the behavior of Rn\K near individual points in K.
To put it another way, here one seeks to contract loops in Rn\K that are
close to K to points, while staying close to K. In the context of Subsection
C.1, one looks at small loops in Rn\K near K, and tries to contract them to
points in the complement while staying in small balls, and not just staying
near K.
83

C.5
Manifold factors
Let W be a Whitehead continuum, constructed through a decreasing se-
quence of solid tori in R3, as in Subsection C.2.
Theorem C.18 If R3/W is deﬁned as in Subsection C.4, then (R3/W)×R
is homeomorphic to R4.
In particular, (R3/W) × R is a topological manifold, even though R3/W
itself is not. Thus (R3/W) × R is a manifold factor.
The fact that (R3/W) × R is homeomorphic to R4 is given as Corollary
3B on p84 of [Dave2]. See also [AndR, Kir].
Note that the existence of a homeomorphism from (R3/W) × R onto
R4 is not the same as the observation mentioned in Subsection C.4, that
R4/(W × {0}) is homeomorphic to R4. In considering (R3/W) × R, one is
in eﬀect taking R4, and then shrinking each copy W × {u} of W to a point,
where u runs through all real numbers. For R4/(W × {0}), one shrinks only
a single copy of W to a point.
Although the construction is more complicated for (R3/W) × R than for
R4/(W × {0}), there are some common aspects. As before, one of the main
points is that the solid tori in R3 which are “clasped” (inside of other solid
tori) become unclasped in R4. With the extra dimension in R4, one can pick
up one end of one of these tori, bring it around, and then lay it down again,
so that the clasping is undone. For the present situation with (R3/W) × R,
one performs this kind of action for all of the copies W × {u} of W at once,
u ∈R, rather than just a single copy. (Compare also with Subsection C.6,
and the general notion of decomposition spaces mentioned there.)
In Subsection C.2, it was mentioned that S3\W is a contractable open set
which is not homeomorphic to a 3-ball (because it is not simply-connected
at inﬁnity), and that (S3\W) × R is homeomorphic to a 4-dimensional open
ball. (See [Bin3, Bin4, Kir].) This result is similar in some ways to Theorem
C.18, but the conclusions are not quite the same either.
In this vein, let us make the following observation. As usual, denote by q
the (singular) point in R3/W that corresponds to W. Let us write L for the
subset of (R3/W) × R given by q × R. Thus L is homeomorphic to a line.
Using a homeomorphism from (R3/W)×R to R4, one gets an embedding
of L into R4. It is not hard to see that any such embedding of L into R4
has to be wild. Just as R3\W is not locally simply-connected near W, if
L denotes the image of L in R4 by an embedding as above, then R4\L is
84

not locally simply-connected near L.
(Note that R4\L is homeomorphic
to (R3\W) × R, by construction.) This ensures that L is wild in R4, no
matter what homeomorphism from (R3/W) × R onto R4 one might use,
since ordinary straight lines in R4 do not behave in this way.
One can also make local versions of this argument, to show that L is
locally wild in the same manner.
If one were to want to pass from a homeomorphism from (R3/W) × R
onto R4 in Theorem C.18 to a homeomorphism from (S3\W) × R onto R4,
then in particular one could be lead to try to ﬁgure out something about what
happens when one deletes L from R4. Conversely, if one wanted to go in the
other direction, one might have to ﬁgure out something about how to put
the topological line back in. These endeavors should be at least somewhat
complicated, because of the wildness of L inside of R4.
The next fact helps to give an idea of how wild L can have to be.
Theorem C.19 Let U be an open set in some Rn, and let F be a closed set
in Rn. If the Hausdorﬀdimension of F is less than n −2, then any open
loop in U\F that can be contracted to a point in U can also be contracted to
a point in U\F. In particular, Rn\F is simply-connected.
In other words, if F is closed and has Hausdorﬀdimension < n −2, then
F is practically invisible for considerations of fundamental groups, even local
ones. From this one can check that L as above necessarily has Hausdorﬀ
dimension at least 2, no matter the homeomorphism from (R3/W) × R onto
R4 which produced it. This is also true locally, i.e., each nontrivial arc of L
has to have Hausdorﬀdimension at least 2, and for the same reasons. This is
somewhat remarkable, since L is homeomorphic to a line (and straight lines
have Hausdorﬀdimension 1). (In general, Hausdorﬀdimension need not be
preserved by homeomorphisms, though, and this is an instance of that.)
Theorem C.19 is given (in a slightly diﬀerent form) in [MartRiV3], in
Lemma 3.3 on p9. See also [Geh2, LuuV, SieS, V¨ai3] for related results. In
particular, [SieS] uses Theorem C.19 in a manner very similar to this, in the
context of double-suspension spheres and homeomorphic parameterizations
of them.
Note that instead of requiring that F have Hausdorﬀdimension less than
n −2 in Theorem C.19, it is enough to ask that the (n −2)-dimensional
Hausdorﬀmeasure of F be zero.
By now, there are many examples known of spaces which are manifold
factors (and not manifolds). The original discovery was in [Bin3, Bin4], using
85

a diﬀerent space. This example, Bing’s “dogbone” space, will come up again
in Subsection C.6.
As mentioned near the bottom of p93 of [Dave2], 3 is the smallest di-
mension in which this type of phenomenon can occur (where a non-manifold
becomes a manifold after taking the Cartesian product with R), because of
results about recognizing manifolds in dimensions 1 and 2. It does occur in
all dimensions greater than or equal to 3.
As a basic class of examples, if K is a compact set in Rn which is a
cell, then Rn/K may not be a manifold if K is wild, but (Rn/K) × R is
homeomorphic to Rn+1. See [AndC, Bry1, Bry2, Dave2, Rus1].
More generally, if K is any compact set in Rn which is cell-like, then
(Rn/K) × R is homeomorphic to Rn+1. When n = 1 or 2, Rn/K is itself
homeomorphic to Rn. (Compare with Proposition C.14 and Theorem C.13
in Subsubsection C.4.1.) If n ≥3, then Rn/K may not be homeomorphic
to Rn, but it is true that (Rn/K) × R is homeomorphic to Rn+1 in this
situation. See Proposition 2 on p206 of [Dave2] for n = 3, and Theorem 9 on
p196 or Theorem 13 on p200 of [Dave2] for n ≥4. (For Theorem 9 on p196
of [Dave2], note that the deﬁnition of a “k-dimensional decomposition” of a
manifold is given near the top of p152 of [Dave2].)
Another class of examples (which is in fact closely related to the previous
ones) comes from the celebrated double-suspension theorems of Edwards and
Cannon [Can1, Can2, Can3, Dave2, Edw2] (mentioned in Section 3). From
these one has the remarkable fact that there are ﬁnite polyhedra P which are
not topological manifolds, but for which P × R is a manifold.
There are compact sets K in Rn such that K is not cell-like, and not
cellular in particular, but (Rn/K) × R is homeomorphic to Rn+1.
This
happens for every n ≥4. See Corollary 3E on p185 of [Dave2]. (The proof
uses the double-suspension theorems.)
There are also non-manifold spaces which become manifolds after tak-
ing the product with other non-manifold spaces. See Section 29 of [Dave2],
beginning on p223.
C.6
Decomposition spaces, 2
The construction of the quotient Rn/K, given a compact subset K of Rn, as
in Subsection C.4, is an example of a decomposition space. More generally,
one can allow many subsets of Rn (or some other space) to be contracted to
points at the same time, rather than just a single set.
86

In general, a decomposition of Rn, or some other space, means a partition
of it, i.e., a collection of subsets which are pairwise disjoint, and whose union
is the whole space. One can then form the corresponding quotient space,
ﬁrst as a set — by collapsing the sets in the partition to individual points —
and then as a topological space. The topology on the quotient is the richest
one (the one with the most open sets) so that the canonical mapping from
the space to the quotient is continuous.
All of this makes sense in general, but in order to have some good proper-
ties (like the Hausdorﬀcondition for the quotient space), some assumptions
about the decomposition should be made. As a start, typical assumptions
would be that the individual sets that make up the decomposition be closed,
and that the decomposition satisfy a certain upper semi-continuity property.
See [Dave2] for details, including the deﬁnition on p13 of [Dave2]. For the
present discussion, we shall always assume that some conditions like these
hold, even if we do not say so explicitly.
If G is a decomposition of Rn, then one writes Rn/G for the corresponding
quotient space.
Given a set K in Rn, one can always consider the decomposition of Rn
consisting of K and sets with only single elements, with the latter running
through all points in Rn\K. This decomposition is sometimes denoted GK,
and the quotient Rn/GK in the general sense of decompositions is the same
as the space Rn/K from Subsection C.4.
As another basic situation, product spaces of the form (Rn/K) × R can
be viewed as decomposition spaces. Speciﬁcally, one gets a decomposition of
Rn+1 ∼= Rn × R using sets of the form K × {u} in Rn+1 for each u ∈R,
together with single-element sets for all of the points in Rn+1\(K × R). The
resulting decomposition space is equivalent topologically to (Rn/K) × R.
An important general point is that wild or interesting embeddings can
often occur in simple or useful ways through decompositions. For instance,
in the decomposition space described in the preceding paragraph, one has a
particular “line”, corresponding to the copies of K. See [Can1, Dave1, Dave2]
for more information, including p451 of [Can1], the last paragraph in Section
2 on p380 of [Dave1], and the remarks near the top of p37 in [Dave2].
The following theorem of R. L. Moore [Moo] is an early result about when
decomposition spaces are manifolds, and homeomorphic to the original space.
Theorem C.20 Let X be a compact Hausdorﬀtopological space. Suppose
that f is a continuous mapping from the 2-sphere S2 to X, and that for each
87

x ∈X, f −1(x) is nonempty and connected, and S2\f −1(x) is nonempty and
connected. Then X is homeomorphic to S2.
In this theorem, the mapping f itself may not be a homeomorphism. As in
Subsection C.4, f might have the eﬀect of collapsing some line segments down
to single points, for instance. It is true that f can always be approximated by
homeomorphisms, however. See [Dave2] for more information and references.
Similar results hold in dimension 1. For this it is enough to assume that
the inverse images of points under the mapping be connected (and nonempty
proper subsets of the domain), without imposing conditions on their com-
plements. In this situation, the inverse images of points will simply be arcs.
Compare with [Dave2], including the remarks near the bottom of p17.
What might be reasonable analogues of Theorem C.20 in higher dimen-
sions? One should not keep the hypotheses literally as they are above, where
the ﬁbers are connected and have connected complements, because of coun-
terexamples like the non-manifold spaces that one can get by contracting a
circle to a point (as in Subsection C.4).
However, in dimension 2, the property of a set in S2 or R2 being connected
and having connected complement is quite strong. For a closed subset of S2
which is not empty nor all of S2, these conditions imply that the complement
of the set is homeomorphic to a 2-dimensional disk, and that the set itself is
cellular (Deﬁnition C.12 in Subsection C.4).
A decomposition G of Rn is said to be cellular if each of the subsets
of Rn of which it is composed is cellular. (Compare with [Dave2], in the
statement of Corollary 2A on p36.) As an analogy with Moore’s theorem,
one might hope that a quotient of Rn (or Sn, or other topological manifolds)
by a cellular decomposition is a manifold, and homeomorphic to Rn again
(or to the original manifold, whatever it might be).
This is true for decompositions which consist of a single cellular subset of
the space, together with all the remaining points in the space as one-element
sets. In other words, this statement is true in the context of quotients as in
Subsection C.4. See Theorem C.13 in Subsection C.4, and Proposition 2 on
p36 of [Dave2].
For decompositions in general, it is not true that cellularity is suﬃcient
to ensure that the quotient space is a manifold. This fails already for decom-
positions of R3. The ﬁrst example of this was provided by Bing’s “dogbone”
construction in [Bin2]. See also [Dave2], especially Section 9, for this and
other examples. For the statement that the decomposition space is not a
88

manifold, and not just not homeomorphic to R3, see Theorem 13 on 498 of
[Bin2]. A recent paper related to this is [Arm].
The dogbone space was also used in the initial discovery of manifold
factors. See [Bin3, Bin4].
Although quotients by cellular decompositions do not in general give man-
ifolds, there are many nontrivial examples where this does occur, and results
about when it should take place. A particularly nice and fundamental exam-
ple is given by “Bing doubling”. See [Bin1, Dave2] (Example 1 in Section 9
of [Dave2]). This is a decomposition of R3 for which the corresponding quo-
tient space is homeomorphic to R3. While the quotient space is standard, the
decomposition has some interesting features, giving rise to some wild embed-
dings in particular. This decomposition has a symmetry to it, which leads to
a homeomorphic involution on S3 which is highly nonstandard. The ﬁxed-
point set of this homeomorphism is a wildly-embedded 2-sphere in S3. This
construction apparently gave the ﬁrst examples of involutions on R3 which
were not topologically equivalent to “standard” ones, made from rotations,
reﬂections, and translations. See [Bin1] for more information, especially Sec-
tion 4 of [Bin1].
See also Section 9 of [Bin4] for a wild involution on R4, whose ﬁxed
point set is homeomorphic to the dogbone space. This uses the fact that the
product of the dogbone space with the real line is homeomorphic to R4.
The results mentioned in Subsection C.5 — about quotients Rn/K being
homeomorphic to a Euclidean space after taking the Cartesian product with
R — can also be seen as providing nontrivial examples of cellular decompo-
sitions of Rn+1 for which the corresponding quotients are manifolds, and are
homeomorphic to Rn+1.
C.7
Geometric structures for decomposition spaces
C.7.1
A basic class of constructions
One feature of decomposition spaces is that they do not a priori come with a
canonical or especially nice geometry, or anything like that. The topology is
canonical, but this is somewhat diﬀerent. Note that there are general results
about existence of metrics which are compatible with the topology, as in
Proposition 2 on p13 of [Dave2]. Once one has one such metric, there are
many which deﬁne the same topology. This is true just as well for ordinary
Euclidean spaces, or the spheres Sn, even if there are also special metrics
89

(like the Euclidean metric) that one might normally like or use.
In some cases (for decomposition spaces), there are some particularly nice
or special geometries that one can consider. A number of basic examples —
like the Whitehead continuum, Bing doubling [Bin1], and Bing’s dogbone
space [Bin2] — have a natural topological “self-similarity” to them, which
can be converted into geometric self-similarity.
Let us be more precise. In these cases, the nondegenerate elements of the
decomposition are generated by repeating a simple “rule”. The “rule” can
be described by a smooth domain D in Rn together with some copies of D
embedded in the interior of D, in a pairwise-disjoint manner. To generate the
nontrivial elements of the decomposition, one starts with D, and then passes
to the copies of D inside of itself. For each of these copies of D inside of D,
one can get a new collection of smaller copies of D, by applying the “rule”
to the copies of D with which we started. One then repeats this indeﬁnitely.
Thus, if the original “rule” involves m copies of D inside of itself, then
the jth step of this process gives rise to mj−1 copies of D, with the ﬁrst step
corresponding to D alone.
The limiting sets which arise from this procedure are pairwise disjoint,
and are used to deﬁne the decomposition. To do this carefully, one can think
of the jth step of the process as producing a compact set Cj, which is the
union of the mj−1 individual copies of D indicated above. The construction
gives Cj ⊆Cj−1 for all j ≥2. To pass to the limit, one can take the set
C = T∞
j=1 Cj, and then use the components of C as subsets of Rn to be
employed in the decomposition G of Rn. For each point x ∈Rn\C, one also
includes the one-point set {x} in the decomposition G.
The Whitehead continuum (discussed in Subsection C.2) is an example
of this. There the “rule” is particularly simple, in that it is based on an
embedding of a single solid torus T1 inside a larger one T. At each stage of
the process there is only one domain, and only one nondegenerate set being
produced in the end (i.e., the Whitehead continuum). In particular, one can
have m = 1 in the general set-up described above, and with the result being
nontrivial. For Bing doubling and Bing’s dogbone space, one has m > 1, i.e.,
there are more than one embedding being used at each step, and more than
one copy of the basic domain. (For Bing doubling the basic domain is again
a solid torus, while for the dogbone space it is a solid 2-handled torus. In
Bing doubling one has m = 2, as the name suggests. For the dogbone space,
m = 4.) In these cases the number of components grows exponentially in the
process, and is inﬁnite in the end (after taking the limit).
90

At any rate, there are a number of basic examples of decompositions
generated in this manner, with individual copies of a domain being replaced
systematically by some embedded subdomains, copies of itself, following rep-
etitions of a single basic “rule”. See [Dave2], especially Section 9.
In typical situations, the basic “rule” involves nontrivial distortion of the
standard Euclidean geometry at each step. As a ﬁrst point along these lines,
when one embeds a copy of some (bounded) domain D into itself, then some
change in the geometry (along the lines of shrinkage) is unavoidable, at least
if the embedded copy is a proper subset of the original domain.
Given that there needs to be some shrinkage in the embedding, the next
simplest possibility would be that the embeddings are made up out of some-
thing like dilations, translations, rotations, and reﬂections. In other words,
except for a uniform scale factor, one might hope that the geometry does not
have to change.
Normally this will not be the case. Some amount of bending or twisting,
etc., will (in general) be involved, and needed, to accommodate the kind of
topological behavior that is present. This includes linking, clasping, or things
like that.
For the purpose of choosing a geometry that might ﬁt with a given de-
composition space, however, one can modify the usual Euclidean metric so
that the embeddings involved in the basic “rule” do have the kind of behavior
indicated above, i.e., a constant scale factor together with an isometry. The
scale factors should be less that 1, to reﬂect the shrinking that is supposed to
take place for the decomposition spaces (even at a purely topological level).
It is not hard to see that one can make deformations of geometry like
this. One can do this in a kind of direct and “intrinsic” way, deﬁning met-
rics on Rn with suitable properties. One can also do this more concretely,
“physically”, through embeddings of the decomposition spaces into higher-
dimensional Euclidean spaces. In these higher-dimensional Euclidean spaces,
the self-similarity that one wants, in typical situations, can be realized in
terms of standard linear self-similarity, through dilations and translations.
More precisely, in these circumstances, the quotient of Rn by the decom-
position can be realized topologically as an n-dimensional subset X of some
RN (with N = n + 1, for instance), in such a way that X is a smooth sub-
manifold away from the natural singularities, and X is self-similar around
these singularities.
To build such a set X, one can start with the complement of the original
domain D in Rn. One would view Rn\D as an n-dimensional submanifold
91

of RN. In place of the iteration of the basic rule for the decomposition from
before, one now stacks some “basic building blocks” in RN on top of Rn\D
(along the boundary of D), and then on top of the other building blocks,
over and over again.
These basic building blocks are given by n-dimensional smooth manifolds
in RN (with boundary). They are diﬀeomorphic to a single “model” in Rn,
which is the original domain D in Rn, minus the interiors of the m copies
of D embedded inside D, as given by the basic “rule” that generates the
decomposition. The building blocks are all diﬀeomorphic to each other, since
they are all diﬀeomorphic to this same model, but they are also constructed
in such a way as to be “similar” to each other. That is, they can all be given
by translations and dilations of each other. This is a key diﬀerence between
this construction and the original decomposition in Rn.
Further, the building blocks are constructed in such a way that their ends
are all similar to each other (i.e., even diﬀerent ends on the same building
block). Speciﬁcally, the building blocks are chosen so that when one goes
to stack them on top of each other, their “ends” ﬁt together properly, with
smoothness across the interfaces.
These things are not diﬃcult to arrange.
Roughly speaking, one uses
the extra dimensions in RN to straighten the “ends” in this way, so that
the diﬀerent building blocks can be stacked properly. Typically, this would
involve something like the following. One starts with the basic model in Rn,
given by D minus the interiors of the m embedded copies of D in D. One
then makes some translations of the m embedded subdomains in D, up into
the extra dimension or dimensions in RN. Up there, these subdomains can
be moved or bent around, until they are similar to D itself (i.e., being the
same modulo translations and dilations). This can be done one at a time,
and without changing anything near the boundary of the original domain
D. In this manner, the original model region in Rn becomes realized as an
n-dimensional compact smooth submanifold (with boundary) in RN, with
the ends matching up properly under similarities.
To put it another way, the main “trade-oﬀ” here is that one gives up
the “ﬂatness” of the original model, as a region in Rn, to get basic building
blocks in RN that are n-dimensional curved submanifolds whose ends are
similar to each other. The curving of the interiors of these building blocks
compensates for the straightening of their ends.
As above, one then stacks these building blocks on top of each other,
one after another, to get a realization of the decomposition space by an n-
92

dimensional subset X of RN. (One also puts in some limiting points, at
the ends of the towers of the building blocks that arise. In other words, this
makes X be a closed subset of RN. These extra points are the singularities of
X.) This subset is smooth away from the singularities, and self-similar at the
singularities, because of the corresponding properties of the basic building
blocks.
By choosing the scale-factors associated to the ends of the basic building
blocks to be less than 1, the diameters of the ends tend to 0 (and in a good
way) as one stacks the building blocks on top of each other many times. This
corresponds to the fact that the sets in the decomposition are supposed to
be shrunk to single points in the quotient space. This is also part of the
story of the “limiting points” in the previous paragraph. The limiting points
are exactly the ones associated (in the end) to the nondegenerate sets in the
original decomposition in Rn, which are being shrunk to single points.
The actual homeomorphic equivalence between the set X in RN produced
through this method and the decomposition space Rn/G with which one
starts is obtained using the diﬀeomorphic equivalence between the building
blocks in RN and the original model in Rn (D minus the interiors of the
m embedded copies of itself, as above). In rough terms, at the level of the
topology, the same kind of construction is occurring in both places, X and
the decomposition space, and one can match them up, by matching up the
individual building blocks. This is not hard to track.
At any rate, more details for these various matters are given in [Sem7].
Instead of stacking basic building blocks on top of each other inﬁnitely
many times, one can stop after ﬁnitely many steps of the construction. This
gives a set which is still smooth, and diﬀeomorphic to Rn, but which approx-
imates the non-smooth version that represents the decomposition space. To
put it another way, although this kind of approximation is standard topolog-
ically, its geometry does reﬂect the basic rule from which the decomposition
space is obtained. In particular, properties of the decomposition space can
be reﬂected in questions of quantitative bounds for the approximations which
may or may not hold.
Some versions of this come up in [Sem7]. In addition, there are some
slightly diﬀerent but related constructions, with copies of ﬁnite approxima-
tions repeated but getting small, at the same time that they include more
and more stages in the stacking.
The topological structure of the decomposition space can also be seen in
terms of Gromov–Hausdorﬀlimits of smooth approximations like these.
93

When one makes constructions like these — either ﬁnite approximations
or inﬁnite limits — the self-similarity helps to ensure that the spaces behave
geometrically about as well as they could. For instance, this is manifested
in terms of properties like Ahlfors-regularity (Deﬁnition 5.1), and the local
linear contractability condition (Deﬁnition 4.10), at least under suitable as-
sumptions or choices. One also gets good behavior in terms of “calculus”,
like Sobolev and Poincar´e inequalities. One has uniform rectiﬁability as well
(Deﬁnition 5.4), although the spaces are actually quite a bit more regular
than that. For smooth approximations with only ﬁnitely many levels in the
construction, one can have uniform bounds, independent of the number of
levels, for conditions like these. See [Sem7] for more information, and some
slightly diﬀerent versions of these basic themes.
To summarize a bit, although the quotient spaces that one gets from
decompositions may not be topological manifolds, in many cases one can
realize them geometrically in such a way that the behavior that occurs is
really pretty good. With the extra structure from the geometry, there are
extra dimensions to the story as a whole, and which are perhaps not apparent
at ﬁrst. (Possibilities for doing analysis on spaces like these, and spaces which
are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from standard Euclidean spaces at that, give one
form of this.)
We shall look at these types of geometries from some more perspectives
in the next subsubsections, and also consider some special cases.
These general matters are related as well to the topics of Appendix D.
C.7.2
Comparisons between geometric and topological properties
Many of the geometric properties that occur when one constructs geometries
for decomposition spaces as above correspond in natural ways to common
conditions in purely topological terms that one might consider.
For instance, if one starts with a decomposition space Rn/G from Rn, and
gives it a metric in which it becomes Ahlfors-regular of dimension n, then in
particular the decomposition space has Hausdorﬀdimension n with respect
to this metric. In the type of examples mentioned above, Rn/G would also
have topological dimension n.
The Hausdorﬀdimension of a metric space is always greater than or
equal to the topological dimension, as in Chapter VII of [HurW]. To have
the two be equal is rather nice, and Ahlfors-regularity in addition even nicer.
For the constructions described in Subsubsection C.7.1, Ahlfors-regularity
94

reﬂects the fact that one chooses the geometries to be smooth away from the
singularities, and self-similar around the singularities.
For cell-like decompositions in general (of compact metric spaces, say),
there is a theorem which says that the topological dimension of the quotient
is less than or equal to the topological dimension of the space with which
one starts, if the topological dimension of the quotient is known to be ﬁnite.
See Theorem 7 on p135 of [Dave2], and see [Dave2] in general for more
information. Note that it is possible for the topological dimension of the
quotient to be inﬁnite, by a result of Dranishnikov [Dra] (not available at the
time of the writing of [Dave2]).
For the situations discussed in Subsubsection C.7.1, Ahlfors-regularity of
dimension n for the geometry of the decomposition space is a nice way to
have good behavior related to the dimension (and with the right value of the
dimension, i.e., the topological dimension). In other words, it is a geometric
property that ﬁts nicely with general topological considerations (as in the
preceding two paragraphs), while also being about as strong as it can be.
It is also quantitative, and it makes sense to consider uniform bounds for
smooth approximations that use only ﬁnitely many levels of the construction.
(Note that it is automatically preserved under Gromov–Hausdorﬀlimits,
when there are uniform bounds. See [DaviS8] for more information.)
Another general result about decomposition spaces implies that a cell-like
quotient of a space is locally contractable if the quotient has ﬁnite dimension,
under suitable conditions on the space from which one starts (e.g., being a
manifold). See Corollary 12B on p129 of [Dave2] (as well as Corollaries 4A
and 8B on p115 and p119 of [Dave2] for auxiliary statements). Here local
contractability of a topological space X means that for every point p ∈X,
and every neighborhood U of p in X, there is a smaller neighborhood V ⊆U
of p in X such that V can be contracted to a point in U. If the quotient space
is not known to be ﬁnite-dimensional, then there are weaker but analogous
conclusions that one can make, along the lines of local contractability. See
Corollary 11B on p129 of [Dave2].
These notions are purely topological ones. The local linear contractability
condition (Deﬁnition 4.10) is a more quantitative version of this for metric
spaces. It is about as strong as one can get, in terms of the sizes of the
neighborhoods concerned. That is, if one tries to contract a small ball in
the space to a point inside of another ball which is also small, but some-
what larger than the ﬁrst one, then weaker conditions besides local linear
contractability might allow somewhat larger radii for the second ball (than a
95

constant multiple of the initial radius). The linear bound ﬁts naturally with
self-similarity.
As indicated earlier (towards the end of Subsubsection C.7.1), local linear
contractability does come up in a natural manner for the constructions in
Subsubsection C.7.1. This ﬁts nicely with the general topological results,
i.e., by giving a geometric form which reﬂects the topological properties in
about the best possible way.
Exactly how nice the spaces discussed in Subsubsection C.7.1 are depends
on the features of the decompositions. This includes not only how many
singularities there are, but also how strong they are. For instance, cellular
decompositions can lead to nicer or more properties for the resulting spaces
than cell-like decompositions. I.e., at the geometric level, cellularity can give
rise to more good behavior than local linear contractability. For example, one
can look at simple-connectivity of punctured neighborhoods in this regard,
and things like that. This is something that one does not have for the space
obtained by taking R3 and contracting a Whitehead continuum to a single
point. Some other versions of this are considered in [Sem7].
C.7.3
Quotient spaces can be topologically standard, but geomet-
rically tricky
We have seen before how decompositions of Rn might lead to Rn again topo-
logically in the quotient, but do so in a manner that is still somehow nontriv-
ial. For instance, the decomposition might arise from a nontrivial manifold
factor, or lead to wild embeddings in the quotient which seem very simple
(like a straight line) at the level of the decomposition. In these situations,
one can still have highly nontrivial geometries from the procedures described
in Subsubsection C.7.1, even though the underlying space is topologically
equivalent to Rn.
As a special case, the wild embeddings that can occur in the quotient
(with the topological identiﬁcation with a Euclidean space) can behave in a
very special way in the geometric realization of the decomposition space that
one has here, with geometric properties which are not possible in Rn with
the standard Euclidean metric. We shall give a concrete example of this in
a moment.
This is one way that geometric structures for decomposition spaces (as
in Subsubsection C.7.1) can help to add more to the general story.
One
had before the notion that a wild embedding might have a simple realization
96

through a decomposition space, and now this might be made precise through
metric properties of the embedding (like Hausdorﬀdimension), using the
type of geometry for the decomposition space that one has here.
Here is a concrete instance of this. Let W be a Whitehead continuum
in R3, as in Subsection C.2.
Consider the corresponding quotient space
R3/W, as in Subsection C.4. Through the type of construction described in
Subsubsection C.7.1, one can give R3/W a geometric structure with several
nice properties. In short, one can realize it topologically as a subset of R4,
where this subset is smooth away from the singular point, and has a simple
self-similarity at the singular point. One could then use the geometry induced
from the usual one on the ambient R4.
Let us write q for the singular point in R3/W, i.e., the point in the
quotient which corresponds to W.
Using the metric on R3/W indicated
above, let us think of (R3/W) × R as being equipped with a metric. One
could also think of (R3/W) × R as being realized as a subset of R5, namely,
as the product of the one in R4 mentioned before with R.
In this geometry, L = {q}×R is a perfectly nice line. It is a “straight” line!
In particular, it has Hausdorﬀdimension 1, and locally ﬁnite length. How-
ever, the image of L inside of R4 under a homeomorphism from (R3/W)×R
onto R4 will be wild. As in Subsection C.5, any such embedding of L in R4
must be wild, and in fact any such embedding must have Hausdorﬀdimen-
sion at least 2, with respect to the usual Euclidean metric in R4. This used
Theorem C.19.
This shows that the geometry that we have for (R3/W)×R has to be sub-
stantially diﬀerent from the usual Euclidean geometry on R4, even though the
two spaces are topologically equivalent. Speciﬁcally, even though there are
homeomorphisms from (R3/W) × R onto R4, no such homeomorphism can
be Lipschitz (with respect to the geometries that we have on these spaces),
or even H¨older continuous of order larger than 1/2.
Although (R3/W) × R — with the kind of geometry described above —
is quite diﬀerent from R4 with the usual Euclidean metric, there is a strong
and nice feature that it has, in common with R4. We shall call this property
“uniform local coordinates”.
Since (R3/W) × R is homeomorphic to R4, it has homeomorphic local
coordinates from R4 at every point. “Uniform local coordinates” asks for a
stronger version of this, and is more quantitative. Speciﬁcally, around each
metric ball B in (R3/W) × R (with respect to the kind of geometry that we
have), there are homeomorphic local coordinates from a standard Euclidean
97

ball β of the same radius in R4, such that
the image of β under the coordinate mapping
(C.21)
covers the given ball B in (R3/W) × R,
and
the modulus of continuity of the coordinate mapping
(C.22)
and its inverse can be controlled, uniformly over all
choices of metric balls B in (R3/W) × R, and in a
scale-invariant manner.
Here “modulus of continuity” means a function ω(r) so that when two
points in the domain (of a given mapping) are at distance ≤r, their images
are at distance ≤ω(r). Also, r would range through positive numbers, and
ω(r) would be nonnegative and satisfy
lim
r→0 ω(r) = 0.
(C.23)
This last captures the continuity involved, and, in fact, gives uniform conti-
nuity.
For a mapping from a compact metric space to another metric space,
continuity automatically implies uniform continuity, which then implies the
existence of some modulus of continuity. This is not to say that one knows
much about the modulus of continuity, a priori. (One can always choose it
to be monotone, for instance, but one cannot in general say how fast it tends
to 0 as r →0.)
Concrete examples of moduli of continuity would include ω(r) = C r
for some constant C, which corresponds to a mapping being Lipschitz with
constant C, or ω(r) = C rα, α > 0, which corresponds to H¨older continuity
of order α. One can have much slower rates of vanishing, such as ω(r) =
(log log log(1/r))−1.
In our case, with the property of “uniform local coordinates”, we want to
have a single modulus of continuity ω(r) which works simultaneously for all
of the local coordinate mappings (and their inverses). Actually, we do not
look at moduli of continuity for the mappings themselves, but renormalized
versions of them. The renormalizations are given by dividing distances in the
domain and range by the (common) radius of B and β. In this way, B and
98

β are viewed as though they have radius 1, independently of what the radius
was originally. This gives a kind of uniform basis for making comparisons
between the behavior of the individual local coordinate mappings.
Let us return now to the special case of (R3/W) × R, with the geometry
as before. In this case one can get the condition of uniform local coordinates
from the existence of topological coordinates (without uniform bounds), to-
gether with the self-similarity and smoothness properties of the set. Here
is an outline of the argument. (A detailed version of this, for a modestly
diﬀerent situation, is given in [Sem7]. Speciﬁcally, see Theorem 6.3 on p241
in [Sem7].
Note that the property of uniform local coordinates is called
“Condition (∗∗)” in [Sem7], as in Deﬁnition 1.7 on p192 of [Sem7].)
Let B be a metric ball in (R3/W)×R, for which one wants to ﬁnd suitable
coordinates. Assume ﬁrst that B does not get too close to the singular line
{q} × R in (R3/W) × R, and in fact that the radius of B is reasonably
small compared to the distance from B to the singular line. In this case
(R3/W) × R is pretty smooth and ﬂat in B, by construction (through the
method of Subsubsection C.7.1). This permits one to get local coordinates
around B quite easily, and with suitable uniform bounds for the moduli of
continuity of the coordinate mappings and their inverses. The bounds that
one gets are scale-invariant, because of the self-similarity in the geometric
construction (from Subsubsection C.7.1).
In fact, one can have Lipschitz
bounds in this case, as well as stronger forms of smoothness.
If the ball B is reasonably close to the singular line {q} × R, then one
can reduce to the case where it is actually centered on {q} × R. That is,
one could replace B with a ball which is centered on {q} × R, and which is
not too much larger. (The radius of the new ball would be bounded by a
constant times the radius of B.) This substitution does not cause trouble for
the kind of bounds that are being sought here.
Thus we suppose that B is centered on the line {q} × R. We may as well
assume that the center of B is the point (q, 0). This is because (R3/W) × R
and the geometry that we have on it are invariant under translations in the
R direction, so that one can move the center to (q, 0) without diﬃculty, if
necessary.
Using the self-similarity of (R3/W)×R, one can reduce further to the case
where the radius of B is approximately 1. For that matter, one can reduce to
the case where it is equal to 1, by simply increasing the radius by a bounded
factor (which again does not cause problems for the uniform bounds that are
being considered here). (To be honest, if one takes the geometry for R3/W to
99

be ﬂat outside a compact set, as in Subsubsection C.7.1, then this reduction
is not fully covered by self-similarity. I.e., one should handle large scales a
bit diﬀerently. This can be done, and a similar point is discussed in [Sem7]
in a slightly diﬀerent situation (for examples based on “Bing doubling”).)
Once one makes these reductions, one gets down to the case of the single
ball B in (R3/W) × R, centered at (q, 0) and with radius 1. For this sin-
gle choice of scale and location, one can use the fact that (R3/W) × R is
homeomorphic to R4 to get suitable local coordinates.
For this single ball B, there is no issue of “uniformity” in the moduli
of continuity for the coordinate mappings. One simply needs a modulus of
continuity.
A key point, however, is that when works backwards in the reductions
just made, to go to arbitrary balls in (R3/W) × R which are relatively close
to the singular line {q} × R, one does get local coordinates with uniform
control on the (normalized) moduli of continuity of the coordinate mappings
and their inverses. This is because of the way that the reductions cooperate
with the scaling and the geometry.
At any rate, this completes the outline of the argument for showing that
(R3/W) × R has uniform local coordinates, in the sense described before,
around (C.21) and (C.22), and with the kind of geometry for (R3/W) × R
as before. As mentioned at the beginning, this argument is nearly the same
as one given in [Sem7], in the proof of Theorem 6.3 on p241 of [Sem7].
It is easy to see that a metric space which is bilipschitz equivalent to some
Rn has uniform local coordinates (relative to Rn rather than R4, as above).
The required local coordinates can simply be obtained from restrictions of the
global bilipschitz parameterization. The converse is not true in general, i.e.,
there are spaces which have uniform local coordinates and not be bilipschitz
equivalent to the corresponding Rn.
Examples of this are given by (R3/W) × R with the kind of geometry as
above. We saw before that the singular line {q} × R, which has Hausdorﬀ
dimension 1 in our geometry on (R3/W) × R, is always sent to sets of Haus-
dorﬀdimension at least 2 under any homeomorphism from (R3/W)×R onto
R4, so that such a homeomorphism can never be Lipschitz, or even H¨older
continuous of order greater than 1/2.
However, one can also get much simpler examples, by taking snowﬂake
spaces. That is, one can take Rn equipped with the metric |x −y|α, where
|x−y| is the usual metric, and α is a positive real number strictly less than 1.
It is not hard to check that this has the property of uniform local coordinates.
100

It is not bilipschitz equivalent to Rn, because it has Hausdorﬀdimension n/α
instead of Hausdorﬀdimension n.
If one assumes uniform local coordinates relative to Rn and Ahlfors-
regularity of dimension n (Deﬁnition 5.1), then the matter becomes much
more delicate. Note that Ahlfors-regularity of the correct dimension rules
out snowﬂake spaces, as in the previous paragraph. It is still not suﬃcient,
though, because the (R3/W) × R spaces with the type of geometry as above
are Ahlfors-regular of dimension 4, in addition to having uniform local coor-
dinates (relative to R4).
With Ahlfors-regularity of dimension n (and uniform local coordinates
relative to Rn), there are some relatively strong conclusions that one can
make, even if one does not get something like bilipschitz parameterizations.
Some versions of this came up in Sections 4 and 5, and with much less than
uniform local coordinates being needed. We shall encounter another result
which is special to dimension 2, later in this subsubsection.
Dimension 1 is more special in this regard (and as is quite standard). One
can get bilipschitz equivalence with R from Ahlfors-regularity of dimension
1 and uniform local coordinates with respect to R (and less than that). This
is not hard to do, using arclength parameterizations.
Let us note that in place of (R3/W) × R in dimension 4, as above, one
can take Cartesian products with more copies of R to get examples in all
dimension greater than or equal to 4, with similar properties as in dimension
4. In particular, one would get sets which are Ahlfors-regular of the correct
dimension, and which have uniform local coordinates, but not bilipschitz
coordinates, or even somewhat less than bilipschitz coordinates.
In dimension 3, there is a diﬀerent family of examples that one can make,
based on “Bing doubling”. This was mentioned earlier, and is discussed in
[Sem7].
Notice that the uniform local coordinates property would imply a bilips-
chitz condition if the local coordinates all came from restrictions of a single
global parameterization. In general, the uniform local coordinates property
allows the local coordinate mappings to change as one changes locations and
scales, and this is why it allows for the possibility that there is no global
bilipschitz parameterization. The case of (R3/W) × R provides a good ex-
ample of this. For this one can check the earlier argument, and see how
the local coordinates that are used are not restrictions of a single global pa-
rameterization. This is true even though the local coordinate mappings at
diﬀerent locations and scales often have a common “model” or behavior. In
101

other words, one might often use rescalings of a single mapping, and this can
be quite diﬀerent from restrictions of a single mapping.
Let us emphasize that in the uniform local coordinates condition, one
does not ask that the uniform modulus of continuity be something simple,
like a Lipschitz or a H¨older condition. Under some conditions one might be
able to derive that, using the uniformity of the hypothesis over all locations
and scales. This is analogous to something that happens a lot in harmonic
analysis; i.e., relatively weak conditions that hold uniformly over all locations
and scales often imply conditions which are apparently much stronger. In
the present circumstances, we do have some limits on this, as in the examples
mentioned above. The ﬁnal answers are not clear, however.
Another way to think about the uniformity over all locations and scales in
the uniform local coordinates property is that it is a condition which implies
the existence of homeomorphic coordinates even after one “blows up” the
space (in the Hausdorﬀor Gromov–Hausdorﬀsenses) along any sequence of
locations and scales in the space. With the uniform local coordinates prop-
erty, the local coordinates could be “blown up” along with the space, with
the uniform bounds for the moduli of continuity providing the equicontinu-
ity and compactness needed to take limits of the coordinate mappings (after
passing to suitable subsequences).
Instead of looking at uniform local coordinates in connection with bilip-
schitz equivalence with Rn, one can consider quasisymmetric equivalence.
Roughly speaking, a quasisymmetric mapping between two metric spaces
is one that approximately preserves relative distances, in the same way
that bilipschitz mappings approximately preserve actual distances. In other
words, if one has three points x, y, and z in the domain of such a mapping,
and if x is much closer to y than z is, then this should also be true for
their images under a quasisymmetric mapping, even if the actual distances
between the points might be changed a lot. See [TukV] for more details and
information about quasisymmetric mappings. Two metric spaces are qua-
sisymmetrically equivalent if there is a quasisymmetric mapping from one
onto the other. As with bilipschitz mappings, compositions and inverses of
quasisymmetric mappings remain quasisymmetric.
If a metric space admits a quasisymmetric parameterization from Rn,
then it also satisﬁes the condition of uniform local coordinates. This is true
for nearly the same reason as for bilipschitz mappings; given a quasisym-
metric mapping from Rn onto the metric space, one can get suitable local
coordinates for the space from restrictions of the global mapping to indi-
102

vidual balls. There is a diﬀerence between this case and that of bilipschitz
mappings, which is that one should allow some extra rescalings to compen-
sate for the fact that distances are not approximately preserved. Speciﬁcally,
a ball B in the metric space may be covered in a nice way by the image under
a quasisymmetric mapping of a ball β in Rn, but then there is no reason why
the radii of B and β should be approximately the same. For a bilipschitz
mapping, one would be able to choose β so that it has radius which is com-
parable to that of B. In the quasisymmetric case, one may not have that,
but if one adds an extra rescaling on Rn (depending on the choices of balls),
then one can still get local coordinates with the kind of uniform control on
the (normalized) moduli of continuity as in the uniform local coordinates
condition.
If a metric space has uniform local coordinates with respect to Rn, and
if these coordinates come from restrictions and then rescalings (on Rn) of a
single global parameterization, as in the preceding paragraph, then that pa-
rameterization does have to be quasisymmetric. This is an easy consequence
of the deﬁnitions, and it is analogous to what happens in the bilipschitz case.
If a metric space admits uniform local coordinates from some Rn, it still
may not be true that it admits a quasisymmetric parameterization. This is
trickier than before, and in particular one does not get examples simply by
using snowﬂake metrics |x −y|α on Rn. Indeed, the identity mapping on Rn
is quasisymmetric as a mapping from Rn with the standard metric to Rn
with the snowﬂake metric |x −y|α, 0 < α < 1.
However, there are counterexamples, going back to results of Rickman
and V¨ais¨al¨a. That is, these are spaces which have uniform local coordinates
(and are even somewhat nicer than that), but which do not admit quasisym-
metric parameterizations.
Basically, these spaces are Cartesian products,
where the individual factors behave nicely in their own right, and where the
combination mixes diﬀerent types of geometry. A basic example (which was
the original one) is to take a product of a snowﬂake with a straight line. Qua-
sisymmetric mappings try to treat diﬀerent directions in a uniform manner,
and in the end this does not work for parameterizations of these examples.
See Lemma 4 in [Tuk], and also [V¨ai4] and [AleV1].
These examples occur already in dimension 2. They do not behave well
in terms of measure, though, and for Ahlfors-regularity (of dimension 2) in
particular. This is a basic part of the story; compare with [AleV1, Tuk, V¨ai4].
As usual, dimension 1 is special. There are results starting from more
primitive conditions, and good characterizations for the existence of qua-
103

sisymmetric parameterizations, in fact. See Section 4 of [TukV].
On the other hand, in dimension 2, there are positive results about having
global quasisymmetric parameterizations for a given space, and with bounds.
For these results one would assume Ahlfors-regularity of dimension 2, and
some modest additional conditions concerning the geometry and topology,
conditions which are weaker than “uniform local coordinates”. See [DaviS4,
HeiKo1, Sem3]. For these results, it is important that the dimension be 2, and
not larger, because of the way that they rely on the existence of conformal
mappings. We shall say a bit more about this in Subsection C.8.
If we go now to dimension 3, then there are counterexamples, even with
good behavior in terms of measure. That is, there are examples of subsets of
Euclidean spaces which are Ahlfors-regular of dimension 3, admit uniform lo-
cal coordinates with respect to R3, but are not quasisymmetrically-equivalent
to R3. These examples are based on the decompositions of R3 associated
to “Bing doubling” (as in [Bin1, Bin7, Dave2]), using geometric realizations
as in Subsubsection C.7.1. This is discussed in [Sem7]. The absence of a
quasisymmetric parameterization in this case is close to a result in [FreS],
although the general setting in [FreS] is a bit diﬀerent.
Concerning the space (R3/W) × R considered before, equipped with a
nice geometry as from Subsubsection C.7.1 and [Sem7], it is not clear (to
my knowledge) whether quasisymmetric parameterizations from R4 exist or
not. We saw earlier that bilipschitz mappings do not exist, because of the
line in (R3/W) × R which has to have Hausdorﬀdimension at least 2 after
any homeomorphism from (R3/W) × R onto R4. These considerations of
Hausdorﬀmeasure do not by themselves rule out the existence of a quasisym-
metric mapping, as they do for bilipschitz mappings. (Compare with [V¨ai3],
for instance.)
Similar remarks apply to double-suspensions of homology spheres.
In
particular, it is not known (to my knowledge) whether or not quasisymmetric
parameterizations exist for them.
To summarize a bit, we have seen in this subsubsection how decomposi-
tion spaces might be “standard” topologically, being equivalent to Rn as a
topological space, and still lead to geometries which are tricky, and which
have some interesting structure. We shall discuss another class of examples
like this in Subsubsection C.7.4. These examples are more trivial topolog-
ically, more tame geometrically, but still nontrivial geometrically.
(They
admit simple quasisymmetric parameterizations, but no bilipschitz parame-
terizations.)
104

See [Sem7] for some other types of geometric structure which can arise
naturally from decompositions. For instance, cellular decompositions whose
quotients are not manifolds — such as Bing’s dogbone space ([Bin2], Example
4 on p64-65 in [Dave2]) — give rise to spaces which do not have “uniform
local coordinates”, but which do have nice properties in other ways. For
instance, one can make constructions so that local coordinates exist at all
locations and scales, and with uniform bounds on how they are localized, but
not for their moduli of continuity. This last is related to having Gromov–
Hausdorﬀlimits which are not manifolds, but are topologically given as a
decomposition space (with a cellular decomposition), like Bing’s dogbone
space.
C.7.4
Examples that are even simpler topologically, but still non-
trivial geometrically
Let us mention another class of examples, which one can also think of in
terms of decompositions (although they are “trivial” in this respect). These
examples are based on “Antoine’s necklaces”, which came up before, in Sub-
section C.1.
Antoine’s necklaces are compact subsets of R3 which are homeomorphic
to the usual middle-thirds Cantor set in the real line, but for which there
is no global homeomorphism from R3 onto itself which maps these sets into
subsets of a line. In dimension 2 this does not happen, as in Chapter 13 of
[Moi].
The “wildness” of these sets is manifested in a simple fundamental-group
property. Namely, the complement of these sets in R3 have nontrivial funda-
mental group, whereas this would not be true if there were a global homeo-
morphism from R3 to itself which would take one of these sets to a subset of
the line. This last uses the fact that these sets are totally disconnected (i.e.,
to have simple-connectivity of the complement in R3 if the set were to lie in
a line).
Antoine’s necklaces are discussed in Chapter 18 of [Moi]. See also p71ﬀ
in [Dave2]. The basic construction for them can be described in terms of the
same kind of “rules” as in Subsubsection C.7.1.
One starts with a solid torus T in R3. Inside this torus one embeds some
more tori, which are disjoint, but which form a chain that is “linked” around
the hole in the original torus. (See Figure 18.1 on p127 of [Moi], or Figure
9.9 on p71 of [Dave2].) In each of these smaller tori, one can embed another
105

collection of linking tori, in the same way as for the ﬁrst solid torus.
One can repeat this indeﬁnitely. In the limit, one gets a Cantor set, which
is a necklace of Antoine.
Actually, we should be a little more precise here. In saying that we get
a Cantor set in the limit, we are implicitly imagining that the diameters of
the solid tori are going to 0 as one proceeds through the generations of the
construction. This is easy to arrange, if one uses enough tori in the basic
rule (linking around the original torus T). If one uses enough tori, then one
can do this in such a way that all of the tori are similar to the initial torus
T, i.e., can be given as images of T by mappings which are combinations of
translations, rotations, and dilations.
One can also consider using a smaller number of tori, and where the
embeddings of the new tori (in the original one) are allowed to have some
stretching. (Compare with Figure 9.9 on p71 of [Dave2].) As an extreme case,
the Whitehead continuum corresponds essentially to the same construction
as Antoine’s necklaces, except that only 1 embedded torus is used in the
linking in the original torus T. (See Figure 9.7 on p68 of [Dave2].) For this
one deﬁnitely needs a fair amount of stretching. In Bing doubling, one uses
two solid tori, embedded and linked around the hole in T (Figure 3 on p357
of [Bin1], Figure 9.1 on p63 in [Dave2]). One again needs some stretching,
but not as much for the Whitehead continuum.
These cases are diﬀerent from the standard ones for Antoine’s necklaces,
because when one iterates the basic rule in a straightforward way, the com-
ponents that one gets at the nth generation do not have diameters tending to
0. For the Whitehead continuum, this is simply unavoidable, and reﬂects the
way that the components are clasped, each one by itself, around the “hole”
of the original torus T. In the case of Bing doubling, one can rearrange the
embeddings at later generations in such a way that the diameters do tend
to 0, even if this might not be true for naive iterations. This was proved by
Bing, in [Bin1]. (See also p69-70 of [Dave2], and [Bin7].)
Let us imagine that we are using enough small solid tori in the linking
around T, as in standard constructions for Antoine’s necklaces, so that it is
clear that the diameters of the components of the sets obtained by repeating
the process do go to 0 (i.e., without having to make special rearrangements,
or anything like that, as in Bing doubling). In other words, in the limit, one
gets a Cantor set in R3, as above. Let us call this Cantor set A.
This Cantor set A is wild, in the sense that its complement in R3 is not
simply-connected, and there is no global homeomorphism from R3 to itself
106

which takes A to a subset of a line. At the level of decompositions, however,
there is not much going on here.
Normally, to get a decomposition from a process like this, one takes the
connected components obtained in the limit of the process, together with
sets with one element for the rest of the points in R3 (or Rn, as the case
may be). This was described before, in Subsubsection C.7.1. (See also the
discussion at the beginning of Section 9 of [Dave2], on p61, concerning the
notion of a deﬁning sequence.) In the construction that we are considering
here, all of the connected components in the end contain only one element
each, because of the way that the diameters of the components in ﬁnite stages
of the “deﬁning sequence” converge to 0.
In other words, the decomposition that occurs here is automatically “triv-
ial”, consisting of one-element sets, one for each point in R3. Taking the quo-
tient does not do anything, and the decomposition space is just R3 again.
There is nothing too complicated about this. It is just something to say
explicitly, for the record, so to speak, to be clear about it, especially since
it is a situation to which one might normally pay little attention, for being
degenerate. (See also the text at the beginning of p71 of [Dave2], about this
kind of deﬁning sequence and decomposition.)
While there is nothing going on at the level of the decompositions topo-
logically, this is not the case geometrically! One can think of this in the
same way as in Subsubsection C.7.1, for making geometric representations of
decomposition spaces, with metrics and self-similarity properties for them.
In the present situation, one can also work more directly at the level of R3
itself, to get geometries like this.
Here is the basic point. Imagine deforming the geometry of R3, at the
level of inﬁnitesimal measurements of distance, as with Riemannian metrics.
In the general idea of a decomposition space, one can shrink sets in some
Rn which have nonzero diameter to single points. In the present setting, our
basic components already are single points, and so there is nothing to do to
them. However, one can still shrink the geometry around these points in R3.
In technical terms, one can think of deforming the geometry of R3, by
multiplying its standard Riemannian metric by a function. One can take
this function to be positive and regular away from the Antoine’s necklace,
and then vanish on the necklace itself.
For instance, one could take the
function to be a positive power of the distance to the necklace A, so that the
107

Riemannian metric can be written as follows:
ds2 = dist(x, A)α dx2.
(C.24)
This type of metric is discussed in some detail in [Sem8] (although in a
slightly diﬀerent form). The geometry of R3 with this kind of metric behaves
a lot like standard Euclidean geometry. One still has basic properties like
Ahlfors-regularity of dimension 3, and Sobolev, Poincar´e, and isoperimetric
inequalities in the new geometry. See [Sem8]. (This kind of deformation is
special case of the broader class in [DaviS1] and [Sem5, Sem10].)
However, with suitable choices of parameters, the metric space that one
gets in this way is not bilipschitz equivalent to R3 with the standard Eu-
clidean metric. This is because the shrinking of distances around the necklace
A can lead to A having Hausdorﬀdimension less than 1 in the new metric.
On the other hand, R3\A is not simply-connected, and this means that the
geometry which has been constructed cannot be bilipschitz equivalent to the
standard geometry on R3, because of Theorem C.19 in Subsection C.5. See
[Sem8] for more information. (Concerning the “choice of parameters” here,
the main point is to have enough shrinking of distances around A to get the
Hausdorﬀdimension to be less than 1, or something like that. The amount
of shrinking needed depends on some of the choices involved in producing
the necklace. By using Antoine’s necklaces which are suﬃciently “thin”, it is
enough to employ arbitrarily small powers α of the distance to the necklace
in (C.24) to get enough shrinking of the metric around the necklace. In any
case, one is always free to take the power α to be larger.)
Let us emphasize that in making this kind of construction, the conclusion
is that the metric space that one gets is not bilipschitz-equivalent to R3
through any homeomorphism between the two spaces. It is easy to make
deformations of the geometry so that the new metric seems to be much
diﬀerent from the old one in the given coordinates, but for which this is
not really the case if one is allowed to make a change of variables.
For
instance, one might deform the standard Euclidean Riemannian metric on
R3 by multiplying it by a function that vanishes at a point, like a positive
power of the distance to that point. Explicitly, this means
des2 = |x −p|β dx2,
(C.25)
where β > 0. In the standard coordinates, this metric and the ordinary one
look quite diﬀerent. However, for this particular type of deformation (as in
108

(C.25)), the two metrics are bilipschitz equivalent, if one allows a nontrivial
change of variables. Speciﬁcally, one can use changes of variables of the form
f(x) = p + |x −p|β/2(x −p).
(C.26)
This is not hard to verify.
As a more complicated version of this, one can also make deformations
of the standard geometry on R3 of the form
dbs2 = dist(x, K)γ dx2,
(C.27)
where γ > 0 and K is a self-similar Cantor set in R3 which is not wild. In this
case one can again get geometries which may look diﬀerent from the usual
one in the given coordinates, but for which there are changes of variables
which give a bilipschitz equivalence with the standard metric. Compare with
Remark 5.28 on p390 of [Sem8].
When one makes deformations based on Antoine’s necklaces, as above,
the linking that goes on can ensure that there is no bilipschitz equivalence
between R3 with the new geometry and R3 with the standard geometry.
In fact, there will not be a homeomorphism which is Lipschitz (from the
new geometry to the standard one), without asking for bilipschitzness. With
suitable choices of parameters, it can be impossible to have a homeomorphism
like this which is even H¨older continuous of an arbitrary exponent δ > 0,
given in advance.
Under the conditions in [Sem8], the identity mapping itself on R3 always
gives a homeomorphism which is H¨older continuous with some positive ex-
ponent. In fact, it is also quasisymmetric, in the sense of [TukV]. Thus, here
one gets examples of spaces which are quasisymmetrically equivalent to a
Euclidean space, and which are Ahlfors-regular of the correct dimension, but
which are not bilipschitz equivalent to a Euclidean space. (Compare with
Subsubsection C.7.3.)
C.8
Geometric and analytic results about the exis-
tence of good coordinates
In Subsection C.2, we considered the question of whether a nonempty con-
tractable open set in Rn is homeomorphic to the standard open unit ball in
Rn. When n = 2 this is true, and it is a standard result in topology.
109

One can establish this result in 2 dimensions analytically via the Riemann
Mapping Theorem. This theorem gives the existence of a conformal mapping
from the unit disk in R2 onto any nonempty simply-connected open set in
R2 which is not all of R2. See Chapter 6 of [Ahl1], for instance.
The Riemann Mapping Theorem is of course very important for many
aspects of analysis and geometric function theory in R2 ∼= C, but it also does
a lot at a less special level. From it one not only obtains homeomorphisms
from the unit disk in R2 onto any nonempty simply-connected proper open
subset of R2, but one gets a way of choosing such homeomorphisms which
is fairly canonical. In particular, Riemann mappings are unique modulo a
three real-dimensional group of automorphisms of the unit disk (which can
be avoided through suitable normalizations), and there are results about the
dependence of Riemann mappings on the domains being parameterized.
By comparison, one might try to imagine doing such things without the
Riemann mapping, or in other contexts where it is not available. In this
regard, see [Hat1, Hat2, Lau, RanS], concerning related matters in higher
dimensions.
Another fact in dimension 2 is that any smooth Riemannian metric on the
2-sphere S2 is conformally-equivalent to the standard metric. In other words,
if g is a smooth Riemannian metric on S2, and if g0 denotes the standard
metric, then there is a diﬀeomorphism from S2 onto S2 which converts g into
a metric of the form λ g0, where λ is a smooth positive function on S2. There
are also local and other versions of this fact, but for the moment let us stick
to this formulation.
One way to try to use this theorem is as follows. Suppose that one has
a 2-dimensional space which behaves roughly like a 2-dimensional Euclidean
space (or sphere) in some ways, and one would like to know whether it can
be realized as nearly-Euclidean in more deﬁnite ways, through a parameter-
ization which respects the geometry. Let us assume for simplicity that our
space is given to us as S2 with a smooth Riemannian metric g, but without
bounds for the smoothness of g. One can then get a conformal diﬀeomor-
phism f : (S2, g0) →(S2, g), as in the result mentioned in the preceding
paragraph. A priori the behavior of this mapping could be pretty compli-
cated, and one might not know much about it at deﬁnite scales. It would be
nice to have some bounds for the behavior of f, in terms of simple geometric
properties of (S2, g).
Some results of this type are given in [DaviS4, HeiKo1, Sem3]. Speciﬁ-
cally, general conditions are given in [DaviS4, HeiKo1, Sem3] under which a
110

conformal equivalence f : (S2, g0) →(S2, g) actually gives a quasisymmetric
mapping (as in [TukV]), with uniform bounds for the quasisymmetry condi-
tion. In other words, these results have the eﬀect of giving uniform bounds
for the behavior of f at any location or scale, under suitable conditions on
the initial space (S2, g), and using the conformality of f.
Another use of conformal mappings of an analogous nature is given in
[M¨ulˇS]. There the assumptions on the space involved more smoothness —
an integral condition on (principal) curvatures, for a surface in some Rn
— and the conclusions are also stronger, concerning bilipschitz coordinates.
This gave a new approach to results in [Tor1]. See also [Tor2], and the recent
and quite diﬀerent method in [Fu].
More precisely, [M¨ulˇS] works with conformal mappings, while [Tor1, Tor2]
and [Fu] obtain bilipschitz coordinates by quite diﬀerent means. In the con-
text of [DaviS4, HeiKo1, Sem3], no other method for getting quasisymmetric
or other coordinates with geometric estimates (under similar conditions) is
known, at least to my knowledge.
One might keep in mind that conformality is deﬁned in inﬁnitesimal
terms, through the diﬀerential of f. To go from inﬁnitesimal or very small-
scale behavior to estimates at larger scales, one in eﬀect tries to “integrate”
the information that one has.
This is a very classical subject for conformal and quasiconformal map-
pings. A priori, it is rather tricky, because one is not given any information
about the conformal factors (like the function λ before).
Thus one can-
not “integrate” directly in a conventional sense.
One of the basic meth-
ods is that of “extremal length”, which deals with the balance between
length and area. At any rate, methods like these are highly nonlinear. See
[Ahl2, Ahl3, LehV, V¨ai1] for more information.
What would happen if one attempted analogous enterprises in higher
dimensions? One can begin in the same manner as before. Let n be an
integer greater than or equal to 2, and suppose (as a basic scenario) that one
has a smooth Riemannian metric g on Sn. Let g0 denote the standard metric
on Sn. One might like to know that (Sn, g) can be parameterized by (Sn, g0)
through a mapping with reasonable properties, and with suitable bounds,
under some (hopefully modest) geometric conditions on (Sn, g). Here, as
before, the smoothness of g should be taken in the character of an a priori
assumption. One would seek uniform bounds that do not depend on this in a
quantitative way. (The bounds would depend on constants in the geometric
conditions on (Sn, g).)
111

If one has a mapping f : (Sn, g0) →(Sn, g) which is conformal, or which
is quasiconformal (with a bound for its dilatation), then [HeiKo1] provides
some natural hypotheses on (Sn, g) under which one can establish that f is
quasisymmetric, and with bounds. In other words, this works for all n ≥2,
and not just n = 2, as above. See [HeiKo2, HeiKo2] for further results along
these lines.
However, when n > 2, there are no general results about existence of
conformal parameterizations for a given space, or quasiconformal parameter-
izations with uniform bounds for the dilatation. It is simply not true that
arbitrary smooth Riemannian metrics admit conformal coordinates, even lo-
cally, as they do when n = 2. Quasiconformal coordinates automatically
exist for reasonably-nice metrics, but with the quasiconformal dilatation de-
pending on the metric or on the size of the region being parameterized in a
strong way. The issue would be to avoid or reduce that.
One can easily see that the problem is highly overdetermined, in the
following sense. A general Riemannian metric in n dimensions is described
(locally, say) by n(n+1)/2 real-valued functions of n variables. A conformal
deformation of the standard metric is deﬁned by 1 real-valued function of
n real variables, i.e., for the conformal factor. A general diﬀeomorphism in
n dimensions is described by n real-valued functions of n variables. Thus,
allowing for general changes of variables, the metrics which are conformally-
equivalent to the standard metric are described by n+1 real-valued functions
of n real variables. When n = 2, this is equal to n(n + 1)/2, but for n > 2
one has that n(n + 1)/2 > n + 1.
In fact, one knows that in dimension 3 there are numerous examples of
spaces which satisfy geometric conditions analogous to ones that work in di-
mension 2, but which do not admit quasisymmetric parameterizations. There
are also diﬀerent levels of structure which occur in dimension 3, between ba-
sic geometric properties and having quasisymmetric parameterizations, and
which would come together in dimension 2. See [Sem7]. Parts of this are
reviewed or discussed in Subsection C.7, especially Subsubsection C.7.3.
Thus, not only does the method based on conformal and quasiconformal
mappings not work in higher dimensions, but some of the basic results that
one might hope to get or expect simply are not true, by examples which are
pretty concrete.
These examples can be viewed as geometrizations of classical examples
from geometric topology, and they are based on practically the same princi-
ples. They are not especially strange or pathological or anything like that,
112

but have a lot of nice properties. They reﬂect basic phenomena that occur.
This is all pretty neat! One has kinds of “parallel tracks”, with geometric
topology on one side, and aspects of geometry and analysis on the other. A
priori, these two tracks can exist independently, even if there are ways in
which each can be involved in the other.
Each of these two tracks has special features in low dimensions. This con-
cerns the existence of homeomorphisms with certain properties, for instance.
Each has statements and results and machinery which make sense for the
given track, and not for the other side, even if there are also some overlaps
(as with applications of Riemann mappings).
Each of these two tracks also starts running into trouble in higher di-
mensions, and at about the same time! We have seen a number of instances
of this by now, in this subsection, in this appendix more broadly, and also
Section 3. The kinds of trouble that they encounter can be rather diﬀerent
a priori (such as localized fundamental group conditions, versus behavior of
partial diﬀerential equations), even if there is again signiﬁcant overlap be-
tween them. In particular, this concerns the existence of homeomorphisms
with good properties.
C.8.1
Special coordinates that one might consider in other dimen-
sions
We have already discussed a number of basic topological phenomena in this
appendix. Let us now brieﬂy consider a couple of things that one might try
in higher dimensions on the side of geometry and analysis, in similar veins
as above.
One basic approach would be to try to ﬁnd and use mappings which
minimize some kind of “energy”. As before, one can consider smooth metrics
on smooth manifolds (like Sn), and try to get parameterizations with uniform
bounds on their behavior, under modest conditions on the geometry of the
spaces. (One can also try to work directly with spaces and metric that are
not smooth.)
A very standard energy functional to consider would be the L2 norm of the
diﬀerential, as with harmonic mappings. In dimension 2, conformal mappings
can be placed in this framework. One can also consider energy functionals
based on Lp norms of diﬀerentials of mappings. This is more complicated
in terms of the diﬀerential equations that come up, but it can have other
advantages. The choice of p as the dimension n has some particularly nice
113

features, for having the energy functional cooperate with the geometry (and
analysis). (This is one of the ways that n = 2 is special; for this one can
have both p = n and p = 2 at the same time!) In particular, the energy
becomes invariant under conformal changes in the metric when p is equal to
the dimension.
In elasticity theory, one considers more elaborate energy functionals as
well.
For instance, these might include integral norms of the inverse of
the Jacobian of the mapping, in addition to Lp norms of the diﬀerentials. In
other words, the functional can try to limit both the way that the diﬀerential
becomes large and small, so that it takes into account both stretchings and
compressions.
In any case, although there is a lot of work concerning existence and
behavior of minimizers for functionals like these, I do not really know of
results in dimensions n ≥3 where they can be used to obtain well-behaved
parameterizations of spaces, with bounds, under modest or general geometric
conditions. This is especially true in comparison with what one can get in
dimension 2, as discussed before.
This is a bit unfortunate, compared with the way that the normal form of
conformal mappings can be so useful in dimension 2. On the other hand, per-
haps someone will ﬁnd ways of using such variational problems for geometric
questions like these some day, or will ﬁnd some kind of special structure
connected to them. In this regard, one might bear in mind issues related to
mappings with branching, as in Appendix B. We shall say a bit more about
this later in this subsection.
One might also keep in mind the existence of spaces with good proper-
ties, but not good parameterizations, as mentioned earlier (and discussed in
Subsubsections C.7.3 and C.7.4, and in [Sem7, Sem8]).
In dimension 3, there is another kind of special structure that one might
consider. Namely, instead of metrics which are conformal deformations of
the standard Euclidean metric, let us consider metrics g = gi,j for which only
the diagonal entries gi,i are nonzero.
In this case the diagonal entries are allowed to vary independently. For
conformal deformations of the standard Euclidean metric, the oﬀ-diagonal
entries are zero, and the diagonal entries are all equal.
In dimension 3, the problem of making a change of variables to put a
given metric into diagonal form like this is “determined”, in the same way as
for conformal deformations of Euclidean metrics in dimension 2. Speciﬁcally,
one can compute as follows. A general Riemannian metric is described by
114

n(n + 1)/2 real-valued functions of n variables, which means 6 real-valued
functions of 3 real variables in dimension 3.
Metrics with only diagonal
nonzero entries are deﬁned by 3 real-valued functions of 3-real variables, and
changes of variables are given by 3 real-valued functions of 3 real variables
as well. Thus, allowing for changes of variables, the metrics that can be
reduced to diagonal metrics can be described by 6 real-valued functions of 3
real-variables, which is the same as for the total family of Riemannian metrics
in this dimension. In dimensions greater than or equal to 4, this would not
work, and there would again be too many Riemannian metrics in general
compared to diagonal metrics and ways of reducing to them via changes of
variables.
Of course this is just an informal “dimension” count, and not a justiﬁca-
tion for being able to put metrics into diagonal form in dimension 3. (One
should also be careful that there is not signiﬁcant overlap between changes
of variables and diagonal metrics, i.e., so that there was no “overcounting”
for the combination of them.) However, it does turn out that one can put
metrics in diagonal form (in dimension 3), at least locally. This was estab-
lished in [DeTY] in the case of smooth metrics. There were earlier results in
the real-analytic category. (See [DeTY] for more information.)
However, this type of “normal form” does not seem to be as useful for
the present type of issue as conformal parameterizations are. As in the case
of conformal coordinates, part of the problem is that even if one has such a
normal form, one does not a priori know anything about the behavior of the
diagonal entries of the metric in this normal form. One would need methods
of getting estimates without this information, and only the nature of the nor-
mal form. In the context of conformal mappings, one has extremal lengths,
conformal capacities, and other conformal and quasiconformal invariants and
quasi-invariants. For diagonal metrics, it is not clear what one might do.
A related point is that the analysis of the partial diﬀerential equations
which permits one to put smooth Riemannian metrics in dimension 3 into di-
agonal form is roughly “hyperbolic”, in the same way that the corresponding
diﬀerential equations for conformal coordinates in dimension 2 are elliptic.
See [DeTY]. This is closely connected to the kind of stability that one has
for conformal mappings, and the possibilities for having estimates for them
under mild or primitive geometric conditions.
In a way this is all “just fair”, and nicely so.
With diagonal metrics
one does have something analogous to conformal coordinates in dimension 3.
On the other hand, this analogue behaves diﬀerently in fundamental ways,
115

including estimates. This is compatible with other aspects of the story as a
whole, like the topological and geometric examples that one has in dimension
3 (where homeomorphisms may not exist, with the properties that one might
otherwise hope for).
In any event, this illustrates how analytic and geometric methods seem to
behave rather diﬀerently in dimensions 3 and higher, compared to the spe-
cial structure and phenomena which occur in dimension 2. This is somewhat
remarkable in analogy with topological phenomena, which have similar diﬀer-
ences between dimensions. With the topology there are both some crossings
and overlaps with geometry and analysis, and much that is separate or inde-
pendent.
On the side of geometry and analysis, let us also note that there are
some other special features in low dimensions that we have not mentioned.
As a basic example, the large amount of ﬂexibility that one has in making
conformal mappings in dimension 2 leads to some possibilities in dimension
3 that are not available in higher dimensions. That is, the large freedom
that one has in dimension 2 can sometimes permit one to make more limited
constructions in dimension 3, e.g., by starting with submanifolds of dimension
2, and working from there (with extensions, gluings, etc.) These possibilities
in dimension 3 can be much more restricted than in dimension 2, but having
them at all can be signiﬁcantly more than what happens in higher dimensions.
We should also make clear that if one allows mappings with branching,
as in Appendix B, then a number of things can change. Some topological
diﬃculties could go away or be ameliorated, as has been indicated before
(and in Appendix B). For instance, the branching can unwind obstructions
or problems with localized fundamental groups (in complements of points or
other sets). There are many basic examples of this, as in Appendix B, and
the constructions in [HeiR1, HeiR2]. Ideas of Sullivan [Sul2, Sul3] are also
important in this regard (and as mentioned in Appendix B).
General pictures for mappings with branching, including existence and
good behavior, have yet to be fully explored or understood. The Alexan-
der argument described in Appendix B, the constructions of Heinonen and
Rickman [HeiR1, HeiR2], classical work on quasiregular mappings (as in
[Res, Ric1]), and the work of Sullivan [Sul2, Sul3], seem to indicate many
promising possibilities and directions.
One can perhaps use variational problems in these regards as well.
Concerning variational problems, one might also keep in mind the ap-
proaches of [DaviS9, DaviS11] (and some earlier ideas of Morel and Solimini
116

[MoreS]). For these one does not necessarily work directly with mappings
or potential parameterizations of sets, and in particular one may allow sets
themselves to be variables in the minimization (rather than mappings be-
tween ﬁxed spaces). This broader range can make it easier for the minimiza-
tions to lead to useful conclusions about geometric structure and complexity,
under natural and modest conditions. In particular, one can get substantial
“partial parameterizations”, as with uniform rectiﬁability conditions.
These approaches are also nicely compatible with the trouble that one
knows can occur, related to topology and homeomorphisms (and in geomet-
rically moderate situations, as in Subsections C.7 and C.7.4, and [Sem7,
Sem8]).
Finally, while we have mentioned a lot about the special phenomena that
can occur in dimension 2, and what happens in higher dimensions, we should
also not forget about dimension 1. This is even more special than dimension
2. This is a familiar theme in geometric topology, for the ways that one can
recognize and parameterize curves. In geometry and analysis, one can look
for parameterizations with bounds, and these are often constructible.
A fundamental point along the lines is the ability to make parameteri-
zations by arclength, for curves of locally ﬁnite length. More generally, one
can use parameterizations adapted to other measures (rather than length),
when they are around.
Arclength parameterizations provide a very robust and useful way for ob-
taining parameterizations in dimension 1 with good behavior and bounds.
In dimension 1, simple conditions in terms of mass can often be immedi-
ately “integrated” to get well-behaved parameterizations, in ways that are
not available (or do not work nearly as well) in higher dimensions, even in
dimension 2.
To put the matter in more concrete terms, in dimension 1 one can often
make parameterizations, or approximate parameterizations, simply by order-
ing points in a good way. This does not work in higher dimensions. Once
one has the ordering, one can regularize the geometry by parameterizing
according to arclength, or some other measure (as appropriate).
For another version of this, in connection with quasisymmetric mappings,
see Section 4 of [TukV].
In diﬀerential-geometric language, one might say that dimension 1 is spe-
cial for the way that one can make isometries between spaces, through ar-
clength parameterizations. This no longer works in dimension 2, but one
has conformal coordinates there. Neither of these are generally available in
117

higher dimensions. In higher dimensions one has less special structure for
getting the existence in general of well-behaved parameterizations, and then
the kinds and ranges of geometric and topological phenomena which can exist
open up in a large way.
C.9
Nonlinear similarity: Another class of examples
A very nice and concrete situation in which issues of existence and behavior of
homeomorphisms can come up is that of “nonlinear similarity”. Speciﬁcally,
it is possible to have linear mappings A, B on Rn which are conjugate to each
other by homeomorphisms from Rn onto itself — i.e., B = h◦A◦h−1, where
h is a homeomorphism of Rn onto itself — and which are not conjugate by
linear mappings!
Examples of this were given in [CapS2]. For related matters, including
other examples and conditions under which one can deduce linear equiva-
lence, see [CapS1, CapS3, CapS4, CapS5, CapS+, CapS∗, HamP1, HamP2,
HsiP1, HsiP2, KuiR, MadR1, MadR2, Mio, Rha1, Rha2, RotW, Wei1, Wei2,
Wilk].
Note that if one has a conjugation of linear mappings A and B by a diﬀeo-
morphism h on Rn, then one can derive the existence of a linear conjugation
from this. This comes from passing to the diﬀerential of the diﬀeomorphism
at the origin.
Thus, when a linear conjugation does not exist, but a homeomorphic
conjugation does, then the homeomorphism cannot be smooth at all points
in Rn, or even at just the origin. One might wonder then about the kinds of
processes and regularity that might be entailed in the homeomorphisms that
provide the conjugation. In this regard, see [CapS4, RotW, Wei1].
D
Doing pretty well with spaces which may
not have nice coordinates
If one has a topological or metric space (or whatever) which has nice coordi-
nates, then that can be pretty good.
However, there is a lot that one can do without having coordinates. As in
Section 3 and Appendix C, there are many situations in which homeomorphic
coordinates might not be available, or might be available only in irregular
forms, or forms with large complexity. Even if piecewise-linear coordinates
118

exist, for instance, it may not be very nice if they have enormous complexity,
as in Section 3.
Or, as in Section 3, local coordinates might exist, but one might not have
an algorithmic way to know this. Similarly, coordinates might exist, but it
may not be so easy to ﬁnd them.
As a brief digression, let us mention some positive results about situa-
tions in which coordinates exist, but are not as regular as one might like, at
least not at ﬁrst. Consider the case of topological manifolds, which admit
homeomorphic local coordinates, but for which there may not be a compati-
ble piecewise-linear or smooth structure. Homeomorphic coordinates are not
suitable for many basic forms of analysis in which one might be interested,
e.g., involving diﬀerential operators. However, there is a famous theorem
of Sullivan [Sul1], to the eﬀect that topological manifolds of dimension ≥5
admit unique quasiconformal and Lipschitz structures (for which one then
has quasiconformal and bilipschitz coordinates). (In dimensions less than or
equal to 3, unique piecewise-linear and smooth structures always exist for
topological manifolds, by more classical results. In dimension 4, quasicon-
formal and Lipschitz structures may not exist for topological manifolds, or
be unique. See [DonS]. Concerning smooth structures in dimension 4, see
[DonK, FreQ]. Some brief surveys pertaining to diﬀerent structures on man-
ifolds, and in general dimensions, are given in Section 8 in [FreQ], and the
“Epilogue” in [MilS].)
Thus, with Sullivan’s theorem, one has the possibility of improving the
structure in a way that does make tools of analysis feasible. Some references
related to this include [ConST1, ConST2, DonS, RosW, Sul1, SulT, Tel1,
Tel2].
Some aspects of working on spaces without good coordinates came up in
Section 4. One could also consider “higher-order” versions of this, along the
lines of diﬀerential forms. We shall not pursue this here, but for a clear and
simple version of this, one can look at the case of Euclidean spaces with the
geometry deformed through a metric doubling measure (as in [DaviS1, Sem5,
Sem10]). Some points about this are explained in [Sem10], beginning near
the bottom of p427. (Compare also with [Sem8], concerning the possible
behavior of Euclidean spaces with geometry deformed by metric doubling
measures.)
In this appendix, we shall focus more on traditional objects from algebraic
topology, like homology and cohomology groups. In this setting, there is a
lot of structure around, concerning spaces which might be approximately like
119

manifolds, but not quite manifolds.
Let us begin with some basic conditions. Let M be a topological space
which is compact, Hausdorﬀ, and metrizable. We shall assume that M has
ﬁnite topological dimension, in the sense of [HurW]. In these circumstances,
this is equivalent to saying that M is homeomorphic to a subset of some Rn.
(See [HurW].)
For simplicity, let us imagine that M simply is a compact subset of some
Rn. It is also convenient to ask that M be locally contractable. This means (as
in Subsubsection C.7.2) that for each point p ∈M, and each neighborhood
U of p in M, there is a smaller neighborhood V ⊆U of p in M such that V
can be contracted to a point in M.
As a class of examples, ﬁnite polyhedra are locally contractable. Finite
polyhedra make a nice special case to consider throughout this appendix,
and we shall return to it several times.
For another class of examples, one has cell-like quotients of topological
manifolds (and some locally contractable spaces more generally), at least
when the quotient spaces have ﬁnite topological dimension. See Corollary
12B on p129 of [Dave2]. (Cell-like quotients were discussed somewhat in
Appendix C, Subsections C.4 and C.6 in particular. Some concrete instances
of cell-like quotients are mentioned in these subsections, and [Dave2] provides
more examples and information.)
Although we shall mostly not emphasize metric structures or quantitative
aspects in the appendix, let us mention that cell-like quotients like these often
have natural and nice geometries, as indicated in Subsection C.7.
These
geometries are quite diﬀerent from those of ﬁnite polyhedra, but they can
also have some analogous properties. In particular, there can be forms of
self-similarity or scale-invariant boundedness of the geometry, and these can
be analogous to local conical structure in polyhedra in their eﬀects. They
are not as strong or special, and they are also more ﬂexible. In any case,
local contractability (and conditions like local linear contractability, in some
geometric settings) is a basic property to perhaps have.
As a general fact about local contractability, let us note the following.
Proposition D.1 Let M be a compact subset of some Rn. Then M is locally
contractable if and only if there is a set V ⊆Rn which contains M in its
interior, and a continuous mapping r : V →M which is a retract, i.e.,
r(w) = w for all w ∈V .
120

This is a fairly standard observation. The “if” part is an easy consequence
of the local contractability of Rn (through linear mappings). I.e., to get local
contractions inside of M, one makes standard linear contractions in Rn,
which normally do not stay inside M, and then one applies the retraction to
keep the contractions inside Rn.
For the converse, one can begin by deﬁning r on a discrete and reasonably-
thick set of points outside M, but near M. For such a point w, one could
choose r(w) ∈M so that it lies as close to w as possible (among points in M),
or is at least approximately like this. To ﬁll in r in the areas around these
discrete points, one can make extensions ﬁrst to edges, then 2-dimensional
faces, and so on, up to dimension n. To make these extensions, one uses local
contractability of M. It is also important that the local extensions do not go
to far from the selections already made, so that r : V →M will be continuous
in the end, and this one can also get from the local contractability.
The notion of “Whitney decompositions”, as in Chapter VI of [Ste1], is
helpful for this kind of argument. It gives a way of decomposing Rn\M into
cubes with disjoint interiors, and some other useful properties. (In particular,
this kind of decomposition can be helpful for keeping track of bounds, if one
should wish to do so.) One can use the vertices of these cubes for the discrete
set in the complement of M mentioned above.
See also [Dave2] for a proof of Proposition D.1, especially p117ﬀ.
Let us return now to the general story. Suppose that M is a compact
subset of Rn, and that M is locally contractable. Let r : V →M be a
continuous retraction on M, as in Proposition D.1. Thus V contains M in
its interior. By replacing V by a slightly smaller subset, if necessary, we may
assume that V is compact, and in fact that it is a ﬁnite union of dyadic cubes
in Rn. (A dyadic cube in Rn is one which can be represented as a Cartesian
product of intervals [ji 2−k, (ji + 1) 2−k], i = 1, 2, . . . , n, where the ji’s and k
are integers.)
This type of choice for V is convenient for having nice properties in terms
of homology and cohomology. In particular, V is then a ﬁnite complex. The
inclusion of M into V , and the mapping r : V →M, induce mappings be-
tween the homology and cohomology of M and V . If ι : M →V denotes the
mapping coming from inclusion, then r◦ι : M →M is the identity mapping,
and thus it induces the identity mapping on the homology and cohomology
of M. Using this, one can see that the mapping from the homology of M into
the homology of V induced by ι is an injection (in addition to being a group
homomorphism, as usual), and that the mapping from the homology of V to
121

the homology of M induced by r is a surjection. This follows from standard
properties of homology and mappings, as in [Mas]. Similarly, r induces a
mapping from cohomology of M to cohomology of V which is injective, and
ι induces a mapping from cohomology of V into cohomology of M which is
surjective.
This provides a simple way in which the algebraic topology of M can
be “bounded”, under the type of assumptions on M that we are making.
(There are more reﬁned things that one can also do, but we shall not worry
about this here.) Local contractability, and the existence of a retraction as
in Proposition D.1, are also nice for making it clear and easy to work with
continuous mappings into M. In particular, one can get continuous mappings
into M from continuous mappings into V , when one has a retraction r : V →
M, as above. This is as opposed to standard examples like the closure of the
graph of sin(1/x), x ∈[−1, 1]\{0}. (This set is connected but not arcwise
connected.)
Now let us consider the following stronger conditions on M.
Deﬁnition D.2 (Generalized k-Manifolds) Let M be a compact subset
of Rn which is locally contractable. Then M is a generalized k-manifold if
for every point z ∈M, the relative homology Hj(M, M\{z}) is the same (up
to isomorphism) as the relative homology of Hj(Rk, Rk\{0}) for each j. (In
other words, Hj(M, M\{z}) should be zero when j ̸= k, and isomorphic to
Z when j = k.)
We are implicitly working with homology deﬁned over the integers here,
and there are analogous notions with respect to other coeﬃcient groups (like
rational numbers, for instance). One may also wish to use weaker conditions
than local contractability (as in [Bred2, Wild]).
There are other natural
variations for this concept.
If M is a ﬁnite polyhedron, then the property of being a generalized
manifold is equivalent to asking that the links of M be homology spheres
(i.e., have the same homology as standard spheres, up to isomorphism) of
the right dimension. Such a polyhedron may not be a topological manifold
(in dimensions greater than or equal to 4), because the codimension-1 links
may not be simply-connected. (This is closely related to some of the topics
of Appendix C, and the condition (C.9) in Subsection C.3 in particular.)
Another class of examples comes from taking quotients of compact topo-
logical manifolds by cell-like decompositions (Subsections C.4 and C.6), at
122

least when the quotient space has ﬁnite topological dimension. See Corollary
1A on p191 of [Dave2] (and Corollary 12B on p129 there), and compare also
with Theorem 16.33 on p389 of [Bred2], and [Fer4]. As in Appendix C (es-
pecially Subsections C.4 and C.6) and the references therein, such spaces are
not always topological manifolds themselves, in dimensions 3 and higher. For
a concrete example of this, one can take the standard 3-sphere, and collapse
a copy of the Fox–Artin (wild) arc to a point. (Compare with [Fer4].) One
could also collapse a Whitehead continuum to a point (where Whitehead
continua are as in Subsection C.2), as in Subsection C.4. As in Appendix C,
the fact that these spaces are not manifolds can be seen in the nontriviality of
localized fundamental groups, i.e., fundamental groups of the complement of
the distinguished point (corresponding to the Fox–Artin curve or Whitehead
continuum), localized at that point. This is analogous to the possibility of
having codimension-1 links in polyhedra which are not simply-connected, as
in the previous paragraph.
As usual, dimensions 1 and 2 are special for generalized manifolds, which
are then topological manifolds. See [Wild], Theorem 16.32 on p388 of [Bred2],
and the introduction to [Fer4].
For more on ways that generalized manifolds can arise, see [Bor2, Bred2,
Bry+, Bry∗, Dave2, Fer4, Wei2] (and the references therein). A related topic
is the “recognition problem”, for determining when a topological space is
a topological manifold. This is also closely connected to the questions in
Appendix C. Some references for this include [Bry+, Bry∗, Can1, Can2,
Can3, Dave2, Edw2, Fer4, Wei2].
What are some properties of generalized manifolds? In what ways might
they be like manifolds?
In particular, how might they be diﬀerent from
compact sets in Rn which are locally contractable in general?
A fundamental point is that Poincar´e duality (and other duality theorems
for manifolds) also work for generalized manifolds. See [Bor1, Bor2, Bred2,
Wild] and p277-278 of [Spa]. This is pretty good, since Poincar´e duality is
such a fundamental aspect of manifolds. (See [BotT, Bred1, Mas, MilS, Spa],
for instance.)
A more involved fact is that rational Pontrjagin classes can be deﬁned for
generalized manifolds. (See the introduction to [Bry+].)
For smooth manifolds, the deﬁnition of the Pontrjagin classes is classical.
(See [BotT, MilS].) More precisely, one can deﬁne Pontrjagin classes for vec-
tor bundles in general, and then apply this to the tangent bundle of a smooth
manifold to get the Pontrjagin classes of a manifold. As integral cohomol-
123

ogy classes, the Pontrjagin classes are preserved by diﬀeomorphisms between
smooth manifolds, but not, in general, by homeomorphisms. However, a fa-
mous theorem of Novikov is that the Pontrjagin classes of smooth manifolds
are preserved as rational cohomology classes by homeomorphisms in general.
Further developments lead to the deﬁnition of rational characteristic classes
on more general spaces.
For ﬁnite polyhedra, there is an earlier treatment of rational Pontrjagin
classes, which goes back to work of Thom and Rohlin and Schwarz. See
Section 20 of [MilS].
More precisely, this gives a procedure by which to
deﬁne rational Pontrjagin classes for ﬁnite polyhedra which are generalized
manifolds, and which is invariant under piecewise-linear equivalence. (For
this, the generalized-manifold condition can be given in terms of rational
coeﬃcients for the homology groups.) If one starts with a smooth manifold,
then there it can be converted to a piecewise-linear manifold (unique up to
equivalence) by earlier results, and the classical rational Pontrjagin classes
for the smooth manifold are the same as the ones that are obtained by the
procedure for polyhedral spaces. (See [MilS] for more information.)
The results mentioned above indicate some of the ways that generalized
manifolds are like ordinary manifolds. In particular, there is a large extent
to which one can work with them, including making computations or mea-
surements on them, in ways that are similar to those for ordinary manifolds.
This is pretty good! This is especially nice given the troubles that can
come with homeomorphisms, as in Section 3 and Appendix C. I.e., homeo-
morphisms can be diﬃcult to get or have, to begin with; even if they exist,
they may necessarily be irregular, as in the case of double-suspensions of ho-
mology spheres [SieS], manifold factors (Subsection C.5), some other classical
decomposition spaces (Subsections C.6, and C.7), and homeomorphisms be-
tween 4-dimensional manifolds (see [DonK, DonS, Fre, FreQ]); even if home-
omorphisms exist and are of a good regularity class, their complexity may
have to be very large, as in Section 3 and the results in [BooHP].
In the case of ﬁnite polyhedra, the condition of being a generalized man-
ifold involves looking at the homology groups of the links (as mentioned
before), and this is something which behaves in a fairly nice and stable way.
Compare with Appendix E. By contrast, the property of being a manifold
involves the fundamental groups of the links (at least in codimension 1 for
having topological manifolds), and this is much more complicated. We have
run into this already, in Section 3.
More generally, we have also seen in Appendix C how conditions related
124

to localized fundamental groups can arise, in connection with the existence
of homeomorphisms and local coordinates. This includes the vanishing of
π1 in some punctured neighborhoods of points in topological manifolds of
dimension at least 3. With generalized manifolds, one has certain types of
special structure, but one does not necessarily have localized π1 conditions
like these. This gives a lot of simplicity and stableness, as well as ﬂexibility.
E
Some simple facts related to homology
Let P be a ﬁnite polyhedron, which we shall think of as being presented
to us as a ﬁnite simplicial complex. Fix a positive integer k, and imagine
that one is interested in knowing whether the homology Hk(P) of P (with
coeﬃcients in Z) is 0 in dimension k. This is a question that can be decided
by an algorithm, unlike the vanishing of the fundamental group. This fact
is standard and elementary, but not necessarily too familiar in all quarters.
It came up in Section 3, and, for the sake of completeness, a proof will be
described here. (Part of the point is to make it clear that there are no hidden
surprises that are too complicated. We shall also try to keep the discussion
elementary and direct, with a minimum of machinery involved.)
The ﬁrst main point is that it suﬃces to consider simplicial homology of
P, rather than something more general and elaborate (like singular homol-
ogy). This puts strong limits on the type of objects with which one works.
By contrast, note that the higher homotopy groups of a ﬁnite complex need
not be ﬁnitely-generated. See Example 17 on p509 of [Spa]. This is true, but
quite nontrivial, for simply-connected spaces. See Corollary 16 on p509 of
[Spa].
Let us begin by considering the case of homology with coeﬃcients in the
rational numbers, rather than the integers. In this situation the homology is
a vector space over Q, and this permits the solution of the problem through
means of linear algebra. To be explicit, one can think of the vanishing of
the homology in dimension k in the following terms. One starts with the
set of k-dimensional chains in P (with coeﬃcients in Q), which is the set
of formal sums of oriented k-dimensional simplices with coeﬃcients in Q.
This is a vector space, and multiplication by −1 is identiﬁed with reversing
orientations on the simplices. The set of k-dimensional cycles then consists
of k-dimensional chains with “boundary” equal to 0. This can be described
by a ﬁnite set of linear equations in our vector space of k-dimensional chains.
125

The set of k-dimensional boundaries consist of k-dimensional chains which
are themselves boundaries of (k + 1)-dimensional chains. This is the same
as taking the span of the boundaries of (k + 1)-dimensional simplices in P,
a ﬁnite set. Chains which are boundaries are automatically cycles, and the
vanishing of the k-dimensional homology of P (with coeﬃcients in Q) is
equivalent to the equality of the vector space of cycles with the vector space
of boundaries. The problem of deciding whether this equality holds can be
reduced to computations of determinants, for instance, and one can use other
elementary techniques from linear algebra too.
In working with integer coeﬃcients, one has the same basic deﬁnitions of
chains, cycles, and boundaries, but now with coeﬃcients in Z rather than
Q. The spaces of chains, cycles, and boundaries are now abelian groups, and
the equations describing cycles and boundaries make sense in this context.
“Abelian” is a key word here, and a crucial diﬀerence between this and the
fundamental group. Homotopy groups πj in dimensions j ≥2 are always
abelian too, but they do not come with such a simple presentation.
Let us be more explicit again. The space of k-dimensional chains in P,
now with integer coeﬃcients, is a free abelian group, generated by the k-
dimensional simplices in P. One can think of it as being realized concretely
by Zr, where r is the number of k-dimensional simplices in P.
The set of cycles among the chains is deﬁned by a ﬁnite number of linear
equations, as above. That is, the cycles z ∈Zr are determined by ﬁnitely
many equations of the form
a1z1 + a2z2 + · · · + arzr = 0,
z = (z1, z2, . . ., zr) ∈Zr,
(E.1)
where the ai’s are themselves integers. In fact, for the equations which ac-
tually arise in this situation, the ai’s are always either 0, 1, or −1. It will be
useful, though, to allow for general vectors (a1, a2, . . ., ar) in this discussion,
and our computations will lead us to that anyway.
We begin with an observation about sets of vectors in Zr deﬁned by a
single homogeneous linear equation (with integer coeﬃcients).
Lemma E.2 Let r be a positive integer, and let a = (a1, a2, . . ., ar) be a
vector of integers. Set
Ca = {z ∈Zr : a1z1 + a2z2 + · · · + arzr = 0}.
(E.3)
Then there is a group homomorphism φa : Zr →Zr such that φa(Zr) =
Ca and φa(z) = z when z ∈Ca.
This homomorphism can be eﬀectively
constructed given r and a.
126

Let us prove Lemma E.2. Let r and a be given, as above. We may as
well assume that the a is not the zero vector, since if it were, Ca would be
all of Zr, and we could take φa to be the identity mapping.
We may also assume that the components ai of a are not all divisible by
an integer diﬀerent from 1 or −1, since we can always cancel out common
factors from the ai’s without changing Ca.
Sublemma E.4 Under these conditions (a is not the zero vector, and no
integers divide all of the components of a except ±1), there exists a vector
b = (b1, b2, . . ., br) of integers such that
a1b1 + a2b2 + · · · + arbr = 1.
(E.5)
A choice of b can be constructed eﬀectively given a.
The r = 2 version of this is solved by the well known “Euclidean al-
gorithm”. It is more commonly formulated as saying that if one has two
nonzero integers c and d, then one can ﬁnd integers e and f such that ce+df
is equal to the (positive) greatest common divisor of c and d. This can be
proved using the more elementary “division algorithm”, to the eﬀect that if
m and n are positive integers, with m < n, then one can write n as jm + i,
where j is a positive integer and 0 ≤i < m.
For general r one can reduce to the r = 2 case using induction, for
instance.
This is not hard to do, and we omit the details.
(We should
perhaps say also that the r = 1 case makes sense, and is immediate, i.e., a1
has to be ±1.)
Let us return now to Lemma E.2.
Given any z ∈Zr, write z · a for
z1c1 + z2c2 + · · · + zrcr. Deﬁne φa : Zr →Zr by putting
φa(z) = z −(z · a) b,
(E.6)
where b is chosen as in Sublemma E.4. This is clearly a group homomorphism
(with respect to addition). If z lies in Ca, then z · a = 0, and φa(z) = z. In
particular, φa(Zr) ⊇Ca. On the other hand, if z is any element of Zr, then
φa(z) · a = z · a −(z · a)(b · a),
(E.7)
and this is equal to 0, by (E.5). Thus φa(z) ∈Ca for all z ∈Zr, so that
φa(Zr) ⊆Ca too. This proves Lemma E.2.
Next we consider the situation of sets in Zr deﬁned by multiple linear
equations (with linear coeﬃcients).
127

Lemma E.8 Let a1, a2, . . ., ap be a collection of vectors in Zr, and deﬁne
C ⊆Zr by
C = {z ∈Zr : ai · z = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , p}.
(E.9)
Then there is a group homomorphism ψ : Zr →Zr such that ψ(Zr) = C and
ψ(z) = z when z ∈C. This homomorphism can be eﬀectively constructed
given r and the vectors a1, a2, . . ., ap.
To prove this, we use induction, on p. The point is basically to iterate
the construction of Lemma E.2, but one has to be a bit careful not to disrupt
the previous work with the new additions.
When p = 1, Lemma E.8 is the same as Lemma E.2. Now suppose that
we know Lemma E.8 for some value of p, and that we want to verify it for
p + 1.
Let a1, a2, . . . , ap+1 be a collection of vectors in Zr, and let Cp+1 denote
the set of vectors z ∈Zr which satisfy ai · z = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , p + 1, as
in (E.9). Similarly, let Cp denote the set of z ∈Zr such that ai · z = 0
when 1 ≤i ≤p. Our induction hypothesis implies that there is a group
homomorphism ψp : Zr →Zr such that ψp(Zr) = Cp and ψp(z) = z when
z ∈Cp, and which can be eﬀectively constructed given r and a1, a2, . . ., ap.
We want to produce a similar homomorphism ψp+1 for Cp+1.
The basic idea is to apply Lemma E.2 to the vector ap+1. This does not
quite work, and so we ﬁrst modify ap+1 to get a vector which has practically
the same eﬀect as ap+1 for deﬁning Cp+1, and which is in a more convenient
form.
Speciﬁcally, let α be the vector in Zr such that
α · z = ap+1 · ψp(z)
for all z ∈Zr.
(E.10)
It is easy to compute α given ap+1 and ψp. One can also describe α as the
vector which results by applying the transpose of ψp to ap+1.
For our purposes, the main properties of α are as follows. First,
α · z = ap+1 · z
when z ∈Cp.
(E.11)
This is a consequence of (E.10) and the fact that ψp(z) = z when z ∈Cp.
Second,
α · ψp(z) = α · z
for all z ∈Zr.
(E.12)
128

To see this, note that ψp(ψp(z)) = ψp(z) for all z, since ψp maps Zr into Cp
and ψp is equal to the identity on Cp, by construction. This and (E.10) give
(E.12).
Because of (E.11), we have that
Cp+1 = {z ∈Cp : α · z = 0}.
(E.13)
That is, Cp+1 = {z ∈Cp : ap+1 · z = 0}, by the deﬁnition of Cp+1 and Cp,
and then (E.13) follows from this and (E.11).
If α = 0, then Cp+1 = Cp, and we can stop here. That is, we can use ψp
for ψp+1. Thus we assume instead that α is not the zero vector.
Let α′ denote the vector in Zr obtained from α by eliminating all common
factors of the components of α which are positive integers greater than 1. In
particular, α is a positive integer multiple of α′. From (E.12) and (E.13), we
get that
α′ · ψp(z) = α′ · z
for all z ∈Zr
(E.14)
and
Cp+1 = {z ∈Cp : α′ · z = 0}.
(E.15)
Now let us apply Sublemma E.4 to obtain a vector β′ ∈Zr such that
α′ · β′ = 1.
(E.16)
Put β′′ = ψp(β′). Then
α′ · β′′ = 1,
(E.17)
because of (E.14). Also, β′′ lies in Cp, since ψp maps Zr into Cp. (It was for
this purpose that we have made the above modiﬁcations to ap+1, i.e., to get
β′′ ∈Cp.)
Now that we have all of this, we can proceed exactly as in the proof of
Lemma E.2. Speciﬁcally, deﬁne φ′ : Zr →Zr by
φ′(z) = z −(z · α′) β′′.
(E.18)
A key point is that
φ′(Cp) ⊆Cp,
(E.19)
which holds since β′′ ∈Cp, as mentioned above. Also,
φ′(z) · α′ = 0
for all z ∈zr,
(E.20)
129

because of (E.17) and the deﬁnition (E.18) of φ′(z). From this and (E.19) it
follows that
φ′(Cp) ⊆Cp+1,
(E.21)
using also (E.15).
On the other hand,
φ′(z) = z
whenever z ∈Zr, z · α′ = 0
(E.22)
(by the deﬁnition (E.18) of φ′). In particular, φ′(z) = z when z ∈Cp+1
(using (E.15) again). Combining this with (E.21), we get that
φ′(Cp) = Cp+1.
(E.23)
Now we are almost ﬁnished with the proof. Deﬁne ψp+1 : Zr →Zr by
ψp+1 = φ′ ◦ψp. This deﬁnes a group homomorphism (with respect to the
usual addition of vectors), since ψp and φ′ are group homomorphisms. We
also have that
ψp+1(Zr) = Cp+1;
(E.24)
this follows from (E.23) and the fact that ψp(Zr) = Cp, which was part of
our “induction hypothesis” on ψp.
Let us verify that
ψp+1(z) = z
whenever z ∈Cp+1.
(E.25)
If z ∈Cp+1, then z ∈Cp in particular. This implies that ψp(z) = z, again
by our “induction hypothesis” for ψp. Thus ψp+1(z) = φ′(z) in this case. We
also have that φ′(z) = z if z ∈Cp+1, because of (E.22) (and (E.15)). This
gives (E.25), as desired.
It is easy to see from this construction that ψp+1 is eﬀectively computable
from the knowledge of r and a1, a2, . . ., ap+1, given the corresponding asser-
tion for ψp. Thus ψp+1 has all the required properties. This completes the
proof of Lemma E.8.
Now let us return to the original question, about determining whether the
integral homology of a given ﬁnite complex vanishes in a given dimension.
We can put this into a purely algebraic form, as follows. Suppose that a
positive integer r is given, as well as two ﬁnite collections of vectors in Zr,
a1, a2, . . . , ap, and d1, d2, . . ., dq. Given this data, the problem asks,
is it true that for every z ∈Zr which satisﬁes ai · z = 0
(E.26)
for all i = 1, 2, . . . , p, there exist λ1, λ2, . . ., λq ∈Z
such that z = λ1d1 + λ2 d2 + · · · + λq dq?
130

The question of vanishing of homology is of this form, and so an eﬀective
procedure for determining an answer of “yes” or “no” to (E.26) also provides
a way to decide whether the homology of a given ﬁnite complex vanishes in
a given dimension.
Let us use Lemma E.8 to reduce (E.26) to a simpler problem, as follows.
Let r ∈Z+ and d1, d2, . . ., dq ∈Zr be given, and also another vector z ∈Zr.
Given this data, the new problem asks,
is it true that there exist λ1, λ2, . . . , λq ∈Z
(E.27)
such that z = λ1d1 + λ2 d2 + · · · + λq dq?
To show that (E.26) can be reduced to (E.27), let us ﬁrst mention an auxiliary
observation.
Suppose that vectors a1, a2, . . . , ap in Zr are given. Consider the set
C = {w ∈Zr : ai · w = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , p}.
(E.28)
Then there is a ﬁnite collection of vectors zj ∈C which generate C (as an
abelian group), and which can be obtained through an eﬀective procedure
(given r and a1, a2, . . ., ap).
This follows from Lemma E.8.
Speciﬁcally,
for the zj’s one can take ψp(ej), 1 ≤j ≤r, where ψp : Zr →Zr is the
homomorphism provided by Lemma E.8, and ej is the jth standard basis
vector in Zr, i.e., the vector whose jth component is 1 and whose other
components are 0. From Lemma E.8, we know that ψp maps Zr onto C, and
that ψp can be eﬀectively produced given r and a1, a2, . . . , ap. This implies
that zj = ψp(ej), 1 ≤j ≤r, generate C and can be eﬀectively produced as
well. (One might analyze this further to reduce the number of vectors in the
generating set, but this is not needed for the present purposes.)
Thus, in order to determine the answer to the question in (E.26), one can
ﬁrst apply this observation to produce a ﬁnite set of generators zj for C as
in (E.28). An answer of “yes” for the question in (E.26) is then equivalent to
having an answer of “yes” for the question in (E.27) for each zj (in the role
of z in (E.27)). In this way, we see that an algorithm for deciding the answer
to (E.27) gives rise to an algorithm for determining the answer to (E.26).
Now let us consider (E.27). Imagine that r, q ∈Zr and dℓ∈Zr, 1 ≤ℓ≤q,
are given. We want to know if there is a vector λ ∈Zq, λ = (λ1, λ2, . . ., λq),
such that
z = λ1d1 + λ2 d2 + · · · + λq dq.
(E.29)
131

Let us rewrite this as
zi = λ1d1
i + λ2 d2
i + · · · + λq dq
i
for i = 1, 2, . . . , r,
(E.30)
where zi, dℓ
i, 1 ≤i ≤r, denote the ith components of z, dℓ, respectively.
Deﬁne vectors δi ∈Zq by δi
j = dj
i for j = 1, 2, . . . , q. With this use of
“transpose” we can rewrite (E.30) as
zi = λ · δi
for i = 1, 2, . . . , r.
(E.31)
Here “·” denotes the usual dot product for vectors, although now for vectors
in Zq, rather than Zr, as before.
With (E.31), we are in a somewhat similar situation as we have considered
before, but with inhomogeneous equations rather than homogeneous ones.
Note that for the inhomogeneous equations there can be issues of torsion,
i.e., it may be that no solution λ ∈Zq to (E.31) exists, but a solution does
exist if one replaces zi with nzi for some positive integer n.
We want to have an eﬀective procedure for deciding when a vector λ ∈
Zq exists which provides a solution to (E.31). To do this, we shall try to
systematically reduce the number of equations involved. Consider ﬁrst the
equation with i = 1, i.e.,
z1 = λ · δ1.
(E.32)
If there is no λ ∈Zq which satisﬁes this single equation, then there is no
solution for the system (E.31) either. If there are solutions to this equation,
then we can try to analyze the remaining equations on the set of λ’s which
satisfy this equation.
In fact it is easy to say exactly when there is a λ ∈Zq which satisﬁes
(E.32). A necessary condition is that z1 be divisible by all nonzero integers
that divide each component δ1
j, 1 ≤j ≤q, of δ1. (If z1 or some δ1
j is 0, then it
is divisible by all integers.) This necessary condition is also suﬃcient, because
of Sublemma E.4. The validity or not of this condition can be determined
eﬀectively, and, when the condition holds, a particular solution eλ of (E.32)
can be produced eﬀectively from the knowledge of z1 and δ1, because of
Sublemma E.4.
If no solution to (E.32) exists in Zq, then one can simply stop, as the
answer to the question of the existence of a solution to the system (E.31) is
then known to be “no”. Let us suppose therefore that there is at least one
solution to (E.32). As in the preceding paragraph, this means that there is
a solution eλ which can be eﬀectively computed from the data.
132

Set L1 = {λ ∈Zq : z1 = λ · δ1}. The existence of a solution λ ∈Zq to
the original system of equations in (E.31) is equivalent to the existence of a
λ ∈L1 which satisﬁes
zi = λ · δi
for i = 2, . . . , r.
(E.33)
Thus we have reduced the number of equations involved, at the cost of having
a possibly more complicated set of λ’s as admissible competitors.
However, we can rewrite L1 as
L1 = {λ ∈Zq : (λ −eλ) · δ1 = 0}.
(E.34)
Set L′
1 = {τ ∈Zr : τ · δ1 = 0}. We can reformulate the question of whether
there is a λ ∈L1 such that (E.33) holds as asking whether there is a τ ∈L′
1
such that
zi + eλ · δi = τ · δi
for i = 2, . . . , r.
(E.35)
In other words, we can make a change of variables and modify the equa-
tions slightly so that the set L′
1 in which we look for solutions is deﬁned
by a homogeneous equation. This permits us to apply Lemma E.2 (with r
replaced by q) to get a homomorphism φ : Zq →Zq such that φ(Zq) = L′
1.
Using this, our question now becomes the following:
does there exist ξ ∈Zq such that
(E.36)
zi + eλ · δi = φ(ξ) · δi for i = 2, . . ., r?
This is equivalent to the earlier question, because the set of vectors τ ∈Zq
which lie in L′
1 is the same as the set of vectors of the form φ(ξ), where ξ is
allowed to be any element of Zq.
From Lemma E.2 we know that φ can be eﬀectively computed from the
knowledge of q and δ1. By making straightforward substitutions, we can
rewrite the equations in (E.36) as
bzi = ξ · bδi
for i = 2, . . . , r,
(E.37)
where the integers bzi and vectors bδi can be computed in terms of the original
zi’s and δi’s, eλ, and φ. In particular, they can be computed eﬀectively in
terms of the original data in the problem.
133

Thus we are back to the same kind of problem as we started with, asking
about the existence of a vector in Zq which satisﬁes a family of inhomoge-
neous linear equations. However, now we have reduced the number of equa-
tions by 1. By repeating the process, we can reduce to the case of a single
inhomogeneous equation, which we know how to solve (as we saw before).
This shows that there is an eﬀective method to determine the answer to
the question in (E.27). As indicated earlier, this also gives a method for
deciding the answer to the question in (E.26), and to the original problem
about vanishing of homology in a ﬁnite complex.
Let us brieﬂy mention a cruder and more naive approach to (E.27). If
the answer to (E.27) is “yes”, then it means that there do exist integers
λ1, λ2, . . ., λq which satisfy z = λ1d1 + · · · + λq dq. To look for an answer
of “yes” to (E.27), one can simply start searching among all vectors λ =
(λ1, λ2, . . ., λq) in Zq, stopping one ﬁnds a λ which satisﬁes the equation
above.
If the answer to the question in (E.27) is “no”, then this search will not
produce an answer in a ﬁnite amount of time. However, in this case one
can make a “dual” search to ﬁnd a reason for the vector z not to be in the
subgroup of Zr generated by d1, d2, . . . , dq, a reason which can also be found
in ﬁnite time, when it exists. Speciﬁcally, z does not lie in the subgroup
of Zr generated by d1, d2, . . . , dq if and only if there is a homomorphism
σ : Zr →Q/Z such that σ(dj) = 0 for each j but σ(z) ̸= 0. We shall explain
why this is true in a moment, but ﬁrst let us notice how this “reason” for an
answer of “no” does ﬁt our purpose.
A homomorphism σ : Zr →Q/Z can be described by r elements of Q/Z,
i.e., the values of σ on the r standard basis vectors in Zr. Any elements
of Q/Z can be used here, and elements of Q/Z can be described in ﬁnite
terms, i.e., by pairs of integers. The conditions σ(dj) = 0, 1 ≤j ≤q, and
σ(z) ̸= 0, can be veriﬁed in ﬁnite time in a straightforward manner. Thus, if
a σ : Zr →Q/Z exists with these properties, then it can be found in a ﬁnite
amount of time, through an exhaustive search.
If no such σ exists, then this exhaustive search will not stop in ﬁnite time.
However, the exhaustive search for the λ’s will stop in a ﬁnite time in this
case. Thus one can run the two searches in parallel, and stop whenever one
of them stops. One of the two searches will always stop in a ﬁnite amount
of time, and thereby give an answer of “yes” or “no” to the original question
(about whether z lies in the subgroup of Zr generated by d1, d2, . . . , dq).
Although naive, this argument ﬁts nicely with what happens for the prob-
134

lem of deciding whether the fundamental group of a ﬁnite complex is trivial.
When the answer is “yes”, one can ﬁnd this out in ﬁnite time, again through
exhaustive searches. In algebraic terms, one searches for realizations of the
generators of the fundamental group as trivial words, using the relations for
the fundamental group which can be read oﬀfrom the given complex. In
general there is no ﬁnite test for the nontriviality of words, however, and
indeed the original question is not algorithmically decidable.
In some cases, one might have extra information which does allow for
eﬀective tests for answers of “no”, and abelian groups are a very special
instance of this.
Let us come back now to the assertion above, that z ∈Zr does not lie
in the subgroup generated by d1, d2, . . ., dq ∈Zr if and only if there is a
homomorphism σ : Zr →Q/Z such that σ(dj) = 0 for j = 1, 2, . . . , q and
σ(z) ̸= 0. Of course this is closely analogous to familiar statements about
vectors in a vector space and linear mappings into the ground ﬁeld.
The “if” part of the statement above is immediate, and so it suﬃces
to consider the “only if” part. Thus we assume that z does not lie in the
subgroup generated by the dj’s, and we want to ﬁnd a homomorphism σ :
Zr →Q/Z with the required properties.
We begin by setting σ to be 0 on the subgroup generated by d1, d2, . . ., dq.
For σ(z) we have to be slightly careful. If there is a positive integer n such
that nz lies in the subgroup generated by d1, d2, . . . , dq, then we need to
choose σ(z) so that nσ(z) = 0. If no such n exists, take σ(z) to be the
element of Q/Z corresponding to 1/2 ∈Q. If such an n does exist, let n0 be
the smallest positive integer with that property. Thus n0 > 1, since z itself
does not lie in the subgroup generated by the dj’s. In this case we take σ(z)
to be the element of Q/Z which corresponds to 1/n0. This element is not 0,
since n0 > 1, but σ(n0z) is then 0 in Q/Z.
We now extend σ to the subgroup generated by z and the dj’s, in the
obvious way (so that σ is a homomorphism). One should be a bit careful
here too, i.e., that this can be done in a consistent manner, so that σ really is
well-deﬁned on the subgroup generated by z and the dj’s. This comes down
to the fact that if n is an integer such that nz lies in the subgroup generated
by d1, d2, . . ., dq, then n should be divisible by n0, which ensures that σ(nz)
is equal to 0 in Q/Z. These things are not hard to check.
Now we simply want to extend σ to all of Zr, in such a way that it is
still a homomorphism into Q/Z. This is not diﬃcult to do; for a general
assertion along these lines, see Theorem 4.2 on p312 of [Mas]. The main
135

point is that Q/Z is divisible, which means that for each element x of Q/Z
and each nonzero integer m, there is a y ∈Q/Z such that my = x. In order
to extend σ to all of Zr, one can extend it to new elements one at a time,
and to the subgroups that they generate together with the subgroup of Zr
on which σ is already deﬁned. The divisibility property of Q/Z guarantees
that there are always values available in Q/Z by which to make well-deﬁned
extensions. That is, if σ is already deﬁned on some subgroup H of Zr, and
w is an element in Zr not in H, then there is always a point in Q/Z to use
as the value of σ at w. This is not a problem if nw does not lie in H for
any nonzero integer n — in which case one could just as well take σ(w) = 0
— but if nw ∈H for some nonzero n, then one has to choose σ(w) so that
nσ(w) is equal to σ(nw), where the latter is already been determined by the
deﬁnition of σ on H.
By repeating this process, one can eventually extend σ so that it becomes
a homomorphism from all of Zr into Q/Z. For instance, one can apply this
process to the standard basis vectors in Zr, at least when they are not already
included in the subgroup of Zr on which σ has already been deﬁned (at the
given stage of the construction). In the end one obtains a homomorphism
σ : Zr →Q/Z such that σ(dj) = 0 for 1 ≤j ≤q and σ(z) ̸= 0, as desired.
136

References
[Ahl1]
L. Ahlfors, Complex Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1979.
[Ahl2]
L. Ahlfors, Lectures on Quasiconformal Mappings, Van Nos-
trand, 1966.
[Ahl3]
L. Ahlfors, Conformal Invariants: Topics in Geometric Function
Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1973.
[Akb]
S. Akbulut, A fake cusp and a ﬁshtail, Proceedings of the
5th G¨okova Geometry–Topology Conference (S. Akbulut et al.,
eds.), 1–14, 1998, published by Tubitak (the Scientiﬁc and Tech-
nical Research Council of Turkey), and distributed internation-
ally by International Press.
[Ale]
P.
Alestalo,
Uniform
domains
of
higher
order,
Annales
Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I Math.
Dissertationes 94, 1994.
[AleV1]
P. Alestalo and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Quasisymmetric embeddings of prod-
ucts of cells into the Euclidean space, Annales Academiæ Sci-
entiarum Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I Math. 19 (1994), 375–
392.
[AleV2]
P. Alestalo and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Uniform domains of higher order II,
Annales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I
Math. 21 (1996), 411–437.
[AleV3]
P. Alestalo and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Uniform domains of higher order III,
Annales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I
Math. 22 (1997), 445–464.
[AndC]
J. Andrews and M. Curtis, n-Space modulo an arc, Annals of
Mathematics (2) 75 (1962), 1–7.
[AndR]
J. Andrews and L. Rubin, Some spaces whose product with E1 is
E4, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 71 (1965),
675–677.
137

[Arm]
S. Armentrout, Bing’s dogbone space is not strongly locally sim-
ply connected, in Topics in Low-Dimensional Topology in Honor
of Steve Armentrout (A. Banyaga, H. Movahedi-Lankarani, and
R. Wells, eds.), 33–64, World Scientiﬁc, 1999.
[As1]
P. Assouad, Espaces M´etriques, Plongements, Facteurs, Th`ese
de Doctorat (January, 1977), Universit´e de Paris XI, 91405 Or-
say, France.
[As2]
P. Assouad, ´Etude d’une dimension m´etrique li´ee `a la possibilit´e
de plongement dans Rn, Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des
Sciences Paris, S´er. A 288 (1979), 731–734.
[As3]
P. Assouad, Plongements Lipschitziens dans Rn, Bulletin de la
Soci´et´e Math´ematique de France 111 (1983), 429–448.
[Att1]
O. Attie, Quasi-isometry classiﬁcation of some manifolds of
bounded geometry, Mathematische Zeitschrift 216 (1994), 501–
527.
[Att2]
O. Attie, Quasi-isometry classiﬁcation of coarse Hadamard
manifolds, DIMACS Technical Report 98–47, October, 1998.
[Aub]
T. Aubin, Nonlinear Analysis on Manifolds, Monge–Amp`ere
Equations, Springer-Verlag, 1982.
[Bin1]
R. Bing, A homeomorphism between the 3-sphere and the sum of
two solid horned spheres, Annals of Mathematics (2) 56 (1952),
354–362.
[Bin2]
R. Bing, A decomposition of E3 into points and tame arcs such
that the decomposition space is topologically diﬀerent from E3,
Annals of Mathematics (2) 65 (1957), 484–500.
[Bin3]
R. Bing, The Cartesian product of a certain nonmanifold and a
line is E4, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 64
(1958), 82–84.
[Bin4]
R. Bing, The Cartesian product of a certain nonmanifold and a
line is E4, Annals of Mathematics (2) 70 (1959), 399–412.
138

[Bin5]
R. Bing, A surface is tame if its complement is 1-ULC, Trans-
actions of the American Mathematical Society 101 (1961), 294–
305.
[Bin6]
R. Bing, The Geometric Topology of 3-Manifolds, American
Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications 40, 1983.
[Bin7]
R. Bing, Shrinking without lengthening, Topology 27 (1988),
487–493.
[Bin8]
R. Bing, The Collected Papers of R.H. Bing (S. Singh, S. Armen-
trout, and R. Daverman, eds.), American Mathematical Society,
1988.
[Bla]
W. Blankinship, Generalization of a construction of Antoine,
Annals of Mathematics (2) 53 (1951), 276–297.
[BloW]
J. Block and S. Weinberger, Large scale homology theories
and geometry, in Geometric Topology (Athens, Georgia, 1993)
(W. Kazez, ed.), AMS/IP Studies in Advanced Mathematics,
2.1, 522–569, American Mathematical Society, 1997.
[BooHP]
W. Boone, W. Haken, and V. Po´enaru, On recursively unsolvable
problems in topology and their classiﬁcation, in Contributions to
Mathematical Logic, Proceedings of the Logic Colloquium, Han-
nover, 1966 (H. Arnold Schmidt, K. Sch¨utte, and H.-J. Thiele,
eds.), 37–74, North-Holland, 1968.
[Bor1]
A. Borel, The Poincar´e duality in generalized manifolds, Micha-
gin Mathematical Journal 4 (1957), 227–239.
[Bor2]
A. Borel, Seminar on Transformation Groups, with contribu-
tions by G. Bredon, E. Floyd, D. Montgomery, and R. Palais,
Annals of Mathematics Studies 46, Princeton University Press,
1960.
[BotT]
R. Bott and L. Tu, Diﬀerential Forms in Algebraic Topology,
Springer-Verlag, 1982.
[Bred1]
G. Bredon, Topology and Geometry, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
139

[Bred2]
G. Bredon, Sheaf Theory, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag,
1997.
[BrezN]
H. Brezis and L. Nirenberg, Degree theory and BMO; Part I:
Compact manifolds without boundaries, Selecta Mathematica
(N.S.) 1 (1995), 197–263.
[BroLL]
W. Browder, J. Levine, and G. Livesay, Finding a boundary for
an open manifold, American Journal of Mathematics 87 (1965),
1017–1028.
[Brow1]
M. Brown, A proof of the generalized Shoenﬂies theorem, Bul-
letin of the American Mathematical Society 66 (1960), 74–76.
[Brow2]
M. Brown, Locally ﬂat embeddings of topological manifolds, An-
nals of Mathematics (2) 75 (1962), 331–341.
[Bry1]
J. Bryant, Euclidean spaces modulo a cell, Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae 63 (1968), 43–51.
[Bry2]
J. Bryant, Euclidean n-space modulo an (n−1)-cell, Transactions
of the American Mathematical Society 179 (1973), 181–192.
[Bry+]
J. Bryant, S. Ferry, W. Mio, and S. Weinberger, Topology of ho-
mology manifolds, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Soci-
ety (N.S.) 28 (1993), 324–328.
[Bry∗]
J. Bryant, S. Ferry, W. Mio, and S. Weinberger, Topology of ho-
mology manifolds, Annals of Mathematics (2) 143 (1996), 435–
467.
[BryS]
J. Bryant and C. Seebeck, Locally nice embeddings in codimen-
sion three, Quarterly Journal of Mathematics, Oxford (2) 21
(1970), 265–272.
[Bur]
C. Burgess, Embeddings of surfaces in Euclidean three-space,
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 81 (1975), 795–
818.
[BurC]
C. Burgess and J. Cannon, Embeddings of surfaces in E3, Rocky
Mountain Journal of Mathematics 1 (1971), 259–344.
140

[Cal1]
A. Calder´on, Cauchy integrals on Lipschitz curves and related
operators, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
U.S.A. 74 (1977), 1324–1327.
[Cal2]
A. Calder´on, Commutators, singular integrals on Lipschitz
curves and applications,
Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians (Helsinki, 1978), 85–96, Academiæ
Scientiarum Fennicæ, 1980.
[Can1]
J. Cannon, The characterization of topological manifolds of di-
mension n ≥5, Proceedings of the International Congress of
Mathematicians (Helsinki, 1978), 449–454, Academiæ Scien-
tiarum Fennicæ, 1980.
[Can2]
J. Cannon, The recognition problem: What is a topological mani-
fold?, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 84 (1978),
832–866.
[Can3]
J. Cannon, Shrinking cell-like decompositions of manifolds: codi-
mension 3, Annals of Mathematics (2) 110 (1979), 83–112.
[CapS1]
S. Cappell and J. Shaneson, Nonlinear similarity of matrices,
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society (N.S.) 1 (1979),
899–902.
[CapS2]
S. Cappell and J. Shaneson, Nonlinear Similarity, Annals of
Mathematics (2) 113 (1981), 315–355.
[CapS3]
S. Cappell and J. Shaneson, The topological rationality of linear
representations, Publications Math´ematiques (IHES) 56 (1982),
101–128.
[CapS4]
S. Cappell and J. Shaneson, Nonlinear similarity and diﬀeren-
tiability, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 38
(1985), 697–706.
[CapS5]
S. Cappell and J. Shaneson, Nonlinear similarity and linear sim-
ilarity are equivariant below dimension 6, in Tel Aviv Topology
Conference: Rothenberg Festschrift (M. Farber, W. L¨uck, and
S. Weinberger, eds.), 59–66, Contemporary Mathematics 231,
American Mathematical Society, 1999.
141

[CapS+]
S. Cappell, J. Shaneson, M. Steinberger, and J. West, Nonlinear
similarity begins in dimension six, American Journal of Mathe-
matics 111 (1989), 717–752.
[CapS∗]
S. Cappell, J. Shaneson, M. Steinberger, S. Weinberger, and
J. West, The classiﬁcation of nonlinear similarities over Z2r,
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society (N.S.) 22 (1990),
51–57.
[ChaF]
T. Chapman and S. Ferry, Approximating homotopy equiva-
lences by homeomorphisms, American Journal of Mathematics
101 (1979), 583–607.
[Che]
J. Cheeger, Finiteness theorems for Riemannian manifolds,
American Journal of Mathematics 92 (1970), 61–74.
[CoiDM]
R. Coifman, G. David, and Y. Meyer, La solution des conjectures
de Calder´on, Advances in Mathematics 48 (1983), 144–148.
[CoiMcM]
R. Coifman, A. McIntosh, and Y. Meyer, L’int´egrale de Cauchy
d´eﬁnit un op´erateur born´e sur L2 pour les courbes lipschitzi-
ennes, Annals of Mathematics (2) 116 (1982), 361–387.
[CoiMe1]
R. Coifman and Y. Meyer, Le th´eor`eme de Calder´on par les
m´ethodes de variable r´eelle, Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des
Sciences Paris, S´er. A, 289 (1979), 425–428.
[CoiMe2]
R. Coifman and Y. Meyer, Une g´en´eralisation du th´eor`eme de
Calder´on sur l’int´egrale de Cauchy, in Fourier Analysis, Pro-
ceedings of the Seminar held at El Escorial, June, 1979 (M. de
Guzm´an and I. Peral, eds.), Asociaci´on Matem´atica Espa˜nola,
Madrid, 1980.
[CoiMe3]
R. Coifman and Y. Meyer, Lavrentiev’s curves and conformal
mapping, Institut Mittag-Leﬄer, Report No. 5, 1983.
[CoiW1]
R.
Coifman
and
G.
Weiss,
Analyse
Harmonique
Non-
Commutative sur Certains Espaces Homog`enes, Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 242, Springer-Verlag, 1971.
142

[CoiW2]
R. Coifman and G. Weiss, Extensions of Hardy spaces and their
use in analysis, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society
83 (1977), 569–645.
[Con]
R. Connelly, A new proof of Brown’s collaring theorem, Proceed-
ings of the American Mathematical Society 27 (1971), 180–182.
[ConST1]
A. Connes, D. Sullivan, and N. Teleman, Formules locales pour
les classes de Pontrjagin topologiques, Comptes Rendus des
S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences S´er. I Math. 317 (1993),
521–526.
[ConST2]
A. Connes, D. Sullivan, and N. Teleman, Quasiconformal map-
pings, operators on Hilbert space, and local formulae for charac-
teristic classes, Topology 33 (1994), 663–681.
[Dah1]
B. Dahlberg, Harmonic functions in Lipschitz domains, in Har-
monic analysis in Euclidean spaces, Proceedings of Symposia in
Pure Mathematics 35, Part 1, 313–322, American Mathematical
Society, 1979.
[Dah2]
B. Dahlberg, Real analysis and potential theory, Proceedings of
the International Congress of Mathematicians (Warsaw, 1983),
953–959, PWN, Warsaw, 1984.
[Dave1]
R. Daverman, Embeddings of (n −1)-spheres in Euclidean n-
space, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 84 (1978),
377–405.
[Dave2]
R. Daverman, Decompositions of Manifolds, Academic Press,
1986.
[Davi1]
G. David, Courbes de Lavrentiev et int´egrales singulieres, These
de 3◦cycle, Universit´e de Paris-Sud, 1981.
[Davi2]
G. David, Op´erateurs int´egraux singuliers sur certaines courbes
du plan complexe, Annales Scientiﬁques de l’´Ecole Normale
Sup´erieure (4) 17 (1984), 157–189.
[Davi3]
G. David, Op´erateurs d’int´egrale singuli`ere sur les surfaces
r´eguli`eres, Annales Scientiﬁques de l’´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure
(4) 21 (1988), 225–258.
143

[Davi4]
G. David, Morceaux de graphes lipschitziens et int´egrales sin-
guli`eres sur un surface, Revista Matem´atica Iberoamericana 4
(1988), 73–114.
[Davi5]
G. David, Wavelets and Singular Integrals on Curves and Sur-
faces, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1465, Springer-Verlag,
1991.
[DaviS1]
G. David and S. Semmes, Strong A∞-weights, Sobolev inequali-
ties, and quasiconformal mappings, in Analysis and Partial Dif-
ferential Equations (C. Sadosky, ed.), 101–111, Marcel Dekker,
1990.
[DaviS2]
G. David and S. Semmes, Harmonic analysis and the geometry
of subsets of Rn, Publicacions Matem`atiques 35 (1991), 237–
249.
[DaviS3]
G. David and S. Semmes, Singular Integrals and Rectiﬁable
Sets in Rn: Au-del`a des graphes lipschitziens, Ast´erisque 193,
Soci´et´e Math´ematique de France, 1991.
[DaviS4]
G. David and S. Semmes, Quantitative rectiﬁability and Lip-
schitz mappings, Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society 337 (1993), 855–889.
[DaviS5]
G. David and S. Semmes, Analysis of and on Uniformly Recti-
ﬁable Sets, American Mathematical Society, 1993.
[DaviS6]
G. David and S. Semmes, On the singular sets of minimizers of
the Mumford–Shah functional, Journal de Math´ematiques Pures
et Appliqu´ees 75 (1996), 299–342.
[DaviS7]
G. David and S. Semmes, Uniform Rectiﬁability and Singular
Sets, Annales Institut Henri Poincar´e, Analyse Non Lin´eare, 13
(1996), 383–443.
[DaviS8]
G. David and S. Semmes, Fractured Fractals and Broken
Dreams: Self-Similar Geometry through Metric and Measure,
Oxford University Press, 1997.
144

[DaviS9]
G. David and S. Semmes, Quasiminimal surfaces of codimension
1 and John domains, Paciﬁc Journal of Mathematics 183 (1998),
213–277.
[DaviS10]
G.
David
and
S.
Semmes,
Sets
and
their
approx-
imations
by
surfaces,
preprint,
1997.
Available
at
ftp://math.rice.edu/pub/semmes in various formats (comp-
geom.dvi, compgeom.ps, etc.)
[DaviS11]
G. David and S. Semmes, Uniform Rectiﬁability and Quasimini-
mizing Sets of Arbitrary Codimension, Memoirs of the American
Mathematical Society 687, 2000.
[DeTY]
D. DeTurck and D. Yang, Existence of elastic deformations with
prescribed principal strains and triply orthogonal systems, Duke
Mathematical Journal 51 (1984), 243–260.
[DonK]
D. Donaldson and P. Kronheimer, The Geometry of Four-
Manifolds, Oxford University Press, 1990.
[DonS]
S. Donaldson and D. Sullivan, Quasiconformal 4-manifolds,
Acta Mathematica 163 (1989), 181–252.
[Dor]
J. Dorronsoro, A characterization of potential spaces, Proceed-
ings of the American Mathematical Society 95 (1985), 21–31.
[Dra]
A. Dranishnikov, On a problem of P.S. Aleksandrov, Mat.
Sbornik (N.S.) 135 (1988), 551–557, 560; English translation
in Mathematics of the USSR–Sbornik 63 (1989), 539–545.
[Edw1]
R. Edwards, Demension theory, I, in Geometric Topology, Lec-
ture Notes in Mathematics 438 (L. Glaser and T. Rushing, eds.),
195–211, Springer-Verlag, 1975.
[Edw2]
R. Edwards, The topology of manifolds and cell-like maps,
Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians
(Helsinki, 1978), 111–127, Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ,
1980.
[Eps]
D. Epstein, Projective planes in 3-manifolds, Proceedings of the
London Mathematical Society (3) 11 (1961), 469–484.
145

[Eps+]
D. Epstein, J. Cannon, D. Holt, S. Levy, M. Paterson, and
W. Thurston, Word Processing in Groups, Jones and Bartlett,
1992.
[EvaM]
B. Evans and L. Moser, Solvable fundamental groups of com-
pact 3-manifolds, Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society 168 (1972), 189–210.
[Fal]
K. Falconer, The Geometry of Fractal Sets, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1984.
[Far]
B. Farb, Automatic groups:
A guided tour, L’Enseignement
Math´ematique (2) 38 (1992), 291–313.
[Fed]
H. Federer, Geometric Measure Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1969.
[Fer1]
S. Ferry, Homotoping ϵ-maps to homeomorphisms, American
Journal of Mathematics 101 (1979), 567–582.
[Fer2]
S. Ferry, Counting simple-homotopy types of topological mani-
folds, preprint.
[Fer3]
S. Ferry,
Topological ﬁniteness theorems for manifolds in
Gromov–Hausdorﬀspace,
Duke Mathematical Journal
74
(1994), 95–106.
[Fer4]
S. Ferry, Controlled Topology and the Characterization of Man-
ifolds, to appear, American Mathematical Society.
[Fla]
H. Flanders, Diﬀerential Forms, with Applications, Academic
Press, 1963.
[Fre]
M. Freedman, The topology of four-dimensional manifolds, Jour-
nal of Diﬀerential Geometry 17 (1982), 357–453.
[FreQ]
M. Freedman and F. Quinn, Topology of 4-Manifolds, Princeton
University Press, 1990.
[FreS]
M. Freedman and R. Skora, Strange actions of groups on spheres,
Journal of Diﬀerential Geometry 25 (1987), 75–89.
146

[Fu]
J. Fu, Bi-Lipschitz rough normal coordinates for surfaces with
an L1 curvature bound, Indiana University Mathematics Journal
47 (1998), 439–453.
[GarcR]
J. Garc´ıa-Cuerva and J. Rubio de Francia, Weighted Norm In-
equalities and Related Topics, North-Holland, 1985.
[Garn]
J. Garnett, Bounded Analytic Functions, Academic Press, 1981.
[GarnJ]
J. Garnett and P. Jones, The corona theorem for Denjoy do-
mains, Acta Mathematica 155 (1985), 29–40.
[Geh1]
F. Gehring, Extension theorems for quasiconformal mappings in
n-space, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathe-
maticians (Moscow, 1966), 313–318.
[Geh2]
F. Gehring, The Hausdorﬀmeasure of sets which link in Eu-
clidean space, in Contributions to Analysis, A Collection of Pa-
pers Dedicated to Lipman Bers (L. Ahlfors, I. Kra, B. Maskit,
and L. Nirenberg, eds.), 159–167, Academic Press, 1974.
[Geh3]
F. Gehring, The Lp integrability of the partial derivatives of a
quasiconformal mapping, Acta Mathematica 130 (1973), 265–
277.
[Giu]
E. Giusti, Minimal Surfaces and Functions of Bounded Varia-
tion, Birkh¨auser, 1984.
[GreP]
R. Greene and P. Petersen V, Little topology, big volume, Duke
Mathematical Journal 67 (1992), 273–290.
[GrePW]
K. Grove, P. Petersen V, and J.-Y. Wu, Geometric ﬁniteness
theorems via controlled topology, Inventiones Mathematicae 99
(1990), 205–213; erratum, 104 (1991), 221–222.
[Gro1]
M. Gromov, Structures M´etriques pour les Vari´et´es Rieman-
niennes (J. Lafontaine and P. Pansu, eds.), Cedic/Fernand
Nathan, Paris, 1981.
[Gro2]
M. Gromov et al., Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-
Riemannian Spaces, Birkh¨auser, 1999.
147

[Gro3]
M. Gromov, Quantitative homotopy theory, in Prospects in
Mathematics: Invited Talks on the Occasion of the 250th An-
niversary of Princeton University (H. Rossi, ed.), 45–49, Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 1999.
[Gut+]
V. Gutlyanski˘ı, O. Martio, V. Ryazanov, and M. Vuorinen, On
local injectivity and asymptotic linearity of quasiregular map-
pings, Studia Mathematica 128 (1998), 243–271.
[HamP1]
I. Hambleton and E. Pedersen, Nonlinear similarity revisited, in
Prospects in Topology: Proceedings of a Conference in Honor of
William Browder (F. Quinn, ed.), 157–174, Annals of Mathe-
matics Studies 138, Princeton University Press, 1995.
[HamP2]
I. Hambleton and E. Pedersen, Topological equivalence of linear
representations for cyclic groups, preprint.
[HanH]
B. Hanson and J. Heinonen, An n-dimensional space that admits
a Poincar´e inequality but has no manifold points, Proceedings
of the American Mathematical Society 128 (2000), 3379–3390.
[Hat1]
A. Hatcher, Linearization in 3-dimensional topology, Proceed-
ings of the International Congress of Mathematicians (Helsinki,
1978), 463–468, Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ, 1980.
[Hat2]
A. Hatcher, A proof of the Smale conjecture, Diﬀ(S3) ≃O(4) ,
Annals of Mathematics (2) 117 (1983), 553–607.
[HeiKi]
J. Heinonen and T. Kilpel¨ainen, BLD-mappings in W 2,2 are lo-
cally invertible, to appear, Mathematische Annalen.
[HeiKiM]
J. Heinonen, T. Kilpel¨ainen, and O. Martio, Nonlinear Poten-
tial Theory of Degenerate Elliptic Equations, Oxford University
Press, 1993.
[HeiKo1]
J. Heinonen and P. Koskela, Deﬁnitions of quasiconformality,
Inventiones Mathematicae 120 (1995), 61–79.
[HeiKo2]
J. Heinonen and P. Koskela, From local to global in quasiconfor-
mal structures, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
U.S.A. 93 (1996), 554–556.
148

[HeiKo2]
J. Heinonen and P. Koskela, Quasiconformal maps in metric
spaces with controlled geometry, Acta Mathematica 181 (1998),
1–61.
[HeiKo+]
J. Heinonen, P. Koskela, N. Shanmugalingam, and J. Tyson,
Sobolev classes of Banach space-valued functions and Quasicon-
formal mappings, preprint.
[HeiR1]
J. Heinonen and S. Rickman, Quasiregular maps S3 →S3 with
wild branch sets, Topology 37 (1998), 1–24.
[HeiR2]
J. Heinonen and S. Rickman, Geometric branched covers between
generalized manifolds, Reports of the Department of Mathemat-
ics, University of Helsinki, Preprint 240, 1999. To appear, Duke
Mathematical Journal.
[HeiS]
J. Heinonen and S. Semmes, Thirty-three yes or no questions
about mappings, measures, and metrics, Conformal Geometry
and Dynamics 1 (1997), 1–12 (electronic).
[HeiY]
J. Heinonen and S. Yang, Strongly uniform domains and periodic
quasiconformal maps, Annales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ
Mathematica Ser. A I Math. 20 (1995), 123–148.
[Hem1]
J. Hempel, 3-Manifolds, Annals of Mathematics Studies 86,
Princeton University Press, 1976.
[Hem2]
J. Hempel, Residual ﬁniteness for 3-manifolds, in Combinatorial
Group Theory and Topology (Alta, Utah, 1984) (S. Gersten and
J. Stallings, eds.), 379–396, Annals of Mathematics Studies 111,
Princeton University Press, 1987.
[HsiP1]
W. Hsiang and W. Pardon, Orthogonal transformations for
which topological equivalence implies linear equivalence, Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society (N.S.) 6 (1982), 459–461.
[HsiP2]
W. Hsiang and W. Pardon, When are topologically equivalent or-
thogonal transformations linearly equivalent?, Inventiones Math-
ematicae 68 (1982), 275–316.
149

[HurW]
W. Hurewicz and H. Wallman, Dimension Theory, Princeton
University Press, 1941.
[Jac]
W. Jaco, Lectures on Three-Manifold Topology, American Math-
ematical Society, 1980.
[JerK1]
D. Jerison and C. Kenig, Hardy spaces, A∞weights, and singular
integrals on chord–arc domains, Mathematica Scandinavica 50
(1982), 221–247.
[JerK2]
D. Jerison and C. Kenig, Boundary value problems on Lips-
chitz domains, in Studies in Partial Diﬀerential Equations, MAA
Studies in Mathematics 23, 1–68, Mathematical Association of
America, 1982.
[Joh]
F. John, Rotation and strain, Communications on Pure and Ap-
plied Mathematics 14 (1961), 393–413.
[JohN]
F. John and L. Nirenberg, On functions of bounded mean oscil-
lation, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 14
(1961), 415–426.
[Jon1]
P. Jones, Square functions, Cauchy integrals, analytic capacity,
and harmonic measure, in Harmonic Analysis and Partial Dif-
ferential Equations, Proceedings of the conference held at El
Escorial, 1987 (J. Garcia-Cuerva, ed.), Lecture Notes in Mathe-
matics 1384, 24–68, Springer-Verlag, 1989.
[Jon2]
P.
Jones,
Lipschitz
and
bi-Lipschitz
functions,
Revista
Matem´atica Iberoamericana 4 (1988), 115–122.
[Jon3]
P. Jones, Rectiﬁable sets and the travelling salesman problem,
Inventiones Mathematicae 102 (1990), 1–15.
[Jou]
J.-L. Journ´e, Calder´on–Zygmund Operators, Pseudodiﬀerential
Operators, and the Cauchy Integral of Calder´on, Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 994, Springer-Verlag, 1983.
[Ker1]
M. Kervaire, Smooth homology spheres and their fundamental
groups, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 144
(1969), 67–72.
150

[Ker2]
M. Kervaire, Lectures on the Theorem of Browder and Novikov
and Siebenmann’s thesis, Notes by K. Varadarajan, Lectures on
Mathematics and Physics, Mathematics 46, Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research, 1969.
[KerM]
M. Kervaire and J. Milnor, Groups of homotopy spheres I, An-
nals of Mathematics (2) 77 (1963), 504–537.
[Kir]
R. Kirby, Topology of 4-Manifolds, Lecture Notes in Mathemat-
ics 1374, Springer-Verlag, 1989.
[KirS]
R. Kirby and L. Siebenmann, Foundational Essays on Topologi-
cal Manifolds, Smoothings, and Triangulations, Annals of Math-
ematics Studies 88, Princeton University Press, 1977.
[KuiR]
N. Kuiper and J. Robbin, Topological classiﬁcation of linear en-
domorphisms, Inventiones Mathematicae 19 (1973), 83–106.
[Lau]
F. Laudenbach, Les 2-sph`eres de R3 vues par A. Hatcher et
la conjecture de Smale Diﬀ(S3) ∼O(4), S´eminaire Bourbaki
1983/84, Ast´erisque 121–122 (1985), 279–293.
[LehV]
O. Lehto and K. Virtanen, Quasiconformal Mappings in the
Plane, Springer-Verlag, 1973.
[Luu]
J. Luukkainen, Assouad dimension:
Antifractal metrization,
porous sets, and homogeneous measures, Journal of the Korean
Mathematical Society 35 (1998), 23–76.
[LuuV]
J. Luukkainen and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Elements of Lipschitz topology,
Annales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I
Math. 3 (1977), 85–122.
[MadR1]
I. Madsen and M. Rothenberg, Classifying G spheres, Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society (N.S.) 7 (1982), 223–226.
[MadR2]
I. Madsen and M. Rothenberg, On the classiﬁcation of G-spheres
I: equivariant transversality, Acta Mathematica 160 (1988), 65–
104.
[Man]
Y. Manin, A Course in Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag,
1977.
151

[Mark1]
A. Markov, The insolubility of the problem of homeomorphy (in
Russian), Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR 121 (1958), 218–220.
[Mark2]
A. Markov, Unsolvability of certain problems in topology (in Rus-
sian), Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR 123 (1958), 978–980.
[Mark3]
A. Markov, Insolubility of the problem of homeomorphy (in Rus-
sian), Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathemati-
cians (Edinburgh, 1958), 300–306, Cambridge University Press,
1960.
[MartRiV1] O. Martio, S. Rickman, and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Deﬁnitions for quasireg-
ular mappings, Annales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Math-
ematica Ser. A I Math. 448 (1969), 1–40.
[MartRiV2] O. Martio, S. Rickman, and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Distortion and singular-
ities of quasiregular mappings, Annales Academiæ Scientiarum
Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I Math. 465 (1970), 1–13.
[MartRiV3] O. Martio, S. Rickman, and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Topological and metric
properties of quasiregular mappings, Annales Academiæ Scien-
tiarum Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I Math. 488 (1971), 1–31.
[MartRyV] O. Martio, V. Ryazanov, and M. Vuorinen, BMO and injectivity
of space quasiregular mappings, Mathematische Nachrichten 205
(1999), 149–161.
[MartV]
O. Martio and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Elliptic equations and maps of bounded
length distortion, Mathematische Annalen 282 (1988), 423–443.
[Mas]
W. Massey, A Basic Course in Algebraic Topology, Springer-
Verlag, 1991.
[Mat]
P. Mattila, Geometry of Sets and Measures in Euclidean Spaces,
Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[MatMV]
P. Mattila, M. Melnikov, and J. Verdera, The Cauchy integral,
analytic capacity, and uniform rectiﬁability, Annals of Mathe-
matics (2) 144 (1996), 127–137.
152

[MatP]
P. Mattila and D. Preiss, Rectiﬁable measures in Rn and exis-
tence of principal values for singular integrals, Journal of the
London Mathematical Society 52 (1995), 482–496.
[Maz]
B. Mazur, On embeddings of spheres, Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society 65 (1959), 59–65.
[McM]
D. McMillan, A criterion for cellularity in a manifold, Annals
of Mathematics (2) 79 (1964), 327–337.
[McMZ]
D. McMillan and E. Zeeman, On contractable open manifolds,
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 58 (1962),
221–224.
[Mil1]
J. Milnor, On manifolds homeomorphic to the 7-sphere, Annals
of Mathematics (2) 64 (1956), 399–405.
[Mil2]
J. Milnor, Two complexes which are homeomorphic but combina-
torially distinct, Annals of Mathematics (2) 74 (1961), 575–590.
[Mil3]
J. Milnor, Topology from the Diﬀerentiable Viewpoint, Univer-
sity of Virginia Press, 1965.
[MilS]
J. Milnor and J. Stasheﬀ, Characteristic Classes, Annals of
Mathematics Studies 76, Princeton University Press, 1974.
[Mio]
W. Mio, Nonlinearly equivalent representations of quarternionic
2-groups, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society
315 (1989), 305–321.
[Moi]
E. Moise, Geometric Topology in Dimensions 2 and 3, Springer-
Verlag, 1977.
[Moo]
R. Moore, Concerning upper semicontinuous collections of com-
pacta, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 27
(1925), 416–428.
[MoreS]
J.-M. Morel and S. Solimini, Variational Methods in Image Seg-
mentation, Birkh¨auser, 1995.
[Morg]
F. Morgan, Geometric Measure Theory, A Beginner’s Guide,
Academic Press, 1988.
153

[Mors]
M. Morse, A reduction of the Schoenﬂies extension problem, Bul-
letin of the American Mathematical Society 66 (1960), 113–115.
[M¨ulˇS]
S. M¨uller and V. ˇSver´ak, On surfaces of ﬁnite total curvature,
Journal of Diﬀerential Geometry 42 (1995), 229–258.
[Nab]
A. Nabutovsky, Einstein structures: existence versus unique-
ness, Geometric and Functional Analysis 5 (1995), 76–91.
[NabW1]
A. Nabutovsky and S. Weinberger, Algorithmic unsolvability of
the triviality problem for multidimensional knots, Commentarii
Mathematici Helvetici 71 (1996), 426–434.
[NabW2]
A. Nabutovsky and S. Weinberger, Algorithmic aspects of home-
omorphism problems, in Tel Aviv Topology Conference: Rothen-
berg Festschrift (M. Farber, W. L¨uck, and S. Weinberger, eds.),
245–250, Contemporary Mathematics 231, American Mathe-
matical Society, 1999.
[Nir]
L. Nirenberg, Topics in Nonlinear Functional Analysis, Courant
Institute of Mathematical Sciences, 1974.
[Oki]
K. Okikiolu, Characterization of subsets of rectiﬁable curves in
Rn, Journal of the London Mathematical Society Ser. II 46
(1992), 336–348.
[Pet1]
P. Petersen V, A ﬁniteness theorem for metric spaces, Journal
of Diﬀerential Geometry 31 (1990), 387–395.
[Pet2]
P. Petersen V, Gromov–Hausdorﬀconvergence of metric spaces,
Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics 54, Part 3, 489–
504, American Mathematical Society, 1993.
[Pom1]
C. Pommerenke, Schlichte Funktionen und analytische Funktio-
nen beschr¨ankter mittler Oszillation, Commentarii Mathematici
Helvetici 52 (1977), 591–602.
[Pom2]
C. Pommerenke, On univalent functions, Bloch functions, and
VMOA, Mathematische Annalen 236 (1978), 199–208.
154

[Pom3]
C. Pommerenke, Boundary behavior of conformal mappings, in
Aspects of Contemporary Complex Analysis (D. Brannen and
J. Clunie, eds.), 313–331, Academic Press, 1980.
[Qui1]
F. Quinn, Ends of maps and applications, Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society (N.S.) 1 (1979), 270–272.
[Qui2]
F. Quinn, Ends of maps I, Annals of Mathematics (2) 110
(1979), 275–331.
[Qui3]
F. Quinn, Ends of maps, III, Journal of Diﬀerential Geometry
17 (1982), 503–521.
[Qui4]
F. Quinn, Local algebraic topology, Notices of the American
Mathematical Society 33 (1986), 895–899.
[RanS]
D. Randall and P. Schweitzer, On foliations, concordance spaces,
and the Smale conjectures, in Diﬀerential Topology, Foliations,
and Group Actions (Rio de Janeiro, 1992), Contemporary
Mathematics 161, 235–258, American Mathematical Society,
1994.
[Rei]
H. Reimann, Functions of bounded mean oscillation and qua-
siconformal mappings, Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici 49
(1974), 260–276.
[Res]
Y. Reshetnyak, Space mappings with bounded distortion, Trans-
lations of Mathematical Monographs 73, American Mathemat-
ical Society, 1989.
[Rha1]
G. de Rham, Reidemeister’s torsion invariant and rotations of
Sn, in International Colloquium on Diﬀerential Analysis (1964:
Bombay, India), 27–36, Studies in Mathematics 2, published for
the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research by Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1964; see also Œuvres Math´ematiques, published by
L’Enseignement Math´ematique, 1981.
[Rha2]
G. de Rham, Hom´eomorphie des rotations de Sm:
´Evolution
d’un probl`eme, souvenirs, L’Enseignement Math´ematique (2) 27
(1981), 177–184.
155

[Ric1]
S. Rickman, Quasiregular Mappings, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
[Ric2]
S. Rickman, Construction of quasiregular mappings, in Quasi-
conformal Mappings and Analysis: A Collection of Papers Hon-
oring F.W. Gehring (P. Duren, J. Heinonen, B. Osgood, and
B. Palka, eds.), 337–345, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[RosW]
J. Rosenberg and S. Weinberger, Higher G-signatures for Lips-
chitz manifolds, K-Theory 7 (1983), 101–132.
[RotW]
M. Rothenberg and S. Weinberger, Group actions and equivari-
ant Lipschitz analysis, Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society (N.S.) 17 (1987), 109–112.
[RouS]
C. Rourke and B. Sanderson, Introduction to Piecewise-Linear
Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1972.
[Rub1]
J. Rubinstein, An algorithm to recognize the 3-sphere, Proceed-
ings of the International Congress of Mathematicians (Z¨urich,
1994), 601–611, Birkh¨auser, 1995.
[Rub2]
J. Rubinstein, Polyhedral minimal surfaces, Heegard splittings
and decision problems for 3-dimensional manifolds, in Geomet-
ric Topology (Athens, Georgia, 1993) (W. Kazez, ed.), AMS/IP
Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 2.1, 1–20, American Mathe-
matical Society, 1997.
[Rus1]
T. Rushing, Topological Embeddings, Academic Press, 1973.
[Rus2]
T. Rushing, Hausdorﬀdimension of wild fractals, Transactions
of the American Mathematical Society 334 (1992), 597–613.
[Sco]
G. Scott, Finitely generated 3-manifold groups are ﬁnitely pre-
sented, Journal of the London Mathematical Society (2) 6
(1973), 437–440.
[Sem1]
S. Semmes, Analysis vs. geometry on a class of rectiﬁable hy-
persurfaces in Rn, Indiana University Mathematics Journal 39
(1990), 1005–1035.
[Sem2]
S. Semmes, Chord–arc surfaces with small constant I, Advances
in Mathematics 85 (1991), 198–223.
156

[Sem3]
S. Semmes, Chord–arc surfaces with small constant II: Good pa-
rameterizations, Advances in Mathematics 88 (1991), 170–199.
[Sem4]
S. Semmes, Hypersurfaces in Rn whose unit normal has small
BMO norm, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society
112 (1991), 403–412.
[Sem5]
S. Semmes, Bilipschitz mappings and strong A∞weights, An-
nales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Mathematica Ser. A I
Math. 18 (1993), 211–248.
[Sem6]
S. Semmes, Finding structure in sets with little smoothness,
Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians
(Z¨urich, 1994), 875–885, Birkh¨auser, 1995.
[Sem7]
S. Semmes, Good metric spaces without good parameterizations,
Revista Matem´atica Iberoamericana 12 (1996), 187–275.
[Sem8]
S. Semmes, On the nonexistence of bilipschitz parameterizations
and geometric problems about A∞weights, Revista Matem´atica
Iberoamericana 12 (1996), 337–410.
[Sem9]
S. Semmes, Finding curves on general spaces through quantita-
tive topology, with applications to Sobolev and Poincar´e inequal-
ities, Selecta Mathematica (N.S.) 2 (1996), 155–295.
[Sem10]
S.
Semmes,
Some
remarks
about
metric
spaces,
spheri-
cal mappings, functions and their derivatives, Publicacions
Matem`atiques 40 (1996), 411–430.
[Sem11]
S. Semmes, Mappings and spaces, in Quasiconformal Mappings
and Analysis: A Collection of Papers Honoring F.W. Gehring
(P. Duren, J. Heinonen, B. Osgood, and B. Palka, eds.), 347–
368, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[Sem12]
S. Semmes, Metric spaces and mappings seen at many scales,
appendix in Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-
Riemannian Spaces, M. Gromov et al., Birkh¨auser, 1999.
[Sie1]
L. Siebenmann, The obstruction to ﬁnding a boundary for an
open manifold of dimension greater than 5, Thesis, Princeton
University, 1965.
157

[Sie2]
L. Siebenmann, Topological manifolds, Proceedings of the Inter-
national Congress of Mathematicians (Nice, 1970), Volume 2,
133–163, Gauthier-Villars, 1971.
[SieS]
L. Siebenmann and D. Sullivan, On complexes that are Lips-
chitz manifolds, in Geometric Topology (Athens, Georgia, 1977)
(J. Cantrell, ed.), 503–525, Academic Press, 1979.
[Sim]
L. Simon, Lectures on Geometric Measure Theory, Proceedings
of the Centre for Mathematical Analysis 3, Australian National
University, 1983.
[Spa]
E. Spanier, Algebraic Topology, McGraw-Hill, 1966.
[Sta1]
J. Stallings, On the piecewise-linear structure of Euclidean space,
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 58 (1962),
481–488.
[Sta2]
J. Stallings, On inﬁnite processes leading to diﬀerentiability in
the complement of a point, in Diﬀerential and Combinatorial
Topology, A Symposium in Honor of Marston Morse (S. Cairns,
ed.), 245–254, Princeton University Press, 1965.
[Ste1]
E. Stein, Singular Integrals and Diﬀerentiability Properties of
Functions, Princeton University Press, 1970.
[Ste2]
E. Stein, Harmonic Analysis: Real-Variable Methods, Orthog-
onality, and Oscillatory Integrals, Princeton University Press,
1993.
[SteW]
E. Stein and G. Weiss, Introduction to Fourier Analysis on Eu-
clidean Spaces, Princeton University Press, 1971.
[StrT]
J.-O. Str¨omberg and A. Torchinsky, Weighted Hardy Spaces,
Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1381, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
New York, 1989.
[Sul1]
D. Sullivan, Hyperbolic geometry and homeomorphisms, in Geo-
metric Topology (Athens, Georgia, 1977) (J. Cantrell, ed.), 543–
555, Academic Press, 1979.
158

[Sul2]
D. Sullivan, Exterior d, local degree, and smoothability, in
Prospects in Topology: Proceedings of a Conference in Honor
of William Browder (F. Quinn, ed.), 328–338, Annals of Math-
ematics Studies 138, Princeton University Press, 1995.
[Sul3]
D. Sullivan, On the foundation of geometry, analysis, and
the diﬀerentiable structure for manifolds, Lezioni Guido Fu-
bini, Scientiﬁc pamphlet, Institute for Scientiﬁc Interchange
Foundation, Torino, Italy, 1996; also appears in Topics in
Low-Dimensional Topology in Honor of Steve Armentrout
(A. Banyaga, H. Movahedi-Lankarani, and R. Wells, eds.), 89–
92, World Scientiﬁc, 1999.
[SulT]
D. Sullivan and N. Teleman, An analytical proof of Novikov’s
theorem on the topological invariance of the rational Pontrjagin
classes, Publications Math´ematiques (IHES) 58 (1983), 291–
295.
[Tel1]
N. Teleman, The index of signature operators on Lipschitz man-
ifolds, Publications Math´ematiques (IHES) 58 (1983), 39–78.
[Tel2]
N. Teleman, The index theorem for topological manifolds, Acta
Mathematica 153 (1984), 117–152.
[Tho]
A. Thompson, Algorithmic recognition of 3-manifolds, Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society (N.S.) 35 (1998), 57–66.
[Thu]
W. Thurston, Three-Dimensional Geometry and Topology, Vol-
ume 1, Edited by S. Levy, Princeton University Press, 1997.
[Tor1]
T. Toro, Surfaces with generalized second fundamental form in
L2 are Lipschitz manifolds, Journal of Diﬀerential Geometry 39
(1994), 65–102.
[Tor2]
T. Toro, Geometric conditions and existence of bilipschitz pa-
rameterizations, Duke Mathematical Journal 77 (1995), 193–
227.
[Tuk]
P. Tukia, A quasiconformal group not isomorphic to a M¨obius
group, Annales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Mathematica
Ser. A I Math. 6 (1981), 149–160.
159

[TukV]
P. Tukia and J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Quasisymmetric embeddings of metric
spaces, Annales Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ Mathematica
Ser. A I Math. 5 (1980), 97–114.
[V¨ai1]
J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Lectures on n-Dimensional Quasiconformal Map-
pings, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 229, Springer-Verlag,
1971.
[V¨ai2]
J. V¨ais¨al¨a, A survey of quasiregular maps in Rn, Proceedings of
the International Congress of Mathematicians (Helsinki, 1978),
685-691, Academiæ Scientiarum Fennicæ, 1980.
[V¨ai3]
J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Quasisymmetric embeddings in Euclidean spaces,
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 264 (1981),
191–204.
[V¨ai4]
J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Quasisymmetric mappings of products of curves into
the plane, Revue Roumaine de Math´ematiques Pures et Ap-
pliqu´ees 33 (1988), 147–156.
[V¨ai5]
J. V¨ais¨al¨a, The wall conjecture on domains in Euclidean spaces,
Manuscripta Mathematica 93 (1997), 515–534.
[V¨ai6]
J. V¨ais¨al¨a, Metric duality in Euclidean spaces, Mathematica
Scandinavica 80 (1997), 249–288.
[VolKF]
I. Volodin, V. Kuznetsov, and A. Fomenko, The problem of
discriminating algorithmically the standard three-dimensional
sphere, Russian Mathematical Surveys 29, No. 5 (1974), 71–
172.
[Vuo]
M. Vuorinen, Conformal Geometry and Quasiregular Mappings,
Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1319, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[Wei1]
S. Weinberger, The Lipschitz rationality of linear representa-
tions, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 40
(1987), 609–610.
[Wei2]
S. Weinberger,
The Topological Classiﬁcation of Stratiﬁed
Spaces, Chicago Lectures in Mathematics, University of Chicago
Press, 1994.
160

[White]
J. Whitehead, A certain open manifold whose group is unity,
Quarterly Journal of Mathematics, Oxford (2) 6 (1935), 268–
279.
[Whitn]
H. Whitney, Geometric Integration Theory, Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1957.
[Wild]
R. Wilder, Topology of Manifolds, American Mathematical So-
ciety, 1949.
[Wilk]
J. Wilker, Topologically equivalent n-dimensional isometries,
Topology and its Applications 15 (1983), 211–221.
161

