
 Recording Secrets for the 
Small Studio 

This page intentionally left blank

 Recording Secrets for the 
Small Studio 
 Mike Senior 

 First published 2015 by Focal Press 
 70 Blanchard Road, Suite 402, Burlington, MA 01803 
 and by Focal Press 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
 Focal Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
 © 2015 Mike Senior 
 The right of Mike Senior to be identiﬁ ed as author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with 
sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by 
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying 
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the 
publishers.
 Notices 
 Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁ eld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden 
our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become 
necessary. 
 Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and 
using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information 
or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom 
they have a professional responsibility. 
 Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identiﬁ cation and explanation without intent to infringe. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Application submitted 
 ISBN: 978-0-415-71670-3 (pbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-135-87950-5 (ebk) 
 Typeset in ITC Giovanni Std 
 By MPS Limited, Chennai, India, www.adi-mps.com  

 To my parents.  

Bound to Create
You are a creator.  
animation, games, audio, media communication, web design, or 
by nothing except your own creativity and determination.
Focal Press can help.  
For over 75 years Focal has published books that support your 
creative goals. Our founder, Andor Kraszna-Krausz, established 
Focal in 1938 so you could have access to leading-edge expert 
knowledge, techniques, and tools that allow you to create 
without constraint.  We strive to create exceptional, engaging, 
and practical content that helps you master your passion.
Focal Press and you.  
Bound to create.
We’d love to hear how we’ve helped 
you create. Share your experience:
www.focalpress.com/boundtocreate
Whatever your form of expression — photography, ﬁlmmaking, 
theatre — you simply want to create without limitation.  Bound 

vii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................. IX
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... XI
PART 1 
● One Source, No Mics .................................. 1
CHAPTER 1 
Recording a Machine...........................................................3
CHAPTER 2 
The Human Element ..........................................................41
CHAPTER 3 
Instruments with Pickups ..................................................81
PART 2 
● One Source, One Mic .............................. 115
CHAPTER 4 
Basic Vocal Recording .....................................................117
CHAPTER 5 
Beyond Vanilla Vocals ......................................................155
CHAPTER 6 
Single-Mic Instrument Recording .....................................171
PART 3 
● One Source, Multiple Mics ...................... 215
CHAPTER 7 
Multimiking in Mono .......................................................217
CHAPTER 8 
Multimiking in Stereo ......................................................243
PART 4 
● Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics .............. 269
CHAPTER 9 
Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array .....................271
CHAPTER 10 Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays ..............................321
CHAPTER 11 Going Freestyle ...............................................................365
CHAPTER 12 Conclusion ......................................................................381
APPENDIX 1 Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview ...383
APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography ...................................393
APPENDIX 3 Quote References............................................................423
APPENDIX 4 Picture Credits ................................................................439
INDEX OF NAMES .................................................................................441
SUBJECT INDEX ...................................................................................443
Contents

This page intentionally left blank

ix
 This book hasn’t been the easiest of births, and would not have been possi-
ble at all without the many people who have helped it on its way. First of all, 
I’d like to thank everyone who has emailed me about my writing, and those 
who have peppered me with questions at the various seminars, workshops, 
and conferences I’ve been involved with—thereby sowing the seeds for this 
book! I’m also very thankful for the forbearance of all the musicians who have 
helped me carry out the numerous practical tests which were vital in road-
testing the advice offered here. Mike Zufall has also been instrumental in mak-
ing this project possible by developing a content-management system for the 
Cambridge Music Technology web resource pages, which has saved me an inor-
dinate amount of time ﬁ ddling with HTML. I must also express my gratitude 
to Bruce Lee, Dr. Elisabeth Wadge, and Rovio’s  Angry Birds franchise for much-
needed motivation during the lengthy writing process! 
 In addition, I’d like to applaud all the interviewers who have done such an 
immense service to us all by shedding light on top-level studio practice: John 
Baccigaluppi, Matt Bell, Howard Bilerman, Bruce Borgerson, Richard Buskin, 
Bill Bruce, Rick Clark, Larry Crane, Eli Crews, Mark Cunningham, Dan Daley, 
Tom Doyle, Maureen Droney, Chris Eckman, Hans Dietrich Faulhaber, Eddi 
Fiegel, Tom Flint, Jimmy Foot, Matt Frost, David Greeves, Keith Hatschek, 
Jason Hiller, Nigel Humberstone, Sam Inglis, Blair Jackson, Michael Jackson, 
Mark Lewisohn, Dave Lockwood, Howard Massey, Chris Mayes-Wright, Alex 
McKenzie, Stephen Murray, Henry Owings, Bobby Owsinski, Joey Ramone, 
J. Robbins, Andrea Robinson, Anthony Savona, Jonathan Saxon, Sue Sillitoe, 
Dave Simons, Craig Smith, Roman Sokal, Philip Stevenson, Paul Tingen, 
Marsha Vdovin, Pete Weiss, and Peter Wetherbee. 
 The following engineers and producers have also generously taken it upon 
themselves to share their insight into the recording process, and I also offer 
them my sincere thanks: Chuck Ainlay, Steve Albini, Tom Dowd, Tony 
Faulkner, Oz Fritz, Jimmy Jam, Kevin Killen, Gerry Kitchingham, Daniel 
Lanois, Roger Nichols, John Merchant, Shep Pettibone, Jack Joseph Puig, Phil 
Ramone, LA Reid, Eric “Mixerman” Saraﬁ n, Al Schmitt, Mike Stavrou, Ron 
Streicher, Bruce Swedien, Butch Vig, and Michael Wagener. Furthermore, many 
thanks are due to the numerous music-technology authors who have helped 
inform my own opinions on the subject of recording: Bruce Bartlett, Trevor De 
Clercq, Karl Coryat, Tim Crich, Joe Dochtermann, Wes Dooley, John Eargle, 
F. Alton Everest, Carlos Lellis Ferreira, Lynn Fuston, Nikolay Georgiev, Mike 
Gray, David Greeves, Christian Hugonnet, Sam Inglis, Jürg Jecklin, Mike Major, 
Jürgen Meyer, Mallory Nichols, Alec Nisbett, Harry F. Olsen, Bobby Owsinski, 
 Acknowledgments 

Acknowledgments
x
Adrian Revill, Hugh Robjohns, Mike Ross-Trevor, Francis Rumsey, Eberhard 
Sengpiel, Günther Theile, Pierre Walder, Paul White, Michael Williams, Helmut 
Wittek, Chris Woolf, Wieslaw Woszczyk, and Jörg Wuttke. 
 The unenviable task of reading through early drafts of this text fell to Timo 
Carlier, Daniel Plappert, and Sam Inglis, and I am indebted to them all for 
their in-depth feedback, insightful suggestions, and continual encouragement. 
I would also like to express my appreciation to the Editorial Department of 
 Sound On Sound  magazine in general, who have been extremely supportive 
during this book’s rather extended gestation. In preparing suitable images, 
I have been assisted enormously by Kim Campbell of Linn Records; Stefan 
Gienger at Munich’s Mastermix studios; Matt Houghton at  Sound On Sound 
magazine; Blake Lewis of Stewis Media; Neil Rogers of Cambridge’s Half Ton 
Studios; Matthias Schaaff, Rainer Schwarz, and all at SAE Munich; and Chris 
Woolf of Microphone Data. I also extend my sincere thanks to all the staff 
at Focal Press whose patience and expertise have played such a large role in 
bringing this project to fruition, in particular Carlin Bowers, Emma Elder, Mary 
LaMacchia, and Anaïs Wheeler. 
 Above all, however, I’d like to thank my wonderful wife, Ute, for her unwaver-
ing love and support, as well as for taking on the worst of the bibliography and 
referencing tasks so graciously. I’d be lost without you, my love! And, ﬁ nally, 
I’d like to thank my trainee limb models Lotte and Lara—I can scarcely believe 
what pros you’re turning out to be! 

xi
 WHAT YOU’LL LEARN FROM THIS BOOK 
 How to achieve release-quality recordings on a budget within a typical small-
studio environment, by applying power-user techniques from the world’s most 
successful producers. In my work for  Sound On Sound  magazine I notice the same 
recording mistakes cropping up time and again, and while it’s sometimes pos-
sible to salvage a usable mix from poor recordings, that way of working is incred-
ibly long winded and laborious. This book is about helping you make better use 
of your time and energy, by leading you step-by-step through a series of in-depth 
practical exercises that demonstrate how to record sensibly in the ﬁ rst place. 
 WHAT YOU WON’T LEARN 
 If you want a “How To Record My Band In Three Easy Steps!” quick-ﬁ x guide, 
you’ll have to look elsewhere. This book has a much broader remit: To teach 
you how to be a conﬁ dent small-studio recording engineer. That means having 
the skills to record a full range of instruments and ensembles; understanding 
how different recording methodologies suit different artists and genres; and 
being able to adapt your approach to get the best out of low-budget gear and 
untreated acoustics. While I make every effort to fast-track the learning process 
within these pages, the art of recording is by nature tremendously complicated 
and full of nuanced decision-making, so this book is ultimately intended to 
reﬂ ect that reality rather than brushing all the subtleties under the carpet. 
 I’m also not going to show you how to operate any speciﬁ c brand of studio 
gear—that’s what equipment manuals are for! In essence, this book is primar-
ily about recording technique, rather than recording equipment. The infor-
mation here is deliberately “platform-neutral,” so that you can use it with 
whatever studio hardware or software you happen to have access to. 
 BEFORE YOU START 
 Although I’ve done my best to make this book accessible to studio newbies, 
there is nonetheless some basic background knowledge that you’ll need in 
order to get the best out of what I’ll be writing about. In particular, I’m assum-
ing that the reader:
 
■
 already understands something about the fundamental physics, measure-
ment, and perception of sound; 
 
■
 has some idea of the main stages involved in the multitrack production 
process; 
 Introduction 

Introduction
xii
 
■
 can identify the main functional components of hardware and software 
recording studios; 
 
■
 knows how to set up a small stereo monitoring system. 
 Many modern musicians will already have absorbed this stuff without realizing 
it, just by coming into contact with other like-minded people and following 
the activities of their favorite commercial artists. However, if you feel you might 
beneﬁ t from a quick refresher on any of that, or you’d like to clarify my usage 
of some of the essential technical terms involved, then check out Appendix 1, 
where I’ve provided a super-condensed overview of this material. 
 Most people reading this book will, I imagine, have some recording system 
available to them, but if you don’t have any studio gear at all, then the web 
resources page at the end of Appendix 1 suggests a few cost-effective entry-level 
systems to get you off the starting blocks. 
 HOW TO USE THIS BOOK 
 Because this book has been speciﬁ cally designed as a step-by-step primer, 
you’ll get best results if you work through it from beginning to end. Later sec-
tions rely on material covered in earlier chapters, so some aspects of the discus-
sion may not make the greatest sense if you just dip in and out. The complexity 
of the subject matter also increases progressively throughout the book, so later 
chapters may suddenly feel rather daunting if you skip ahead. 
 At the end of each chapter there is a “Cut to the Chase” box, which allows you 
to review a summary of each chapter’s main “secrets” before proceeding fur-
ther. Underneath it are one or two “Assignment” boxes, which suggest prac-
tical activities to help consolidate your understanding of each chapter, and 
these could also serve as coursework tasks within a more formal educational 
framework. Each of these assignments is deliberately limited in scope, so that it 
doesn’t call on topics before they’ve been properly discussed, but these limita-
tions naturally reduce as the chapters progress, and are removed completely in 
Chapter 11. Finally, the “Web Resources” box leads to a separate website con-
taining an extensive selection of related links and audio ﬁ les, all of which may 
be freely used for educational purposes. 
 This book is based on my own wide-ranging research into the studio practices 
of more than 200 world-famous engineers, drawing on more than 5 million 
words of ﬁ rst-hand interviews. The text therefore includes hundreds of quotes 
from these high-ﬂ iers. If you don’t recognize someone’s name, then look it up 
in Appendix 2 to get an idea of the most high-proﬁ le records they’ve worked 
on—you’ll almost certainly have heard a few of those! If you’d like to read any 
quote in its original context (which I’d heartily recommend), then follow the 
little superscript number alongside it to Appendix 3, where there’s full refer-
ence information for each one. Finally, if you have any further questions or 
feedback, feel free to email me on ms@cambridge-mt.com. 

 One Source, No Mics 
 PART 1 
 PART 1 

This page intentionally left blank

3
 Recording a Machine 
 CHAPTER 1 
 CHAPTER 1 
 Although much of the magic in many productions stems from a marriage of 
live performers and microphones, I’d like to start this primer by eliminating 
both these variables from the proceedings, so that we can ﬁ rst concentrate on 
the bedrock studio techniques you’ll need for pretty much every recording job 
you attempt. As such, our ﬁ rst goal will be learning to record samples from 
playback machines that directly output an electrical signal—things like radios, 
TVs, CD players, and mobile devices. On the face of things, this might seem a 
rather unedifying prospect, but bear with me, because it’s actually the quick-
est way to fast-track your basic technical skills. If you can learn to do this task 
right every time, then you’ll avoid the embarrassment of elementary goofs and 
the frustration of unnecessary delays once musicians are in the room. In addi-
tion, this activity should iron out the most common small-studio conﬁ gura-
tion problems, thereby preparing your core recording system for the rigors of 
serious music sessions. 
 1.1  HOOKING THINGS UP 
 So what do you need to know to connect the outputs of such equipment to 
your recording system? First off, you should realize that plugging anything in 
can generate powerful signal spikes, which could easily damage your monitors 
and/or ears. Seeing as deafening yourself probably isn’t the best way to begin 
a recording course, do ensure that you mute your speakers or headphones at 
the outset. The simplest way to do this is by silencing your system’s monitor-
ing outputs in some way: you could mute your mixer’s master output; you 
could hit your monitor controller’s Mute button or disengage its output selec-
tor switches; or you could just turn down the volume control on the ampliﬁ er 
feeding your speakers or headphones. 
 1.1.1  Connector Basics 
 Most modern playback devices and sound modules output analog signals at 
“line level,” which is an alternating voltage roughly in the 1V ballpark. Getting 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
4
this signal to the inputs of your recording system usually involves one of the 
hardware connectors illustrated in  Figure 1.1 . 
 Each of these provides one earth (or ground) conductor and at least one con-
ductor for carrying audio signals. Where two audio conductors are provided 
(for example in XLRs and TRS jacks), both still typically carry only one audio 
signal, but in a so-called “balanced” conﬁ guration that better protects it against 
 FIGURE 1.1   
 The most common plugs 
and sockets for making 
line-level analog audio 
connections. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
5
electrical interference  en route  to its destination. Connectors such as RCA pho-
nos and TS jacks don’t offer this additional defense, and their “unbalanced” 
signals are often transmitted at slightly weaker levels too, so you’ll usually get 
a cleaner recording if you use balanced connections wherever possible. Most 
playback devices have stereo outputs, which means you’ll need to make con-
nections for both the left-channel and right-channel audio signals. 
 There are a few extra things to be aware of with XLRs:
 
■
 Because male and female XLR plugs interlock, it’s possible to chain several 
cables into a single longer cable run. 
 
■
 Many female XLR sockets/plugs have a locking design, so you won’t be able 
to unplug them until you press the special lock-release buttons shown in 
 Figure 1.1 . 
 
■
 Little alignment dimples on XLR plugs and sockets mean that the plugs will 
only insert fully when the internal pins are correctly oriented. This means 
you don’t actually need to see an XLR socket to plug into it correctly—you 
can just twiddle the XLR plug between your ﬁ ngers while holding it gently 
against the socket until you feel the dimple engage, whereupon the plug can 
be inserted fully. 
 
■
 Some XLR inputs are able to feed a 48V “phantom” power supply back 
along the signal cable, which may damage line-level outputs, so make sure 
the phantom power is switched off. 
 
■
 Occasionally you may come across a so-called “combi-jack/XLR” socket, 
which looks a lot like a normal XLR socket, but which can also accept a 
jack plug instead if you wish. There’s nothing extra you have to know about 
using these inputs, though—just insert the plug as you’d normally expect, 
and away you go! 
 Recording an unbalanced signal through a balanced TRS jack input should be ﬁ ne 
as long as you use an unbalanced TS jack cable for the connection. This effectively 
earths one of the two signal conductors inside the TRS jack socket so that it can 
accept the unbalanced signal. Balanced XLR inputs can also record unbalanced 
signals directly if you use a special cable such as the one shown in  Figure 1.2 . 
 FIGURE 1.2   
 Schematic diagram 
for creating a lead to 
connect an unbalanced 
TS jack output to a 
balanced XLR input. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
6
 Connecting balanced outputs to unbalanced inputs is a bit of a mineﬁ eld, 
because the outcome depends on the design speciﬁ cs of the output cir-
cuitry. Although modern equipment frequently has TRS jack output sockets 
that’ll happily permit unbalanced operation if you insert a TS jack plug, you 
shouldn’t assume you can do this unless it’s clearly condoned on the unit’s 
rear panel or in its user manual—some output circuits might go up in smoke! 
Rather than take any risks in this respect, I prefer to use a dedicated trans-
former-isolation box to unbalance the signal if in any doubt, especially now 
that companies such as ART and Ebtech offer respectable-quality transformer 
isolation for only around $30 (£20) per channel. A balanced output can be 
cabled directly to the transformer isolator’s TRS/XLR input without disconnect-
ing or short-circuiting any signal conductors in the process, and the gizmo’s 
outputs will then safely accept TS jack and/or RCA phono plugs to feed your 
unbalanced recording inputs. Although transformers will inevitably alter the 
recorded tone a fraction, I wouldn’t lose any sleep over this if you ﬁ nd your rig 
needs them—unbalanced inputs usually only appear on the cheapest record-
ing hardware nowadays, in which case any minuscule transformer-related side-
effects should be a long way down your list of quality-control concerns! 
 While normal TRS jacks mostly carry balanced signals in the studio, a half-size 
(“minijack”) version of the same connector is frequently employed on con-
sumer computer hardware for unbalanced stereo line outputs. In this scenario 
the two audio-signal conductors carry the left and right channels respectively, 
while the earth conductor is shared. Headphone outputs use TRS jack/mini-
jack connections in a very similar way, so can be treated as line-level outputs 
for recording purposes. Functionally speaking, TRS jacks and TRS minijacks 
 FIGURE 1.3   
 Not all balanced TRS jack outputs will operate correctly with a TS jack plug inserted. If in doubt, it’s safest 
to unbalance the signal via a transformer isolator box such as ART’s T8 or Ebtech’s Hum Eliminator. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
7
are identical, so it’s easy to convert between them 
with cheap adaptor plugs, and there is also a wide 
variety of adaptors that will take a stereo signal 
on a TRS jack/minijack connector and split it out 
onto a pair of TS jacks or RCA phonos. 
 Occasionally it’s possible to make a direct digital 
connection from a playback unit to a Digital Audio 
Workstation (DAW) system, bypassing the analog 
domain entirely. In that event you’ll probably have 
to deal with one of the three digital transmission 
formats shown in  Figure 1.5 : coaxial S/PDIF (usu-
ally on unbalanced RCA phonos), optical S/PDIF 
(usually on ﬁ ber-optic Toslink connectors), or 
AES-EBU (usually on balanced XLRs). All of these 
formats transfer stereo audio, but you’ll need a ded-
icated format-conversion gadget to convert between 
them if you’re faced with incompatible socketry. 
 1.1.2  Choosing Cables 
 Once you’ve muted the monitors, decided which audio plugs/sockets you’re 
going to use, and placed your sound source within easy reach of your record-
ing system, you’re ready to hook things up. Even cheap-as-chips consumer 
hi-ﬁ  cables will carry line-level signals OK, but I’d deﬁ nitely recommend using 
the more robust professional-style cables designed speciﬁ cally for onstage/
studio use. You shouldn’t have to spend more than about $20 (£15) each for 
workmanlike specimens of up to 10 m in length, but do try to avoid anything 
with molded-on connectors, because they’re almost impossible to repair if 
one of the internal solder joints fails—separate connectors can be resoldered. 
(Speaking of which, if you’re a soldering Jedi then you can save yourself a 
packet by constructing your own cables in the ﬁ rst place.) Plastic-bodied con-
nectors are also a false economy in my opinion, as the casings have a tendency 
to crack even at the best of times, and only get more brittle with age. 
 As long as a line-level audio cable has the appropriate plugs, it’ll usually do the 
job, but there are a few exceptions that you need to be careful about if you’re 
rooting through an unknown box of leads. Firstly, some TS jack cables are 
designed for connecting the high-level output of an ampliﬁ er to a speaker, and 
don’t offer as much protection against external electrical interference. The best 
way to identify these speaker-level cables is to unscrew one of the TS jack plugs 
and have a look inside (see  Figure 1.6 ): a line-level cable will usually have a 
single plastic-insulated core (for the audio signal) surrounded by an earthed 
wire-mesh “screen,” whereas a speaker cable typically has two insulated cores 
of a thicker gauge without any mesh screening. 
 Cables designed for digital audio signals are also constructed differently 
from normal analog leads, but because they’re usually clearly labeled by 
 FIGURE 1.4   
 Where an unbalanced 
stereo output is provided 
on a TRS jack or TRS 
minijack connection, 
cheap adaptors are 
widely available to 
convert between these 
plug sizes (bottom 
right), or indeed to make 
the left-channel and 
right-channel signals 
available on separate 
mono connectors such 
as RCA phonos (bottom 
left and top). 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
8
the manufacturer (and often noticeably less ﬂ exible when handled), you’re 
unlikely to confuse them in practice. As it happens, you can sometimes get 
away with using analog RCA phono or XLR leads to transmit coaxial S/PDIF 
or AES-EBU digital signals over short distances without problems, but if you 
hate the thought of sacriﬁ cing session time to data glitches as much as I do, 
then spending $45 (£30) on a dedicated digital cable is a no-brainer. Another 
thing to realize when recording a digital source is that your recorder’s sample 
rate must be synchronized to that of the incoming data, so you’ll only get the 
audio coming through correctly once that’s been done. The simplest means of 
 FIGURE 1.5   
 The most common plugs 
and sockets for stereo 
digital audio connections. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
9
doing this is to “slave” the recorder’s sample 
rate to that embedded in the incoming digi-
tal data stream, but more complex systems 
are also possible (see “Digital Clocking & 
Jitter” in Section 1.4.4 for more details). 
On computer systems the synchroniza-
tion options are usually located somewhere 
in the audio interface’s driver settings—
although somehow they always seem to be 
playing “hide and seek” whenever I need to 
ﬁ nd them! 
 1.1.3  Cable Layout 
 Physically arranging cables in the studio 
should be mostly common sense, but I’ve 
seen enough small-studio catastrophes over 
the years that I’m still inclined to proffer a few basic tips. The most frequent 
mistake is using leads that are too short, thereby suspending the cables in the 
air as ﬁ rst-class tripwires and stressing the internal solder joints and signal con-
tacts of your sockets—not a good idea with budget studio equipment in par-
ticular, where the socketry may be pretty fragile to begin with. 
 It’s also preferable to keep audio cables (particularly unbalanced ones) as far 
away as possible from your mains electrical wiring or any mains transformers, 
in order to minimize the amount of unwanted interference these may add to 
the signal you’re trying to record. Mains transformers can be pernicious in this 
regard, because they’re so often tucked away out of sight inside everyday elec-
trical appliances and domestic lighting systems. Networking devices such as 
modems, routers, and hubs are also best given a wide berth if possible.
 
 TWISTED CABLES 
 A classic newbie mistake is coiling up cables for storage in such a way that they get twisted. A twisted cable 
is a complete pain in the ass, because the twist’s slight torque causes the cable to wrap around itself, so that 
it refuses to lie fl at on your studio fl oor and generally creates an almighty tangle. Fortunately, it’s easy to avoid 
this, either by using one of several special coiling techniques which neutralize the normal twisting action, or by 
storing your cables in loose folds or on a cable drum. (For more information on these methods, check out this 
chapter’s web resources.) 
 FIGURE 1.6   
 Here are the TS jack 
plugs from three 
different audio cables, 
with their casings 
unscrewed. Examining 
the internal conductors 
can help to identify 
which are suitable for 
line-level signals (left 
and center), and which 
for speaker-level signals 
(right). 
 Spare a thought for wear and tear, because although studio cables are pretty 
hardy, there’s no sense in throwing money away on unnecessary repairs/
replacements. Obviously, do your best not to tread on them, but also try to 
anticipate anything that might roll over them (wheeled ﬂ ightcases, ofﬁ ce chair 
casters, trolleys), crush them (doors, table legs, high heels), or melt them 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
10
(lamps, radiators), and take evasive action. Special mention needs to be made 
of optical digital cables, however, because these are quite fragile, and won’t 
even tolerate being bent beyond a certain angle without damaging the optic 
ﬁ ber, so keep the kid gloves on when handling those. 
 1.2    THE LINE-CHECK 
 Returning to our stated task (namely recording the output of a stereo play-
back device), in an ideal world you should now be able to start playback, 
make any necessary internal signal-routing assignments within your record-
ing system, and see the appropriate meters on your recorder lighting up. Back 
on Planet Earth, however, it’s actually very common for source signals to go 
AWOL, which is why “where’s the signal?” is probably the most common 
setup problem in any studio. As such, one of the recording engineer’s primary 
tasks before every session is to “line-check” the rig, ensuring that all signals are 
reaching their intended destinations. “There’s nothing worse on a session, and 
nothing worse on an engineer than when things are just not working right,” 
comments Al Schmitt, 1 echoing similar comments from Simon Climie 2 and 
Stephen Hague. 3 “It’s like they say in the boy scouts,” continues Schmitt: “Be 
prepared. Be on top of your game. Make sure everything’s working.” 
 1.2.1    Unity Gain 
 To make the line-checking process as straightforward as possible, you should 
ﬁ rst try to make sure nothing in the recording path is changing the level of 
your audio signal at all, which means setting every gain control that precedes 
the recorder track to its 0 dB or “unity gain” position. There can be hundreds 
of gain controls even in entry-level recording systems, manifesting themselves 
as knobs, switches, or faders labeled Gain, Volume, Level, Sensitivity, Pad, or 
Trim—or sometimes just calibrated in decibels. Digital gain controls usually 
default to their 0 dB setting, while analog controls often have their unity-gain 
position marked or detented, so the trickiest part of zeroing them is usually 
just tracking them all down! Computer audio interface drivers and DAW soft-
ware mixers in particular often have little gain controls tucked away in nooks 
and crannies all over the place, and if just one of those has been pulled down 
inadvertently it can throw a spanner in the works. Some gain controls (such as 
+4 dBu/−10 dBV sensitivity switches) may offer no unity-gain position at all, 
while others (such as headphone volume knobs) may have no calibration—in 
either case start off with those at their lowest gain settings. 
 Don’t forget to check that any Pan or Balance controls are centered too, 
because both of those are essentially stereo-ganged gain controls. Also, conﬁ rm 
that there are no Mute/Solo buttons engaged, and that any signal-processing 
facilities have been reset or removed from the circuit—particularly the channel 
EQ if you’re recording via an analog mixer. Once you’ve set your whole record-
ing chain to unity gain, do the same for the monitoring chain.

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
11
 
 Now you can start the line-check. Level meters should be adequate for the pur-
pose, so your monitors can remain muted for now. Set the playback machine 
going, turn up any output-level or headphone-volume control it has, and 
examine your recorder track’s level meter. Don’t worry too much about what 
the level actually is for the moment—just check whether there’s something 
there! If you can see something on the readout, then stop the player and check 
that this reading also dies—a simple step which conﬁ rms that what you’re 
metering is really the playback device, and not some other unwanted signal. 
Now restart the player, pull down the recorder track’s monitor-channel fader, 
unmute your studio monitoring system, and carefully fade up the recorder 
track to conﬁ rm that what you’re hearing tallies with what you’re seeing. All 
of which should take no more than 20 seconds if all’s well, after which you’re 
ready to set recording levels. If nothing comes through, though, then it’s time 
to troubleshoot. 
 1.2.2  Divide and Conquer! 
 The secret to line-check troubleshooting is to make like Daft Punk: Keep a 
cool head! Unless you work methodically, you’ll waste masses of time going 
down blind alleys. When a signal isn’t reaching the recorder track, your ﬁ rst 
call should be the recording system’s input metering: in other words the very 
ﬁ rst meters the input signal hits after exiting the connection cable. These might 
be single LEDs next to the input sockets or something much more sophisti-
cated within a computer soundcard’s software control utility, but unfortunately 
they’re not always that easy to ﬁ nd—the input-channel metering in most DAW 
software rarely ﬁ ts the bill for line-checking, for example, because a signal can 
so easily be misdirected by the audio drivers prior to that. Whatever form the 
system’s real input meters take, it’s paramount that you ﬁ nd out where they 
are, because they allow you to speedily eliminate a whole section of the stu-
dio setup from your inquiries: if those input meters light up but you’re still 
not hearing anything, then something’s awry in your recording system; if they 
don’t, then you need to scrutinize your sound source or its connections. 
 RECORDING FROM TURNTABLES 
 Despite being superseded in the mass market by digital playback formats, the vinyl record shows little sign of 
dying out, especially now that scratch DJs have elevated it to the status of musical instrument. Capturing the 
output of a turntable isn’t any trickier than dealing with regular line-level sources, as long as you realize you 
can’t just record the cartridge’s raw signal—it’ll require both amplifi cation and heavy RIAA-standard equalization 
fi rst. Fortunately, most DJ mixers and turntable-equipped hi-fi s have built-in RIAA preamplifi cation to handle all 
that, so the trick is to take your recording feed from the DJ mixer’s master outputs or from the hi-fi  amplifi er’s 
dedicated line-level recording outputs, rather than using the RCA phono sockets on the turntable itself. Also, 
be sure that the turntable itself is correctly earthed, otherwise the cartridge won’t be properly shielded from 
unwanted electromagnetic interference. This may require a separate earth wire to be connected between 
dedicated binding posts on the turntable and preamplifi er. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
12
 Armed with this information, try to slim down the variables further, as illus-
trated in  Figure 1.7 . For example, assuming a no-show on your recording sys-
tem’s input meters, try to ﬁ nd any readout on the player itself, or try plugging 
headphones directly into its headphone socket. If something’s actually com-
ing out of the player, then the ﬁ nger of blame points at your cabling; whereas 
if the player’s silent, then it’s time to dust off its instruction manual or ring 
the repair shop. Alternatively, let’s say audio is indeed arriving at your com-
puter system’s recording inputs, but not showing up at the recorder track. Try 
inspecting your DAW’s input-channel metering: if you get a reading, then you 
can concentrate on tinkering with the routing and channel-assignment options 
 FIGURE 1.7   
 The “divide and conquer” troubleshooting approach in action. Step 1 divides the ﬁ eld of inquiry in half by 
using the recording system’s very ﬁ rst input meters (those on the computer audio interface itself). Whichever 
section of the recording chain Step 1 implicates is then divided again in Step 2, narrowing the options further.  

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
13
in your software mixer; if not, then the input signal has probably been misdi-
rected somehow by your audio interface’s conﬁ guration settings—or perhaps 
the DAW is just using the wrong driver. 
 This kind of “divide and conquer” approach is the cornerstone of effective 
troubleshooting, irrespective of the gear you’re using, so try to get into the 
habit of thinking this way right from the outset. It might seem a bit pedan-
tic when you’re just recording your radio, but unless it becomes second nature 
you’ll quickly ﬂ ounder on more complicated sessions, especially when you’ve 
got frustrated musicians/clients breathing down your neck! 
 Another way to apply the divide-and-conquer principle is if you ﬁ nd that only 
one side of a stereo signal is coming through properly, as in  Figure 1.8 —for 
 FIGURE 1.8   
 If one side of a stereo signal’s coming through, but not the other, swapping over the cables can help 
diagnose the source of the problem. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
14
the sake of discussion, let’s say the right channel’s arriving safely at your sys-
tem’s input meters, but the left channel’s missing in action. First, conﬁ rm that 
the right-channel cable is correctly connected to the player by brieﬂ y remov-
ing the plug in the player’s right-channel output socket—if all’s well, the 
right-channel meter reading should disappear as you do this. Then plug the 
right-channel cable into the player’s left-channel output socket instead, look-
ing at your meters to see whether the signal reappears: If it does, you know 
that both of the player’s outputs are working, so you should probably regard 
the left-channel cabling with suspicion; if it doesn’t, then either the player’s 
left-channel output is bust, or there’s a stereo balance control set funny some-
where under the hood. Where both of the player’s outputs are actually func-
tioning correctly, your next move might be to restore the player’s output-socket 
plugs to their original positions, and then swap the plugs feeding the relevant 
pair of recording-system inputs instead. If you still only get the right-channel 
input meter lighting up in that instance, then you’ve removed the cables from 
the equation—in other words, there’s probably something wrong with the 
left-channel input itself. 
 Exactly the same troubleshooting techniques can be applied if you encoun-
ter problems getting signals out of the recording system for monitoring pur-
poses. Again, you should take pains to identify which metering stage most 
reliably reﬂ ects what’s appearing at the physical output sockets of your record-
ing system, because this gives you concrete information about whether or 
not your monitoring hardware is at fault. The channel-swapping technique is 
also very handy if you’re only hearing one side of the stereo picture, but with 
one important safety caveat: You should switch off all ampliﬁ ers (including 
headphone amps and powered speakers) before replugging any monitoring 
connections, otherwise you risk damage to your listening equipment and/or 
hearing. 
 1.3    SETTING LEVELS 
 You don’t want just any signal reaching your recorder track, though—you 
want something that actually sounds good! The fundamental prerequi-
site for achieving this is that you set appropriate signal levels throughout 
your recording chain. For one thing, low-level noise will inevitably be added 
to your recording by any recording equipment you use, so you want to keep 
your audio signal level higher than this “noise ﬂ oor”—the higher the bet-
ter, in fact, in order to maximize the recording’s signal-to-noise ratio. On the 
other hand, overloading or “clipping” your recording gear by feeding it levels 
that are too high will produce unwanted distortion, and the further you push 
the level beyond any unit’s capabilities, the more audible this distortion will 
become. So in the normal run of things your aim is to keep signal levels high 
enough to minimize noise, but not so high that you trigger undesirable clip-
ping distortion. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
15
 This seems quite simple on the face of it, but there are a couple of complica-
tions in practice: Firstly, different stages in your recording chain may require 
different optimum signal levels; and, secondly, there are often so many meters 
and gain controls on hand that it’s easy to get confused about which ones to 
 SAMPLE RATES AND BIT DEPTHS 
 The limit of CD-quality sound is largely determined by its standardized 44.1 kHz sample rate (which restricts the 
upper frequency-response limit to around 20 kHz) and 16-bit sampling resolution (which results in a noise fl oor 
at roughly −96 dBFS). Given that most commercial music is distributed in this form (or in a data-compressed 
fi le format directly derived from it), you should at the very least record at 44.1 kHz/16-bit if you’re planning on 
releasing anything to the general public. 
 However, to make best use of the CD noise fl oor, it actually makes sense to record at a higher bit-depth, so 
that the digital noise fl oor of your recording won’t rise above that of a CD even if you increase the levels of your 
recordings during mixing and mastering. For this reason I suggest working at 24-bit resolution instead, which 
drops the digital noise fl oor well below the noise fl oor of any other equipment in a typical small studio—at which 
point you can stop worrying about it! The downside of 24-bit audio is that it takes 50% more storage space 
than 16-bit, but nowadays this really isn’t a big deal given the ridiculously low cost of digital storage. Some DAW 
platforms give you the option of recording at “32-bit fl oating point” as well, but I wouldn’t waste further disk 
space on that—frankly, it’s overkill for practical recording purposes, unless you’re the kind of person who stores 
their CDs in the fridge to keep them fresh… 
 The choice of sample rate for recording is a more contentious issue. In addition to the CD-quality rate of 
44.1 kHz, a 48 kHz rate has long been standard in the broadcast and fi lm industries on account of its ease 
of synchronization with video equipment. To be honest, it matters very little which you choose for music work, 
although I marginally favor 44.1 kHz so that I don’t have to convert the sample rate for CD mastering—a 
process that can have audible side-effects. However, in recent years manufacturers have begun offering higher 
rates as well, based on doubling and redoubling the 44.1 kHz and 48 kHz standards to 88.2 kHz/96 kHz, 
176.4 kHz/192 kHz, and beyond, extending the upper limit of the captured frequency range well beyond the 
20 Hz–20 kHz zone commonly regarded as the range of human hearing. The extent to which frequencies 
above 20 kHz do actually infl uence our listening experience is very much a moot point, but there are also well-
understood technical reasons why elevated sample rates can actually sound better even below 20 kHz, and 
many professionals have already voted with their ears and wallets by moving to 88.2 kHz/96 kHz in particular. 
 On the face of it, this should be a strong incentive for ambitious small-studio owners to follow suit, but there 
are two big downsides to factor in. The fi rst is that working at a doubled sample rate not only doubles the 
storage space you need, but it also doubles the strain on every data buss and digital signal processor in your 
entire studio, which frequently translates into fewer simultaneous record/playback tracks, fewer effects plug-ins 
at mixdown, and more complicated digital cabling. The second thing is that the difference in resolution brought 
about by the increase in sample rate demands equal resolution of your recording and monitoring hardware, and 
many lower-cost devices simply haven’t been designed with frequencies above 20 kHz in mind. 
 As a result, although it’s diffi cult to dispute that elevated sample rates make an audible difference to the audio 
quality, I wouldn’t recommend for anyone on a budget to bother with them. In my opinion, the 44.1 kHz/48 kHz 
rates are more than a match for practically every small studio I’ve ever been into, so upgrading your entire 
studio rig to handle elevated sample rates will rarely ever be an effi cient use of resources—especially when 
seen within the wider context of a music market increasingly reliant on MP3/AAC fi les and media-streaming 
technology, which fall well short of even CD fi delity. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
16
use. Neither does it make things any easier that there’s no “standard” recording 
rig these days, and that many small-studio users are frequently working with 
shared or borrowed gear that’s unfamiliar. So in response to all this I’d like to 
explain a step-by-step procedure that I’ve found to be pretty foolproof for set-
ting decent levels, no matter what studio setup you happen to be faced with. 
 1.3.1    Find the First Gain Stage 
 Firstly, try to locate the very ﬁ rst gain stage in your signal chain. To give a sim-
ple example, imagine that I’m using an unbalanced splitter cable to record 
the TRS minijack headphone output of a portable MP3 player into the TS jack 
inputs of one of those little all-in-one sampling workstations (perhaps one of 
Akai’s iconic MPC range) as illustrated in  Figure 1.9 . My ﬁ rst gain stage there 
will probably be the MP3 player’s headphone level control. 
 A more complicated setup is shown in  Figure 1.10 : a vinyl turntable being 
recorded via a DJ mixer and a studio mixing console to a stand-alone stereo 
analog-to-digital converter, which in turn feeds the digital inputs of a software 
DAW system. In this case the ﬁ rst gain stage will likely be the Input Gain knobs 
on the DJ mixer’s turntable channels. 
 FIGURE 1.9   
 A very simple recording chain, from a portable MP3 player to a sampling workstation, showing the 
position of the gain controls, level checkpoints, and meters. The ﬁ rst checkpoint is disregarded because 
it has no meter to measure the signal level there. Setting a preliminary recording level using this setup 
would therefore involve adjusting the MP3 player’s headphone level control to achieve a sensible reading 
on the sampling workstation’s digital input meter (see dashed lines). 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
17
 1.3.2  Identify the Important Meters 
 Next, narrow down which meters you need to concentrate on while setting 
your levels. The way to do this is to work your way through the signal chain, all 
the way from the ﬁ rst gain stage to the destination recorder track, looking for 
“checkpoints” where the signal:
 
■
 passes through an analog cable (I call this a “cable” checkpoint);  
 
■
 is converted between the analog and digital domains (a “conversion” 
checkpoint). 
 Optimizing the signal level at a given checkpoint should pretty much guaran-
tee that you’ll steer clear of noise and distortion problems between that check-
point and the previous one—provided that you were conscientious in setting 
unity gain throughout the signal path back in Section 1.2.1. The most suitable 
meter for assessing the level in each case will be:
 
■
 the closest meter before a cable checkpoint; 
 
■
 the digital meter closest to a conversion checkpoint.  
 If you can’t ﬁ nd a meter for a given checkpoint that satisﬁ es these conditions 
before reaching another checkpoint (or the ﬁ rst gain stage), then it means that 
it can’t reliably be measured, so strike it from your list and continue working 
through the remaining checkpoints as if it didn’t exist. (Theoretically speaking, 
disregarding the signal level at any checkpoint raises the possibility of noise/dis-
tortion concerns, but in practice problems very rarely arise, because manufacturers 
of studio equipment tend to provide metering where it’s required.) Bear in mind 
that some meters may be able to measure signals in a variety of signal-chain posi-
tions—for example, the main meters of a small analog mixing console will often 
display the control-room monitoring signal, allowing you to measure the level of 
different channels, groups, and returns just by hitting their Solo buttons. (Solo 
buttons may sometimes be labeled PFL (Pre-Fader Listen) or AFL (After-Fader 
Listen) to indicate where in the channel path the signal is being measured.) 
 Let’s look at how these principles apply to our two setup examples. In  Figure 
1.9 there’d be two level checkpoints: the headphone splitter cable and the 
sampler’s analog-to-digital converters. However, assuming there was no meter-
ing within the MP3 player (which is quite common), then there’d be no way 
of measuring the level prior to the ﬁ rst checkpoint, so I’d disregard that one 
and focus all my attention on the second checkpoint instead, relying on the 
sampling workstation’s digital input meters. (In theory, by ignoring the ﬁ rst 
checkpoint I’d risk overloading the MP3 player’s analog output circuitry if I 
turned the headphone level up too high. In practice, though, this would be very 
unlikely given that most MP3 players are designed to play back even the loudest 
digital ﬁ les at maximum headphone volume without signiﬁ cant distortion—
which is why they seldom require output metering!) 
 Turning to the more complicated setup in  Figure 1.10 , the checkpoints would 
be: the cables from the DJ mixer’s main outputs, measured from the DJ mixer’s 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
18
 FIGURE 1.10   
 A more complicated recording chain, from a turntable, through a DJ mixer, a studio mixer, and a 
standalone ADC, and then into a computer recording system’s audio interface. Again, the dashed lines 
indicate which gain control and which meter would be used for setting each checkpoint’s level in the ﬁ rst 
instance—all other gain stages would remain at their unity setting unless the ﬁ rst-choice control’s gain 
range was insufﬁ cient. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
19
master output meters; the cables from the studio mixer’s group outputs, mea-
sured from its group output meters; and the analog-to-digital conversion stage, 
measured from the digital meters most closely following it, i.e., those within the 
standalone converter unit itself. (Note that the cable between the standalone con-
verter unit and the audio interface wouldn’t qualify as a level checkpoint because 
it’s not an analog connection.) I’d have to keep my eyes on the meters for all 
three checkpoints when setting levels, to be sure of capturing the cleanest signal.
 
 DATA-COMPRESSED FILE FORMATS 
 Most affordable digital studio equipment now offers at least 44.1 kHz/24-bit recording resolution, but older gear 
and some more modern mobile devices may offer you the option of maximizing the recording time available 
by using a data-compressed fi le format such as MP3 or AAC. Despite the fact that the sound quality captured 
by such compression schemes can sometimes be almost indistinguishable from uncompressed (“linear” or 
“PCM”) digital audio, I would personally advise against them, and here’s why. The way most of these algorithms 
squeeze the data bandwidth is by reducing the recording resolution whenever the human hearing system 
wouldn’t normally notice—contrary to what you might expect, we don’t actually perceive everything in a musical 
signal all the time, and background details in particular are often rendered inaudible by strong foreground 
sounds. This drop in resolution would be fi ne if all you were planning to do with your recording was play it 
back (through one side of a pair of earbuds, natch!), but the moment you apply any mixdown processing to the 
audio, you’ll fi nd yourself unveiling previously inaudible (and unmusical) distortions introduced during the data-
compression process. 
 1.3.3  Adjust Gain Through the System 
 Now make sure your monitors are muted and restart your playback device—
it’ll save time if you can shuttle to the loudest section for level-setting pur-
poses. Adjust your ﬁ rst gain stage while watching the meter for the following 
level checkpoint. The reading you’re aiming for will vary depending on the 
type of meter you’re using, so here are some guidelines:
 
■
 Digital Peak Meter.  This shows the instantaneous level of a digital signal, 
sample by sample. At the top of a digital meter is 0 dBFS, which is the high-
est level the system can capture before overloading. The basic level-setting 
tactic here is to make sure the signal is as hot as possible, but without ever 
hitting the top of the scale. (Digital distortion is one of the nastier-sound-
ing varieties.) There’s no need to be too ﬁ nicky about things, though—if the 
loudest signal from the playback device registers within the top 6 dB of the 
meter’s scale you’re ﬁ ne.  
 
■
 Volume Unit (VU) Meter.  This is normally used for analog signals, and 
doesn’t respond nearly as quickly to fast-moving waveforms as a digital 
peak meter does. As such, it tends to favor lower frequencies in general, as 
well as seriously under-reading short-term level spikes (often called tran-
sients) that are responsible for both the percussive attack of drums and the 
note-onset deﬁ nition of many other instruments such as acoustic guitar, 
piano, and tuned percussion. For this reason, the 0 dBVU “reference level” 
marking on such meters is usually designed to correspond to an electrical 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
20
level about 20 dB below the actual overload point of the surrounding ana-
log circuitry. Therefore you can set your gain control to give a reading at 
the meter’s reference level and you’ll still have around 20 dB of “headroom” 
to accommodate the unmetered transient peaks without distortion. (If your 
VU meter eschews the dBVU scale in favor of dBu markings, then you can 
usually treat the +4 dBu level as 0 dBVU.) 
 
■
 Peak Program Meters (PPMs).  These meters are pretty uncommon in 
small studios, so you’re only likely to come across them if you’ve scav-
enged some broadcast gear for your recording rig. Like VU meters, they’re 
primarily intended for use with analog equipment, but they respond much 
better to transients. For this reason, you can set a recording level only about 
10 dB below the analog overload point on a PPM without any real danger 
of distorting unmetered signal peaks. Irritatingly, though, there are several 
different labeling standards commonly used for PPMs, some of which use 
decibel markings, while others use an arbitrary numeric scale, so you’ll 
need to work out roughly where the “10 dB below overload” point appears 
in your speciﬁ c instance if you’re going to use PPMs to judge your gain 
settings. 
 
■
 Uncalibrated Meters.  Metering is one area where manufacturers of budget 
equipment tend to cut corners, most commonly by replacing fully-featured 
metering with a single LED. The simplest design just lights up when it senses 
any signal signiﬁ cantly stronger than the unit’s own noise ﬂ oor, and is there-
fore mostly just a line-checking tool. More useful for level-setting is the 
overload/clip LED, which warns you of impending distortion on signal 
peaks, so your primary concern while setting recording levels is to turn up the 
gain as far as you can without triggering that. These two single-LED meters 
complement each other quite well, so they’re often twinned in practice, or 
else have their functions combined via a single variable-color LED.  
 When you’ve achieved the meter reading you’re after for your ﬁ rst checkpoint, 
grab whichever gain control is immediately after the ﬁ rst checkpoint and 
adjust it (if necessary) while looking at the next checkpoint’s meter. Continue 
in a similar manner until you’ve got appropriate meter readings for all the 
checkpoints. 
 Returning to our examples, in  Figure 1.9  there’s only one measurable check-
point, so I’d just turn up the headphone volume control until the loudest play-
back signal registered just under 0 dBFS on the sampling workstation’s digital 
input meters. In  Figure 1.10  I’d ﬁ rst grab the Input Trim knob on the DJ mixer’s 
turntable channel, and set that for a 0 dBVU reading on the unit’s master 
output VU meters. Then I’d shift my focus to the studio mixer’s group-output 
VU meters and check whether those were reading around 0 dBVU—if not, I’d 
adjust the Input Gain knob on the mixer channel(s) receiving the DJ mixer’s 
stereo output. Finally, I’d check the digital meter on the standalone converter 
unit and if necessary adjust the input sensitivity controls on the converter to 
achieve the most sensible reading.

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
21
 One potential ﬂ y in the ointment, though, is if a speciﬁ c gain control doesn’t 
have enough juice to achieve your target meter reading. Here’s what to do in 
that scenario:
 
■
 If you need more boost, use the next gain control in line—as long it still 
precedes the metering point. 
 
■
 If you need more cut, use the previous gain control in line.  
 So if, for example, the DJ mixer’s Input Trim in  Figure 1.10  didn’t give me an 
adequate level on its master output meters, then I might apply further gain by 
pushing the turntable channel’s fader above its 0 dB mark, and even the DJ 
mixer’s master fader too. Alternatively, if setting the optimum level on the stu-
dio mixer’s group output meters resulted in overloading the standalone con-
verter unit’s digital meters (even at the lowest input-sensitivity setting), I might 
turn down the studio mixer’s group output fader to reduce the level. 
 1.3.4  Listen 
 With a bit of luck, you should now be able to fade up your studio monitors and 
hear what you’re about to record, clean and clear. With the best will in the world, 
however, there will still be times when the signal is unacceptably degraded in 
some way, either by a quirk of the equipment or by good old-fashioned user 
error. So what can be done to ﬁ x such problems? 
 WHAT ABOUT ANALOG TAPE? 
 Because analog tape machines feature in very few small studios these days, I’ve not complicated my main 
level-setting discussion by including them. However, if you’re faced with recording to tape, then here’s how to 
incorporate it into the scheme. 
 Firstly, unless you have the luxury of a studio technician, you’ll need to acquaint yourself with the overbiasing and 
alignment procedure of your specifi c tape machine—if the tape deck’s manual isn’t enough help here, then fi nd 
someone who can talk you through it. As well as generally minimizing undesirable signal-loss or tonal coloration 
for the recorded sound, this also does two things that are absolutely essential for the level-setting process:
 
■
 It matches the unit’s input and output gain so that you get roughly the same level coming off the tape as 
you put onto it. Therefore the tape machine’s input metering can be used to optimize the signal level in its 
input and output circuitry simultaneously. 
 
■
 It determines how hard the tape is driven magnetically for a given input level. You’d need a dedicated 
fl uxmeter to measure this directly, something which would be uneconomical on studio tape machines. 
Instead, the idea is to establish a known relationship between electrical input level and magnetic fl ux level 
using a special test tape during alignment, so that the tape machine’s input metering can guide you in 
minimizing noise and distortion incurred by the tape itself. 
 What this all means is that you can treat an analog tape machine as a third type of level checkpoint in Section 
1.3—let’s call it a “tape” checkpoint—and you should use the machine’s own input metering to measure the 
signal level. Although the noise/distortion response of the tape will depend on the specifi cs of the alignment 
process, the suggested meter readings in Section 1.3.3 still provide a reasonable starting point. However, it’s 
important to realize that refi ning your level settings in Section 1.5.2 may involve not only revising your target 
meter reading, but also adjusting your initial alignment parameters. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
22
 1.4    TROUBLESHOOTING SIGNAL QUALITY 
 1.4.1    Pinpointing the Problem 
 In order to solve any audio-quality problem, you need to ﬁ nd out what’s caus-
ing it, and whereabouts in the signal chain. Here are some sleuthing tips:
 
■
 Check the Source.  It may seem obvious, but you’ll feel like a prize chump 
if you dismantle your whole recording rig in search of setup gremlins, only 
to discover that the signal degradation you’re hearing is actually part of the 
playback medium itself! Listen to that LP/tape/disc/ﬁ le on another play-
back system if you’ve not already done so, or plug headphones 
directly into the player as a conﬁ dence check.  
 
■
 Check Your Monitoring.  In a similar vein, brieﬂ y 
mute the destination recorder track to conﬁ rm 
that any unwanted noise you’re hearing through 
the monitors is actually coming through your 
recording chain, and not from some other 
unnoticed source. Another simple thing to 
check is that the signal isn’t inadvertently clip-
ping on its way from the recorder track through 
to your monitoring hardware—the big giveaway 
is when reducing the track’s monitor-channel fader 
level cleans up the distortion, in which case you 
may need to apply the gain-management techniques of 
Section 1.3 to your monitoring chain as well. 
 
■
 Listen to the Unwanted Signal. One of the quickest ways to track spe-
ciﬁ c signal-degradation problems is if you’ve learnt to recognize their 
tell-tale sound character. For example, analog clipping is generally 
smoother-sounding than digital clipping, and both are usually more 
related to changing signal levels than the kinds of distortion generated by 
faulty connections/gear. Likewise, the generic “hiss” of broadband circuit 
noise is usually dealt with quite differently to things like hums/buzzes or 
digital clicks/pops. If your ear can distinguish between these sonic signa-
tures, you’ve immediately got a head start.  
 
■
 Divide and Conquer — Again!  If none of the above provides a deﬁ ni-
tive answer, then you’ll need to adopt a “divide and conquer” approach 
similar to that described in Section 1.2.2. Occasionally you may discover 
a mismatch between the noise/distortion levels of the left and right chan-
nels of your stereo signal, in which case repatching cables as before can 
help tracing the signal-path position of a problem. In most situations, 
though, both channels will be equally afﬂ icted, so rather than repatching 
cables, the trick is to grab a gain control somewhere in the middle of the 
signal chain (preferably one of those you used while setting the metered 
levels) and try gradually backing it off while you listen. Where distortion is 
the concern, ask yourself whether the distortion remains consistent as you 
turn down the gain. If it does, then clipping is happening  before  that gain 
 “It may seem 
obvious, but you’ll 
feel like a prize chump if you 
dismantle your whole recording rig 
in search of setup gremlins, only to 
discover that the signal degradation 
you’re hearing is actually part 
of the playback medium 
itself!” 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
23
control in the signal path; if the degree of distortion reduces, then clipping 
is happening  after  that gain control. Where noise is the concern, ask your-
self whether the signal-to-noise ratio remains consistent as you turn down 
the gain—in other words, whether the noise level reduces roughly in pro-
portion with that of the desired signal. If it does, then unwanted noise is 
being added  before  that gain control in the signal path; if the signal-to-noise 
ratio gets worse (i.e., the gain change doesn’t affect the noise as much as the 
desired signal), then the unwanted noise is being added  after  that gain con-
trol. These questions answered, you can now reach for another gain control 
within the portion of the recording chain still under suspicion, and keep 
repeating the process to home in on the primary culprit.  
 SOME USEFUL ALARM BELLS 
 One of the things engineers gain with experience is a kind of sixth sense which provides advanced warning that 
something, somewhere, is wrong with their setup. Since this instinct is usually hard won, a reward for the litany 
of embarrassing mistakes everyone makes as they learn, hopefully I can spare you a few blushes by sharing a 
few little things that always set off my own mental alarm bells:
 
■
 If any of your left-channel gain settings don’t roughly match the corresponding right-channel gain 
settings. There’s probably a stereo balance control set wrong somewhere.  
 
■
 If the left and right meters of a stereo recording appear to be responding identically. This usually means 
you’re inadvertently recording the same mono signal twice. 
 
■
 If you have to really crank any gain control when recording a line-level signal. Most of the time line-level 
signals shouldn’t need much gain adjustment. 
 
■
 If turning up a gain control doesn’t change your meter readings as much as you’d expect. There may be 
an undetected overload (or some unnoticed signal processing) going on between the gain control and the 
meter. 
 
■
 If you spend several minutes trying to decide on the merits of any ﬁ ne adjustment. It’s not that it’s wrong 
to do this, it’s just that it’s really easy to imagine differences that aren’t actually there—something that has 
made every engineer in the history of the universe feel like a total idiot at least once in their life. So do 
yourself a favor: First give the control a good wrench to check it’s actually doing what you think it is before 
you focus on minutiae! 
 To demonstrate these concepts in practice, here’s a quick case study. Imagine 
I’m hearing a distorted signal coming through the rig in  Figure 1.10 . First I 
plug headphones into the DJ mixer and solo the turntable channel, conﬁ rm-
ing to my satisfaction that the source signal’s clean. Then I brieﬂ y mute the 
DAW’s recording track to check that a distorted signal isn’t inadvertently arriv-
ing via another route, and try waggling the recording track’s software fader to 
see whether the degree of distortion changes—this doesn’t remedy the prob-
lem, so I know I’m not being misled by a fault in my listening system. The 
smoother sound of the distortion suggests analog clipping to me, so I try 
fading down the studio mixer’s channel input gain control momentarily, then 
its group output fader: The former reduces the distortion, the latter doesn’t, 
so I’m now pretty sure there’s something amiss in the mixer itself. Perhaps 
the channel fader’s been knocked accidentally, some processor has been left 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
24
in circuit by mistake, or there’s some ﬂ aky electronic component under the 
hood—whatever species of technical gremlin it is, I’m a whole lot closer to 
exterminating it now that I know where it’s skulking. 
 1.4.2    Managing Earth Loops 
 So far I’ve mostly focused on tactics for minimizing broadband hiss and clip-
ping distortion, because this is something that’s fundamental for any session. 
However, there are a few other signal-quality concerns that arise from time to 
time which can easily render a recording unusable: earth loops, digital errors, 
and feedback loops. You never quite know when any of these will crop up, but 
they’re a lot more common on low-budget sessions, so I think it’s important 
for small-studio users to learn to recognize them and respond appropriately 
right from the outset. 
 An earth loop is an unbroken ring of electrical earth conductors, which can 
arise whenever you cable audio devices together. If two pieces of studio gear 
have power cables that access the shared earth conductor of the studio’s mains 
electrical supply, then the earth conductor in a signal cable running between 
them can complete the circuit, as shown in  Figure 1.11 . The earth loop then 
effectively operates as a kind of aerial, typically picking up a continuous 
pitched humming or buzzing from the alternating current of the mains supply 
itself, sometimes accompanied by various clicks, chirps, and swizzles induced 
by other electrical equipment in the vicinity, particularly mobile phones and 
refrigerators—I’ve even been treated to bursts of police radio on a couple of 
sessions! 
 FIGURE 1.11    
 A simple earth loop 
between two pieces of 
audio equipment, in this 
case a playback machine 
and a mixer. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
25
 One of the reasons to address any earth loops in your system at the earliest 
opportunity is that they can be a pain in the posterior to remedy, so you  really 
don’t want to be fafﬁ ng around with them while there are musicians waiting to 
play. The biggest obstacle small studios face with earth-loop problems is that 
they usually only become worryingly audible once there’s a whole tangle of 
earth loops interacting with one another, at which point you simply can’t trou-
bleshoot them in the same straightforward way you can a duff cable or a bit of 
distortion—there are too many variables. As such, these two preventative mea-
sures are a better recourse:
 
■
 Use “Star” Mains Wiring.  One way to reduce the impact 
of any earth loops within your system is to elimi-
nate as much of the building’s mains wiring from 
them. The way to do this is to connect your whole 
recording and monitoring system to a single 
power socket. Whether you do this via a dedi-
cated multi-output power distribution unit or 
just by chaining several multi-output plug-
boards together is a question of budget as much 
as anything, but either approach should substan-
tially reduce the audible effects of any earth loops. 
 
■
 Use Balanced Connections Wherever Possible. 
While this won’t break earth loops, it can decrease the 
level of the unwanted noises enough to sidestep the problem.  
 If these measures don’t give you a workable system (or are impossible to 
implement in your speciﬁ c studio scenario), then the only reliable way to deal 
with earth loops is by ﬁ rst unplugging all the audio cables in your system, with 
the exception of the cables connecting your studio monitors to their ampli-
ﬁ er. In this state, the monitors shouldn’t hum or buzz unless they’re broken or 
a wasp’s ﬂ own into the vent! You can then start rebuilding your studio setup 
one unit at a time, listening after each addition for earth-loop problems. The 
moment you hear something untoward, see if you can ﬁ nd a way to break the 
earth connection in the audio cables you most recently connected. 
 Where an unbalanced cable is responsible for creating an earth loop, then the 
easiest way to tackle it is with the same kind of transformer isolator box I’ve 
already mentioned in Section 1.1.1, since this interrupts the earth connection. 
(As we’ll see in Section 3.2.1, a DI box can be pressed into service to do the 
same job, but a simpler transformer-isolator is usually more cost-effective with 
line-level signals.) Alternatively, if you’re a whizz with a soldering iron, you can 
reduce the level of the hum by inserting a 100 Ohm resistor and a 100 nano-
Farad capacitor in parallel between the earth connector and the earth conduc-
tor at one end of the cable, and a similar scheme can also be applied to the 
unbalanced-to-balanced adaptor cable previously shown in  Figure 1.2 —both 
these conﬁ gurations are illustrated in  Figure 1.12 . 
 “Don’t  ever try 
to break an earth loop 
by disconnecting the earth 
conductor of a mains cable—
that’s there to stop people getting 
barbecued by electrical faults. In 
the grand scheme of things, a 
little hum’s preferable to the 
silence of the grave!” 

 FIGURE 1.12   
 Two cables which can reduce earth-loop hum when connecting the outputs of unbalanced gear. The upper schematic shows a lead for connecting an unbalanced TS 
jack input to an unbalanced TS jack output; the lower schematic and the photograph show a pseudo-balanced lead for connecting an unbalanced TS jack output to a 
balanced XLR input. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
27
 Transformer isolation will also work with balanced connections, but in a 
fully balanced scenario there’s also a cheaper option: You can actually break 
the loop by snipping the earth conductor away from the connector pin at one 
end of the audio cable without compromising its operation. (Cutting the earth 
conductor on unbalanced connectors is inadvisable because it makes the 
signal more vulnerable to unwanted interference.) However, in my experience 
this dodge is hardly ever necessary in smaller systems, so I wouldn’t recommend 
it unless you’ve already tried all other possible solutions, because it makes your 
customized cable ineffective for interfacing with unbalanced gear and it’ll need 
soldering to repair! Whatever you do, though, don’t  ever  try to break an earth 
loop by disconnecting the earth conductor of a mains cable—unlike the earth 
conductor in an audio cable, a mains power cable’s earth conductor is there to 
stop people getting barbecued by electrical faults. In the grand scheme of things, 
a little hum’s preferable to the silence of the grave!  
 EARTHLESS SYSTEMS 
 Having too many earth connections can cause earth loops, but you can also encounter similar-sounding 
problems if your studio has no mains earth connection at all. Fortunately, an earthless “fl oating” system is 
pretty rare, because there’s usually at least one piece of equipment in any setup that connects to the mains 
electrical earth via its power cable. However, low-budget home recordists often rely heavily on consumer-grade 
electronic equipment powered via external “wall wart” power adaptors or fi gure-eight mains connectors ( Figure 
1.13 ), neither of which make an earth connection. So, for example, if you were recording a battery-powered 
MP3 player via a USB-powered audio interface to a laptop 
with a wall-wart power adaptor, and you were monitoring on 
headphones, there’d be nothing electrically connecting the 
whole system to earth. 
 In practice, for line-level signals this probably won’t impinge 
drastically on the signal quality as long as you get your gain 
settings right. If it does, though, you can usually scotch 
the unwanted noises by improvising an earth connection. 
Try making contact between a bit of the recording system’s 
exposed metalwork and some other earthed item, such as an 
unpainted plumbing pipe or the metal casing of an earthed 
domestic appliance. If that’s awkward to do in practice, you 
can make it easier by plugging a spare cable into an unused 
audio socket of the recording system, and using that as an 
earthing extension, gaffer-taping the free end so that its earth 
conductor touches some earthed metalwork. Alternatively, 
if you have any earthed audio gear you’re not using for your 
recording, a redundant connection between that and your 
recording system might also do the job. 
 FIGURE 1.13    
 Audio equipment powered via a “wall wart” mains 
adaptor (left) or a ﬁ gure-eight mains plug (right) 
typically makes no connection to the mains earth. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
28
 1.4.3    Avoiding Digital Errors 
 Errors in the data stream of a digital audio signal are usually identiﬁ able as 
little click/pop sounds that don’t bear any obvious relation to the rest of the 
audio signal—they don’t get worse for louder signals, and you can’t usually 
predict exactly when they’ll occur. There are several common causes for them 
in the small studio, each of which calls for different remedial action:
 
■
 Damaged Optical Media.  If the surface of a CD or Minidisc is damaged, 
and that sufﬁ ciently interferes with the player’s laser optics to defeat the 
medium’s built-in error-correction mechanism, then you may get audio 
glitches and drop-outs. Unlike most types of digital error, these often occur 
in a regular rhythm, directly related to the disc’s revolution speed—a useful 
troubleshooting clue, especially if you can actually see the disc spinning in 
the player. There’s not a tremendous amount you can do to ﬁ x a damaged 
CD or Minidisc, but at least you can save yourself some troubleshooting 
time by spotting the nature of the fault swiftly. 
 
■
 Cable Issues.  When audible glitches are combined with sporadic error mes-
sages from your digital recording device along the lines of “Digital Clock 
Unlocked!” or “Digital Synchronization Error!”, this usually means you’ve 
got a problem with a digital cable or your digital clocking/sychronization 
scheme isn’t set up properly. It’s most likely to occur if you’re using nor-
mal XLR or RCA phono cables instead of correctly speciﬁ ed AES-EBU or 
S/PDIF cables, but can also happen if an optical S/PDIF cable’s internal 
ﬁ lament has been damaged. Even bending an optical cable too sharply  en 
route  between input and output may cause the data to become unreliable if 
it causes too much light to refract out of the optical ﬁ ber, rather than being 
reﬂ ected successfully along it. However, if you use purpose-designed digital 
cables, and treat them carefully, this kind of data corruption shouldn’t ever 
make it onto your radar. 
 MULTI-CHANNEL DIGITAL CONNECTIONS 
 Although we’re only focusing on recording stereo in this chapter, it’s not unusual for even quite unassuming 
studio setups to have a multi-channel digital connection somewhere in the recording chain, most frequently 
between the output of a multi-channel analog-to-digital converter box and the corresponding digital input on a 
digital recorder or computer audio interface. There’s no need to panic about multi-channel digital connections, 
though, because they’re usually no more complicated to deal with than stereo connections. The eight-channel 
ADAT standard uses the same Toslink connections as optical S/PDIF, so budget gear frequently has Toslink 
sockets which are software-switchable to use either data format. Eight-channel AES-EBU works electrically, 
using thick multi-core cables with D-Sub connectors (9-pin or 25-pin) equipped with locking screws that can 
be fastened by hand. Unbalanced audio lines are best kept away from any D-Sub cable if possible, to avoid 
collecting modem-like interference on your recordings. It’s important to treat D-Sub plugs with care, because 
the pins are thin enough to be bent if handled roughly, and you should be aware that the allocation of signals to 
pins varies between different manufacturers, so be prepared to consult your equipment manuals when hooking 
things up for the fi rst time. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
29
 
■
 Sample-Rate Mismatch.  Whenever you send a digital signal down a cable, 
it’s important that the sampling frequencies of the source and destination 
units are properly synchronized (even if they’re nominally operating at the 
same sample rate), otherwise the receiving unit will periodically misread 
the incoming data, causing a series of digital pops and clicks. Most budget-
friendly equipment will usually prevent you getting yourself into difﬁ culties 
here by refusing to unmute a digital input unless the unit’s sample rate has 
been set to synchronize with the incoming audio data stream’s embedded 
clocking information. Equipment aimed more directly at the professional 
market may not be as forgiving, however, and the remedy will usually 
involve a bit of menu/manual surﬁ ng in order to track down the necessary 
digital clocking and synchronization settings. 
 
■
 Software Driver Problems. If your recording system is based around a com-
puter, by far the most common cause of unwanted digital detritus on the 
audio signal is the computer’s software conﬁ guration. The permutations 
and pitfalls here are innumerable, so rather than getting too bogged down 
in speciﬁ cs, let me suggest some general strategies that usually lead me to a 
suitable ﬁ x. First, invest in a dedicated computer recording interface, instead 
of trying to use the built-in audio hardware—you can get something for 
under $100 (£70) that’ll work more reliably and record at a much higher 
quality. Then check that you have the latest version of your audio interface’s 
software driver, and that you’ve correctly selected it for recording purposes 
in your DAW’s user preferences. Close down any unnecessary applications 
running alongside your DAW software to minimize the load on your com-
puter’s CPU resources—bear in mind that some programs may be running 
as background processes, so they may not immediately be visible. For simi-
lar reasons, remove any unnecessary plug-ins from your DAW’s recording 
project. If you’re using an external audio interface connected via a data 
connection such as USB or FireWire, try to connect it directly (rather than 
via any kind of multi-port hub), and try different sockets on the computer 
in case some are handled by its motherboard in different ways. Finally, 
ﬁ nd the audio-interface driver’s conﬁ guration settings and try increasing 
the buffer size parameter, which reduces CPU drain, albeit at the expense 
of increasing the processing delay incurred between the audio inputs and 
outputs (which shouldn’t cause any practical problems with this chapter’s 
recording task). If none of that helps, then try the soundcard manufactur-
er’s technical support channels for ideas, and search the Internet for simi-
lar reports from any other users of your particular interface—there’s usually 
someone out there who’s already got the solution!  
 1.4.4  Feedback Loops and Comb-Filtering 
 While setting up your recording rig, it’s not hard to unwittingly send a signal 
from some point in your recording chain back to an early point, creating a cir-
cular signal path called a “feedback loop.” If the overall gain around the loop 
is above unity, then the signal level in the loop will rapidly accumulate and 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
30
overload, typically resulting in an unpleasantly distorted high-pitched squeal-
ing called “howlround” or “howlback.” Howlround isn’t easy to ignore, so 
you’ll know pretty quickly if you’ve got a positive-gain feedback loop in your 
recording chain, but if the gain around the feedback loop is less than unity, the 
 DIGITAL CLOCKING AND JITTER 
 If all you wish to do is digitally connect a stereo playback machine to your recording system, then you shouldn’t 
have to tangle with anything more complicated than a single S/PDIF or AES-EBU cable. However, some larger-
scale DAW systems may incorporate several independent digital converters, at which point things get a bit more 
complicated: Either you have to fi nd some way of synchronizing all their sample rates, because the destination 
device can’t slave itself to several sources at once; or you have to have additional circuitry at the inputs to 
continuously convert the incoming sample rates to match the destination sample rate. The former solution is 
cheaper to implement (so it’s the one you’re most likely to meet in small studios), but if you’re not careful it 
may lead to digital glitches and can also introduce subtle sample-rate fl uctuations (called “jitter”), which make 
analog-to-digital conversion less accurate. Because such problems may affl ict any of a recording system’s 
inputs, even this chapter’s simple stereo recording task may require you to tangle with them, so here are some 
tips that should hopefully keep you out of trouble. 
 The most common scheme for synchronizing digital equipment together is to distribute a dedicated digital “word 
clock” signal from a master unit, to which a number of slave units are synchronized. In small systems the usual 
approach is for one of the units to “daisy-chain” its word-clock output to each of the slaves in turn using special 
digital clock cables, whereas more complex multimedia rigs may use a dedicated multi-output “master clock” 
unit to feed each slave directly instead. (See the fi rst two setups in  Figure 1.15 .) In either scenario, every slave 
unit needs to be switched into its designated word-clock synchronization mode. When using the daisy-chaining 
approach, it’s best for the master unit to be something that’s doing analog-to-digital conversion, because slaving 
any digital converter to an external word-clock signal will usually increase its jitter. If there’s more than one ADC 
in the system, then choose the higher-quality unit to act as the slave, because it’ll normally have superior clock-
reading mechanisms to minimize the added jitter. 
 Word-clock cables are very similar to digital audio cables in design, but use BNC connectors featuring a 
bayonet-style locking system to hold them in place—a quarter-turn of the plug’s rotating collar secures it in 
place. One complication with BNC word-clock cabling, however, is that every chain of BNC cables needs a 
75 Ohm impedance at the end, to stop the clock signal refl ecting back and forth along the chain. In many cases 
the clock input’s circuitry will already provide this, in 
which case all you need to do is connect the cable, but 
there are some units that can switch to a higher input 
impedance as well. The higher-impedance termination is 
provided as a means of avoiding the processing delays 
incurred by each unit’s word-clock circuitry, should these 
begin to compromise synchronization between the fi rst 
and last units in a clocking daisy chain. The way this 
works is that the fi nal unit in the chain is connected to 
the master with a 75 Ohm impedance as usual, but all 
the intervening units maintain a higher input impedance 
which allows them to tap into this signal using special 
BNC “T-piece” splitters without rendering it unreadable. 
(See the third setup in  Figure 1.15 .) 
 FIGURE 1.14   
 A BNC cable and a “T-Piece” splitter, as used for digital 
word-clock connections. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
31
problem becomes more insidious. Where the feedback level is reasonably high 
or the feedback loop’s gain is near unity, you may hear a pronounced pitched 
ringing, or a strangely metallic “in a drainpipe” timbral quality, but if the feed-
back is slight, there may only be a subtle (though usually undesirable) tonal 
change to show for it. 
 You also need to be on guard against situations where a portion of your input 
signal is inadvertently split off, delayed by some means, and then mixed back 
in with the undelayed signal further down the signal chain. The time-difference 
between the undelayed and delayed signals causes a tonal effect called comb-
ﬁ ltering (or “phase cancellation”), which often sounds quite similar to a subtle 
feedback loop. You might think this kind of comb-ﬁ ltering would be an unlikely 
eventuality, but it’s actually quite easy to fall foul of, given that every piece of 
digital audio equipment inevitably causes a small (but signiﬁ cant) processing 
delay between its inputs and outputs.  
 The most challenging thing about both these problems is recognizing them in 
the ﬁ rst place, so it pays to tune your ear to how they sound under controlled 
conditions, because you’ll then spot them more quickly in the wild. (I’ve pro-
vided some pertinent audio examples in this chapter’s web resources.) Even 
then, you may sometimes question whether you’re hearing subtle feedback-
loop or comb-ﬁ ltering artifacts, or whether your ears are just playing tricks on 
you—in which case the best sanity-saver is to use headphones to compare the 
sound of the player’s raw output with your main monitoring signal. 
 Once you’re aware what’s wrong, it’s not usually too difﬁ cult to diagnose 
the causes. In my experience, both these issues are most likely to arise where 
you’re recording through the same small mixer that’s also routing the record-
er’s monitoring signal to your loudspeakers/headphones. One wrong button-
press can easily route the monitor channels back to the recording inputs 
(creating a feedback loop through the recording system) or the input channels 
to the mixer’s monitor outputs (mixing the original undelayed signal with the 
delayed signal returning from a digital recorder). Likewise, many computer 
audio interfaces now incorporate complex DSP-powered mixers that operate 
independently of the DAW software, and they seem to take a perverse glee in 
encouraging very similar routing gaffes. It may only be your monitoring signal 
that’s suffering, not the recording itself, but it’s still important to banish this 
malaise before hitting Record, because it can disguise various sonic subtleties 
you may want to assess—especially when we start working with microphones 
later on. 
 1.5   BEYOND REASONABLE: REFINING YOUR RESULTS 
 By this point you should be able to hit Record on pretty much any compar-
atively modern studio system and capture a passably clean-sounding version 
of whatever your playback machine’s putting out. But if you’re serious about 
the art of recording, then that simply isn’t good enough! You want to get the 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
32
 FIGURE 1.15    
 Three different digital 
clocking arrangements 
for interfacing several 
external analog-to-
digital converters with a 
single computer audio 
interface: (1) a simple 
daisy-chain system; (2) 
a system synchronized 
from an independent 
digital master clock unit; 
and (3) a daisy-chain 
system using BNC “T”-
piece adaptors. 
 maximum  quality out of a given system, especially if you’re at the mercy of out-
dated and/or low-budget gear which may struggle to deliver truly usable results 
even at the best of times. So let’s look at how we can reﬁ ne the basic approach 
so far in order to boost quality. 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
33
 1.5.1  Improving the Source 
 One of the essential truths about any recording job is this: The better your 
source sounds, the better your recording will sound. Furthermore, the sonic 
beneﬁ ts of adjusting a sound source directly will usually dwarf any improve-
ments attained via your studio gear, and often cost less time and money into 
the bargain. Admittedly, there may not be anything you can do to improve the 
sound of the simplest playback devices, but if you’re recording from a cassette 
deck, say, you’ll almost certainly get a bigger step-up in quality by cleaning and 
aligning its playback heads than you’d get by doubling the cost of your record-
ing system or switching to a 96 kHz sample rate. 
 Given the impact that the source quality has on the recording, one of the big 
learning curves of studio engineering is discovering how to get the best out of 
each speciﬁ c sound source you’re presented with, so if you’re not happy with 
the recorded sound of any playback device (DAT, LP, cassette, wax cylinder…), 
either do a bit of background reading to harvest general-purpose tips or ﬁ nd 
someone who can clue you in on the best specialist tweaks. 
 1.5.2  The Aesthetics of Noise and Distortion 
 When I talked about setting initial levels using your meters back in Section 1.3, 
I deliberately erred on the side of caution with my suggested meter readings, on 
the basis that excess distortion is usually trickier to remedy at mixdown than 
excess noise. In doing this, however, I’ve allowed you to dodge an important judg-
ment call that every engineer must make at each level checkpoint in their own 
unique rig: What do  you  think is the best balance between noise and distortion? 
 Answering this question is partly a question of learning the nuances of your 
own equipment, so if you’re starting out I’d suggest fast-tracking your devel-
opment in that respect—by which I mean experimenting with alternative gain 
settings at this point, while there aren’t any musicians hanging around getting 
bored! Work through each of the level checkpoints you identiﬁ ed in Section 
1.3.2 and try hitting them with a higher signal level, bearing in mind that you 
may need to turn down a gain control later in the recording/monitoring chain 
to avoid unintentionally overloading later checkpoints. Discovering how each 
of your pieces of gear responds to overloads is an important factor in getting 
the best from your studio, not least because it tells you in practical terms how 
much headroom your speciﬁ c VU meters and PPMs provide, and thus what 
target meter readings are sensible. And once you accept the inevitability of a 
trade-off between noise and distortion, it becomes perfectly defensible on tech-
nical grounds to allow some overloads if their audible consequences turn out 
to be a reasonable price to pay for an improved signal-to-noise ratio. While 
you can often afford to leave lots of headroom for signal peaks when recording 
at 24-bit resolution with decent project-studio equipment, there’s also nothing 
to say you shouldn’t light up a few red LEDs with your signal peaks on a cheap 
and noisy mixer, or ﬂ atten the odd transient against the 0 dBFS digital ceiling 
of an old 12-bit sampler, if your goal is substantially lower noise.  

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
34
 NOISE FINGERPRINTS 
 Despite the best efforts of your gain controls, you may occasionally fi nd yourself with no choice but to 
record a signal which is noisier than you’d like—when sampling an old cassette tape, for example. There’s 
specialist noise-reduction software for such eventualities which can improve matters after the session, but 
its effectiveness will often depend on whether there’s a noise-only section of the recording (called a “noise 
fi ngerprint”) which can be analyzed to help tailor the processing precisely. So if you can’t escape background 
noise while you’re recording, make sure you record a few seconds of it on its own to improve your chances of 
removing it later. 
 However, it’s equally important to acknowledge that overloading any studio 
equipment has an aesthetic dimension too—I’d wager that every studio box 
ever invented has been purposely overdriven on at least one hit record! Part 
of the point of trying out your gear with hotter signal levels is to hear what 
it actually sounds like, so that you can draw on that knowledge for creative 
ends if necessary—whatever the meters are telling your eyes, it’s your ears that 
should always have the ultimate authority. Pushing any bit of analog equip-
ment out of its comfort zone will add a unique blend of distortion products, 
and the appealing tonal color of these additions is a big part of the appeal of 
the most sought-after studio hardware. Analog tape machines are particularly 
revered by many engineers for their ability to smoothe and fatten high-level 
drum transients, for instance, but even the abrupt, harsh onset of digital clip-
ping is put to artistic use on occasion, particularly in more electronic styles. As 
an engineer, you’re better equipped to know when the time is right for each of 
these if you’re able to conjure their contrasting characteristics to your mind’s 
ear at will. One word of caution, though: It’s a lot easier to add distortion 
while mixing than to take it away, so if you’re in any doubt about how much 
distortion to add while tracking, I’d always suggest playing it a little safe. 
 1.5.3    Simplify the Signal Path 
 Another way you can improve signal quality is by simplifying the signal path. 
Fundamentally, the less circuitry you have between your signal source and your 
recorder track, the fewer opportunities there’ll be for any type of audio degra-
dation. Clearly some of you will face restrictions here—perhaps you’re working 
on a college system that you’re not allowed to repatch—but don’t let that stop 
you improving what you can. 
 In the ﬁ rst instance, you should ask yourself whether there’s any more equip-
ment in the recording chain than you need. So in  Figure 1.10  you’d get 
a cleaner signal by connecting the DJ mixer directly to the standalone digital 
converter—indeed, bypassing the studio’s main mixer like this is extremely 
common amongst professionals. Another thing to avoid is unnecessary digital 
conversion stages. So if the DJ mixer in  Figure 1.10 were actually a digital mixer 
rather than an analog one, you might be able to take a digital feed directly 
from that into the computer audio interface, completely removing the mixer 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
35
and standalone digital converter from the equation—as well as speeding up 
the gain-setting process by eliminating all but one level checkpoint. In a sim-
ilar vein, try to turn off (or “bypass”) any unused signal processing facilities 
within your equipment as this will reduce the likelihood that it tampers with 
what you’re recording, and will often reduce the amount of circuitry in the 
signal path too. 
 Cabling should be kept as simple as possible, so if you can use a single cable 
between two pieces of equipment, rather than relying on chains of cables 
and adaptor plugs, you’ll likely improve the recorded sound a little, as well as 
reducing the number of variables to troubleshoot if you hit a snag during the 
line-check. Choosing your audio connections wisely may also help streamline 
your cabling, particularly if you can obviate the need for transformer isolators. 
Finally, notwithstanding my warnings in Section 1.1.3 against using cables that 
are too short, overlong cables can also impact on recording quality, so aim for 
a happy medium in that department. 
 DEALING WITH PATCHBAYS 
 A patchbay (or jackfi eld) is basically a means of extending the socketry of many different studio units so that 
it’s all in one place, at which point you can conveniently connect or “patch” things together using short cables 
called “patch cords.” Although the general trend toward software-based recording rigs has now rendered 
patchbays redundant in many small studios, there are a few things that you should know if you’re working in a 
system which uses them. 
 Firstly, the jack sockets provided on some patchbays may not be designed to accept standard quarter-inch 
plugs—bantam jack plugs are smaller, for instance, and older “B-type” jacks have a signifi cantly different shape 
despite sharing the same diameter. Trying to use any type of jack plug with the wrong type of jack socket will 
usually result in an unreliable connection, and can easily damage the socket’s internal contacts too, so consider 
yourself warned! 
 Beyond that, though, the best way to navigate any specifi c patchbay is to ask the person who wired it up, 
because small-studio patchbays are far from standardized in my experience: Earthing schemes may be quirky 
to say the least; labeling will frequently be missing or misleading, without adequate indication of normaling 
(whereby certain sockets may automatically be connected if unpatched); and a random selection of sockets 
and patch cords will usually need cleaning and/or repairing. Indeed, trying to line-check or troubleshoot earth-
loop hum through various unknown patchbays has so often caused me to chew my own face off in frustration 
that I now routinely avoid patchbays while recording wherever possible. Besides, even if a patchbay works as it 
should, it’ll still make the wiring between any two pieces of connected equipment more complicated than it need 
be, so direct connections may also sound better, even if they don’t look as neat. 
 1.6   AFTER YOU HIT RECORD 
 You’re not off the hook, though, even if you’ve got the world’s most high-ﬁ delity 
signal arriving at your recorder. While the recording’s happening, it’s still your 
job to keep eyes and ears open. If you see an unexpected overload on any of 
the crucial meters you identiﬁ ed in Section 1.3.2, especially the one that’s 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
36
measuring the actual recorded level, then at the very least you should check 
that section of the recording for distortion later on. (The “peak hold” func-
tion of many digital meters can be very handy in this regard, so I’d recom-
mend switching it on if you have it.) But whatever the meters say, if you hear 
unwanted distortion while you’re recording, then stop where you are, adjust 
your gain controls accordingly, and retake. 
 And once the recording’s completed you should always listen back to it, if 
only to make sure you  did  actually record something—no recording device is 
foolproof and, besides, every audio engineer presses the wrong button at least 
once in their career! Much better to discover a mistake immediately, while the 
gear’s still all set up, rather than waiting until you’ve packed everything away. 
Playing back what you’ve recorded isn’t just about saving you from silly slip-
ups, though: it’s the ﬁ nal stage in a quality-assurance process that reaches back 
all the way to your line-check. When you’ve taken such trouble to get a great 
signal to your recorder, it’d be daft not to guard against potential failures in the 
recording medium itself. 
 1.7    KEEPING UP WITH THE MUSICIANS 
 If you’ve grasped everything so far in this chapter, then you should now be 
equipped to record line-level signals. However, until you can conﬁ dently 
hit Record within a couple of minutes of switching on your source playback 
device, you aren’t really ready to record anything other than a 
machine. So given that Chapter 2 involves working with 
real performers, you’ll still need to consider how 
you’ll go about reaching that kind of session 
speed.
 The main weapon at your disposal is prepa-
ration. Even if you can’t get your hands on 
the source playback device until the session 
itself, it shouldn’t be too difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd out 
beforehand what socketry it has. Armed with 
this information, you can deal with almost 
everything up to Section 1.3.3. Doing a pre-
liminary dry run of the session, with the help of a 
substitute playback machine if necessary, will take you 
even further, highlighting whether any of the signal-quality 
issues described in Section 1.4 are inherent in the recording system itself, so 
that you can address them before the clock’s ticking. With all of that in the 
bag, come session time the job should be a breeze: Plug in the new playback 
machine, tweak a couple of gain controls, and burn rubber! 
 But your gear isn’t the only thing that needs preparing: You also have to prime 
your ears and your mind. In other words you have to learn how far you can 
push your meter readings to get the best noise/distortion trade-off; expand 
your ability to recognize different signal-quality problems when you hear 
 “Once the 
recording’s completed you 
should always listen back to it, 
if only to make sure you  did actually 
record something—no recording device 
is foolproof and, besides, every audio 
engineer presses the wrong button 
at least once in their career!” 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
37
them; and build your troubleshooting powers to the stage where no level/rout-
ing snag delays you longer than a minute or so. All of these things improve 
with experience, and the best way to gain experience is through practice, prac-
tice, and more practice. 
 In light of that, I’m going to draw this chapter to a close with a series of assign-
ments designed to consolidate your understanding of the principles we’ve cov-
ered so far. In the process you’ll also be preparing your studio gear for the fray, 
as well as fast-tracking your own engineering skills so that you can operate at a 
more musician-friendly pace. But just before we get to those assignments, let’s 
quickly recap on the main concepts in this chapter. 
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 The basic procedure for recording a line-level playback device is: Mute your monitors, 
select your connections, and hook everything up; set unity gain through the system and 
carry out a line-check; set preliminary gain based on meter readings; unmute your moni-
tors to troubleshoot signal degradations and reﬁ ne the signal quality as much as you can; 
record the signal and then listen back to check it over.  
 
■
 Use balanced connections wherever possible: It’ll reduce unwanted noise on your record-
ings and make earth loops easier to manage. If you’re using XLR connections for line-
level signals, make sure phantom power is switched off. Balanced inputs can usually be 
connected to unbalanced outputs with a specially wired cable, but if you want to feed 
a balanced output to an unbalanced input, then it’s safest to go through a dedicated 
transformer isolator unless the output is speciﬁ cally designed to cope with unbalanced 
operation. 
 
■
 Dedicated studio/stage cables without molded connectors are well within most bud-
gets, so don’t settle for less. Dedicated digital cables are also worth the investment, even 
though analog cables can sometimes substitute for them in a pinch.  
 
■
 When laying out cables for a session: Keep audio cables away from sources of interference 
such as mains leads, power-supply transformers, and data cabling; try not to create obvi-
ous tripping hazards; and think ahead to prevent needless damage to cables or sockets.  
 
■
 The “divide and conquer” approach is the most reliable troubleshooting technique at 
your disposal, but it saves time in the long run if you also learn to recognize how differ-
ent types of audio degradation sound. 
 
■
 When setting levels, you need to achieve the best balance between noise and distortion 
whenever your signal passes through an analog cable, undergoes digital conversion, or 
is committed to analog tape. This involves ﬁ nding the best meter for each of these level 
checkpoints, and then selecting the most appropriate gain control(s) for any adjustments.  
 
■
 The best way to improve your recording is to improve the quality of the sound source. 
Simplify the signal path to keep your recording clean and minimize troubleshooting 
time—bypassing the main studio mixer or any patchbays if possible. Where unacceptable 
background noise levels prove unavoidable, record a noise ﬁ ngerprint to assist with later 
restoration processing. 
 
■
 Working at digital resolutions above 24-bit/48 kHz is rarely the best use of a small-studio 
budget, but recording to data-compressed digital formats is almost always a false economy. 
If you’re going to use analog tape, make sure it’s properly aligned, and familiarize yourself 
with how different alignment variables affect its general sound and response to overloads.  

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
38
 
■
 Reduce earth-loop problems by using “star” mains wiring and balanced cables. Any trou-
blesome individual earth loops can be broken by cutting a balanced audio cable’s earth 
connector or using a transformer isolator. Earth loops in unbalanced lines can be tackled 
with transformer isolation too, or by using special pseudo-balanced cables. Never discon-
nect the earth conductors in any mains plug or cable. If your whole recording system has 
no direct mains earth connection, you may need to improvise one.  
 
■
 Digital errors are usually caused by: damaged recording media; inappropriate cabling; 
unmatched sample rates; or software audio-driver problems. Inattention to digital clock-
ing can increase the unwanted effects of jitter upon your digital converters. 
 
■
 Feedback loops and comb-ﬁ ltering can easily arise in small-studio systems, and may sub-
tly undermine the tone of your recordings in a way that’s easily missed. 
 
■
 Preparation is vital if you want your recording sessions to go smoothly and swiftly.  
 The purpose of this assignment is to identify the controls and meters you need for 
recording; to line-check and troubleshoot the recording system itself; and to give you a 
clear idea of the meter readings you should be aiming for at each point in your system.
 
■
 Find yourself a stereo line-level playback device, and connect it to your recording 
system as described in Section 1.1. 
 
■
 Work your way through the entire recording and monitoring signal path, drawing 
yourself a fl owchart that indicates every single gain control (don’t forget switches!), 
mute button, and stereo pan/balance control. While you’re at it, set all of them to 
unity gain and reset/bypass any audio processing facilities you come across.  
 
■
 Line-check your recording and monitoring system as discussed in Section 1.2.  
 
■
 With reference to Section 1.3, indicate on your fl owchart the position of every 
level checkpoint between the fi rst gain stage and the recording track, and mark 
the location of the best meter for measuring each checkpoint’s signal level. 
(You should also make a note of any level checkpoints you can’t measure, as 
those may be under suspicion if you hear distortion later on.) Now set your gain 
controls according to the guidelines in Section 1.3.3.  
 
■
 Listen carefully to the signal you’re about to record, keeping your ears peeled for any 
of the audio-quality problems described in Section 1.4. Troubleshoot as necessary.  
 
■
 Record your signal, maintaining a watchful eye on the relevant meters and listen-
ing carefully for anything unexpected that might warrant further fi xes. Play back the 
recording to check you’ve captured it intact, and then save/store it somewhere safe.  
 
■
 Now follow the guidelines in Section 1.5 to improve the signal quality: investigate 
whether you can adjust the source playback machine for better results; see how 
hard you can drive each level checkpoint in turn before distortion side-effects 
become unappealing; and simplify the signal chain in any way you can. 
 
■
 Record the tweaked signal, again watching and listening carefully for problems, 
and play it back to check it over. 
 
■
 Compare the two recordings side-by-side within your recording system, evening out 
any loudness differences between them by adjusting their relative playback levels. 
Give special attention to the audibility of the recorded noise fl oor, the impact of 
distortion on the timbre, and how any transients in the source signal have been 
 Assignment 1: The Dry Run 

Recording a Machine CHAPTER 1
39
 This assignment is designed to speed up the development of your line-checking and 
trouble-shooting skills.
 
■
 Get hold of a stereo line-level playback device, if possible a different one to that 
used in Assignment 1. Connect it up (Section 1.1), do a line-check (Section 1.2), 
set levels (Section 1.3), troubleshoot any signal problems (Section 1.4), and refi ne 
the recording quality if necessary (Section 1.5). If you’ve already worked your way 
through Assignment 1, this shouldn’t take you more than about fi ve minutes.  
 
■
 Turn down your monitors, and then give a mildly sadistic friend (preferably a fellow 
student of the recording arts with a passing knowledge of your studio system) pre-
cisely two minutes to repatch audio connections and tweak equipment settings while 
you turn your back, their express intention being to try to fool you. For safety’s sake you 
should make sure they don’t touch any mains connections or phantom power switches, 
or indeed do anything else that’s likely to actually damage the kit, but otherwise try to 
give them a free hand so that they can get things into a proper tangle.  
 
■
 When their two minutes are up, hand over the stopwatch to your persecutor so 
they can time how long it takes you to get the system back up and running again. 
And try to resist the urge to throw things at their smugly amused face…  
 
■
 It shouldn’t require too many repetitions of that exercise to dramatically accelerate 
your troubleshooting skills. If you can repay your fellow student by performing the 
same controlled sabotage on their system, all the better—and if you’re really seri-
ous about boosting your engineering mojo, then try swapping over and debugging 
each other’s systems too! 
affected. Whether or not the second recording turns out to be an improvement 
on the fi rst, try to isolate which adjustments to the recording chain were primarily 
responsible for the most audible differences—if you’re in any doubt, perform addi-
tional test recordings to probe the variables further. 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 audio demonstrations of different types of signal degradation for ear-training 
purposes, as well as example fi les showing the scale of side-effects from some 
affordable transformer isolators; 
 
■
 specimen fl owcharts for Assignment 1, based on the example setups shown in 
 Figures 1.9 and 1.10 ; 
 
■
 further reading on topics such as analog metering standards, tape-machine 
alignment, digital interfacing, studio wiring, cable coiling, and patchbay design; 
 
■
 links to some manufacturers of affordable transformer isolators and pseudo-
balanced cables. 
  http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch1.htm 
 Assignment 2: Line-Checking & Troubleshooting 

This page intentionally left blank

41
 Now that some essential technical skills are under your belt, you should be in 
a position to start grappling with the most important and complex part of any 
music recording session: the performer. We’ll stick with line-level and digital sig-
nals for the moment, and make it our task this chapter to learn about capturing 
musical instruments which generate no acoustic sound of their own: synths, sam-
pling workstations, laptops with live performance software, and scratch DJ turn-
tables. And because these kinds of instruments are often recorded as overdubs, 
we’re also going to talk about the practicalities of monitoring the instrument 
against whatever backing track you have. (This chapter’s web resources include a 
variety of prerecorded stereo backing tracks in different musical styles which you 
can download if you don’t already have a production of your own to overdub on.) 
 I realize that most people reading this will probably be performers themselves, 
and may therefore be multitasking as both artist and engineer during recording 
sessions. However, working with other people is a far more challenging pros-
pect, so I’m going to focus primarily on that in this chapter. Fundamentally, 
though, the same engineering principles apply in either situation, the main 
difference being that you’ll cut yourself more slack on the engineering side of 
things than anyone else is likely to! 
 2.1  PREPARING FOR THE SESSION 
 If you’ve learnt anything from the assignments in Chapter 1, then I’m assum-
ing you’ve already line-checked your recording and monitoring chains in 
advance of the session, you’ve made sure that all the relevant gain controls 
and meters are at your ﬁ ngertips, and you’ve got the right cables for the instru-
ment’s output socketry. But that’s just the tip of the iceberg… 
 2.1.1  Studio Layout 
 Because the instruments we’re recording in this chapter don’t make any acous-
tic noise, the best place to set them up is in your control room—whether that’s 
the glistening nerve-center of a high-grade project studio, or just the bedroom 
 The Human Element 
 CHAPTER 2 
 CHAPTER 2 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
42
containing your PC. When you’re recording your own performance, this keeps 
the studio controls within easy reach while you’re playing, but even if you’re 
recording someone else, the advantage of working in the control room is that 
everyone can use your main studio loudspeakers for monitoring purposes. 
From an engineering perspective, it can be tricky to judge the timbre of 
recorded sounds over headphones (or “cans”), and there are also many aspects 
of headphone listening that can interfere with a musician’s ability to perform:
 
■
 the characteristic sensation that the music is originating inside your cra-
nium, rather than happening in front of you; 
 
■
 the slightly unsettling psychological effect of being isolated from the envi-
ronment you’re performing in, because the headphone earcups stop you 
hearing the room’s natural acoustic reﬂ ections;  
 
■
 the physical restrictions imposed by the tether between your headset and 
the headphone outlet; 
 
■
 the communication difﬁ culties that arise from the fact that it’s tough to 
listen and talk at the same time, especially during highly collaborative ses-
sions where several bystanders are brainstorming freely with the performer;  
 
■
 the tendency for pitch-perception to become less reliable, particularly at 
higher listening volumes, which can cast doubt over tuning decisions. 
 
 HEADPHONE EXTENSION CABLES 
 If you’re looking for a headphone extension cable, don’t go for the fl imsy variety designed for domestic 
multimedia use, because the skinny wires and cheap molded connectors rarely survive long under studio 
conditions, in my experience. My recommendation is to combine a studio-grade TRS-to-XLR cable with one of 
those chunky barrel adaptors which have an XLR socket at one end and a TRS jack socket at the other. Not 
only is this a whole lot more robust, but you can also further lengthen the cable using spare XLR mic cables if 
you need. 
 Clearly, though, many of you may have no speakers in your recording system 
at all—or you may be working too late at night to ﬁ re them up—so you have 
to make the best of it. If you have any open-back headphones available, these 
are a good choice for this kind of overdubbing, because they normally give a 
more natural sound and also make it easier to hear conversation and other 
incidental noises while you’re working. Open-back headphones aren’t as advis-
able when working with microphones, because they let the monitoring signal 
escape into the room and spill onto your recording, but that doesn’t mean 
they’re not fair game in mic-less situations. 
 When someone you’re recording has headphones of their own that they like, 
then suggest they bring them along to the session, because the timbre of differ-
ent models can vary enormously and some people are very partial to a certain 
balance. (Just make sure you have a spare pair of headphones in the wings as 
a backup in case they’re actually rubbish!) The volume level at which a per-
former normally monitors may also have a bearing on which headphones are 
most suitable for them, because the human ear becomes more sensitive to the 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
43
high and low extremes of the audible frequency spectrum as listening levels 
increase—headphones with a brighter tone can prove quite fatiguing on the 
ear at higher listening levels, for instance, whereas models with hyped bass 
response may improve the subjective appeal of quieter playback. 
 If you need more headphone outputs from your recording system than you 
actually have, the cheapest workaround is one of those little adaptor plugs that 
can split a single headphone output to a pair of sockets. I hate those things, 
though, and not just because they typically stress the socket contacts. The main 
problem is that the adaptor plug ties both listeners to the same headphone 
volume control. If you like listening a lot louder than the performer does, say, 
either you end up deafening the talent, or you’re forced to make sonic judg-
ments at a listening level that presents the audible spectrum with an unfamil-
iar frequency balance. Even if both of you like listening at the same volume, 
some sets of headphones work more efﬁ ciently than others, so it’s not uncom-
mon to notice a signiﬁ cant level mismatch between two pairs of cans fed from 
the same socket. Moreover, splitting a headphone output like this will reduce 
the maximum volume the headphone ampliﬁ er can deliver for each listener. 
Overall, then, if you don’t have enough headphone outputs, I’d thoroughly 
recommend supplementing your rig with a dedicated multi-output headphone 
ampliﬁ er that has a separate volume control for each output. A four-output 
box like this needn’t cost you more than about $75 (£50), although it is worth 
checking out models around the $150 (£100) mark if you want to guarantee 
bone-splintering volume levels even with less sensitive headphones. Whatever 
headphone ampliﬁ cation method you choose, though, do get some stereo 
 FIGURE 2.1   
 A dedicated multi-output headphone ampliﬁ er, such as the Aphex Headpod 4 shown here, can be very 
useful for small-studio work, because it gives several listeners independent control over their own 
listening level. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
44
headphone extension cables, so that the musician will always have enough 
freedom to move while performing, and any other people in the control room 
can be positioned well out of harm’s way! 
 Many of the instruments we’re considering here need to rest on something 
like a tabletop or keyboard stand, so set that up in advance, along with a 
chair or music stand if you think either might be of assistance. While you’re 
at it, consider where your cable runs would be best located (with reference to 
Section 1.1.3), and make sure that mains outlets and headphone sockets are 
placed sensibly—headphone and power cables are often rather short. Because 
communication is so vital, you should go out of your way to plan decent 
sight lines between you and your performer, and indeed anyone else direct-
ing the session. This is especially true if you’re unable to use speaker monitor-
ing, because you can transmit all sorts of information visually even when the 
headphone monitoring militates against verbal communication: You can cue 
a musician when to start/stop playing; indicate a speciﬁ c note that’s pitched a 
bit ﬂ at; express your emotional response to a killer take; or just warn someone 
they’re in danger of spilling coffee over themselves! It’s not a bad idea to have 
a small lamp around too, because the controls of some electronic instruments 
can be notoriously difﬁ cult to navigate in low-light conditions. 
 2.1.2    Written Materials 
 Although some musicians are content to overdub parts entirely by ear, almost 
any session will proceed a lot more smoothly with the help of some pre-
prepared written materials. At the very least, it makes sense for the engineer 
to know what each of the major song sections is called, where it starts and 
ends in the timeline, its tempo and time-signature, and how many musical 
bars it contains. I normally put all that info onto a single piece of paper (see 
 Figure 2.2 ) called a “cue sheet,” but there’s nothing to stop you using the met-
ric grid and timeline markers of your DAW software in lieu. Not only does a 
cue sheet save time whenever the artist says, “Let’s start four bars before the 
third chorus,” but it also standardizes everyone’s terminology when discuss-
ing takes. Some structural terms, such as “bridge” and “breakdown,” can mean 
very different things to different people, so if you’re not careful it’s surprisingly 
easy to end up recording parts over the wrong song sections, or losing/obliter-
ating some unrepeatable moment of performance heroics by mistake. 
 Useful as a cue sheet is, though, it won’t give you much help if you anticipate 
working with the performer to learn/reﬁ ne a new musical part in detail. In that 
case, jotting down the music’s chord structure and main melody/bass lines 
prior to the session can speed up progress tremendously. Daniel Lanois 1 is a 
big fan of this idea, creating elaborate production charts using large charcoal-
drawing books so that he’s never at a loss during fast-paced musical discus-
sions: “You have to be able to say, ‘I know  exactly  what you mean.’ Not, ‘Oh, 
where’s that?’ and waste people’s time.” Finally, make sure you have plenty of 
spare paper and functional writing implements handy, if only for your own 
note-taking purposes, as we’ll come to in Section 2.3.1. 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
45
 FIGURE 2.2   
 To keep up with the creative ﬂ ow when overdubbing, it’s essential that you’re able to locate to any point 
in the project quickly. A DAW’s internal locator markings (top) can help you here, but alternatively a paper 
cue sheet (bottom) will work with any recording system, whether hardware or software. 
 2.1.3  Creature Comforts 
 Although technicalities are important in the studio, you can also improve 
results by thinking more holistically about the performer’s needs and the frame 
of mind you’d prefer them to be in while recording. Most musicians give of 
their best when they’re comfortable, both physically and emotionally. “The 
most important thing an engineer has to remember,” says Al Schmitt, 4 “is that 
he’s got to keep the musicians happy.” 
 It’s always a good idea to offer appropriate refreshments (whether that means 
water, coffee, beer, meths…), and snacks are a welcome addition on any ses-
sion lasting longer than a couple of hours. This isn’t just about courtesy either 
(endearing though that is), because it’s also a time-worn method of increas-
ing productivity—you’ll almost always get better work done if everyone’s 
well hydrated, energy levels are high, and people’s tastes in chemical mood-
enhancement are catered for. 
 In fact, where you’re on sessions that span a day or more, I strongly suggest 
proposing some kind of schedule for communal mealtimes, and not just for 
nutritional reasons. Although you never want to stick too rigidly to the agreed 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
46
 BUILDING PRODUCTIONS FROM SCRATCH 
 Until Part 4 of this book, I’ll for the most part be considering the task of overdubbing new parts alongside existing 
recorded backing tracks. However, if you’d rather create your own productions from scratch while carrying out the 
earlier chapter assignments, then don’t let me stand in your way! The fi rst challenge you may encounter, though, 
will be keeping the fi rst performer suffi ciently in time when there’s nothing for them to play against. Sure, it’s easy 
enough to use a metronome to prevent a musician’s tempo drifting too much between takes, and that carries 
little danger of stamping out natural performance variations that are the heart and soul of more natural-sounding 
styles. However, if you’re aiming for the stricter timing regimentation heard in many mainstream chart styles, then 
it makes sense to prepare some kind of guide backing track for the performer to listen to while recording. 
 This might be as simple as a metronome “click track” to keep them in time with your DAW’s tempo grid, 
although it’s rarely the best solution in practice because metronomes often sound very unmusical, and can 
interfere with the rhythmic groove if they’re too foursquare. For this reason I usually prefer to use some kind 
of drum/percussion guide track that fi ts musically with the style being performed—free percussion loops are 
dime-a-dozen on the Internet these days, and frequently bundled with DAW software, so lack of availability is 
really no excuse. If the rhythm loop you like is at the wrong tempo, then there’s plenty of freeware that can time-
stretch it to suit. When choosing a loop for guide-track purposes, I usually like to make sure there’s something 
useful going on between the main beats of the bar, because that helps keep timing on track even when powerful 
on-beat notes (such stomping chords or percussive backbeats) obscure the guide track’s main beats. If the 
fi rst performer’s tuning also needs help, then a simple chordal synth pad running along with the guide loop will 
usually suffi ce from a technical standpoint, but again you may get a better performance if you use a particularly 
evocative sound or some kind of rhythmic fi guration. 
 Another issue is that simple loop-based guide tracks won’t allow any ebb and fl ow in the tempo, of the kind 
that good musicians provide instinctively when left to their own devices. If this concerns you, then you should 
perhaps investigate the in-depth tempo options available within many software DAW systems these days—
these will let you create a tempo “map” which varies throughout the musical time-line, and in some cases you 
can even extract this map from a freely recorded guide part rather than having to input tempo values directly. 
Whatever you choose to do, just remember to include at least two bars of count-in before the start of the music. 
 There’s no end to how far you can go with the guide-track concept if you’re handy with MIDI sequencing, but 
mocking up the whole arrangement beforehand can be a mixed blessing. On the one hand it may give everyone 
a better idea of the fi nal context within which their part will exist, which can make choosing timbres and 
performances easier. But, on the other hand, there’s a risk that presenting the performer with an apparently 
fi nalized arrangement may prevent them developing some new riff, countermelody, or arrangement idea that 
knocks spots off the ones you initially planned. 
 One fi nal consideration when constructing a project from scratch is that recording initial parts without any 
backing track makes it very easy to misjudge the recorded tone. Us humans are much better at comparing 
timbres than at evaluating them in isolation, so Toby Wright 2 suggests having some familiar commercial 
releases (preferably similar in musical style to your production) on hand to calibrate your ears from time to 
time during the earliest tracking stages. If you happen to be working with unfamiliar control-room monitoring 
which makes those commercial tracks sound tonally imbalanced, you might also consider putting an equalizer 
into your main mix buss to compensate for this, as this can also make fi nding appropriate tones a little more 
instinctive. Once you’ve got a couple of parts recorded, they should themselves provide enough of a tonal 
reference point that you can forget about comparing with the commercial releases from then on. “If you have 
basic tracks on tape and you’re going to another place to do vocals and overdubs,” confi rms John Agnello, 3 
“they’re your frequency barometer.” 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
47
times (because creative and musical considerations should always take prior-
ity), just the presence of a notional “stop for lunch” point can do a surprising 
amount to focus and motivate everyone’s work in the run-up to that. And if 
you’re anything like as absent-minded as me, it’ll remind you to eat something 
before you start feeling faint… 
 2.1.4  Framing the Session 
 “Every performance is affected by the environment it’s in,” says Oz Fritz. 5 
“Many studios have a neutral, institution-like feeling about them… the exact 
opposite of what you want in a creative environment.” This is why there’s a 
long tradition in professional circles of scattering drapes, posters, and music 
memorabilia around the studio, as well as setting up moody/novelty lighting. 
You don’t need a black belt in Feng Shui to beneﬁ t from “framing the session” 
like this, though, as long as you keep a few general concepts in mind.
 
■
 Shrinking the Space.  For many players, performing on their own in a large 
space makes them feel rather exposed and defensive, inhibiting their perfor-
mance. This is where things like drapes and “gobos” (free-standing acoustic 
screens) can help a lot, creating a much more intimate 
and protective niche. Strong overhead lighting 
can also be quite intimidating, especially if 
you’ve got those starkly utilitarian ﬂ uo-
rescent strips that blight so many class-
rooms, factories, and ofﬁ ces. Switching 
off overhead lights in favor of more 
localized lighting—even if that’s just 
a well-targeted desk lamp and the 
glow from your computer screen—will 
therefore make most recording environ-
ments feel cozier and more emotionally 
secure.  
 
■
 Choosing the Visual Focus.  Another thing 
that’ll sap most people’s self-conﬁ dence is being too 
closely scrutinized. Jimi Hendrix was a case in point when recording vocals, 
remembers Eddie Kramer: 6 “He’d always face the other way. He hated to be 
looked at.” While a “Spartan chic” approach to control-room decor may 
impress some clients, featureless minimalism may cause conﬁ dence prob-
lems for performers who’d rather not be the center of everyone’s attention, 
so a modicum of attention-diverting clutter in the studio is frequently a 
positive thing. Angling your lighting a little away from the talent can help 
too. Sometimes there’s a good argument for adjusting the studio setup so 
that you’re not directly facing the performer while working your equip-
ment, because that means you can avoid eyeballing them the whole time 
under the entirely defensible pretext of minding the controls. That said, 
there are some musicians who’ll only come out of their shell when playing 
 “While a ‘Spartan 
chic’ approach to control-
room decor may impress some 
clients, featureless minimalism 
may cause confi dence problems for 
performers who’d rather not be the center 
of everyone’s attention, so a modicum 
of attention-diverting clutter in the 
studio is frequently a positive 
thing.” 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
48
to the gallery, in which case shifting more focus onto them by turning the 
session into a mini-gig crammed full of band members and hangers-on 
may be just the ticket. Another important issue for computer users is that 
your computer screen will exert a strong draw on everyone’s eyes, and can 
easily distract far too much attention away from what people are actually 
hearing. “[A lot of artists] look at music, instead of listen to it,” asserts Steve 
Lillywhite. 7 “I don’t look at the screen, ever.” For this reason, I personally 
prefer a “for my eyes only” screen position while tracking, wherever pos-
sible, and sometimes switch it off entirely for critical auditioning.  
 
■
 Setting the Tone.  The concept of surrounding artists with imagery that reso-
nates with the style of their music should be pretty instinctive to most people. 
It isn’t hard to work out that a nostalgic display of pastel-hued merchandis-
ing from the heyday of Swing is unlikely to jibe well with your average Nu 
Metal scratch DJ. However, your studio decor also has the potential to help 
or hinder the atmosphere and productivity of your session in other ways. For 
example, if your studio looks like something from an interior design catalog, 
it can be tough to get performers to relax because they’re self-conscious about 
spreading out all their necessary musical paraphernalia, or anxious that they 
might scuff your immaculate leather sofa. Happily, this is one problem most 
real-world budget studios don’t have to contend with very often—indeed, one 
of their foremost advantages is that they frequently occupy domestic-style 
rooms and familiar rehearsal spaces that naturally encourage you to make 
yourself at home. Given how useful humor is for boosting morale on many 
sessions, any little badges or curios you leave lying around that’ll reliably elicit 
a chuckle can do a lot to diffuse tension if nerves start fraying under pressure.  
 
■
 
 SHOULD I SEND THE PLAYER A MIX IN ADVANCE? 
 Some performers like to come to an overdubbing session well prepared, particularly classically trained 
musicians, who are less comfortable with improvisation. For other players, however, their most inspired 
response may only spring forth during their fi rst fl ush of emotion upon hearing the track fresh. So when it 
comes to deciding whether to send them a work-in-progress mix prior to overdubbing, there can be no defi nitive 
answer. My feeling is that people who favor preparation will usually request a mix without prompting, in 
which case there’ll rarely be grounds for denying them that. Where a mix isn’t specifi cally requested, the only 
situation I might send one anyway would be if there were some specifi c guide parts that had to be replaced 
under time pressure. However, I’d be reluctant to do this under less constrained circumstances, because many 
players will instinctively gravitate toward parts that work best on their instrument if you don’t immediately 
shove them toward some preconceived line. 
 Sources of Inspiration.  Circumventing creative blocks is one of the hard-
est things to do in the studio, particularly when deadlines are looming, so 
most producers keep a few things around their room that can help reinvigo-
rate a stalled production. Probably the most celebrated example of this is 
Brian Eno and Peter Schmidt’s “Oblique Strategies” (a deck of cards offering 
cryptic artistic suggestions), but there are plenty of quirky junk-shop items 
that can inspire equally fresh lines of enquiry: an illustrated history of the 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
49
ancient Mayans, a collection of bizarre old LPs, a dog-eared orchestration 
textbook, a suggestively shaped ethnic instrument… in short, anything that 
has the potential to send thoughts in unexpected directions. A brief word 
of warning, though: Don’t be tempted to bring mainstream entertainment 
vehicles like TV sets, games consoles, and Internet terminals into the studio 
on these grounds, because it’ll probably backﬁ re, derailing your workﬂ ow 
with incessant distractions even when the going’s good. 
 Now I’ll be the ﬁ rst person to concede that stunning performances have occa-
sionally been achieved by placing musicians in unpalatable situations, pushing 
their creativity outside the comfort zone. It seems every producer has at least 
one faintly implausible anecdote about half-starving the keyboard player and 
then forcing him to record inside a washing machine during the spin cycle—
or something like that! However, combative and confrontational approaches 
tend to be most appropriate and effective when dealing with conﬁ dent and 
experienced players with a strongly deﬁ ned performance style that just doesn’t 
happen to ﬁ t the context of the production in hand. Working with the less 
experienced and commanding musicians that most small-studio engineers 
encounter on a regular basis, you’ll almost always get better results if your ﬁ rst 
impulse is to frame the session from their perspective, trying your hardest to 
make them feel most comfortable. Sure, if that tactic draws a total blank you 
might consider playing hardball with alternative session-framing tactics, but 
I’d think twice even then, because deliberately antagonizing the talent can seri-
ously damage your working relationship with them, especially if the musical 
results you’re gambling on fail to materialize. 
 2.1.5  Setting up the Recorder 
 When your performer nails their part straight away, it can be one of the greatest 
thrills you’ll get in the studio with your clothes on. The other 95% of the time, 
though, you’ll need to record more than one take to get the performance you’re 
looking for. “Almost all good recordings are built from the best parts of many 
performances,” says Bob Rock. 8 “Getting better is simply a matter of hard work.” 
Different engineers build their master takes in different ways, but for 
now we’re going to learn the simplest: retaking on a single 
recorder track as many times as necessary to achieve the 
required result. On this basis, you can go ahead and 
prepare your recorder for this, creating/selecting a 
free track and routing your recording chain to it. 
If you’re working in a software system, then nam-
ing and coloring the new track sensibly will help 
you keep tabs on it easily during the session.  
 Of course, if the part you’re recording is of any 
length, it’s also doubtful you’ll get a ﬂ awless 
performance of it all in one take, so you’ll almost 
certainly need to rerecord some speciﬁ c sections, a 
 “When your 
performer nails their part 
straight away, it can be one of 
the greatest thrills you’ll get in the 
studio with your clothes on. The other 
95% of the time, though, you’ll need 
to record more than one take to 
get the performance you’re 
looking for.” 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
50
process referred to as “punching in” (or “dropping in”). So let’s say the player 
slam dunks a full take, with the exception of a couple of isolated phrases. 
While you might try recording the whole thing again on the off-chance you 
get perfection next time, it’ll be less risky just to do a couple of punch-ins to 
replace only those dodgy phrases. 
 In order to use this facility, though, you need to familiarize yourself with the 
input-monitoring facilities of your speciﬁ c recorder. Hardware multitrack 
machines normally provide two monitoring modes for any track that’s record-
armed (see  Figure 2.3 ):
 
■
 Input (or Source).  This routes the track’s input directly to the track’s moni-
tor output, whatever you do with the recorder’s transport controls (i.e., the 
Record, Play, Stop, Pause, Fast Forward, and Rewind buttons, as well as any 
shuttle/seek/locator functions). This mode is well suited to developing and 
rehearsing ideas with your instrumentalist, because you can listen to the 
player’s live input alongside playback from the rest of the multitrack back-
ing without having to hit Record. 
 
■
 Auto (Auto Input).  Here, if the multitrack is recording, or if it’s stopped, 
the track’s input will go directly to the track’s monitor output, as in Input 
mode. However, whenever the multitrack is playing back, the material 
 FIGURE 2.3   
 This diagram demonstrates how Input and Auto monitoring modes operate during a typical punch-in. 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
51
recorded on the track is sent to the track’s monitor output instead. This 
mode is speciﬁ cally designed for punching in, and to explain why this 
is, let’s imagine I wanted to repair a mistake in bar six of a take I’d just 
recorded (as in  Figure 2.3 ). I’d maybe start playback at bar four, giving the 
player a two-bar “pre-roll” during which we’d hear the pre-recorded take for 
orientation purposes. During the pre-roll the performer would play along 
to get into the swing of things, but wouldn’t hear their live playing until 
the punch-in began at bar six—at which point the prerecorded track’s signal 
would be muted and the player’s input signal would be heard instead. After 
punching out at the beginning of bar seven, we’d once again hear the prere-
corded track until I stopped the machine (the “post-roll”).  
 In software, things can get a bit more complicated. Every DAW platform imple-
ments its monitoring functions slightly differently, so you’ll have to do a bit 
of detective work to discover which combination of track switches and project 
preferences allows you to recreate these two different input-monitoring func-
tions. In some cases, you may ﬁ nd that Auto mode is called “tape-machine 
style,” for instance, while in others the Input/Auto terminology isn’t used, so 
you have to work things out from ﬁ rst principles. Whatever the technicalities in 
your DAW, the crucial thing is that you work out how to implement both these 
fundamental input-monitoring modes, and also learn how to switch between 
them in the blink of an eye. 
 Another issue you may have to contend with is if your DAW’s latency (i.e., the 
unavoidable processing delay incurred by a live input signal as it passes 
through the computer on its way to your monitoring hardware) is sizable 
enough to impinge on the musician’s ability to perform. Although laten-
cies below 15 ms or so are barely detectable in rhythmic terms, above this 
the instrument will begin to feel like it’s responding a little sluggishly. Up to 
around 30 ms latency most players will probably be able to take this in their 
stride, compensating for the delay by marginally anticipating the beat, but 
once you get beyond 50 ms the performance timing will certainly suffer unless 
the part has very little rhythmic content by nature. 
 ALTERNATIVES TO SOFTWARE MONITORING 
 If you’re a computer user, then for the purposes of this chapter you should stick with your DAW’s standard “software 
monitoring” facilities—in other words, you should monitor the input signal through the DAW, using the software’s 
internal mixer to adjust the balance between the input signal and the backing track in your loudspeakers/
headphones. However, it’s as well to be aware at this point in our progress that there’s also a popular alternative to 
software monitoring, which is usually called “low/zero-latency monitoring” or “direct monitoring.” 
 This involves splitting the input signal so that it simultaneously feeds both the software’s recorder track 
and the post-software monitoring chain. For this to work properly, the DAW’s software monitoring must be 
disabled (otherwise it’ll cause comb-fi ltering, as mentioned in Section 1.4.4), and the mix you hear on your 
loudspeakers/headphones has to be created outside the DAW software. The necessary splitting and mixing 
duties can be executed in the analog domain, banishing latency altogether, or in the digital domain via a 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
52
dedicated DSP chip within the computer’s audio interface, thereby avoiding any delays caused by the computer’s 
software (usually the most punitive). I’ll fully explore the ramifi cations of these schemes in the next two 
chapters, but the main thing to realize for now is that your computer audio interface may already have such 
latency-reduction facilities built into it, and you should ensure these are switched off at the moment so that they 
don’t subvert the operation of the software monitoring.  
 FIGURE 2.4    
 These three block diagrams show how a software monitoring setup (top diagram) compares with two 
different types of split-input monitoring, the ﬁ rst using a DSP-based digital mixer (middle diagram) and 
the second using analog hardware (bottom diagram). 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
53
 The easiest way to reduce the latency of your system is to go into the audio-
interface driver’s conﬁ guration settings and decrease the audio buffer size—at 
normal 44.1 kHz/48 kHz sample rates you’ll need a value below 300 samples if 
you’re aiming for sub-15 ms latency. However, this will also increase the strain 
on your computer’s CPU, which may mean your audio starts glitching before 
your performer’s happy with the timing, even if you already did your best to 
lighten the machine’s workload in Section 1.4.3. 
 In this case, the ﬁ rst thing to try is removing all processing plug-ins and virtual 
instruments from your project. If this usefully reduces the CPU load and/or 
delay, then return the project to its original state and see if you can slim down 
the number-crunching requirements more selectively. You may be able to sub-
stitute troublesome plug-ins or instruments for more well-behaved alternatives, 
for instance, or else bounce down (or “freeze”) their output to a new audio ﬁ le 
so you can disable them—you can always reverse these changes at mixdown, 
when higher latency is rarely a concern. In general, third-party effects are likely 
to be less efﬁ cient of CPU resources than those bundled with the DAW, espe-
cially those oriented toward mastering activities. It’s also worth pointing out 
that plug-ins powered by external DSP hardware (such as those designed for 
Universal Audio’s UAD cards) will incur some transmission delays as data is 
sent to and fro, so I prefer to avoid those at the tracking stage. 
 If combining all these measures still doesn’t deliver manageable system 
latency, then either you have the kinds of underlying computer problems 
that require specialist attention, or you need to change your audio interface. 
Occasionally, circumstances may dictate that you use a PC’s built-in audio 
sockets, rather than dedicated audio interfacing, in which case a generic ASIO 
driver such as Michael Tippach’s freeware ASIO4ALL may allow you to work at 
usably low latency—but it won’t make the audio quality any less ropey! 
 One ﬁ nal point where monitoring delays are concerned: It takes roughly a 
millisecond for sound to travel a foot (30 cm) through the air, so moving 10 
feet (3 m) closer to the monitors will effectively reduce your system’s apparent 
latency by 10 ms. If a more distant playing position can’t be helped, then this 
may be a strong argument for giving the performer headphones, even if every-
one else in the room continues listening via loudspeakers.
 2.1.6  Checking the Monitoring 
 For the purposes of this chapter, we’re going to constrain ourselves to using 
a single monitor mix, which will be shared by everyone in the control room. 
As monitoring arrangements go, this is the apex of simplicity, but you still 
want to minimize the amount of session time spent adjusting it before you 
start recording. So hook up some other line-level source (perhaps the play-
back machine from Chapter 1) to your recording chain and check that both 
input signal and backing mix are coming through clearly, and at roughly the 
right relative levels. If you’re using headphones, make a point of listening to 
every pair to check for malfunctions or unwanted distortion, and give the plugs 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
54
 MEASURING MONITORING LATENCY 
 The only reliable way of fi nding out the latency of a studio DAW system is to measure it yourself. Here’s a fairly 
straightforward method:
 
■
 Find a stereo line-level sound source and use it to play a mono sound, which will result in identical signals 
appearing at its left and right outputs. The sound should also contain well-defi ned transients, so that any 
subsequent timing discrepancies are easy to measure. A synth or sampler should fi t the bill here, but you 
could also use a simple playback device if you’ve got a suitable mono recording for it to play. (You can 
download an audio test fi le from this chapter’s web resources if you need one.)  
 
■
 Get hold of a separate audio recording device that can capture stereo. This doesn’t need to be complicated 
or high quality, as long as you can get line-level signals into it and there’s some way to export its recordings 
back into your DAW. 
 
■
 Connect the source’s left-channel output directly to the left-channel input of the separate stereo recorder. 
Connect the source’s right-channel output to your DAW system, routing it and setting the gain as if you 
were going to record it, and then connect one of your studio system’s main monitoring outputs to the right-
channel input of the separate stereo recorder. (This setup can be seen in  Figure 2.5 .) 
 
■
 Adjust the input gain of the separate stereo recorder if necessary to avoid clipping, and then record a few 
seconds of the source signal. (There’s no need to record anything on the DAW system itself.)  
 
■
 Create a fresh DAW project fi le, into which you should import the recording from the separate stereo 
recorder. Zooming in on the waveform display, you’ll be able to see how much the DAW system’s latency has 
delayed the right-channel waveform, and you can then measure it using your software’s time displays. 
 If you’re unable to lay hands on a separate stereo 
recorder, an alternative is to simultaneously record 
both the sound source and the studio’s control-room 
monitoring signal to separate tracks in your DAW. 
Your system’s latency will then be revealed as the 
time offset between the two recorded waveforms. 
However, if the track which receives the “loopback” 
signal from the control-room monitoring outputs itself 
feeds the monitor mix, you’ll get instant feedback 
howlround, so it’s important to guard against that in 
some way—for example by pulling the fader on that 
track’s monitor channel all the way down. If you’re on 
a PC, there’s freeware such as Centrance’s Latency 
Test Utility and Oblique Audio’s RTL Utility that will 
perform this kind of loopback latency test without 
any danger of feedback. Neat as these are, though, 
they won’t pick up any latency incurred by plug-ins 
within your DAW project, so they won’t give you as 
complete a picture of real monitoring predicaments. 
 FIGURE 2.5    
 A simple setup for measuring a DAW system’s audio latency. 
a gentle wiggle to check for intermittent solder joints or socket contacts. The 
goal here is that, once the player arrives, you should only have to nudge the 
recording track’s monitor fader a bit, and maybe the loudspeaker/headphone 
volume levels, before the monitoring is good to go. One of the most frus-
trating things for a performer is when they’re forced to sit on their hands for 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
55
ten minutes while the engineer gets their headphones working—almost as if 
it were a surprise that musicians might need to hear themselves while 
recording! 
 While you’re checking all that, brieﬂ y reassess any default balance of your 
backing parts in relation to the type of instrument and part you’re about to 
record. If the rhythmic accuracy or groove of the overdub is of primary impor-
tance, then you might try pulling out any parts that muddy the water there, 
particularly any guide parts designed only to showcase the arrangement, and 
which won’t be used in the ﬁ nal mix. However, it will normally make sense to 
include everything you’ve recorded so far, so that you can more easily design 
the overdub’s musical part and timbre to ﬁ t within that context—after all, the 
better it ﬁ ts, the more straightforward the mixing process will be. By the same 
token, any of the existing parts that you envision having obviously audible spe-
cial effects (atmospheric syncopated echoes, say, or super-heavy ﬂ anging) are 
worth presenting in that way for monitoring purposes, so that the musician 
can react to them appropriately. 
 LISTENING LEVELS WHILE OVERDUBBING 
 A lot of musicians like to listen loud while performing, often to emulate the visceral experience of performing 
live through a fusion-powered PA, and there’s no arguing against this in terms of production priorities if it 
actually gets the performances you’re seeking. However, high listening levels can cause irreversible damage 
to the human hearing system, especially if maintained for hours on end during extended studio sessions, so 
I consider it your moral duty as an engineer to alert the talent if you think they’re endangering their long-term 
career prospects in this manner. From time to time, though, you’ll fi nd yourself stuck in a studio with people who 
will cheerfully ignore you, adopting a defi antly cavalier attitude not only to their aural health, but also to yours. 
In the company of such personalities, the engineer’s natural impulse to serve the music results in a strong 
temptation to just go with the fl ow and hope for the best, so as not to sour the mood. If the nebulous threat of 
premature hearing loss isn’t enough to help you resist that urge, let me provide some other reasons that are 
more closely related to the job in hand. 
 The biggest practical diffi culty with trying to engineer while listening at deafening volumes is that you 
immediately lose perspective on the quality of what you’re recording. It’s programmed into our psychological 
make-up that louder playback will sound more appealing (so you won’t work as hard on refi ning the timbre) and 
more exciting (so you won’t work as hard on the performance). “I like to listen loud,” comments Jeff Powell, 9 
“but I also know you need to turn it down and see what you can hear. If you can’t hear your cool guitar sound on 
a medium to low volume, you probably don’t have a very good, or exciting, guitar sound.” In addition, it’s easier 
to hear all the details in a mix when you turn it up, which means you’re less likely to leave enough space in your 
arrangement for those details to be heard at more moderate listening levels. And, of course, it’ll probably only 
be a few minutes before hearing fatigue renders your decisions pretty worthless at low levels too, and probably 
for the rest of the day at least. So if you’re really interested in serving the music, do take precautions to protect 
your ears if you feel obliged to work at uncomfortably high monitoring levels. Overall I reckon you’ll do a better 
engineering job if you wear earplugs while the monitors are blaring, and then evaluate the results at more 
reasonable levels during the inevitable cigarette breaks. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
56
 So why not go the whole hog and polish things further with detailed chan-
nel processing, high-quality mixdown effects, computer-controlled parameter 
automation, and even mastering-style processing? You could argue that this 
would make engineering judgments even clearer, and also ease the load at mix-
down if you’re handling that yourself. However, personally I’d advise against 
getting too carried away, particularly on smaller-scale projects. First and fore-
most, you’re more likely to fall foul of latency or general reliability problems 
with more processing in circuit. But apart from this, I’m not convinced that 
mixing as you record is actually such a good use of time for small-studio pro-
ductions, because it encourages questionable mixing practices. For example, 
the order you mix your tracks can signiﬁ cantly alter the way the mix turns out, 
and in some cases the most sensible mixing order may even be the opposite 
of the tracking order—many producers record pop vocals last, for instance, 
whereas it’s often smartest to fade them up ﬁ rst of all at mixdown. 
 Furthermore, I think over-sweetened monitor mixes can actually have a nega-
tive impact on the recording quality. It’s easy, for instance, to add too many 
effects to an arrangement that isn’t yet complete, which means that there’s less 
room in the mix for any new overdub. The result is that you won’t try quite as 
hard to hunt down characterful and engaging raw materials. Compound that 
effect over several stages of overdubbing and you have a recipe for blandness, 
unless you already have a great deal of experience at avoiding this pitfall. 
 One ﬁ nal thought on the matter. During the process of building an arrange-
ment via overdubbing, everyone involved with the process may end up hearing 
the production hundreds of times over, and it’s a natural byproduct of such 
overexposure that things can begin to feel slightly stale, no matter how exciting 
the music may appear to fresh ears. Leaving your monitor mixes comparatively 
unadorned while tracking, leaves you more scope to reinvigorate the artist’s 
enthusiasm at the mixdown stage. 
 PERFORMANCE HEADROOM 
 I introduced the concept of headroom back in Section 1.3.3, but the meter readings at that point were based 
on the assumption that you were recording a machine. When humans are involved, things aren’t nearly as 
predictable: Not only are no two human performances ever identical, but a lot of people will naturally play louder 
while actually recording than they do when you ask them to play along with the backing track for the purposes 
of level-setting. Because of the slow response and built-in headroom of VU meters, allowing an additional 
safety margin of 2–3 dB on their meter reading should be plenty to account for this, but with PPMs you may 
want to bring the peaks down 5–6 dB for peace of mind, and I’d allow an extra 12 dB where digital peak meters 
are concerned (i.e., peak readings between −18 dBFS and −12 dBFS), given that digital systems usually have 
extremely low noise and distinctly ugly-sounding distortion characteristics. Even so, you should still watch your 
meters like a hawk during the fi rst few takes particularly, keeping your gain controls poised to react swiftly if any 
peaks start getting scorched. 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
57
 2.2   THE MUSICIAN STROLLS IN… 
 You should now be ready for the musician to stroll in. Once the instrument is 
unpacked and you’ve plugged it in, the troubleshooting and gain-management 
skills you developed during Chapter 1 should equip you to capture the perfor-
mance in high deﬁ nition. Viewed purely from an engineering perspective, your 
initial workﬂ ow might therefore proceed along the following lines:
 1.  Generate some arbitrary output from the instrument so you can line-check.  
 2.  Play the backing track so everyone can ﬁ nd a suitable loudspeaker/head-
phone monitoring volume. 
 3.  With the recording track in its Input monitoring mode, ask the performer to 
play along with the backing mix while you set levels. 
 4.  While the performer continues to play, balance the instrument against the 
rest of the monitor mix using the recording track’s monitor-channel fader 
(i.e., the main track fader in most DAWs). 
 5.  Reﬁ ne the instrument’s recorded timbre if necessary, in discussion with the 
musician and anyone else with a stake in the outcome. 
 6.  Hit Record. 
 Real-world sessions, however, will frequently play havoc with such neatly 
laid plans, for the simple reason that the last of the steps listed above is more 
important than any of the other ﬁ ve. 
 2.2.1  The Importance of Hitting Record 
 If the musician plays something magical before you’ve hit Record, you’ve 
ﬂ unked the most important challenge of all, which is to serve the music. 
“Probably the worst thing that could happen at a session,” conﬁ rms Phil 
Ramone, 10 “would be missing a take.” “Vibe is all about spur of the moment,” 
adds Wyclef Jean. 11 “Being ready when the thing happens. You don’t want to 
miss it when it happens…There’s no second takes for vibe.” On some occa-
sions that may well prevent you addressing some (or all!) of those other ﬁ ve 
steps until  after  you’ve started recording the ﬁ rst take, but you just have to take 
that in your stride when it’s performances you’re looking for. “If something 
goes wrong, work around it,” asserts Jacquire King. 12 “You never want to stall. 
Just hit Record, even if something is not to your satisfaction engineering-
wise—if you record something that is inspired, it doesn’t really 
matter.” 
 So imagine that a friend of the band you’re recording 
offers to lay down some keyboard overdubs for them 
between gigs. She’s brought her well-loved stage 
piano with her, so she parks it on the stand you’ve 
so thoughtfully provided and asks to have a listen 
to the song you’ve all been slaving away at, seeing as 
she hasn’t heard it yet. Within eight bars, the genre-
busting awesomeness of your Hawaiian trance rock has 
 “If the musician 
plays something 
magical before you’ve hit 
Record, you’ve fl unked the 
most important challenge of 
all, which is to serve the 
music.” 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
58
her completely freaking out—dancing round the room, punching the air, the 
whole bit. By the time the chorus arrives, the urge to join in this new musical 
revolution proves overpowering, and she ﬂ ings herself at her keyboard as one 
possessed—the same keyboard you’ve barely ﬁ nished powering up and plug-
ging into your rig. Now is the time to hit that red button. It doesn’t matter 
whether  you  feel ready to record, because the musician certainly is, and may 
never again be as swept away by the music once the power of its ﬁ rst impres-
sion has dissipated.  
 This is why your preparations are so important. You need to have all your gear 
set up so that “even without hearing the music, you can hit Record and get a 
decent sound,” says Justin Niebank, 13 for instance. “If you think it’s going to 
take you a day to set up,” adds Jacquire King, 14 “well then do that day of setup 
before somebody is waiting on you.” Assuming you’ve already line-checked 
your own system, and sensibly prepared the multitrack recorder, then it’d be 
the height of bad luck in this case if the keyboard player’s signal didn’t ﬁ nd its 
way to the recorder—the only thing you’ve been unable to defend against is a 
fault in the instrument itself. And by using a playback device to make ballpark 
gain and monitoring settings in advance, you’ve also dramatically increased 
the chances that our guest will be able to hear herself, and at some kind of 
useful level, from the moment she touches the keys, without a bunch of noise 
or distortion breaking the mood. At which point you’re a hero, because the 
recording should, at the very least, be usable. Give it another twenty seconds, 
during which you’re frantically twiddling the audio interface’s Input Gain knob 
with one hand and the recording track’s monitor-channel fader with the other, 
and you’ll have reﬁ ned both the signal quality and the monitor balance—all in 
good time for that blistering middle-eight solo that’s about to sear itself onto a 
new page of musical history. Hero? That’ll be  super hero, thank you very much!
 
 GETTING THE BEST OUT OF THE DIGITAL MEDIUM 
 There continues to be heated debate in the recording industry about the pros and cons of different recording 
formats for studio work, but most small-studio users don’t have much choice in the matter—they only have 
the budget for digital recording technology. In this context, though, John Kurlander 15 and Mike Poole 16 both 
mention a trick that helps you make the best of this situation: Don’t ever listen to the input signal directly. 
Monitoring through the digital system forces you to adapt your recording technique to what you’re hearing, 
which means you’ll naturally try to factor out any undesirable characteristics inherent in the recording medium. 
 2.2.2    Playing for Time 
 Now while it’s absolutely your responsibility to deal with seat-of-the-pants sce-
narios like this when they arise, that certainly doesn’t mean you should work 
that way by default—quite the opposite, in fact, because it leaves rather too 
many opportunities for Lady Luck to rain on your parade. Maybe someone 
dropped the keyboard while they were loading it into the car, or it’s powered 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
59
up with its default (and wholly inappropriate) “Astral Didgeridoo” patch, 
or you plugged into the wrong output by mistake, or you forgot to arm the 
recorder track. Although preparation is the bedrock of any session, there’s only 
so much you can do before the fact. Which is why one of the real secrets of 
successful engineering is learning how to play for time. For example, when 
our hypothetical keyboardist ﬁ rst dumped her keyboard on the stand, you 
might have said: “Hey, is that a real Casiotone? I’ve heard that does a mental 
Wurlitzer!” Whether or not this is a big fat lie, ﬂ attering any musician’s taste 
in hardware never does any harm, and if it naturally triggers a few seconds 
of showing off at the ivories, you’ll have a gift-wrapped opportunity to line-
check, adjust your recording-path gain controls, and set a preliminary monitor-
channel fader level. Within a minute, you can then pipe up with “Can’t wait to 
hear what you’re going to do on this song!” and dive back into Plan A, safe in 
the knowledge that you’re all but guaranteed a decent-sounding result, no mat-
ter how soon you’re called upon to hit Record. 
 In larger studios, the assistant often steps into the breach here too, taking bever-
age orders and dropping a choice one-liner about the battery in the engineer’s 
hearing aid, during which time you’ve surreptitiously played a few notes to ser-
vice the dull but important technicalities and given that cheeky rascal a good-
natured kick in the shins. It’s possible to pull off similar stunts single-handed 
too if you’ve got the gift of the gab, but it takes a bit of practice to maintain 
a diverting patter while troubleshooting missing signals or concentrating on 
meter readings. This is where your session framing can really help out: If the 
detailed map of Discworld on your studio door or the enormous inﬂ atable 
Godzilla behind your mixing console prompts 30 seconds of awestruck perusal 
or self-propelling discussion, then they’ve earned you a valuable head start. 
 Clearly, though, such sleight of hand won’t work every time, and also carries 
its own risk: that you’ll inadvertently derail a fragile creative impulse that had 
already germinated just before the musician crossed the studio threshold. On 
every single session you’ve got to weigh up that risk against the risk that you’ll 
hit a deal-busting technical obstacle because you didn’t have time to nip it in the 
bud before hitting Record. There’s no “one size ﬁ ts all” game plan that’ll work 
on every session and, frankly, that’s all to the good, because oth-
erwise recording wouldn’t be nearly as much fun! Just so 
long as you keep asking yourself what’s in the best inter-
ests of the music, you shouldn’t drastically misread 
the situation too often. When (not if) you perpetrate 
a truly epic fail, however, you can console yourself 
that there are few things more powerful than a thor-
oughly cringe-inducing memory at spurring you to 
further hone your chops—and there isn’t one of the 
world’s ﬁ nest engineers who couldn’t regale you with 
a dozen toe-curling tales from their rookie years, each 
of which informs their session technique to this day.
 “When (not if) you 
perpetrate a truly epic 
fail, you can console yourself 
that there are few things more 
powerful than a thoroughly cringe-
inducing memory at spurring 
you to further hone your 
chops.” 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
60
 2.2.3    When to Tackle the Sonics 
 So much for the essentials of capturing a signal: what about trying to make 
that signal sound incredible? Again, the extent to which you’ll be able to grap-
ple with that without unduly compromising the quality of the performance is 
very much a judgment call on any session. On the one hand, anything that 
slows down the natural pace of a musician’s creativity may endanger the spon-
taneity of the following take or, worse still, prevent embryonic ideas from gath-
ering sufﬁ cient momentum to be of beneﬁ t within the session time available. 
On the other hand, a gorgeous recorded timbre will frequently fuel a player’s 
imagination, and can save an enormous amount of time and effort at the mix-
down stage. 
 Personally, I’m a great believer in involving the musician in the decision-
making process here. In other words, if at any time during the session I think 
some extra attention to the sonics may help the end result, I’ll say something 
like: “I think we may be able to improve the sound here. Can we just try some 
things out for a couple of minutes?” Such a request very rarely gets a negative 
response, because every performer wants to sound their best, as long as you’re 
not daft enough to pop that question while everyone’s right in the middle of 
working through an important idea. (Even then the worst you’re likely to get is 
“Can we quickly ﬁ nish this ﬁ rst?”—provided that it’s not the umpteenth time 
you’ve stuck your oar in at the wrong moment!) Explicitly bringing the musi-
cian on-side in this manner has two big things going for it:
 
■
 You can ask the performer for help. Their understanding of the mechanics 
of their own instrument will frequently outstrip yours. I’ve already stressed 
that changing the sound source itself usually bears fruit more quickly than 
footling with your recording chain, so that makes the musician the best 
friend you’ve got when time is of the essence. 
 
■
 You’ll put less strain on your performer’s patience. They understand your 
reasons for the hiatus, and you gave them the right of veto in case they pre-
ferred the sound as it was or were focused on more pressing musical con-
cerns. In addition, they now have a rough idea how long the hold-up’s 
going to last—waiting around’s always a whole lot easier when there’s a 
clear end in sight. 
 The same trick is equally relevant if you’re fortunate enough to be work-
ing with musicians who appreciate that designing a great tone is as much in 
their interests as yours, and who are willing to spend some time pursuing that 
goal before attempting takes. This is certainly preferable from an engineering 
standpoint, so take full advantage of this concession wherever it’s on offer. Just 
remember to clarify the terms of engagement, as I’ve already mentioned. “How 
about we spend the next half hour ﬁ nding just the right sound for this song, 
and then plan to blast out some takes around eleven?” This lets the performer 
know precisely where they stand, and also gives anyone else involved in the 
session the option to sit out the tone-tweaking activities if they want to keep 
a clear head for concentrating on the quality of the actual takes. Personally I 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
61
like to slightly overestimate the time we’ll need, not only because it gives me 
a bit of leeway, but also because it can generate a few positive vibes on those 
occasions when you apparently complete your tweakery ahead of schedule. 
However, whenever you’re sound-mining for any longer than about ﬁ ve min-
utes, you should always be vigilant for any signs of waning stamina, and step 
on the gas well before this jeopardizes the creative atmosphere. 
 Sometimes, though, catching a mercurial talent’s ﬁ rst outpourings effec-
tively railroads you into recording a less-than-stellar sound, because if some 
parts of the very ﬁ rst performance are the bee’s knees, then it’s indisputably 
in the interests of the music to keep them, whatever technical difﬁ culties that 
may cause at mixdown. Any mix engineer would rather be faced with salvag-
ing a poor sound than a poor performance! Within that context, there’s little 
to be gained by tweaking the recorded tone after the ﬁ rst take’s gone down, 
because you’ll just be adding a further mix problem: namely, matching the new 
sound with that of the ﬁ rst take. That’s not to say I’m proposing a defeatist 
attitude, though, because you should nonetheless remain alert for possibili-
ties to address any sonic deﬁ ciencies as the session proceeds. For example, an 
alteration to a musical part may mean rerecording from scratch, in which case 
you’d be well advised to pounce on whatever chance that gives you to reﬁ ne 
the sound without mixdown penalties. If an instrument plays several distinct 
roles in different sections of an arrangement, then the mix engineer will often 
seek to contrast those parts anyway, so any timbral changes you make there 
shouldn’t add signiﬁ cantly to the mixing workload. Even when you’re only 
able to make enhancements between one song and the next, or between one 
session date and the next, that’s still got to be better than nothing. 
 2.2.4  Reﬁ ning the Sound 
 Whatever time you have available to deal with sonics, it’ll usually feel too 
short, so it’s important to prioritize. For this reason, try to work from coarse 
tweaks to ﬁ ner ones rather than obsessing about little details early on. There 
are thousands of things you  can  do to change a sound, but what sets more in-
demand engineers apart is the knowledge they’ve accrued about what changes 
will tend to reward you with the most dramatic improvements for each differ-
ent type of instrument. So try to develop this critical faculty early on. If there’s 
some instrument setting that makes a huge difference to the sound (say, choos-
ing the sample or synth patch you’re going to use), then resist the temptation 
to skate over that. Even if you think you’ve found the right sound in two sec-
onds, take a little extra time to sift out a couple of other strong contenders, and 
then do a swift shootout to eliminate the weaklings on the shortlist—more 
often than not your ﬁ rst choice of sound will end up on the cutting-room 
ﬂ oor. By the same token, when you ﬁ nd yourself tweaking something that’s not 
making an enormous difference, there are two questions you need to ask your-
self: “Is there a faster way?” and “Can I do this later?” I’m not trying to suggest 
that you should deliberately defer the hard work of ﬁ nding great sounds, but 
the reality of small-studio work is that you’re going to be battling the clock 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
62
 RECORDING WITH PROCESSING 
 On a professional level, it’s long been common practice for engineers to process their input signals on the way 
to the recorder. One reason for this is purely technical: Many renowned practitioners learnt their trade in analog 
studios, where preprocessing can help mitigate some technical shortcomings of the equipment. For example, 
compressors and limiters can turn down signal spikes, allowing you to keep your signal further above a tape 
recorder’s noise fl oor before you run into unacceptable peak distortion. Tape recordings also gradually lose high-
frequency defi nition as they’re repeatedly played back during the lifecycle of a production, so pre-emphasizing 
the input signal’s upper spectrum with an equalizer can help compensate for this, with the added benefi t that 
redressing any overemphasis at mixdown reduces the relative audibility of the tape’s HF-heavy background hiss. 
And, of course, there’s always a limit to how many physical processing units you have available in an analog 
studio, so you’ll get more sonic value out of them if you use them during both the tracking and mixing stages. 
 Beyond this, though, most working engineers also treat processing pragmatically, as a means of making their 
workfl ow more effi cient—if you can manage to record every track sounding the way it should at mixdown, it’s 
easier to judge the sonics of each overdub in the proper context, and the full arrangement should then pretty 
much mix itself. From that perspective, any processing that can be “printed in” as part of the initial recordings 
is one less thing to worry about before deadline. 
 Despite all that, however, it’s my fi rm belief that most users of small studios are much better off recording 
without any processing at all. For a start, decent 24-bit digital recording technology is now so affordable that 
it’s child’s play to record cleanly without any recourse to compression or limiting. Also, the fi delity of a digital 
recording doesn’t deteriorate over time in the way an analog recording does, so there’s no call for pre-emptive 
processing on that account either. The virtually unlimited plug-in count of modern software DAW systems means 
most people  can leave all their processing to mixdown too, an added incentive being that lower CPU drain while 
tracking decreases the likelihood of digital glitches or general system instability. 
 However, my biggest reasons for urging you to forget about processing during tracking aren’t technical. It’s as 
well to remember that most of the big-name engineers whose recording techniques you read about are working 
on projects as part of a team—which may include DAW operators, studio assistants, drum/guitar technicians, 
voice coaches, roadies, caterers… Within that context, they usually have more time available to spend on 
pure engineering matters. By contrast, on a low-budget session you’ll usually be transporting, setting up, 
and operating all the equipment single-handed within an extremely limited timeframe, whereupon the simple 
technicalities of piloting the gear at speed become overwhelming unless you adopt a streamlined approach—
especially if you’re faced with donning the arranger’s or producer’s hat as well, or if you happen to be the band’s 
drummer! Performers will rarely look kindly on you holding up their session to twiddle compressor knobs, even if 
you manage to avoid the danger of overcooking your settings in the heat of the moment. 
 But on top of that you have to ask yourself what your priorities should really be while recording. Over the years 
I’ve mixed dozens of home-brew multitracks for  Sound On Sound magazine’s “Mix Rescue” column, and the 
worst recordings usually come from people who’ve chickened out of tackling sonic problems at source, and 
have then compounded the error by trying to fi x the unfi xable with a zillion plug-ins. If you have any time left 
over between sorting out your levels and pressing Record, then it’s always best ploughed into making the source 
itself sound as good as possible. And an important ancillary benefi t of treating signal processing as a last 
resort is that it disciplines you to work harder on your actual recording chops, which means you need it less 
anyway! 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
63
a lot of the time, in which case it’s better to prioritize those things that will 
advance the timbre furthest before time runs out, and those things that you 
can’t address after you’ve hit Record. 
 It would be utter foolishness for me to try to deﬁ ne what a “good” sound is, 
because one man’s meat is frequently another’s poison in this respect. If you’re 
unsure what sounds work in your genres of choice, pretty much the only way 
you can develop your own instincts is by listening widely to relevant commer-
cial productions. That doesn’t mean you have to be an avid consumer of every 
kind of music you record, though, so long as you’re working with musicians 
who specialize in their chosen style—in which case you’ll be able to rely heav-
ily on their tastes to guide you whenever you’re at a loss. One of the classic rec-
ipes for disaster on self-produced projects is when a band wants to push itself 
in an unfamiliar stylistic direction, but with the help of its usual engineer, who 
(it transpires) actually knows even less about the demands of that style than 
the band does! 
 So while there’s very little point in my lecturing you on sonic aesthetics, there 
are some general suggestions I’d make for skirting around some of the most 
common practical pitfalls:
 
■
 Enlist the Musician’s Help.  There’s always something new to learn about 
any instrument, which means your player may know a quicker way to reach 
a target sound. So don’t just knit your brow and struggle on taciturnly when 
results aren’t immediately forthcoming; discuss your concerns with the 
instrumentalist. I ﬁ nd it’s best if you speak in terms of more abstract sound 
and arrangement issues (“Can we take some of the edge off the front of 
each note?” or “Perhaps something more nasal would contrast better with 
those other piano chords”), rather than suggesting concrete changes (“Can 
you increase the envelope attack time?” or “Perhaps we should add more 
2 kHz”), because you’ll often discover that the performer has a better idea of 
what’ll help (“That spike’s only one of the sample layers in the patch. Let’s 
just try switching it off ﬁ rst,” or “How about this death-metal ukulele patch 
instead?”). 
 
■
 Listen in Context.  Your aim as an engineer should be to make the whole 
record sound fabulous, but that isn’t the same as saying that each part 
should sound fabulous in isolation. Far from it, in fact, because there’s only 
ever a limited amount of space in any mix. Giving your most important 
voices and instruments enough elbow room to sound glorious may well 
result in background parts which sound pretty hideous when soloed—but 
of course the audience never hears them that way. “You’re going for a sound 
that’s appropriate for the song,” underlines Roy Thomas Baker, 17 “not nec-
essarily what’s a good sound, and what’s appropriate can vary greatly.” So 
never let any musician sign off on their sound before everyone’s heard how 
it works when they’re playing something representative over the backing 
track. This is one of the biggest mistakes small-studio engineers make, so I 
can’t stress its importance enough! 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
64
 
■
 Flex that Monitor Fader.  One of the most reliable signs that an overdub’s 
timbre is well suited to your production is when you can hear all its most 
desirable tonal qualities without it feeling too loud overall. In this happy 
event, you’re also more likely to ﬁ nd that it’s easy to set the recording track’s 
monitor-channel fader for a respectable rough mix balance, and that you 
can leave it alone most of the time. Whenever you feel that you can’t hear 
the personality of the overdub unless it’s way too loud, or that you’re for-
ever ﬁ ddling with its monitor-channel fader throughout the track, that 
probably means the balance is trying to tell you some home truths about 
your sonics. From an arrangement perspective, however, a part which can 
be pushed high in the balance without getting in the way of other more 
important parts is usually serving the production much more efﬁ ciently 
than one which can only be tolerated at low levels.  
 RECORDING WITH EFFECTS 
 Many of the instruments we’re considering in this chapter commonly have effects processing built into them, 
but it’s usually a good idea for this to be switched off while tracking, otherwise it can interfere with the mix 
engineer’s work later on. That said, don’t reject the idea of printing in effects on refl ex, because many high-
profi le engineers (Rhett Davies, 18 Kevin Killen, 19 and Jay Messina 20 amongst them) have no qualms about 
making this kind of sonic commitment well before mixdown. Some keyboards and samplers can implement 
incredibly complicated multi-effect chains that would be extremely time-consuming to recreate at the mix, 
while the vintage analog effects in classic hardware synths frequently prove inimitable by digital means, so if 
everyone in the room loves the sound they’re hearing and you’ve no clue how you’d get that sound yourself, why 
not print them and sidestep some unnecessary mixdown aggro? As long as you don’t record every instrument 
with heavy effects, it really shouldn’t tie the mix engineer’s hands unduly—although do try to be as conservative 
as you can with delay-based effects and artifi cial reverberation, which are more likely to be problematic at the 
mixing stage. 
 On occasion, though, you may be able to have your cake and eat it too by recording an additional track of “dry” 
signal (without any of the effects) concurrently. On the off-chance that the effects prove OTT at mixdown, you’ll 
then have the option of mixing in some dry signal to reduce their relative level, or of just replacing them entirely. 
Studio-oriented synths and samplers often have more than one pair of outputs for precisely this kind of reason, 
and it’ll usually be possible to extract a separate dry signal from any laptop-based performance system that 
uses a dedicated computer audio interface. Once your musician has worked out how to squirt the right signals 
out of the instrument, all you have to do is connect them all up to separate inputs of your recording system 
and arm a larger number of tracks for recording, which hopefully shouldn’t cause you to break a sweat by now. 
Where an instrument is equipped with MIDI sockets, an alternative strategy is to record a MIDI track alongside, 
so that you can retrigger the same performance at a later date with different effect settings—or indeed a 
completely different MIDI instrument entirely. 
 
■
 Go Easy on the Distortion.  Although distortion can be the very soul of a 
lot of instrument sounds, a frequent shortcoming of small-studio multi-
tracks is too much drive. The problem is that the noisy elements of a dis-
torted sound always cut through a mix better than the instrument’s pitched 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
65
components and attack character, so anything you overgrill will tend to 
sound spongy and distant. It also means that players are often misled into 
thinking that the sounds on commercial records have been driven harder 
than they actually were, so they end up unwittingly exaggerating their own 
settings. My own rule of thumb is that if any musician dials up a distorted 
sound while listening to it on its own, I’ll usually want to reduce that drive 
setting by 25% or so once we’re hearing it in its proper context. It’s a doddle 
to add more distortion at mixdown if you really need it, but excess printed-
in fuzz is one of those things that’s virtually impossible for a mix engineer 
to ﬁ x later on. 
 
■
 Look out for the Low End.  Back in Section 1.5, I advised against processing 
your input signal while recording, but there’s one processor that I make an 
exception for: the high-pass ﬁ lter. This is a basic type of equalizer that cuts 
away low end below a certain “cutoff” frequency, and the further down the 
spectrum you go, the more it cuts. The most useful design has a control to 
 FIGURE 2.6   
 Although ﬁ xed-frequency high-pass ﬁ lters are available on many mixers (top left) and microphones (top 
right), mic preamps with a variable-frequency design (bottom) are signiﬁ cantly more useful for small-
studio recording. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
66
adjust the cutoff frequency, but on more budget equipment you may just 
get a rudimentary HPF on/off switch with preset cutoff. One of the reasons 
high-pass ﬁ ltering is useful is that many sound sources (especially scratch 
DJ turntables) output high levels of unwanted low frequencies, below the 
frequency range of the sound you’re ostensibly recording, or even below 
the 20 Hz low-frequency limit of the audible spectrum. If you don’t remove 
such signals, they may force you to leave more level headroom than is actu-
ally necessary for the desirable frequency content—to the detriment of your 
recorded signal-to-noise ratio. So if you see your speaker’s woofer cones 
ﬂ apping about wildly for no real reason, or you’re getting massive sporadic 
level surges that seem out of character with your input signal’s longer-term 
meter readings, check whether high-pass ﬁ ltering can clear up the problem 
without undesirably thinning the musician’s tone. Where you have a choice 
of cutoff frequencies, err on the side of setting the ﬁ lter too low rather than 
too high. 
 
■
 Check it in Mono.  Whenever you record anything stereo, it’s a good idea 
to check what happens to the sound when you combine the left-channel 
and right-channel signals—in other words, when you listen in mono. (If 
you don’t have a Mono button in your monitoring setup, then check out 
one of the mono-switch DAW plug-ins in this chapter’s web resources.) You 
should be particularly wary of any keyboard/sampler preset with a super-
wide stereo image, because this is often the result of over-egged stereo-
widening effects (slathered on by the manufacturer to impress potential 
customers auditioning on headphones) which can cause untold dam-
age to your carefully chosen timbre when it’s summed to mono. Synth 
bass parts, above all, should be carefully mono-checked, paying particu-
lar attention to frequencies below 80 Hz. If you notice a level drop in this 
spectral region when switching to mono, or there are unmusical sub-80 Hz 
level inconsistencies from note to note, then your low end isn’t going to 
fare well on quite a lot of end-user playback systems—which means it 
won’t really cut the mustard in most mainstream commercial genres. (In 
other words, you’ll either need to change the patch, or you’ll have to high-
pass ﬁ lter it around 80 Hz and ﬁ ll the blank more powerfully and predict-
ably by recording an additional purpose-designed “sub-bass” synth line.) 
Keyboard patches based upon naturally miked stereo samples may suf-
fer tonal changes in mono too, or the balance of the instrument’s differ-
ent pitch registers may alter considerably. Some people scoff at the idea of 
checking mono-compatibility these days (“Er… haven’t we had stereo for, 
like, ﬁ fty years?”), but in truth it remains as relevant for mass-market music 
consumption as it ever was, because many real-world listening and public-
address systems are still mono. Leaving that aside, though, your mix engi-
neer won’t thank you, either, if reducing the image width of any of your 
stereo recordings (in other words, partially summing them to mono) guts 
the tone quality.  

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
67
 2.3   IN-SESSION MULTITASKING 
 In the small studio, almost everyone on a session is likely to be multitasking, 
which means the engineer is increasingly being relied upon to act as a pro-
ducer and/or arranger to some extent, simply because a suitable specialist is 
rarely on hand to ﬁ ll those roles. When a recording session is progressing at 
lightning speed, it may be all you can handle just keeping up with all the tech-
nical stuff, and there’s no shame in that; but the moment you ﬁ nd yourself 
with any headspace to spare, there are lots of other things you can do to help 
achieve an end result that everyone can be proud of. 
 2.3.1  Take Notes 
 Of these, taking notes is probably the most important, because it can save so 
much time and frustration. Here are some things that are frequently worth 
committing to paper:
 
■
 A “To Record” List.  This should be a list of every part you need to record 
during the session, and where it belongs in the production. (I usually try to 
get hold of this before the session, but somehow on low-budget projects it 
almost never materializes in time.) If any new parts are developed during 
the tracking itself, note those down too. The main reason for this list is so 
you won’t have to schedule another whole session just to record those four 
bars that slipped everyone’s mind at the end of a long, boozy night’s work. 
However, putting this list somewhere everyone can see it (make a wall chart 
if you like) also turns it into something of a motivational tool, because 
everyone knows how far they’ve got. If you’re making good progress, it adds 
to the positive vibe; if not, the seriousness of the situation will be plain for 
all to see, and conscientious musicians will automatically respond by shift-
ing up a gear without a cross word from anyone. 
 
■
 A Track List.  The main impetus here is that you never want to lose any-
thing you’ve recorded. It’s not only a waste of time, but it’s also a massive 
 RECORDING MIDI PERFORMANCES 
 Although this isn’t really a book about MIDI sequencing, recording a live performer’s MIDI data involves a lot of 
the same considerations as recording their audio, so much of this chapter’s content will be of relevance. On 
a practical level, computer DAW users may encounter latency problems if they want to use CPU-hungry virtual 
instruments in this scenario, but the beauty of MIDI recording is that you can often use a more lightweight 
instrument for recording purposes, only substituting the proper sound source at mixdown when latency is less 
of a concern. Increasing the amount of sample data a sample-based software synth loads into the computer’s 
RAM (rather than streaming it from a hard disk) can also improve your system’s overall latency performance. If 
neither of those workarounds help, though, remember that even if recording at a suitably low latency introduces 
some audio glitching in your monitor mix, that should vanish once you reinstate a higher audio buffer-size 
setting post-recording. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
68
morale-killer for any musician trying to recapture a moment of magic they 
thought was already in the bag—especially if either the sound or perfor-
mance prove to be unrepeatable. For each project you work on, the track 
list simply needs to tell you where to ﬁ nd everything you’ve recorded. On 
analog recorders you might use a traditional-style pre-printed “track sheet,” 
with blank boxes representing each physical track, but in digital systems 
where trackcount is more negotiable I tend to just list all the parts I’ve 
recorded along with some short-form indication of where on the recorder 
(and in the timeline) it resides. In DAW systems, a separate track list may 
not be necessary, provided that you’re disciplined about naming your audio 
tracks sensibly, although if your particular software platform offers alterna-
tive “playlists” or “virtual tracks” for each visible recording track, then paper 
may still have a useful role to play. 
 
■
 Recall Notes.  Anything you do on a session that you’d rather not work out 
from scratch twice should be documented ﬁ rst time around. In the case of 
Section 2.2.1’s hypothetical keyboardist, for example, it would do no harm 
at all to make a note of your gain settings, so you’ll be even more likely 
to capture her volcanic muse faithfully next time she graces your session. 
 FIGURE 2.7   
  If you’re working on a recorder with a limited track count, a traditional track sheet (main picture) is vital so that you avoid recording 
over something unintentionally. However, even where track numbers are more negotiable, it still makes sense to keep notes about 
where each take is within your recorder’s ﬁ le system (inset), so important parts don’t slip down the back of the virtual sofa.    

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
69
Similarly, it’s the work of an instant to jot down the keyboard patch she 
used, but it might take ages to ﬁ nd it again amongst thousands of other 
presets, should you ever need to change the part or introduce that instru-
mental texture into another of the band’s songs. If you’ve used any kind of 
processing in the recording chain, its settings should certainly be recorded 
somewhere too, for similar reasons. Where settings are very involved, a 
screenshot or photo may be easier than paper notes, especially now that so 
many people have cameras built into their mobile phones. Some DAW soft-
ware platforms also give you the facility for typing in track/project notes, so 
you can cut down on the wood pulp by using those instead.  
 
■
 Session Minutes.  This is just a fancy name for anything important that’s 
said or agreed during the recording process. That might be an opinion from 
the synth player about which of two countermelody alternatives he prefers; 
a suggestion from the turntablist that the ﬁ nal seven seconds of his scratch 
solo should be faded gradually in the mix; or a warning from your laptop 
whizzkid that he’s dropped an uncleared sample of the  Thunderbirds theme 
tune into his dubstep breakdown. Write it all down, and you’ll look like 
the most professional person in the room when you’re the only one who 
can answer those inevitable “What did we say we were going to do here?” 
questions. 
 2.3.2  Evaluate the Performance 
 If you pay attention to nothing else about a performance, you should try to 
make sure the instrument is in tune. It shouldn’t be a big deal to do this now 
that every self-respecting DAW has a bundled tuner plug-in, but unfortu-
nately poor tuning continues to blight home-brew recordings with depressing 
regularity. Even your grandma will have cottoned on to the fact that pitch-
correction software exists these days, but you should be assertive in combat-
ing any laziness this may engender on the part of performers. This is partly 
because ﬁ xing tuning in software is almost always a very poor use of time com-
pared with just tuning properly in the ﬁ rst place. Minimizing the unmusical 
side-effects of pitch-correction algorithms can take ages, even with cutting-edge 
technology, and even then the results will frequently sound rather artiﬁ cial. 
Moreover, some types of sound respond very badly to pitch-processing, which 
means that there are still a lot of tuning problems that may prove beyond 
redemption in this way—particularly anything that’s polyphonic with strong 
transients and/or dense high frequencies. Seeing as Grandma’s on our minds, 
I’m sure she’d agree that a stitch in time saves nine. 
 What a lot of young engineers don’t realize is that tuning isn’t just a pitch 
issue, because it also affects how well instruments blend with each other, and 
consequently how easily they’ll ﬁ t into the ﬁ nal mixdown. As such, a nicely 
tuned instrument will give you more leeway when trying to ﬁ nd a sound that’ll 
work in the mix, so reminding the musician to tune regularly (or tuning the 
instrument yourself if you turn out to be more capable at it!) is worth the 
energy if only to make your own life easier. With electronic instruments you 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
70
should only need to tune once for each arrangement you’re overdubbing on, 
although the tuning of older analog synths may drift over time, so rechecking 
those every couple of takes is more advisable. You certainly shouldn’t assume 
that any synth, even a virtual instrument, will automatically be in tune with 
the backing, because not only might the backing itself be slightly ﬂ at/sharp, 
but pitch perception is also highly dependent on musical context, which 
means that a tuning that ﬁ ts one section of your song may not sound nearly as 
pure in another. 
 Beyond the tuning and timbre issues which impact directly on your engineer-
ing role, though, you can also beneﬁ t the production as a whole if you keep 
your ears open to the quality of the performance itself, if only so you don’t 
look like a complete numbskull every time anyone asks “So what did  you 
think?” As with choosing sounds, judging musical parts and performances isn’t 
some kind of exact science, and the only way you’ll get better at it is through 
experience—listening to commercial records, watching musicians at work, 
comparing different takes over many different sessions, and re-evaluating track-
ing decisions with the beneﬁ t of hindsight once projects reach their ﬁ nal form. 
Again, though, let me suggest a few general things to listen for, which should 
help start you on the right road:
 
■
 Emotion.  The way you feel about a performance should always be the 
biggest reason for keeping it, regardless of any more tangible and easily 
expressed concerns. Clearly your own feelings must yield to those of the art-
ist if it’s not your music, but that doesn’t mean your own responses have no 
value at all.  
 FIGURE 2.8   
 Poor tuning is one of the most common failings of low-budget recordings, and also one of the least 
defensible, given that the tools to deal with it are so cheap. 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
71
 
■
 Balance.  In other words, listen for whether all the ele-
ments of the performance are at an appropriate sub-
jective level relative to each other from a musical 
perspective. Does the keyboardist’s left hand feel 
like it’s overpowering the right, for instance, or is a 
heavy right thumb imbalancing its main rhythmic 
riff? Are there melodic fragments within the musi-
cal part that could be emphasized to prevent them 
being obscured by more accompanying elements? 
 
■
 Phrasing.  A performance with good phrasing pro-
pels the listener through time by indicating where the 
music’s heading. That might mean something as elemen-
tary as making the on-beat note of some riff a little louder, longer, or more 
legato than the following off-beat note, underlining the musical hierarchy 
between them; but it might equally be enshrined in the long-term build-up 
of an extended solo, taking you all the way from a stripped-back breakdown 
through to the powerful full-band entry of your ﬁ nal chorus. So how can 
you gauge the effectiveness of a musical part’s phrasing? Well, my favorite 
method is to try singing/beatboxing it for myself—yes, even if the overdub’s 
some kind of glitchcore mayhem, anyone can summon some kind of half-
recognizable impression! The reason I think this works is that conscious 
thought is usually the enemy of good phrasing, so if the player’s concentrat-
ing on getting all their ﬁ ngers in the right positions, the engineer is listen-
ing for the tuning and signal quality, and the producer is thinking about 
the way the part works with the harmonies and arrangement, then clunky 
phrasing can easily go unnoticed. Because using your voice is so instinctive, 
it usually seems to make appropriate phrasing choices spring from your 
unconscious much more readily. (And besides, regular glitchcore beatbox-
ing is surprisingly beneﬁ cial for the sinuses…) 
 
■
 Articulation.  Does the nature of each note/sample’s attack support its role 
in the music? Some keyboard patches may soften the attack of notes that 
overlap others, while sampled musical phrases will make a very different 
impression depending on whether their onset is abrupt or fades in more 
softly. In addition, how do the lengths of notes/samples relate to the other 
parts in the arrangement? Rarely is this more important than with bass 
lines, where the positioning of each note’s end point will frequently be as 
critical to the arrangement as where each note begins. 
 
■
 Pace.  Although the tempo of the production will already have been deter-
mined by the time overdubbing takes place, the subjective impression of 
how fast or slow that tempo  feels  can change when you add an overdub. 
If the whole song suddenly seems to be dragging, for instance, this can 
be a clue that your player isn’t quite locking into the rhythm properly, or 
they’re clogging up the groove with too many syncopations or busybody 
ﬁ gurations. Another common ailment is where a new instrument swings its 
eighth or sixteenth notes in a way that doesn’t match the swing in the exist-
ing parts. 
 “The way 
you feel about a 
performance should always 
be the biggest reason for 
keeping it, regardless of any 
more tangible and easily 
expressed concerns.” 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
72
 In addition, because so many of the decisions people make about musi-
cal parts and performances are emotionally charged (and rightly so), they 
are highly vulnerable to bias from non-musical factors. You’ll experience a 
take very differently if you’re watching the performer’s movements and facial 
expressions, for instance, whereas consumers won’t have the beneﬁ t of these 
visual cues. Here’s Don Was 21 talking about recording Mick Jagger, for instance: 
“He’d give it the full stage bit and, in fact, it was so awesome I had to keep 
looking down at the console… I didn’t want to be biased in my assessment 
of his vocal. So I had to look down and just listen to make sure it was work-
ing, because otherwise I could have lost my objectivity.” Given that personal 
interaction with the musician is often essential to session dynamics, averting/
closing your eyes during recording may not be a viable option, so there’s a 
good argument for ratifying subjective judgments primarily during playback. 
(This also allows the musicians themselves to participate in this process with a 
clearer head, of course, which is especially important where the player happens 
to be you!) The graphical waveform displays on a DAW screen can also lead 
you astray when you’re evaluating performance timing, so I’ll often turn them 
off (or zoom out far enough that they can’t be seen) where rhythmic concerns 
are a high priority. 
 Even miming along or tapping your foot while playing back a 
take can potentially overlay ﬁ ctitious emotional and rhyth-
mic cues, so I’ll occasionally force myself to close my 
eyes and sit still where an important decision hangs 
in the balance. (It makes you look more like you’re 
concentrating too, which can’t hurt!) While many 
styles want a beat that incites people to jump up and 
shake their thang, when you’re trying to create that 
kind of music in the studio there’s a ﬁ ne line between 
responding innately to the real qualities of your groove 
and trying to validate dysfunctional rhythms by wishfully 
bopping along. 
 2.3.3    Support the Performer 
 Lending a hand in appraising the quality of the performances is already a valu-
able service, but there’s also a lot you can do to support players in their quest 
for the perfect take. The biggest way you can do this is by conducting yourself 
in a manner that allows the talent to feel at ease in your company, hopefully 
building on the careful studio preparations you already did back in Section 
2.1. If you need someone to teach you social skills or a sense of humor, then 
I’m afraid you’re always likely to be ﬁ ghting an uphill struggle in any music 
recording situation (unless you happen to work entirely on your own music)—
honestly, quit now and plumb your efforts into something that doesn’t rely 
so fundamentally on personal interaction! Fortunately, however, musicians 
are a pretty sociable lot on the whole, and typical small-studio recordists are 
 “There’s a 
fi ne line between 
responding innately to 
the real qualities of your 
groove and trying to validate 
dysfunctional rhythms by 
wishfully bopping 
along.” 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
73
musicians themselves, so this should hopefully come naturally. That said, I 
do have a few recommendations for developing the most productive studio 
manner. 
 In my opinion, far too many engineers forget how intimidating a studio can 
seem to non-techies. “Sometimes, people are scared when they walk into a 
control room,” says Dennis Sands. 22 “It’s not their world, and it’s got to be 
frightening when you know you’re dependent on this, but it looks so unbeliev-
ably complex.” John Porter 23 concurs: “If you’ve never been in a recording stu-
dio before, it’s such a weird environment, especially if you’re used to playing in 
front of hundreds of people in clubs and there’s terriﬁ c feedback between you 
and the audience. Suddenly, you’re in this room with headphones on, hearing 
something that probably doesn’t sound at all like what you’re used to hear-
ing. It can be very disconcerting.” As such, a few words of explanation from 
you can work wonders: what you’re doing at each stage of the process, why 
you’re doing it, and what you need the player to do. It’ll soon transpire if your 
guest is actually a seasoned session veteran, in which case you can tone down 
the running commentary, but most of the time you’ll immediately disperse a 
small cloud of anxiety from around your player. Not only that, but your open-
ness about the recording process should immediately begin building a sense of 
mutual trust; your inclusive attitude to them (a non-specialist) will imply that 
you consider them a colleague/peer, improving the chances that they’ll return 
that respect; and the mere dialogue encourages a positive ethos of free commu-
nication and general goodwill. 
 Leaving musicians guessing is rarely a good idea outside the technical realm 
either. Whenever they produce something on behalf of the session (whether 
it’s a choice of sound, a recorded take, or a suggested change to the musi-
cal part), about the worst response they can get is none at all—it’s incredibly 
unnerving as a performer if you’re left in limbo without any indication of how 
your input has been received. Even if everybody on the session hates that spe-
ciﬁ c contribution, it’s vital that somebody says something about it as quickly as 
possible after it’s been offered, so that the player isn’t just left hanging, imagin-
ing the worst. If there’s no one else to fulﬁ ll this important function, then it’s 
your responsibility to step up to the plate. 
 I’d suggest not taking yourself too seriously in the studio either, no matter how 
good an engineer you feel you are or how fancy-looking your rig. “People are 
often very surprised working with me quite how idiotic I am in the studio,” 
comments David Kosten, 24 for instance. “I’m a total clown and I like people to 
have a good time and laugh and not realize that they’ve done so much work.” 
Coming across too strongly as Mr Big Shot Engineer is one of the most reli-
able ways to put musicians on edge: Either you’ll put the frighteners on them, 
or they’ll suspect you of being a shyster and go on the defensive. Plus, any awe 
your charade may inspire will be short lived, because there’s no engineer on 
the planet who’s immune from stupid errors, and when your comeuppance 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
74
arrives, everyone’s much more likely to start questioning and/or resent-
ing your inﬂ ated opinion of yourself. So take my advice and leave your ego 
at the door, concentrating instead on serving the talent and, by extension, the 
music itself. Within this context, try to keep any mistakes you make out in the 
open, being the ﬁ rst to poke fun at them if they’re trivial, and the ﬁ rst to accept 
responsibility for them when they’re more serious. There’s no point trying to 
sweep problems under the carpet, either, because ﬁ xing things at the earliest 
opportunity is usually the best means of cutting your losses, and also avoids 
squandering the trust you’ve worked so hard to build up with your musicians/
clients. “If you realize you fucked up a track or you made a bad decision, ﬁ x it,” 
asserts Eric “Mixerman” Saraﬁ n 25 . “If that requires starting from scratch on the 
track, do it… Everyone fucks up. It’s how you deal with those fuck-ups that sets 
you apart.” 
 TIPS FOR PUNCHING IN 
 The way you handle the punch-ins during tracking can have a signifi cant bearing on the quality of your eventual 
master take. First and foremost, whenever you’re planning to punch into an existing recording, make sure the 
performer is already playing along with the backing track before you reach the punch-in point, and continues to 
play right through the drop-out point too. This helps to ensure that sustain tails and between-note transitions 
sound natural on either side of the newly recorded snippet. Even taking that precaution won’t protect you from 
the occasional “bump” at one of the punch-in boundaries, though, so these must be chosen with care. Punching 
in during clear gaps in the performance is obviously the minimum-risk option, but where this isn’t possible the 
best spots to go for will usually be fractionally before well-defi ned note onsets (especially ones with strong 
transients) or else at locations where any lumpiness will be veiled by another event in the arrangement, typically 
a loud drum hit. 
 In Section 2.1.5, I already mentioned that switching between Input and Auto monitoring modes should be a 
refl ex, and the reason for this is that you may need to switch between them on the fl y. Although Auto is usually 
the default mode for normal patch-up work, some players fi nd it too disconcerting trying to play along silently 
to their pre-recorded performance prior to the punch-in point, with the result that their rhythmic feel suffers, 
or they instinctively play too forcefully because they can’t hear their own live signal. Jay Graydon 26 comments 
on this in relation to singers, for instance: “It’s most important to put the singer’s mic in Input mode on the 
recorder at least one line before the punch-in. If not, the singer will sing louder at the punch point due to not 
hearing him/herself in the headphones before the punch point.” Performers without much studio experience 
may simply assume there’s nothing that can be done about this, so won’t bring the matter up, which means you 
have to keep your ears open for tell-tale signs: namely, repeated instances of dodgy groove or overenergetic 
performance within the fi rst couple of beats of the punch-in zone. Don’t switch over to Input mode without 
telling the talent you’re doing it, though, and why you think it might help. 
 Most multitrack recorders now provide some facility for punching in and out automatically at user-defi nable 
time locations. There’s no denying the usefulness of this when you’re recording yourself, but I don’t like using 
it when recording other musicians because it always seems to slow down the work rate—by the time I’ve set 
up the necessary boundary points with suffi cient accuracy, I could have done the same punch-in manually three 
times over! While those working on analog tape will naturally approach any punch-in with a certain amount of 
trepidation, for fear of spoiling an existing recording by fumbling the transport controls, the ubiquitous Undo 
button banishes any such anxiety for users of digital systems. The worst thing that can happen is you have 
to redo an occasional botched punch-in, but is that such a big deal? Think of it as just another opportunity to 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
75
 Another big no-no is giving the talent the impression that your mind’s not 
fully engaged with the matter in hand. “If you’re excited about what you’re 
doing, that will translate to the musicians,” says Rafa Sardina, 27 “You need to 
be there in the moment… connected continually, not detaching yourself from 
the session.” Don’t check your Twitter feed while they’re tuning up; don’t doo-
dle elaborately on the tracksheet; don’t whip out your nail ﬁ le to catch up on 
your manicure regimen—stay focused on serving the music, because there’s 
always something more you can do either to support the goals of the current 
session activity or to anticipate and plan better for the next. If you treat the 
musicians with respect in this way, I ﬁ nd they’ll often go out of their way to 
warrant that respect when the Record light’s shining, at which point everyone’s 
a winner. 
 Small-studio engineers have to deal with performers of all skill levels, and each 
will have their own unique blend of strengths and weaknesses. Getting the 
best from a given player therefore means playing to their strengths, and one 
way you can do this is by adjusting the way you build up the ﬁ nal recording. 
Although I’ve currently tied your hands a little by stipulating that you build 
up your master take on a single track using punch-ins, there are still plenty 
of other variables you can juggle on the ﬂ y. For a start, you can choose how 
much of the musical part in question you record in one go. Highly skilled and 
assured instrumentalists will typically deliver better consistency of tone and 
have a good laugh at yourself. A much bigger deal to my mind is inserting an unproductive 30-second time-
lag between thinking “let’s replace that bar” and actually doing it, especially in any situation where numerous 
different punch-ins are required.  
 FIGURE 2.9    
 Although you can easily set up automatic punch-in/out points with most digital recorders, punching in 
manually on the ﬂ y is usually much more straightforward, and carries very little risk of upset because of 
the ubiquitous Undo function. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
76
more ﬂ uid phrasing if you record the whole track top to tail, or at least work 
on extended sections. This is especially pertinent when recording improvised 
lead solos, since it’s very difﬁ cult to get these sounding natural by constructing 
them piecemeal. With less proﬁ cient performers, however, the sheer number of 
retakes required to achieve a respectable performance without ﬂ ubs will most 
likely knock their conﬁ dence, as well as unnecessarily draining their more lim-
ited stamina. In that case, punching in for a couple of bars (or even beats!) at a 
time may be a more productive approach. That said, even the ropiest performer 
will often beneﬁ t from the warm-up of a full-length take to kick off proceed-
ings, so unless you’re already familiar with the talent’s capabilities, that’s prob-
ably the best way to start off in any case, during which you should have ample 
chance to assess what caliber of player you’re dealing with. 
 An initial run-through take will also highlight those sections the performer 
ﬁ nds most challenging, information that you can take advantage of later on. 
The window of opportunity for successfully capturing such sections may be 
quite small, because the player not only needs to be well warmed up, but also 
fresh enough that their concentration is still sharp, so I will frequently struc-
ture the workﬂ ow of the session accordingly, getting the musician into the 
swing of things with a couple of simpler segments before tackling the trickiest 
bits. Also, keep your ears pricked for any musical passages the instrumentalist 
can sail through with ease, because rattling through one of those can be just 
the thing to lift spirits if morale’s ﬂ agging, or if everyone needs a break from 
grappling with some thornier spot. “With each take you peel away some of 
your excitement,” comments Josh Homme. 28 “If you don’t have a good take by 
take 10, you should move on and come back to it later.” 
 And, speaking of breaks, this is another area where there’s scope for positive 
intervention. When signs of performance frustration begin to show, or when 
everyone’s beginning to ﬁ nd it hard to evaluate the emotional quality of the 
recording, there’s no underestimating the value of ﬁ ve minutes in the com-
pany of tea and biscuits, preferably contemplating some non-studio vista. 
Creative blocks also have a habit of solving themselves subconsciously during 
moments of respite—which is why every famous studio’s “smallest room” has 
usually witnessed the birth of at least one hit-making hook! Bear in 
mind, though, that the primary purpose of breaks, from a 
production standpoint, is to reinvigorate everybody’s 
ears, creativity, and morale, not to give the engineer 
a breather, so don’t you waste that opportunity 
to head off any technical hitches or prepare for 
foreseeable upcoming session requirements.  
 The monitor mix also allows you to exert some 
inﬂ uence over proceedings, because most per-
formers will naturally play more aggressively if 
they’re low in the monitor balance, whereas they’ll 
show more restraint and nuance if they’re a touch 
too loud. And this isn’t just a performance issue, either, 
 “Creative blocks 
have a habit of solving 
themselves subconsciously 
during moments of respite—
which is why every famous studio’s 
“smallest room” has usually 
witnessed the birth of at least 
one hit-making hook!” 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
77
because altering the nature of a player’s “touch” on their instrument will often 
impact the sonics too. A heavily accented note isn’t usually just louder than a 
softly played one—in many sample-based keyboard patches it’ll also have a 
harder attack and a brighter timbre, for example. Because of this, there’s often 
an argument for encouraging the musician to play more softly during recording 
where a given part needs to loom large in the ﬁ nal mix, because such a recording 
can sound fuller and closer to the listener when faded up to an appropriate level 
relative to the rest of the arrangement. That said, the level of any overdub in the 
mix will also affect the production’s groove, so with rhythmic parts you need to 
be a little wary of recording to an out-of-balance monitor mix, in case it impairs 
everyone’s ability to judge the performance timing correctly. It’s also worth stress-
ing that the needs of the performer should trump those of the engineer when 
adjusting the balance of a single communal monitor mix. Note that less conﬁ -
dent performers will often soldier on with an unhelpful headphone mix out of 
misguided politesse, because they don’t want to be seen as wasting session time, 
so it’s pivotal that you lay any such fears to rest as swiftly as possible. 
 There are plenty of more direct ways you can take an active role in improving 
a performance as well, but we already have plenty of new ideas to be getting 
on with for now. So we’ll pick up this subject again in the next chapter once 
we’ve gained some practical experience of applying what we’ve covered so far. 
For now, just try to do what you can for the performer behind the scenes, and 
give them the time they need to deﬁ ne their part and deal with the practical 
challenges of performing it. “The most important thing in the studio besides 
technical ability,” says Kevin Killen, 29 “is to have patience. You have to wait for 
great performances to happen and be ready to capture them.”   
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 A big advantage of overdubbing electronic instruments in the control room is that you 
can monitor over loudspeakers. Where you have to use headphones, though, choose 
cans that suit each listener (and their preferred listening level) and consider open-back 
designs for improved ﬁ delity and communication. If you don’t have independent volume 
controls for each person, an additional multi-output headphone ampliﬁ er is helpful. 
A setup with good sight-lines can mitigate the inherent communication difﬁ culties when 
using headphones. Make sure all monitoring hardware is functioning properly prior to 
the session, and that you’ve got a good backing balance. 
 
■
 A good cue sheet (or equivalent information programmed into your DAW system) will 
speed up your workﬂ ow, and things like chord charts and notated musical lines may also 
be worth generating in advance. 
 
■
 Try to make performers as comfortable as possible. Suitable refreshments help here, as 
can manipulating the studio layout, shrinking the space around the musician and choos-
ing the visual focus. Studio decor not only inﬂ uences the general mood, but can also 
provide inspiration or distraction in times of need.  
 
■
 When using a DAW system’s software monitoring, you should aim to bring its latency 
below 15 ms. If buffer-size settings can’t achieve this on their own, try removing or 
replacing any active plug-ins to reduce strain on the computer’s CPU, and avoid master-
ing-oriented effects or those powered by external DSP hardware. Distant speaker place-
ments may also add to the problem. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
78
 
■
 Your most important job is to hit Record at the right moment, even if that means funda-
mental technical and sonic decisions must be deferred. Fastidious preparation helps you 
work around this fact, but you can often play for time to an extent.  
 
■
 If you’d like to work on tones, ask the performer. This conﬁ rms the time is right, and 
allows you to enlist their help. Always try to give a clear idea of how much time you’ll 
need for this. If you’re unable to settle on the perfect timbre before the ﬁ rst take, look for 
opportunities to address this as you progress from one musical part to the next. When 
searching for sounds, make the best use of time by adjusting the most audible things 
ﬁ rst, and don’t try to judge the suitability of a sound out of context or while it’s overloud 
in the balance. Be on the alert for excess distortion, mono-incompatibility, and unwanted 
low end. Where effects processing is integral to an instrument’s character, don’t be afraid 
to print it into the recording, but do try to minimize delay/reverb effects if possible to 
avoid painting the mix engineer into a corner. As a safety precaution, you can simultane-
ously record the dry sound or the MIDI trigger data to a separate track if you wish.  
 
■
 Once overdubbing is underway, take notes to document session progress, keep track of 
takes, preserve settings for later recall, and record any spoken remarks that may have a 
bearing later. If this leaves any spare thought-capacity, use that to form your own opinions 
about the performances, but be wary of factors that can bias your subjective decisions.  
 
■
 Your studio manner can make a big difference to the performer’s state of mind. 
Demystify your own activities for them and don’t intimidate or antagonize them by tak-
ing yourself too seriously, trying to cover up your mistakes, and generally acting bored. 
 
■
 With unfamiliar instrumentalists it’s usually best to start off with one take of a reason-
able length, so you can gauge their strengths and weaknesses. For weaker players, work-
ing on smaller sections will often prove to be the most efﬁ cient use of time, whereas 
stronger players will usually deliver more compelling performances if you record longer 
chunks. Record the most challenging sections of a musical part as soon as the musician 
has properly warmed up. If energy levels droop, try working on a simpler section of the 
part as a brief respite, or take a quick break to regroup. 
 
■
 Adjusting the monitor balance can usefully inﬂ uence a performer’s touch, but overly 
skewed listening levels may also mislead them rhythmically. 
 
■
 To make punch-in boundaries as imperceptible as you can: Get the musician to play 
right across them; place them just before a transient note onset; or conceal them behind 
a loud event in the backing track. Be prepared to switch between your recorder’s input-
monitoring modes if you hear the performer struggling with the start of any punch-in.  
 Assignment 1: The Dry-Run 
 The purpose of this assignment is to familiarize yourself with the session-preparation 
and overdubbing procedures described in this chapter without the additional pres-
sures of dealing with a separate performer.
 
■
 Select an existing project you can practice overdubbing on. There are some 
specimen projects in this chapter’s web resources if you have nothing suitable of 
your own. 
 
■
 Lay hold of some kind of line-level electronic instrument you can perform with for 
the purpose—you don’t need to be an expert with it, because you’re free to make 
the part as simple as you need it to be in this instance. 
 
■
 Set up the instrument and monitoring arrangements as explained in Section 2.1.1, 
line-check the input chain, and set recording levels. Put together a cue sheet (or 
something similar using markers within your DAW system) as in Section 2.1.2. 

The Human Element CHAPTER 2
79
 
■
 From your recording system’s instruction manuals, learn how to do punch-ins (both 
on the fl y and automatically) and how to quickly switch between Input and Auto 
monitoring modes, as discussed in Section 2.1.5. Users of computer systems 
should confi rm that software monitoring is active, and then play something through 
the system to check for problems with comb-fi ltering or monitoring latency. 
 
■
 Play the backing track to adjust the monitor mix balance and overall playback 
volume, and then play along to fi nd a comfortable monitor-fader setting for your 
recorder track. 
 
■
 In the light of Section 2.2.4, think about where the part you’re about to perform 
fi ts within the arrangement as a whole, and choose/refi ne the sound as necessary 
to better suit that role—as well as to cater for your own personal tastes!  
 
■
 Record a take. With reference to Section 2.3.2, play it back and assess the qual-
ity of your own performance. Take notes of those sections that you may be able to 
improve upon, and retake them, making use of manual or automatic punch-in facili-
ties as required. Make a point of trying out both Input and Auto monitoring to get 
an insight into how they feel from a performer’s perspective. For similar reasons, 
experiment with some alternate monitor-mix balances to see how they affect your 
performance. When you’re done, play back the master take in its entirety one more 
time to confi rm that all the patch-ups you originally noted have been completed, 
that the punch points are inaudible, and that no further punch-ins are required. 
 
■
 Repeat the last two steps for at least two other parts. Try to record at least one of 
each of the following: a sustained pad or effects-based soundscape; a riff or accom-
paniment with a strong rhythmic element; an expressive lead solo part of some type.  
 Assignment 2: Overdubbing in the Wild 
 Now that you’ve had some practice with the mechanics of the overdubbing process, 
and have developed a basic feel for the workfl ow, you should be ready to start dealing 
with the more complicated scenario of working with a separate performer.
 
■
 Select an existing project you can practice overdubbing on, and fi nd an under-
standing player of some line-level electronic instrument to help you out. Arrange 
a session with them, giving them free reign to create one or more original parts. 
If they ask to hear the track in advance to develop ideas, then by all means give 
them a rough backing mix to listen to in their own time.  
 
■
 Prior to the session, fi nd out as much as you can about the instrument you’ll be 
faced with, and do everything in your power to ensure that you’ll get usable input 
and monitoring signals, even if you have to hit Record the moment that instru-
ment’s plugged in. Review the equipment setup you used for Assignment 1, and 
adjust it if necessary to suit the needs of your upcoming session. Prepare the writ-
ten materials you might need for the session, including at least some indication 
of the chords and bass line in preparation for any discussions while developing 
musical parts. 
 
■
 With reference to the suggestions in Sections 2.1.3 and 2.1.4, ask yourself 
whether you’ve prepared everything you can to make the musician comfortable 
while performing and to nurture a creative environment in your control room. 
 
■
 Fifteen minutes before the session, double-check that the backing balance is com-
ing through all monitoring devices cleanly and at a reasonable volume. Also con-
fi rm that you’ve got the necessary cables on hand to connect up the instrument 
when it arrives. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
80
 
■
 Once the performer walks through the door, you should always try to prioritize their 
needs as a musician over your needs as an engineer. As long as the instrument is 
plugged in and powered up, you should hit Record the moment they start playing 
along to the track. If you are able to buy yourself some time to deal with engineer-
ing matters before that moment comes, then make that time count: Nail the gain-
setting and monitor mix fi rst, before moving on to any other sonic concerns; and 
then focus on the sonic changes that make most difference, particularly any con-
trols on the instrument itself, enlisting the help of the player as much as you can. 
 
■
 After the fi rst take, explain to your guest that you’re planning to build a master 
take on a single track using punch-ins—feel free to blame me for this arbitrary lim-
itation! Discuss whether you should keep any sections of that fi rst take or retake it 
all from scratch. Listen back to the fi rst take if that helps, and note down any deci-
sions as necessary. For the purposes of this exercise, try to stay positive in your 
comments and defer to the performer if any serious confl ict of opinions occurs. 
 
■
 From here on in, you’re on your own! I can’t predict what exact course your session 
will take, but as long as you insure you’re always serving both the music and the 
performer, any mistakes you make should be forgivable, because your heart will be 
in the right place! Just make sure you save any project data regularly, and stay on 
the lookout for signs that a break and/or some nourishment might be in order.  
 
■
 Following the session, make notes of any details that may be of use for future 
sessions—the gain settings you used, for example, or the location of any particularly 
useful controls on the player’s instrument. In addition, make a list of any technical 
errors that compromised the recording quality or wasted time; any situations 
where engineering issues interrupted or impeded the performer’s creative process; 
and any interpersonal misjudgments that broke the mood or caused you to cringe! 
Needless to say, you’ll want to work out in your mind how to avoid those mishaps 
before the next session comes along. 
 
■
 Try to carry out another couple of sessions like this, preferably with different per-
formers if possible, the idea being to transform some of the simpler engineering 
tasks into habits, thereby freeing up valuable brainpower for the extra complexities 
I’ll be introducing in Chapter 3. 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 a selection of backing tracks in a variety of different musical styles, complete with 
tempo/key indications and structure/chord charts for performers;  
 
■
 audio example fi les demonstrating some of the performance parameters highlighted 
in Section 2.3.2; 
 
■
 links to free loop download libraries, freeware time-stretching algorithms, and some 
of the products suggested in this chapter; 
 
■
 further reading about computer monitoring schemes and latency reduction 
methods, together with an audio fi le suitable for testing system latency; 
 
■
 some glossaries of musical terms. 
 
 
  http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch2.htm 

81
 So far the only things we’ve talked about recording are line-level and digital 
signals, so now let’s expand our repertoire to include signals from pickups. 
This signiﬁ cantly increases the range of instruments we can record, taking in 
electric guitars and basses, electric pianos/clavinets, and any acoustic instru-
ments that have pickup systems ﬁ tted (most commonly acoustic guitars and 
other stringed instruments). 
 3.1  RECORDING PICKUP SIGNALS 
 Electric guitars and electromechanical keyboards typically use magnetic pickups 
to convert the physical vibrations of metal components in the instrument directly 
into electrical signals. These signals are then rendered audible by a connected 
ampliﬁ er and loudspeakers, and the nature of this ampliﬁ cation system is fre-
quently essential to the desired sonic character. This is why it’s common practice 
in the studio to record such instruments by miking the ampliﬁ ed sound—a much 
more complex subject we’ll explore in later chapters. However, the unampliﬁ ed 
“Direct Injection” (DI) signal can also be very useful for recording purposes. 
Small-studio acoustics rarely allow powerful low frequencies from bass instru-
ments to be captured faithfully through a microphone, for instance; and record-
ing a DI signal has the advantage that it allows you to re-evaluate or experiment 
with ampliﬁ er sounds after recording, either by rerecording the DI signal through 
a real miked-up ampliﬁ er (“reamping”) or by applying ampliﬁ er-emulation soft-
ware at mixdown. 
 Although the outputs of most electric instruments are quarter-inch TS jack 
sockets, you’re unlikely to get a good recording by hooking those straight up 
to normal unbalanced recording inputs, because most pickups only oper-
ate properly when connected to special high-impedance input circuitry. 
Some TS jack inputs can be switched into a high-impedance mode to cater 
for such eventualities, usually via a button labeled “Instrument” or “Hi-Z.” 
A more ﬂ exible option, however, is to use a dedicated DI box instead, 
because most of these not only provide a high-impedance TS jack input 
 Instruments with Pickups 
 CHAPTER 3 
 CHAPTER 3 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
82
socket for the instrument and a balanced XLR output socket for recording 
purposes, but they also feature a TS jack output socket labeled “Thru” or 
“Link” which can be connected to the player’s ampliﬁ er, so that they can per-
form with that as they’d normally do. 
 Some ampliﬁ ers have a dedicated line output which can be recorded in place 
of a DI signal, but this rarely sounds as clean, so I almost always favor a DI 
box if one’s available. There are also some specialized DI boxes that can safely 
accept an ampliﬁ er’s speaker-level output signal, sitting in-line between the 
ampliﬁ er and the speaker—some can even substitute for a speaker, retaining 
some of that “real amp” character in the recorded timbre without waking the 
neighbors. However, because the speaker is typically responsible for taming 
the frequency extremes of an instrument ampliﬁ er’s raw output, you’re unlikely 
to achieve a usable timbre in that instance without artiﬁ cial speaker simula-
tion. Analog speaker simulation is usually built into DI boxes that can handle 
ampliﬁ ed signals, but if you can switch this off for recording purposes you’ll 
often get a better end result, given the range and quality of software speaker-
modeling bundled with most DAW systems these days. To be honest, though, 
 FIGURE 3.1    
 Some jack inputs are switchable to accept instrument-level signals with the correct impedance matching 
(left), but if yours doesn’t then you’ll want to use a DI box instead (right). 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
83
there’s little point in DI’ing an instrument’s ampliﬁ ed signal if you’re able to 
mike it up instead, because it’ll hardly ever sound as good. 
 Softer acoustic instruments such as acoustic guitar, mandolin, and orchestral 
strings frequently have piezo-electric pickups ﬁ tted, primarily to allow onstage 
ampliﬁ cation during live performances. Again, though, such systems always 
sound rather unnatural, so reaching for a mic is almost always a better option 
in the studio. However, if you’ve no choice in the matter, then consider getting 
hold of a DI speciﬁ cally designed for piezo-electric systems, because the input 
impedance of a normal DI box isn’t always high enough to squeeze the best 
tone out of them.
 
 Once you’ve managed to get a DI signal into your recording system, the gain-
setting process shouldn’t hold any mysteries, but you have to be a bit more 
careful about potential sources of signal degradation. This is especially the case 
with magnetic pickups, some of which are very sensitive to electromagnetic 
interference. This is a good reason to banish mobile phones from the studio 
(if their distracting inﬂ uence on the creative process weren’t already enough) 
and you should also pay attention to the physical orientation of the instru-
ment in your room, because rotating its position through 90° can make all the 
 GOOD OLD-FASHIONED FLATTERY 
 Flattery is a pretty good way to get anyone on your side, and is at the heart of one little psychological trick 
that seasoned engineers have been using since time immemorial. The principle is simple: Mention to the 
musician that some esoteric technical maneuver, reserved only for special occasions, is to be used for their 
overdub. Whether or not it actually makes any audible difference, it often spurs the player into giving a better 
performance. So before you write off, say, hand-woven platinum cables as a total waste of money on purely 
sonic grounds, try telling your guitarist (in suitably hushed tones) that you’ve had one smuggled out of darkest 
Mongolia and transported to the studio under armed guard specially for their overdub. You may be surprised 
how much better the player makes it sound… 
 FIGURE 3.2    
 A couple of more specialized Direct Injection devices: Palmer’s PDI03 (left), which can accept the output 
of an instrument ampliﬁ er and includes speaker simulation; and L R Baggs’ Para DI (right), a DI box with 
extra-high-impedance input options for piezo pickups. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
84
difference in the world to the amount of hum, buzz, and general sonic rubbish 
it hoovers up. Whatever type of pickup you’re using, keep instrument cables as 
short as possible. “With short cables, you get all the bottom end as well as a 
nice top end,” says Mike Fraser. 1 “As soon as you lengthen the cable, the magic 
of the sound goes away, and you have to add top end.” It’s also good to lay 
instrument cables well away from mains and data lines, because of the typi-
cally low level of many instrument signals and the unbalanced nature of their 
TS jack interconnections. 
 3.2    MONITORING CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
PICKUP RECORDING 
 3.2.1    Silent Instruments 
 Where a pickup-equipped instrument produces no appreciable acoustic 
sound in the recording room, the simple monitoring setup we discussed last 
chapter may well continue to ﬁ t the bill. It’s possible you may encounter 
latency problems on some DAW systems if your recorded signal is feeding a 
software amp simulation, and if you can’t solve these by substituting a CPU-
light stop-gap just for tracking purposes, then an alternative is to monitor 
through a hardware amp-modeling device instead—you can get something 
basic but workable for under $75 (£50). The simplest way to set it up is to 
record both the DI signal and the amp-modeller output simultaneously, onto 
separate recorder tracks. This means that the performer can record, play back, 
and do punch-ins listening to the amp-modeled signal at all times, while you 
retain the ﬂ exibility to completely remold the guitar sound at mixdown using 
the DI track. 
 You may already have discovered during last chapter’s assignments how 
awkward it can be to make engineering decisions while listening to a moni-
tor balance designed primarily to beneﬁ t the performer. A way round this is 
to give your musician headphones, feeding those with a personalized fold-
back mix created via your studio system’s auxiliary sends, while everyone else 
in the room continues listening to the main monitor mix. If you’re already 
restricted to using headphones anyway, then arranging this should be pretty 
simple, just as long as you’re sure to use “pre-fader” auxiliary sends (i.e., sends 
fed from before each monitor channel’s fader)—otherwise any changes you 
make to your own monitoring balance will alter the foldback balance too. The 
moment the talent has a separate mix, though, you need to be a little more 
careful about protecting people’s ears from any signal spikes generated while 
you’re powering up equipment, plugging cables around, or switching phantom 
power, because muting your control-room monitors won’t mute any foldback 
mixes. The safest option is usually to mute the recording chain’s input chan-
nel, but whatever approach you take, you should verify that this does actually 
mute the foldback feed—the Mute buttons on some mixers don’t affect pre-
fader sends, for instance.

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
85
 
 Given the practical beneﬁ ts of loudspeaker monitoring, there’s no point in 
moving wholesale to headphone listening until it’s absolutely necessary. Any 
moderate rebalancing of the performer’s monitoring experience in the control 
room (such as the common request for “more me”) can usually be handled 
perfectly well by using the performer’s headphones merely to supplement the 
main loudspeaker mix everyone’s hearing. Again, open-backed headphones can 
work very well in this application, but closed-back models can also be pressed 
into service by using them one-sided, sliding the unused earcup slightly off the 
performer’s ear so they can still hear the loudspeakers unhindered. 
 3.2.2  Working with a Separate Live Room 
 Where you’re DI’ing an acoustic instrument, or the player can’t perform comfort-
ably without hearing their guitar/keyboard through its usual ampliﬁ er, the moni-
toring approach starts to get more complicated, because the direct sound of the 
instrument in the control room interferes with the engineer’s ability to evaluate its 
recorded timbre via the main monitor mix. The traditional solution to this prob-
lem involves moving the player out into an acoustically isolated live room instead, 
along with their foldback monitoring system. This tracking method might seem 
completely irrelevant to you if your own studio is crammed into a single room, but 
bear with me while I explain a little about how the monitoring works in two-room 
setups, because one-room workarounds are best understood in relation to that. 
 Instrumentalists who prefer to judge their performance by listening to their 
recording signal will usually be better served by closed-back headphones, 
because these will make the acoustic sound in the live room less distracting for 
them. Loudspeakers might also still be usable in this case too, provided that 
the instrument is naturally quiet enough to be obscured by its own monitoring 
 ACTIVE OR PASSIVE? 
 Some DI boxes require power to operate correctly, whether this power is supplied directly from the mains 
electrical supply, from an internal battery, or from phantom powering (via the unit’s XLR output). These “active” 
designs include internal preamplifi cation, so are often preferred for handling the low-level signals of unpowered 
“passive” pickups (the most common kind). However, this active circuitry can distort if subjected to much higher-
level signals, for example from battery-powered active pickup systems, in which case an unpowered passive DI 
box may be more suitable, because its lack of active circuitry will usually allow it to accept higher levels without 
problems. With either design, though, you’ll regularly fi nd that an input Pad switch is supplied to extend the range 
of signal levels that it can handle. Another common facility is an earth-lift switch, which interrupts the earth 
connection between the DI box’s input and output sockets, and can therefore help fi x some earth-loop problems 
(see Section 1.4.2). In this capacity a DI box might well be used for interfacing line-level devices with your 
recording system, in which case the greater headroom typical of passive designs would make most sense. 
 From a technical standpoint, active pickup systems will usually have the advantage of cleaner and clearer sound 
quality, and the signal will also suffer less when traveling through long or low-quality guitar cables. The downside, 
though, is that you need to make sure their batteries have enough juice, so it’s safest to replace the battery before 
any important recording session if you can. (The same also applies, of course, to any other essential studio gear 
that doesn’t have mains powering, such as DI boxes, stompbox-effect pedals, tuners, metronomes, tazers …) 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
86
signal when listening to the foldback mix at a comfortable overall volume 
level—and also provided that the loudspeakers don’t trigger so much sym-
pathetic physical vibration in the instrument itself that it sets off a feedback 
howlround. The same Input and Auto monitoring modes we used in the last 
chapter should continue to work ﬁ ne here. 
 A musician who requires real acoustic interaction with their instrument dur-
ing a performance might monitor the backing track over speakers, open-backed 
headphones, or one-sided closed-back headphones, so that they can easily hear 
their direct sound at the same time. Adjusting the instrument/backing balance 
then becomes a question of tweaking the volume level of the instrument and/
or the playback volume of the monitor loudspeakers/headphones—you could 
even set up a PA system for monitoring purposes if the instrument’s super-
loud. Under these circumstances the input signal is best left out of the foldback 
mix entirely, leaving only the track’s playback signal for post-recording evalua-
tion purposes. Different systems require different approaches to implementing 
this “No Input” monitoring mode:
 
■
 On most DAW systems, you can switch off software input monitoring com-
pletely. (Where yours can’t, a more laborious alternative is to mute the 
recorder track’s monitor channel during recording and unmute it for play-
back.) However, this approach will also eliminate the input signal from your 
control-room monitor mix, so it’s only really suitable for recording your own 
playing unless you also feed the input signal direct to your monitor mix by 
some other means—via the DAW’s input channel routing, via your audio 
 FIGURE 3.3    
 A two-room monitoring and foldback setup using DAW’s software monitoring facilities. 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
87
interface’s onboard DSP mixer, or via some analog hardware working outside 
the DAW system entirely. Bear in mind, though, that monitoring the input 
signal before it reaches the digital domain means that you may not detect data 
glitches on your recording until after you’ve started laying down takes.  
 
■
 Leave the recorder track’s monitoring mode set to Input or Auto, but turn 
down the foldback send on that track’s monitor channel. This leaves the soft-
ware monitoring signal intact in the control-room monitor mix, but also 
prevents playback signals on that track from reaching the foldback mix, so 
whenever the performer wants to hear what’s been recorded you’ll need to 
fade up the send manually, or else invite them into the control room to listen 
to the main monitor mix with you.  
 FIGURE 3.4    
 This diagram compares the No Input monitoring mode with the Input and Auto monitoring modes already 
introduced in Chapter 2. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
88
 Whatever the monitoring arrangements, insure that it’s as straightforward as pos-
sible for you to check the foldback mix for yourself during the tracking session. 
Personally, I like to have a spare pair of headphones in the control room perma-
nently monitoring the foldback feed, so that I can put them on while adjusting 
the balance the musician’s hearing. However, some mixers make it easy to solo 
the auxiliary send feeding the foldback, allowing you to hear it directly through 
the main monitors if you prefer (assuming no one else in the control room is 
relying on those). Whichever method you use, though, don’t jump to the conclu-
sion that a performer’s just whinging about nothing until you’ve checked what’s 
coming out of  their headphones. “Don’t just use the control-room headphones,” 
says Clif Norrell, 2 “because his ’phones might be ﬂ apping out or doing some-
thing strange. You need to hear what he is hearing.” 
 3.2.3    Studio Communications 
 The inherent acoustic isolation between the live room and the control room 
can make interacting with the performer a struggle. In most small studios 
you’ll usually get enough sound leakage through the adjoining door that you 
can just about shout instructions back and forth, and a sight-line between the 
rooms can also help, especially if you agree a few studio-speciﬁ c hand signals 
in advance (things like “tape rolling,” “keep going,” “play along,” and “just 
listening back”) to supplement the timeless comic appeal of mime. However, 
from the performer’s perspective (always the overriding concern), even a com-
bination of these two isn’t ideal for discussing parts and takes in any detail, 
and can also leave musicians feeling rather stranded and “out of the loop” cre-
atively. This is why I invariably prefer to set up a dedicated communications 
system to enable free conversation between the rooms.
 
 DSP-DRIVEN LOW-LATENCY MONITORING 
 In Section 2.1.5, I discussed various ways to reduce monitoring latency in DAW systems, but you may still 
struggle to bring this below 15 ms on some systems—and even if you can, there will be some performers who 
still fi nd that degree of delay off-putting. For this reason, many audio interfaces now include a built-in DSP-based 
mixer which allows you to send the performer’s input signal to their foldback mix without passing through the 
computer’s operating system, typically bringing the audible latency to well under 5 ms, regardless of how large a 
buffer size your audio driver needs to deliver glitch-free operation. One downside of working this way is that you 
have to switch off software input monitoring completely to avoid comb-fi ltering between that and the DSP mixer’s 
input-signal feed in the foldback mix—sometimes called “double monitoring.” As such, you may not be able to 
use the Auto monitoring mode that’s so convenient for punch-in recording. However, some DAW applications 
provide a workaround scheme (such as Steinberg’s ASIO Direct Monitoring) whereby the DAW software is 
granted control over the DSP mixer, muting the input signal only during playback, thereby reinstating the Auto 
monitoring facility. 
 If the concept of DSP-driven low-latency monitoring appeals to you, then my main piece of advice is this: Make 
sure you get to grips with exactly how your audio interface’s DSP mixer works before the session! Some of them 
can be fi endishly complex, merrily providing plenty of rope to hang yourself with, especially when you’re trying to 
keep an eye on your DAW’s mixer at the same time. 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
89
 The simplest setup involves a “talkback mic” for the engineer, which directly 
feeds the talent’s foldback mix, and a “listen mic” for the musician, which 
directly feeds the main monitor mix, the result being that a comment in either 
room will be heard in the other. However, it’s normally beneﬁ cial for these mics 
to be switch-activated, so that they’re not audible during playback or recording, 
otherwise the sound of the control-room monitors will compromise the fold-
back mix, and the acoustic sound of the instrument will break through into the 
main monitor mix—thereby undermining the very purpose of using a two-room 
setup in the ﬁ rst place! Where loudspeakers and/or open-back headphones 
are being used for monitoring in both rooms, using a talkback mic and a lis-
ten mic together for communication purposes carries a risk of generating feed-
back howlround, although you can usually avoid this by positioning the mics 
close to each person’s mouth, angling the mics away from any monitor loud-
speakers, and choosing fairly conservative levels for the mic signals in each mix. 
Another weapon against howlround is if the switch activating the talkback mic 
also automatically turns down (or “dims”) the control-room monitors, a feature 
frequently found on larger mixers and monitor controllers—an added bonus of 
this feature being that the engineer can also make comments during recording 
and playback without spill from the control-room monitors upsetting the fold-
back mix balance. 
 There are dozens of ways of implementing studio communications, both in 
hardware and software, and I’m not going to bore your pants off by trying to 
 FIGURE 3.5    
 Two affordable mic switchers: Radial’s Hot Shot (above left) footswitch, which can be used for a single 
dynamic talkback/listen mic; and a phantom-powered Microphone Mute desktop unit from Orchid 
Electronics (below right), which provides independent switching for two talkback/listen mics and works 
with both dynamic or condenser models. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
90
catalog them all here. Whichever scheme you choose, the most important 
thing in my view is the nature of the switching. In the ﬁ rst instance, it’s vital 
to have dedicated hardware buttons to engage each of the mics. Depending 
on the setup, these might be a mixer’s talkback/listen buttons, computer key-
board shortcuts (preferably of the single-key variety that don’t require you to 
hold down modiﬁ er keys at the same time), MIDI controller keys, or bespoke 
mic-switcher gizmos—it doesn’t really matter, just so long as anyone can easily 
press them to instantly open communications. Trying to use faders or foldback-
send level knobs to open your talkback/listen mics is extremely cumbersome 
by comparison, as is trying to click or drag anything in a software DAW with 
the mouse, and those kinds of kludges are also more difﬁ cult for anyone other 
than the engineer to operate. So don’t settle for anything less than real, physical 
switching! 
 Some people conﬁ gure their setups so that the talkback mic switches on auto-
matically whenever the multitrack recorder stops. While this function may ini-
tially seem labor-saving, I’m not a huge fan of it myself, because it makes it 
easier for catastrophically indiscreet control-room banter (who, me?) to reach 
the ears of the performer inadvertently, and also stops you shouting suggestions 
during playback or cueing the performer with a count-in during recording. 
 What kind of mic should you use for talkback and listen mics? Well, if you’ve 
not yet had any experience working with mics, then I’d suggest trying a 
“dynamic” model, simply because it should be fairly robust and foolproof to 
use—even a cheapy $25 (£20) one will do ﬁ ne as long as it has an XLR out-
put. Cabling such a mic to a microphone input on your recording system will be 
straightforward, and all you’ll have to do then is make sure you get appropriate 
signal levels, in exactly the same way you would with line-level sources. You’re 
never going to win any Grammies for the sound of your talkback or listen mics, 
so don’t stress about that—you just need to be able to decipher what people are 
saying through them! 
 I already established in the previous chapter that check-
ing the monitoring arrangements should be part 
of your regular session-prep routine, but the 
importance of this increases now that 
you’ve got separate control-room and 
foldback mixes going on, as well as a 
couple of communications mics to fac-
tor in. So make sure that your talkback 
mic is actually working, and at a com-
fortable level relative to the backing-
track mix, because you’ll be slower off 
the starting blocks if you can’t imme-
diately communicate with the musician. 
That said, if you hit thorny line-checking or 
signal-degradation problems at any point, it’s 
 “While automatic 
talkback switching may 
initially seem labor-saving, I’m not a 
huge fan of it myself, because it makes 
it easier for catastrophically indiscreet 
control-room banter (who, me?) to reach the 
ears of the performer inadvertently, and 
also stops you shouting suggestions 
during playback or cueing the 
performer with a count-in 
during recording.” 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
91
usually easier to abandon using talkback while you’re sorting those out—just 
leave the live-room door open so you can converse naturally while you focus 
all your brain-power on tracking down the technical gremlins.
 3.2.4  One-Room Monitoring Workarounds 
 For those without the luxury of a separate live room (in other words the major-
ity of small-studio owners), a little lateral thinking can often pay dividends. In 
this respect, the ﬁ rst thing to say is that anyone with a pretty minimal studio 
setup shouldn’t discount transporting it to another venue which  does provide 
two rooms, particularly if it’s somewhere that can be used for free—for exam-
ple a friend’s house, a rehearsal space, or perhaps a local church hall or college 
at evenings/weekends. If the mere thought of lugging your main recording rig 
around induces migraine, there’s often a good economic case for investing $350 
(£250) or so in an additional portable digital multitracker for on-location over-
dubbing purposes—at least when you compare that to the cost of adding an 
extra room to your house or hiring a commercial studio for a day! Who cares 
if it only holds eight tracks? You only need a stereo backing bouncedown from 
your main studio system to overdub against, which leaves you plenty of spare 
tracks to work with. (And it’s not just small-studio folks who do this kind of 
thing—David R. Ferguson 3 used a Roland VS2480 multitracker to record 
Johnny Cash for the Rick Rubin-produced “American” albums, for instance.) 
 Assuming you’re stuck working in a single-room setup, though, the trick to get-
ting the best out of it is to fake as much of a two-room monitoring experi-
ence as you can. From your perspective as the engineer, that means trying to 
reduce how much direct sound from the performer reaches your ears. If there’s 
any way you can turn down the level of the instrument without affecting the 
performance, then that’s worth investigating—for high-gain ampliﬁ ed sounds; 
a dedicated “powersoak” box between the ampliﬁ er and the speakers can do 
this, although only the more expensive ones can do so without destroying the 
overdriven tone as well! Positioning the sound source as far as you can from 
your monitoring position will usually help, of course, as will angling it away 
from you—instruments and ampliﬁ er cabinets all emit more sound in some 
 FIGURE 3.6    
 A “powersoak” box such as this Palmer PDI06 can be used to quiet the output of a high-gain instrument 
ampliﬁ er without drastically affecting its overdriven tone. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
92
directions than others. Studio furniture can also be strategically rearranged to 
absorb or deﬂ ect sound, and it’s perfectly possible to build something akin to 
a temporary isolation booth in many one-room studios with nothing fancier 
than mattresses, quilts, spare mic stands, bungee cords, and gaffer tape. 
 Despite such measures, headphone monitoring will usually be unavoidable in 
the circumstances, although you may be able to get away with the lesser isola-
tion of open-back or semi-open-back cans in order to beneﬁ t from their typi-
cally greater ﬁ delity. (Just don’t then turn them up so loud that you can’t make 
useful sonic judgments, as discussed in Section 2.1.6.) Where closed-back 
headphones are unavoidable, you should be conscious of the fact that they’ll 
block high frequencies disproportionately, so any of the instrument’s in-room 
sound you can still hear will be dulled. If you try to compensate for this when 
choosing sounds, your recordings will tend to overaccentuate the highs. 
 As far as the talent is concerned, nothing separates one-room and two-room situ-
ations, from a monitoring perspective: The chief concern will still be whether or 
not their in-room sound is necessary for performance purposes. Where they’d 
prefer to listen over your control-room loudspeakers, remember that you your-
self can still use headphones at the same time, either for additional acoustic iso-
lation from their instrument, or to evaluate the quality of the input signal when 
No Input monitoring is being employed. (From a practical standpoint, though, 
you’ll probably ﬁ nd it less hassle to set up your headphone monitor mix via aux-
iliary sends, as if it were a foldback mix, leaving the main monitor mix for the 
musician’s needs.) A major operational plus-point for one-room setups is that 
dedicated talkback and listen microphones are rarely required, which makes 
communication with the performer freer. However, if you’ve gone crazy enough 
with your DIY booth-building to require talkback/listen facilities, then just treat 
the booth as if it were a separate live room for setup purposes. 
 The reality of one-room studio life, however, is that you may never achieve a 
complete remedy, so there’ll always be an unwelcome element of guesswork 
involved whenever you try to judge the quality of your input signal while the 
source instrument’s playing. An ingenious workaround for this is to use an 
effects processor to delay your own monitor mix, so that you hear the instru-
ment’s input signal a few seconds after its direct sound in the room. This makes 
it much easier to focus on the quality of the DI sound independently. However, 
if this isn’t practical in your situation, then you’ve no other choice but to slow 
the pace of your session by developing each sound via a series of test recordings. 
In other words, you make your best stab at getting a suitable timbre while the 
musician’s playing, and then record a section so that you can listen back to it 
more critically against the backing mix. Based on the information gleaned, you 
take a more educated guess at how to improve on your ﬁ rst effort. Rinse and 
repeat a few times, and you’ll eventually ﬁ nd the sound you’re looking for. 
 I say “eventually,” though, because this process isn’t half tedious if the cards 
don’t fall in your favor! For this reason it’s extremely important to be upfront 
with the performers about what you’re going to do, and why you have to do it. 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
93
Try something like: “I really want to get the right sound for you here, but we can’t 
properly hear what the recording sounds like while you’re playing. Is it OK if we do 
some test recordings for 20 minutes before we start doing any takes?” Most play-
ers recording in smaller studios will understand the practicalities of the situation, 
 FIGURE 3.7    
 If an electric guitarist wants to monitor without headphones using a real amp, this diagram shows some of 
the ways you might alleviate the resultant monitoring difﬁ culties within a small one-room studio: The player is 
distanced from the control-room loudspeakers with his or her amp facing away from the monitoring position; 
a sofa and an upturned table are drafted in as impromptu half-height gobos, blocking the path between the 
ampliﬁ er cabinet and the engineer, but not between the player and control-room loudspeakers; and various 
quilts have been used to reduce the amount of guitar amp sound reﬂ ected toward the monitoring sweetspot. 
Additional improvements might be brought about by using supplementary headphones for the engineer or by 
using a powersoak in conjunction with the guitar amp to reduce its acoustic output.  

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
94
cutting you the slack required to make them sound good. When they’re fore-
warned like this they’ll also instinctively “hold ﬁ re” a bit on the creative side until 
you’re ready to catch them. Even so, if the sound-hunting stage ends up trespassing 
on the wrong side of the 20-minute mark, I’d recommend taking a short break to 
clear everyone’s heads and ears before doing any real takes. Furthermore, if a musi-
cian’s muse suddenly takes ﬂ ight while you’re in the middle of working on tones, 
it’s still incumbent on you to hit Record at that instant—whatever the sonics. 
 3.3    BUILDING A PERFORMANCE WITH COMPING 
 In the last chapter, I deliberately restricted you to recording a single track for each 
overdubbed part, building up a master take on that track with the help of punch-
ins. The main alternative to this is recording several takes on different tracks, 
and then comping the best bits of those together at your leisure to create a ﬁ nal 
 SLAVE REELS AND SLAVE PROJECTS 
 One of the diffi culties of using tape-based multitrack recorders is their limited track count, which can seriously 
cramp your style where comping is concerned. One workaround is to bounce down a submix of several backing 
tracks onto a single new track or stereo pair, freeing up the original tracks. The downside, though, is that you can’t 
then process the individual constituents of each submix separately at mixdown, because you’ll end up recording 
over them. For this reason it’s much more common practice to bounce backing submixes to a  separate  tape called 
a “slave reel” wherever lots of free tracks are required, transferring any completed comps back onto the “master 
reel’ once you’ve fi nished constructing them. Not only does this maintain fl exibility at the mixing stage, but with 
analog tape it also saves the master reel from the unavoidable wear and tear incurred by intensive overdubbing 
and auditioning. “[For] the recordings I made with Michael [Jackson],” elaborates Bruce Swedien, 4 “my big worry 
was that if those tapes got played repeatedly, the transient response would be minimized. I heard many recordings 
of the day that were very obviously done that way, and there were no transients left on those tapes. So what 
I would do would be to record the rhythm section on a 24-track tape, then take that tape and put it away and 
wouldn’t play it again until the fi nal mix. And, holy cow, what a difference that made—it was just incredible!” 
 However, you can only really work with slave reels if you can synchronize them to the master reel when you 
want to reimport your comped parts. The most convenient way to do this is with twin multitrack machines and 
a specialized synchronizer unit: Matching synchronization signals (typically SMPTE timecode) recorded onto the 
tapes themselves are read by the synchronizer, which then governs the transport controls and playback speed 
of one tape machine to keep it in step with the other. However, there’s also a much cheaper method (Warwick 
Kemp’s Image Shift Monitoring) which can synchronize any two playback devices directly, without the use of 
timecode, as long as one of them has a manual varispeed control—it’s just rather more laborious! (Full details 
of the ISM technique can be found in this chapter’s web resources.) 
 Although the concept of making a slave reel was originally developed for hardware recording devices, don’t 
necessarily discount the idea in the software domain. Where you’re working on a large and complex production, 
it’s not too hard to reach a point where your track count is straining the data-transfer bandwidth of the 
computer’s storage media, and the processing demands of so many tracks can also prevent you from achieving 
a low enough latency for software monitoring while recording. In either case, bouncing down backing submixes 
into a fresh “slave project” is a good solution, and it has the added benefi t of simplifying your monitor mixing 
while recording, as well as preventing you from unwittingly upsetting pre-existing parts during the cut and thrust 
of tracking and comping procedures. 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
95
patchwork performance. The big advantage of working this way from a produc-
tion perspective is that you can mix and match tiny sections of different perfor-
mances, perhaps even from different moments in the timeline, to generate the 
most emotionally powerful result—a crucial issue when session time with a star 
performer is in short supply and you don’t want to risk losing the tiniest scrap 
of material. The multi-take approach also suits more restrictive studio setups, 
because it’s not as reliant on a communication system for the musicians—you 
can just wind ’em up and watch ’em go, reserving the face-to-face conferences for 
between takes.  
 But the picture’s not all rosy. For a start, comping can be tremendously time con-
suming, and can easily involve several hours of painstaking auditioning, deci-
sion-making, and audio-editing work on top of the basic tracking time required; 
whereas a master take constructed using punch-ins is ﬁ nished as soon as the 
musician is. This is why there’s rarely much to gain from comping backing parts 
that only fulﬁ ll a supporting role—save that extra effort for production hooks, 
lead/solo lines, and maybe important countermelodies. Piling up masses of alter-
nate takes also risks tiring out less experienced players before you’ve aced the 
toughest sections, and tends to lull engineers into an uncritical mindset so that 
they waste the opportunity to optimize the raw material by inﬂ uencing the per-
former directly. You can do a zillion takes, but if they’re all mediocre you’ve still 
got a snowball’s chance in hell of comping together something spine-tingling. 
 This is why I wanted you to get to grips with the punch-in method ﬁ rst of all, 
because it naturally promotes a much better attitude. It forces you to listen 
back to your recordings and evaluate them properly, since that’s the only real 
way to determine which sections to retake. This effectively holds a mirror up 
to the musician, which tacitly challenges them to try to outdo themselves with 
each new take—an enormously powerful motivator. Working with punch-ins 
also lends the workﬂ ow a natural efﬁ ciency, because it focuses the majority of 
your tracking time on sections that need most improvement; keeps everyone 
abreast of how much work still remains, so they can pace themselves accord-
ingly; and allows the fullest contribution from the one person who can affect 
the outcome more than anyone else, namely the performer. So when you’re 
building tracks via comping, the secret to getting maximum results in mini-
mum time lies in retaining as many of the positive features of the punch-in 
method as you can. There are a couple of practical ways to encourage this: (1) 
limiting your track count and (2) using a comp sheet. 
 3.3.1 Limit Your Track Count 
 For every part you choose to construct through comping, I recommend decid-
ing in advance how many tracks of raw material you’re going to allow yourself. 
I normally use a minimum of three if I’m going to bother comping at all, but 
even for exposed lead vocal parts you shouldn’t need more than eight—unless 
you’ve only got 45 minutes with your “A”-list diva and you’d rather be up all 
night editing than drop a single note!

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
96
 
 LAYERING AND DOUBLE-TRACKING 
 Layering is where you record the same performance more than once, and then blend several of those 
performances together at mixdown—where only two performances are involved, it’s normally called “double-
tracking.” A lot of modern music styles trade heavily on layered guitars and vocals in particular, most commonly 
using the technique to thicken the texture, make the performance appear more consistent, and increase the 
production’s apparent stereo width (by distributing the layers across the panorama). The main parameters you 
need to think about while overdubbing layers are:
 
■
 how closely you match the performances. Looser matching will give more of an impression that several 
parts are playing at once, and tends to suit rootsier styles, while tighter matching will generate a more 
obviously “studio-enhanced” sound that’s akin to a single part with an added effect. In the latter case, 
detailed audio editing is frequently used to take up the slack where a player fi nds it impossible to perform 
two suffi ciently similar takes. 
 
■
 how many layers you record. The more layers you add, the larger your ensemble appears, and this often 
seduces small-studio artists into overdoing things. The fl ipside of adding lots of layers is that the expressive 
performance nuances of each one become progressively more diffi cult to hear, leading to a bland and 
emotionless result—a problem that plagues far too many of the low-budget productions I hear. Fewer layers 
will usually also sound bigger and closer to the listener in your fi nal mix, for a given playback volume. 
 
■
 how to balance the layers in the mix. All your layers don’t have to be at the same level. Indeed, one of 
the most common applications of double-tracking is where the second performance is quite low in level, 
surreptitiously smoothing and thickening the main part without most listeners consciously spotting its 
presence at all. 
 One of the advantages of using comping is that the unused alternate takes can be pressed into service as 
additional layers should the need arise later on. But even if you’ve only recorded a single take, you may be 
able to conjure up double tracks at mixdown by copying between similar musical sections, presuming that 
you didn’t generate those by copy/paste editing in the fi rst place—it’s the slight performance variations 
between layers that create the thickness in a layered texture, so combining copies doesn’t produce the 
same effect at all. 
 When you’re deliberately overdubbing parts for layering purposes, a salient question is whether you should let 
the performer monitor layers they’ve already recorded as the session progresses. For rhythmic parts I wouldn’t 
normally advise this, because the rhythmic information within the previous layers will invariably mislead the 
performer, reducing their timing accuracy. However, where you’re double-tracking melodic lines, it may prove hard 
work to match note lengths and performance infl ections if the previous layers aren’t present to guide the player. 
In this case, panning previously recorded layers well off-center in the foldback mix may help the instrumentalist 
hear their current performance better when using Input or Auto monitoring modes. 
 Finally, if you’re planning to layer up multiple distorted guitar parts for rock music, I wouldn’t recommend 
recording all of them through digital amplifi er emulation if you can avoid it. Even though this technology is now 
quite mature, there’s still something about it that doesn’t sound quite as satisfying to my ears when it’s layered. 
If you really have no choice, at least try to use different manufacturers’ algorithms for different parts, because 
that seems to help narrow the quality gap a little. Whatever approach you end up using, however, giving each 
new layer a slightly contrasted sound will often make for a beefi er-sounding mixed result, and changing the 
layering slightly for different elements of a riff (the chugs versus the powerchords versus the string-bends, say) 
can actually make it sound more musically engaging. For a fi nal perspective on guitar double-tracking, however, 
I’ll defer to AC/DC’s engineer Mike Fraser: 5 “The thing about AC/DC is that they don’t double-track their guitars. 
I keep saying to young bands: ‘If you want a really big guitar sound, just get a really good [single-tracked] guitar 
sound.’ Of course, when you double something it sounds bigger, but in the end result you have less guitar: You 
have to turn it down because it takes up too much space.” 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
97
 When you’ve decided on your track count, approach each of the tracks with a 
punch-in mentality, taking and retaking until you obtain equally compelling 
performances on each track, such that the eventual comp becomes a “best of 
the best” version. Personally, I prefer to do the takes in a kind of round-robin 
system. Let’s say I’ve decided to use ﬁ ve tracks. I’ll start off by recording one 
take after another onto different tracks, only retaking one if it’s obviously mer-
itless. Then I’ll listen back to the ﬁ rst track with the musician and we’ll ask our-
selves whether we think we can get something better—usually that answer will 
come back in the afﬁ rmative, simply because we’ve effectively rehearsed the 
part ﬁ ve times by this point! (That said, there are also times when something 
ﬂ eeting and precious is captured while the musician is still slightly off-guard, 
so you should always keep your ears open for those delicate early-take gems.) 
We’ll then retake as much of that track as necessary to bring it up to the new 
quality level we’ve established. 
 Once this is done, we’ll continue revisiting the tracks in turn like this until 
each of them feels equally strong from a performance perspective. That’s not 
to say any of them will be ﬂ awless, because one of the strengths of comping 
is that it gives the performer a safety net, so they can push the envelope in 
pursuit of the most inspired delivery without worrying about the inherently 
hit-and-miss nature of such risk-taking—as long as at least one of your tracks 
feels incredible for any given snippet, it doesn’t matter how many other tracks 
you end up leaving on the cutting-room ﬂ oor. So the main thing is that every 
phrase on every track should have at least something that feels good enough to 
make the master take—if not, punch that phrase in again! 
 3.3.2 Use a Comp Sheet 
 The other big thing you should do while tracking multiple takes is to make 
notes of which phrases in each track are worth keeping. This involves creat-
ing a “comp sheet,” which is basically a sketch of the part’s musical timeline, 
with space alongside it for you to indicate how well each section has been 
performed on each track. Some kind of musical notation works well for parts 
that are mostly preplanned, but if the creative process is more ﬂ uid and impro-
visatory (or you just don’t like music notation), a more conceptual map of 
the bars and/or phrases can sufﬁ ce too. Whatever form your timeline sketch 
takes, working on manuscript paper can still be quite convenient, because a 
spare stave above the timeline provides a ready-made grid to organize your 
annotations—as you can see in  Figure 3.8 . I’d strongly suggest writing lightly 
in pencil, so that it’s easy to revise your notes as the round-robin process pro-
gresses, and it also helps if your timeline sketch is printed or written in ink, so 
you don’t erase that at the same time as your pencil scribblings! 
 The main things you’re looking to note down on your comp sheet for any 
given track are:
 
■
 Solidly Usable Sections.  That means anything that you’d be willing to 
accept for your master take if the dog ate all your other tracks, without 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
98
feeling you had to rerecord. Until you get an unbroken string of these 
markings across the whole part, the job’s not ﬁ nished. Personally, I don’t 
really feel safe until I have at least two bankable tracks available all the way 
through the part, however many tracks I happen to be comping across.  
 
■
 Moments of Magic.  These may be immediately recognizable “that’s the 
keeper!” licks, or lunatic follies that might none the less have a glint of genius 
about them given the right context. It’s things like these that really make a 
performance touch the listener, so you want as many of them as possible, 
and preferably sprinkled liberally throughout the part. If all your tracks are 
already solidly usable for a given section, but you have no unmissable high-
lights, then that’s a good reason for retaking some of them—and if you make 
a point of telling the talent you’ve already got plenty of usable material in the 
bag, they’re more likely to go for broke.  
 These notes provide valuable reassurance that you’re covering all your bases: 
You’re getting enough bread-and-butter material to build a full-length mas-
ter take that won’t embarrass anyone; and you’re catching enough pearls 
of brilliance to justify the effort you’re putting into the comping pro-
cess. Furthermore, by the end of the session you’ll already have some clue 
about how to direct your editing efforts when compiling the master take 
itself, so I’d advise carrying out the comp fairly soon afterwards, while the 
meaning of your own scribbled hieroglyphs is still fresh in the memory! 
However long it takes you to ﬁ nish the comping, though, don’t give a hos-
tage to fortune in the meantime by recording new overdubs against one of 
the uncomped takes. “Then, when you put the next overdub on, you don’t 
know what to relate to,” explains John Simon, 6 “[and] when you try to 
bring everything up to mix it together, nothing makes sense any more.” Your 
limited track count should prevent the comping process itself being too 
challenging, as long as you’re  au fait  with your recording platform’s audio-
editing procedures, and bear in mind that the advice I gave in Section 2.3.3 
about placing your punch-in boundaries is equally applicable when choos-
ing good locations for edits.
 FIGURE 3.8    
 Whether or not you use traditional musical notation, musical manuscript paper can be very handy for 
making comp sheets. Here you can see a four-bar guitar solo which has been mapped out graphically 
on the lower stave, while separate lines of the upper stave are being used to evaluate three different 
recorded takes for comping purposes. 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
99
 
 3.4   IN SEARCH OF THE BEST PERFORMANCE 
 In Section 2.3.3 I suggested some things you could do behind the scenes to 
help the talent nail a great take. Otherwise, though, I’ve so far recommended 
adopting a fairly deferential stance as regards molding the performance itself, 
much as you might when working to realize someone else’s clearly deﬁ ned 
artistic vision—whether that comes directly from an established writer, artist, 
or band, or from some professional third-party producer or musical director. 
However, many lower-budget overdubbing sessions are more or less rudder-
less ships in production terms: The musicians themselves may not have a clear 
idea of what parts they need, or how to perform those parts most effectively, 
and there’s no veteran hand on the tiller to provide the necessary direction. 
In that climate, you may be as well qualiﬁ ed as anyone to help chart a new 
course when the session hits choppy waters on the creative front, especially if 
you have speciﬁ c expertise pertinent to the situation—better guitar chops, say, 
or a training in harmonic voice-leading. It’s also quite a natural transition from 
thinking about sounds to thinking about production. “I basically produce by 
engineering,” says Ken Caillat, 7 for instance. “If I can’t get all of the sounds 
 TUNING TIPS 
 Ropey tuning continues to blight most of the home-brew multitracks I hear, and I think this is partly because 
people try to judge issues of pitch while listening too loud—pitch perception actually changes subtly at different 
playback volumes. Loud foldback monitoring may be the only way to get an inspired take from the player in the 
live room, but that doesn’t mean you have to listen that loud in the control room. I also fi nd that pitching issues 
often become more obvious on a smaller speaker, particularly where bass instruments are concerned, because 
it emphasises the mid-frequency tuning cues that best survive through small mass-market playback systems. 
The time to be particularly careful about tuning is when doubling parts at the octave, because that tends to 
make tuning discrepancies between the parts more obvious. One useful trick to remember is that balancing the 
upper part a little quieter than the lower one in this situation will usually make the octave appear sweeter. 
 You may encounter some instruments that can’t easily be retuned. Anything with a thousand strings, tines, 
or sounding rods is probably best left well alone, for instance, unless you’ve got a specialist professional on 
speed-dial, while some acoustic instruments which are ostensibly easier to tune may not resonate as effectively 
when shifted sharp or fl at to match a production that’s not at concert pitch (which normally puts “A” at 440 Hz). 
In such cases your recorder’s varispeed control may be able to bail you out instead, effectively shifting the 
tuning of the whole project to match the overdubbing instrument. Once recording is completed and varispeed 
disengaged, everything you’ve recorded (including the new overdub) returns to the production’s home pitch. 
Although doing this does have some side-effects for the overdub’s sonics, they should be negligible unless 
you’re trying to adjust the pitch by more than about a semitone. 
 With electric guitars and basses, it’s not enough simply to tune their open strings, because you should also 
check the instrument’s “intonation,” in other words the relative pitching of the fretted notes. The quickest test 
here is to tune the open strings and then verify that each string’s twelfth-fret octave is also pitching accurately. 
If not, then someone will need to twiddle the screws in the instrument’s bridge assembly to correct this—this is 
something that many guitarists can do themselves, but otherwise an appointment at the guitar shop can prevent 
the nightmare of having to retune the instrument for each new chord. Be aware that good intonation may be 
thrown out if you change the gauge or brand of a guitar’s strings, and that it may also suffer if the strings are old. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
100
to come up and be a good mix, it’s like, “What’s 
wrong?” If the sounds aren’t the problem, then 
what  is the problem?” 
 Clearly, though, there’s always a danger 
of a “when I want your input I’ll ask for 
it” response to any non-technical sug-
gestions coming from the engineer, so 
you have to tread carefully, especially 
when working with anyone for the 
ﬁ rst time. For example, it’s best if you 
let musicians exhaust their own strate-
gies ﬁ rst before chipping in with your own. 
Apart from anything, gamely following through 
on their ideas without shooting them down (how-
ever daft they may at ﬁ rst appear) provides incontrovertible 
evidence that you’re on their side, so your intent is less likely to be miscon-
strued if you offer your own contributions. 
 The last thing you want is for an artist to feel like you’re trying to turn them 
into something they aren’t, or for a performer to feel you’re undermining them 
in front of their band mates—who cares what you think if the artist hates it, or 
if you cause the band to implode? “Mutt [Lange] was always very careful not 
to intimidate the musicians,” recalls Tony Platt, 8 for instance. “I remember on 
one occasion… we spent a long time trying to get a bass part. Mutt is a bass 
player himself, so I know he could have gone out and played the part in two 
minutes ﬂ at, but that would have been very intimidating to the bass player and 
might have destroyed his conﬁ dence completely. So Mutt was quite prepared 
to sit there for the best part of a day and coax the bass part out of this guy.” In 
small studios there will inevitably be occasions where technical limitations or 
the lateness of the hour preclude much experimentation, but you’ll minimize 
bad vibes if you express misgivings in terms of those practical concerns, rather 
than arguing on creative grounds. In other words, “Perhaps we should try that 
once the main part’s in the bag?” is likely to lose you fewer allies than “I don’t 
think that’ll work, so let’s not waste time on it.” 
 One thing that’s worth stressing to performers in the studio is that the valid-
ity of an idea is frequently impossible to judge unless you persevere with it 
long enough to hear what it actually sounds like, so trying something out 
doesn’t mean committing to its appearance on the record. The best way to 
underline this point is by the unﬂ inching ruthlessness with which you bury 
any idea of yours that the musicians decide against when the results are 
actually in front of them. “I love being proven wrong,” says Joe Chiccarelli, 9 
“because then you know what the right way is.” Doing this without a back-
ward glance makes musicians feel more relaxed about trying your ideas, 
knowing that you’re not going to react to their veto as if someone just 
drowned your ﬂ ufﬁ est kitten.
 “Let musicians 
exhaust their own 
strategies fi rst before chipping 
in with your own. Apart from anything, 
gamely following through on their ideas 
(however daft they may at fi rst appear) 
provides incontrovertible evidence that 
you’re on their side, so your intent is 
less likely to be misconstrued 
if you offer your own 
contributions.” 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
101
 
 3.4.1  Performance Pointers 
 When working with new people, performance-related suggestions are probably 
a lower-risk starting point than weighing in about how the part itself should 
be written. Here are some general-purpose strategies that can help improve 
results, irrespective of your level of insight into the technicalities of speciﬁ c 
instruments:
 
■
 Maintain a Positive Spin.  Presenting your reactions with a positive spin 
should be a default position—it may not endear you to everyone, but it 
sure gives you the shortest odds! If the player peels off a blinding lick or 
inspired ﬁ ll, acknowledge it, if only with a smile or a quick thumbs-up. If 
you’re feeling the groove, don’t just sit there like a gargoyle—let it move 
you a little. Don’t let a take go by without commenting at least in passing 
about some admirable feature. (“Great lead-up into the middle-section!” 
“I wish I could play rhythm like that.” “That last chord was so evil, you’d 
be burnt at the stake in certain parts of rural Herefordshire.” You get the 
idea … ) If you think the last take sucked, the player probably thinks so 
too, so just asking their opinion (“How was that one for you?”) will often 
get them kicking their own ass without any assistance from you. When 
you have to play Bad Cop, build on something positive that’s already been 
achieved. (“You nailed that ﬁ rst verse, so let’s see if we can match that 
 WORKING IN TEAMS 
 In most small-studio situations the engineer will be engaged by the musicians being recorded, and will be 
directly answerable to them. As such, you’ll primarily show your professionalism by being on time, well prepared, 
courteous, and effi cient. (It helps if you don’t smell like a curried Stilton too.) However, if you’re working as part 
of a production team, you also have to realize that successful teams need both a clear leadership structure and 
a culture of mutual support. 
 In other words, if you’re not the producer, then you should know who is, and should be doing your best to 
make that person’s job easier. This usually means being “invisible,” in other words performing your tasks so 
quickly, effectively, and unobtrusively that you never distract the musicians from their job. If a musician or the 
producer actively notices you, then that usually means you’re doing something wrong! Another skill you should 
cultivate is anticipating the direction of the session and preparing for it in the background, so that everything 
that’s required for the next activity seems to appear magically just as it’s needed. “Anything that disrupts the 
session breaks the vibe, and vibe is what the music is all about,” remarks Scott Kieklak. 10 “Technical chops 
are important, but being able to avoid disruptions to the fl ow of the session is even more important.” Relevant 
information must be fed up the chain of command in a timely fashion too, and guesswork is to be avoided when 
answering questions from superiors. While it’s bad form to directly oppose or contradict the producer during 
open discussion, they’ll also expect (and respect) a quiet word of warning if you spot them careening toward 
some embarrassing technical error or social  faux pas unawares. 
 When you fi nd yourself in the lead role of a team yourself (even if that team is just you and an assistant), then 
you should try to have a clear plan for the session so that you keep the team working as a well-organized unit. 
Leading by example will usually engender most respect amongst underlings, and loyalty can be fostered both by 
providing people the opportunity to learn on the job, and by apportioning credit where it’s due. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
102
feeling here.” “I think we’ve already got a stronger take on track two, but 
I reckon we can trump that if we give it another go.” “I’m sure I heard a 
better one from you onstage.” “You smoked both those riffs, but the link-
ing part didn’t seem to live up to them for me.”) The more you accentu-
ate the positive when you can, the fewer ﬂ ounce-outs you’re going to get 
on those difﬁ cult occasions when there’s no alternative but to trot out 
umpteen variations on “It’s still ﬂ at.”  
 
■
 Be Informative.  “Do it again” doesn’t tell a player anything useful. What 
wasn’t good enough? All of it? The last note? The tuning? The rests?! Even if 
you can’t say anything very concrete, at least try to give some indication of 
whether or not they’re heading in the right direction. (“You were actually 
closer with the previous take, I think.”) 
 
■
 Favor the Abstract.  Interfering with the nuts and bolts of an instrumentalist’s 
playing technique is one of the most hazardous things you can do as an engi-
neer. With more spontaneous musicians, it can spook them into thinking 
too consciously, killing the vibe stone dead; and it can quickly antagonize 
more cerebral types by implicitly belittling their technical abilities. No matter 
how much of a virtuoso you happen to be, you’ll always be on safer ground 
politically by keeping your comments fairly abstract, stating the problem 
in broadly emotive terms and allowing the musician to develop the solu-
tion best adapted to their own abilities. So with a violinist I’d give “Can you 
make that line smoother somehow?” a proper chance before trying anything 
more speciﬁ c like “Slur the bowing and stay on the ‘A’ string.” Sure, if a player 
requests technical assistance, then provide it if you can, but normally I’d treat 
it as a last resort.  
 
■
 Find Some Shared Imagery.  If merely waxing lyrical can’t conjure up the 
right emotional state in the performer, try ﬁ nding some shared imagery. 
Visual images are often most potent, such as adverts (Marlboro Man, the 
sepia-tinged world of Hovis, those ridiculous slow-mo perfume spots), movie 
scenes/characters (“King of the world!”, “Of all the gin joints … ”, “Well, do 
ya, punk?”), or real/imagined locations (ﬂ ying over the Grand Canyon, play-
ing to a packed arena, trapped in an ice cube). However, any shared experi-
ence is fair game, whether that’s memories of high school, historical events, 
or the personalities of mutual acquaintances.  
 
■
 Look to the Lyrics.  Because vocals are frequently added late in the tracking 
process, it’s easy to overlook the value of responding to the lyrical message 
while overdubbing instrumental parts. Indeed, this is one reason why some 
producers insist on working to a scratch vocal from the very earliest stages 
of a project (of which more in Section 11.1.2). Whether you go that far 
or not, a copy of the lyrics can provide a useful emotional focus for the 
entire project. 
 
■
 Deal in Questions.  Try couching requests in the form of questions. For 
example, by saying “What about a high ‘E’? Is it even possible to get up 
there?”, rather than “I think the high ‘E’ would be better,” you’re making it 
easier for the performer to disagree with your opinion, because you’ve made 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
103
it clear that it’s negotiable. Plus they can also save face if they’re not skilled 
enough to hit a high ‘E’, by claiming that it’s not physically possible—even if 
you could play the part much better yourself, there’s nothing to be gained by 
rubbing their nose in it.  
 ENGINEER’S QUICKSTART GUIDE: GUITARS 
 The bewildering variety of guitar and bass-guitar designs means that choosing the right instrument for 
recording any overdub is pivotal. Indeed, it’s in recognition of this fact that some high-profi le recordists retain 
collections of suitable instruments even though they’re not players themselves. It’s doubly important for rock 
and pop productions, which rely heavily on guitar textures, because combining different guitars typically gives 
fuller sonics, and contrasted timbres are terrifi cally useful for arrangement purposes. So I urge you to ask 
any guitarist you overdub with to bring some alternative instruments with them, whether they’re their own or 
borrowed from obliging acquaintances. 
 Old strings won’t usually help the sound of any guitar, but if you do sensibly change them for a recording 
session, try to do it the day before, so that the strings have a chance to fi nish stretching in—the tuning of nylon 
strings in particular can be diffi cult to nail down during the fi rst 24 hours. If the height of the strings above the 
fretboard (the “action”) isn’t enough, they’re more likely to buzz against the frets, so listen closely for this at the 
fi rst opportunity, because it’s impossible to correct after recording. Raising the action may require adjustment 
of the instrument’s bridge assembly or neck curvature (via a “truss rod” in the neck itself), something that any 
guitar shop can do if the guitarist isn’t comfortable tackling it personally. 
 If there’s a choice of pickups available on any 
instrument, then it’s sensible to ask the player to 
try some of those different options early on when 
you’re hunting for sounds, because they’ll usually 
make a big difference, and any onboard tone 
controls will also be extremely important. If you’re 
experiencing balance problems within the sound 
(maybe one string is overwhelming the others, 
or the upper strings aren’t counterbalancing the 
lower strings), it may indicate that the pickups 
would benefi t from some height adjustment—
typically a job for a specialist. Another critical 
tonal factor is the type of pick used, if any, so 
there’s no sense in relying on your guitarist here 
when you can spend a few pennies on a selection 
of your own. “I generally have a pack of picks 
with me,” says Jack Joseph Puig, 11 “that range 
from medium to thick, metal, wood, plastic, felt, 
and smooth and jagged edges. This part of the 
equation is as important as selecting the proper 
amp.” The picking action warrants attention too. 
“If the guitarist wants the sound to be a little 
more bright or aggressive,” continues Puig, “you 
can suggest that he move his picking hand a little 
further toward the bridge, or maybe turn the pick 
sideways so the string catches the side of the pick a bit.”  
FIGURE 3.9    
 The choice of guitar pick can make a surprisingly big sonic 
difference, so small-studio engineers are well advised to keep a 
selection of their own. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
104
 
■
 Play Through Any Mistakes.  Given that punch-ins and comping can repair 
any performance mishaps, you should encourage all performers to keep 
playing even if they make a mistake. Not only does this tend to improve 
the performer’s creative ﬂ ow overall, but it’s also surprising how the effort 
of playing through a momentary instability very often unearths gold dust 
on the other side. “It’s the mistakes, sometimes, that are the magic,” says Jez 
Coad, 12 “and a major, major part of my job is to say, ‘OK, let’s go again, but 
play that—I know it’s not what you meant to do, but there’s some unbeliev-
able magic there!’” 
 
■
 Eyes Closed.  There are many potential advantages of getting an instru-
mentalist to perform with their eyes closed. Firstly, it blocks out distracting 
visual cues from the studio, thereby focusing more of the player’s atten-
tion on the subtle emotional undercurrents of what he or she is hearing. 
In addition, though, it forces the performer to memorize their part and 
play by feel (not by sight), both of which can help make a performance less 
inhibited. 
 
■
 Posture and Movement.  The way musicians hold their bodies while per-
forming will alter how they play, so it deﬁ nitely matters whether your 
guitarist is lounging back on the sofa, sitting on the edge of a stool, or 
standing up, because each posture is more likely to suit different parts. 
Bear in mind that some chairs can impede the playing action too—cellists, 
 FIGURE 3.10    
 Scenes from classic ﬁ lms like these are fantastic common currency when trying to communicate speciﬁ c 
emotional moods you’d like the performer to convey in their playing. 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
105
for example, will have difﬁ culties playing in low or overly comfy chairs, or 
where prominent armrests interfere with their bowing action. You can also 
inﬂ uence a performance by getting the musician to move while playing. 
This is very pertinent when you’re grappling with rhythmic issues, because 
a player who moves with the music will usually play tighter, in my experi-
ence. Asking the talent to take a single rhythmic breath on the beat before 
an important entry is another time-honored means of improving their tim-
ing. Physically expressing the emotional content of a phrase while playing 
it (think of the archetypal classical maestro) is natural to some, but more 
reticent performers may need some extra encouragement to try this for 
themselves.  
 
■
 Be the Conductor.  While I’m not proposing you go all Herbert von 
Karajan, performers who rarely perform on their own will ﬁ nd it easier 
to relax if they’re following someone else’s lead—even if all you’re doing 
is indicating where the start of each phrase is. Furthermore, the nature 
of your physical motions and facial expressions may also incite more 
enthusiasm in the performer. (Or helpless bouts of the giggles, which are 
rarely a bad thing either!) By way of evidence, here’s Leonard Cohen talk-
ing about producer Bob Johnston: 13 “The best thing that Bob did was he 
went up to the glass when people were performing and he put his arms up 
and he bobbed his head and he smiled like he was hearing the music of 
the spheres. As a performer, when you see that, you feel like you’re doing 
something right.”  
 
 ENGINEER’S QUICKSTART GUIDE: STRING INSTRUMENTS 
 Acoustic instruments almost always sound better miked than DI’d, but if you’d still like to try recording a string 
soloist for this chapter’s assignment, then here are a few tips. The fi rst thing to realize is that players will 
almost always fi nger parts with their left hand as close to the tuning pegs as they can (“fi rst position,” in the 
lingo), simply because it’s technically easier. However, many of the richest string tones are derived by moving 
the hand up toward the bridge into higher-numbered positions. Sliding the hand between different positions 
while playing also has great expressive potential. If you’d like to hear what some of these options sound like, 
try asking the musician to play the musical line on a lower string (so they have to shift to a higher position) 
or not to cross strings (which forces them to shift between positions). Using higher positions also allows the 
instrumentalist to avoid playing their topmost open string, which is usually of a different construction and has a 
tone that will tend to zing out rather obtrusively—especially on any violin worth less than a pair of Jimmy Choos. 
 The importance of bowing should not be underestimated. Again, string players will often play everything with 
separate bow strokes unless you ask them to do otherwise, whereas “slurring” groups of notes into single 
bow-strokes often improves the phrasing. Asking a player to “use more bow” or “use more vibrato” is also a 
handy way of getting them to play with more expression—classical players in particular will often favor a more 
measured delivery instinctively. 
 On a practical level, bear in mind that cellos and double basses have a metal spike that rests on the fl oor 
during playing. This may skid on hard fl ooring surfaces (and may also damage them), so it’s worth being 
prepared with a small rug or an offcut of carpet to head these problems off. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
106
 3.4.2    Arrangement Tips 
 Once you’ve built up some trust, the musicians you’re working with may well 
appreciate fresh input on arrangement matters too, although again it’s better 
to give them ample opportunity to solve a problem for themselves ﬁ rst. Whole 
books have been written on the subject of arrangement, so I’m not going to try 
to cover all bases here—from an engineer’s perspective you can get a long way 
just by considering some of the following fundamental principles:
 
■
 Contrast.  If your production features different musical sections, then you 
can draw more attention to each section’s arrival by increasing the con-
trast between them. The enemy of contrast is any part that goes on doing 
the same thing across a section boundary, so it’s a good idea to avoid that. 
Also, if there are any moments that need to feel really powerful, those can 
be enhanced by preceding them with sections that have been deliberately 
softened in some way. Contrast isn’t just a concern “horizontally” through 
time; it’s also important “vertically” in terms of differentiating the separate 
musical elements in what you are recording. Wherever any two instruments 
play at the same time, it’ll be a lot easier to hear them independently (and 
indeed mix them) if their personalities are distinct—one sustained and the 
other staccato, perhaps. 
 
■
 Variation.  Although repetition is important for groove 
and memorability, the longer anything repeats in an 
arrangement, the less you consciously notice it, 
broadly speaking. So if you want to make your 
arrangement as arresting as you can, you need 
to keep refreshing the listener’s attention in 
the more repetitive parts by varying every third 
or fourth iteration slightly to catch their ear 
anew. If you just record a loop and then copy 
and paste that across your whole track, you’ll 
clutter up your mix with a part people won’t actu-
ally notice most of the time. A variation doesn’t have to 
be anything fancy, though—just altering or missing out a note 
will often be ﬁ ne.  
 
■
 Register. When two important parts happen to reside mostly within the 
same frequency range, it’s going to make life difﬁ cult at mixdown: You 
won’t be able to make both of them sound very good, because they’ll be 
ﬁ ghting for the same frequencies; and they’ll also tend to create an unnatu-
ral frequency build-up overall. Your choice of timbres can help avoid this, 
but you should also try to put musical parts in appropriate pitch registers. 
This is something that many instrumentalists fail to do naturally, because 
there is usually one region of their instrument that they’re most comfort-
able with, which is why you can bring some valuable objectivity to bear 
here. Just shifting the octave may be enough, and with guitars, a capo is a 
simple way of squeezing many more harmonic inversions from an amateur 
player’s limited chord vocabulary. However, effective use of register may 
 “Wherever any 
two instruments play 
at the same time, it’ll be a lot 
easier to hear them independently 
(and indeed mix them) if their 
personalities are distinct—one 
sustained and the other 
staccato, perhaps.” 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
107
also mean restricting the range of chordal instruments, for example drop-
ping a Rhodes part’s left-hand notes, or suggesting that a guitarist uses only 
the lower three strings. Again, a lot of musicians will tend to play any chord 
in its most thickly textured version by default, even though it’s frequently 
the thinner registrations that are more suitable for ﬁ tting in against other 
tracks. Finally, keep an ear open for which pitch registers (or even which 
individual notes) actually provide the best sonics for the instrument in 
question, as this may also inform the exact choice of part. 
 
 
■
 Efﬁ ciency.  It’s an immutable fact that the more parts you put into an 
arrangement, the less space each one of them has to sound good in the 
ﬁ nal mix. “People think, ‘If I throw a hundred instruments on here, it will 
sound huge,’” says Frank Liddell, 14 “but it’s often the other way around.” 
Neil Dorfsman 15 echoes this sentiment: “I generally try to get by with as 
few parts as are necessary to get the job done. Even if I hear another part, I’d 
also rather you hear it in your head when you listen, rather than recording 
it. That’s a hard trick to pull off; only the really masterful records achieve 
that sense of being literally understated.” One way to ﬁ ght clutter is to make 
each part more efﬁ cient from an arrangement perspective. So you might 
obviate the need for a new part by adding more rhythmic interest to a sim-
ple note-per-bar bass line, by introducing a few broken-chord ﬁ gurations 
to add harmonic texture to an oboe solo, or by embellishing a repetitive 
piano oscillation with snatches of countermelody. By the same token, if a 
new part includes harmonic support that’s already amply provided by an 
existing part, then why not strip out the harmonic element and focus more 
on the melodic or rhythmic elements of the new idea? 
 
■
 Gaps.  Almost any part will have some psychological “gaps” in it, even 
when it’s sounding all the time, in other words, brief moments where 
nothing new is happening. If you can aim the main action within any new 
part to coincide with the gaps in existing parts, and likewise create gaps in 
the new part to accommodate existing points of interest, then it’ll lighten 
the mix engineer’s load when it comes to making everything audible. 
(For a great recent example of this, check out the way the main chorus riff 
in Carly Rae Jepsen’s enormo-hit “Call Me Maybe” slots neatly around the 
lead vocal.) Similarly, it can be a mistake to try to ﬁ ll all the gaps in your 
arrangement with your earliest overdubs, because that leaves nowhere to 
go later.  
 ENGINEER’S QUICKSTART GUIDE: ELECTROMECHANICAL KEYBOARDS 
 You don’t meet many electromechanical keyboards in small studios nowadays, because so many musicians 
are content to use modern digital emulations instead—or at least not concerned enough about the sonic 
differences to put up with the cost, maintenance, and transport problems of owning the real thing! If you do 
encounter the genuine article, though, the main thing to say is that tuning is no job for the faint hearted, so if 
this is a concern, it’s worth sorting out well in advance, and probably with professional help. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
108
 
■
 Arches.  If you think of a piece of music as a series of resolutions with arches 
of tension between them, it’s usually important that no part undermines an 
arch by resolving too early. The most common way people do this is by hit-
ting the key’s home chord before it’s required, or by laboring the tonic note 
too often in their melodies. If you want to build up harmonic tension, the 
best way to do it is to withhold the chord/note of resolution. Similarly, if the 
rhythmic energy of your chorus relies on your adding sixteenth-note percus-
sion, then bringing this in two bars earlier may weaken that section’s arrival.  
 DEALING WITH CLASSICALLY TRAINED MUSICIANS 
 Compared with folk or popular musicians, players raised in the classical tradition tend to be less comfortable 
creating their own lines or improvising parts on the hoof. Although this needn’t at all stand in the way of getting 
good results, I’ve seen numerous sessions falter simply because they failed to acknowledge the fact that 
classical players usually give of their best when they’ve prepared, practiced, and (preferably) memorized their 
parts in advance. So if you’re not a classical musician yourself, let me offer a few tips for avoiding this pitfall. 
 When you’ve already got a part in mind, do your level best to provide it in sheet-music form. If you’re not 
confi dent with musical notation yourself, then ask the musicians to notate the part themselves, either before 
or during the session. (Don’t rely on them bringing the necessary pencils and manuscript paper to the studio, 
though, because they often don’t, in my experience! Loose-leaf paper is better than bound pads, because it 
makes it easier for people to avoid page turns mid-take.) Most players can transcribe a recorded guide part 
by ear, but screenshots of a MIDI part within a software DAW’s piano-roll editor will usually make that process 
signifi cantly quicker. If your computer sequencer can generate rough-and-ready notated parts from MIDI data 
semi-automatically, that can speed things up even more, but make sure you check that the part’s within your 
target instrument’s pitch-range; that you choose an appropriate clef for the stave; and that you’ve tidied up 
(or quantized) the source MIDI data’s timing and removed note overlaps as much as possible without actually 
changing the part’s fundamental rhythms, because this will make the printout clearer to read. While the player’s 
writing out their part, take the opportunity to discuss the phrasing, rhythmic stresses, and overall volume 
contour of the required performance with them, asking them to make whatever markings they need on the page 
to remind themselves of any decisions. It also improves communications during overdubbing if you write bar 
numbers in at the start of each line—so much so that I always insist on it myself. 
 If the onus of creating the part falls primarily on the performer, then leave ample time to develop and rehearse 
it before you actually need to record. Some classical performers get very self-conscious feeling their way around 
their own instrument looking for ideas, so this is one situation where looping a section of the backing mix and 
leaving the musician alone with it for a few minutes can really pay off. But while you’re fetching the coffee, do 
keep an ear open for moments that seem to work particularly well, and compliment those spots to steer the 
player in the right direction. Getting the musician to note down any particularly juicy bits is also worthwhile, 
because once you have a handful of these you can often build most of the fi nal part out of them like a jigsaw, 
after which it becomes much easier to think of smaller sections to fi ll remaining gaps. 
 Where inspiration’s proving thin on the ground, suggest that the player notates a few of the arrangement’s other 
main lines, which can help on two counts: Firstly there may be aspects of those that can be repackaged into 
the current part; and, secondly, it may highlight gaps in a competing line which will suggest where your new part 
should be most active. Writing down the constituent notes of underlying chords is useful for some players too, 
because it indicates the most obvious resting points for a line, harmonically speaking. You may even fi nd it’s 
instructive for the talent to trundle through a few highlights of their concert repertoire for you, so you can trawl 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
109
them for evocative-sounding ornaments or specialized performance techniques that are unlikely to spring up 
naturally during improvisation. 
 Whatever part you come up with, though, don’t let the performer record it cold straight after writing it. Leave 
them to get used to it on their own while you dust the valances for a few minutes, and only start going for takes 
when it sounds like they’re really inhabiting the part emotionally. One thing classical performers are very good at 
is practicing a part, so they’ll typically improve their performance much more quickly this way (or in a rehearsal 
situation) than they will just by racking up loads of takes. 
FIGURE 3.11    
 Even if you aren’t conﬁ dent creating traditional musical notation yourself, you can still help classical performers by providing 
them with a basic score printout, from which they can handwrite their own parts. 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
110
 
■
 Countermelody.  Snatches of melody in subsidiary parts can give your 
music a powerful forward momentum, so try sneaking them into overdubs 
wherever they don’t distract from some more important lead line or hook. 
Countermelody tends to be most noticeable (and therefore effective) at the 
high or low registral extremes, which is why the bass line in many com-
mercial hits frequently competes with the lead vocal for melodic supremacy 
(Brian Malouf: 16 “I try to have the bass and vocals be the counterpoint to 
each other”), and also why G-Funk’s trademark super-high synth leads were 
such an effective device. When trying to come up with melodic ideas, it’s 
excellent practice to examine the melodic contour of the production’s lead 
vocal or hook riff, to see whether you can reinforce those in the listener’s 
memory by presenting fragments of them in your countermelodies.  
 
■
 Dissonance.  Perfectly tuned parts that ﬁ t the prevailing harmony will tend to 
blend better into the arrangement, whereas off-tuned or dissonant notes will 
stick out more—something you can use to good effect from an arrangement 
perspective. For example, the snare drum in AC/DC’s “Back In Black” blends 
well with the mix despite its power, because it’s tuned to the song’s key note, 
whereas the wayward tuning of the “mob” vocal hook in Usher’s “OMG” 
keeps that clearly audible even when it’s at a very low level in the balance.  
 3.5    NEXT STOP: MICS! 
 Over the last three chapters you should have accumulated enough information 
to set up and drive an overdubbing session from start to ﬁ nish, and we’ve also 
explored many of the less tangible issues involved in sharing a studio with liv-
ing, breathing musicians. If you take the time to hone these skills through this 
chapter’s assignments, you should be well prepared for Part 2’s next big chal-
lenge: dealing with microphones. 
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 A DI box or dedicated high-impedance instrument input should be used for pickup sig-
nals. Specialized higher-impedance DI boxes are advisable for piezo-electric pickups. 
If you decide to use a speaker-level DI box, be careful not to damage the ampliﬁ er by 
running it without a load. An active DI box will usually work better for passive pickup 
electronics, while passive DI boxes are more suitable for higher-level active-pickup and 
line-level signals. 
 
■
 Pickup signals are very prone to interference, so listen for noise levels when positioning 
the player and try to keep cables as short as you can, avoiding mains transformers and 
digital cabling. 
 
■
 A separate foldback mix makes your engineering job easier, not least because it allows 
you to put the musician in a separate room. If the performer and engineer can’t hear each 
other directly, set up some kind of communications system, preferably involving separate 
hardware-switched talkback and listen mics. 
 
■
 Where a DI’d instrument makes an acoustic sound, you must decide whether it helps 
or hinders the musician’s performance. If it helps, then the player can balance them-
selves against the foldback mix acoustically, using loudspeakers or open-back/one-sided 
headphones in conjunction with No Input monitoring; if it hinders, then closed-back 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
111
headphones are safest, using Input/Auto monitoring. Always check that monitoring 
arrangements are operational immediately before the session, and that talkback/listen 
mic levels are already set up sensibly. 
 
■
 Even if you can’t use a recording venue with a separate live room, try faking a two-room 
scheme as far as you can with closed-back headphones, improvised bafﬂ ing, and power-
soaks. If that doesn’t work well enough and you don’t have the facility to delay your own 
monitor mix, then you’ll have to allocate extra session time for test recordings. 
 
■
 While comping has many advantages in the small studio, it also has hazards, which can 
be mitigated by limiting the target track count and by using a comp sheet. If your recorder 
won’t support enough tracks for the comping approach, create a slave reel/project.  
 
■
 When layering and double-tracking, the main aesthetic choices are how closely you 
match the performances, how many layers you record, and how you balance the layers 
in the mix. Whether the performer should monitor previously recorded layers while over-
dubbing new ones will depend on the nature of the part.  
 
■
 Make tuning judgments at reasonable volume levels. For guitars and basses, check the instru-
ment’s intonation as well as its open-string tuning before recording. A recorder’s varispeed 
function can work around small untreatable tuning offsets with negligible side-effects.  
 
■
 As an engineer, it’s safest to wait until the musicians have exhausted their own ideas 
before proffering any creative direction of your own, and then to favor performance over 
arrangement suggestions at ﬁ rst. Don’t judge an artist’s suggestions in the abstract with-
out trying them out, so that you encourage them to extend you the same courtesy.  
 
■
 When reﬁ ning performances: Be positive and informative, and deal in questions; favor 
abstract imagery and seek inspiration in the lyrics; suggest performing with eyes closed 
and playing through mistakes; try to use posture and movement in your favor; and con-
sider conducting in some way. 
 
■
 Important factors for any arrangement include contrast, variation, register, efﬁ ciency, 
gaps, arches, countermelody, and dissonance. 
 
■
 With guitars and bass guitars, concentrate ﬁ rst on choosing the most suitable instrument, 
pick, and pickup, as well as tweaking on-body tone controls. Keep an ear open for fret 
buzz/rattle that might indicate a poorly conﬁ gured action. 
 
■
 For string instruments, try to get good use out of left-hand ﬁ ngerboard positions and 
bowing possibilities, and plan in advance for cello and double-bass spikes.  
 
■
 Classically trained musicians usually perform better when parts are notated and practiced 
in advance. Most musicians can notate their own parts if required, but make sure they 
include phrasing/expression markings and bar numbers. When developing new parts, 
try notating existing parts or playing favorite concert repertoire for inspiration, and then 
allow enough time for practice before doing takes.  
 Assignment 1: One-Room Dry-Run 
 In this assignment you’ll get some experience of comping and layering, as well as 
working around the compromises of one-room overdubbing using delayed monitoring 
and test recordings if necessary.
 
■
 Select an existing project you can practice overdubbing on, and fi nd a pickup-
equipped instrument you can use for the recording—again, don’t worry if you’re no 
great performer, because the simplest of parts will do for now. 
 
■
 In addition to the session preparations discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, work out 
how best to get a DI signal into your recording system (Section 3.1) and what 

PART 1 One Source, No Mics
112
one-room monitoring scheme you’re going to use (Section 3.2). If you’d like to 
try DSP-driven low-latency monitoring, now’s the time to get that up and running, 
working out how this affects your choice of monitoring modes and listening care-
fully for the comb-fi ltering side-effects that might indicate double monitoring. For 
this assignment, you should try building at least one master take via comping, so 
make sure you can access enough spare tracks for this (comp from just three raw 
takes for now), migrating to a slave reel/project if necessary. 
 
■
 Once you’ve dealt with connection, level-setting, and monitoring technicalities, 
develop a short lead-solo/countermelody part (with reference to Section 3.4.2) 
and a sound to go with it (revising the suggestions in Section 2.2.4), using 
delayed monitoring and/or test recordings to help you. Record three takes of raw 
material for comping purposes, using a comp sheet to focus both on what’s solidly 
usable and on what’s magical. When you’re done, stitch together the master take. 
If you discover any weak moments remaining, mark them on the comp sheet, and 
go back and rerecord those sections once you’ve comped as far as you can. 
 
■
 Build a new rhythm part using a different sound, but this time returning to 
Chapter 2’s punch-in method of creating a master take. Once the fi rst track is 
done, record two additional layers of the same part, but only monitoring the layer 
you’re recording. Once all three layers are done, experiment with balancing them 
together for different effects, and ask yourself whether the rhythmic matching is 
close enough—if not, retake the more wayward track sections. Finally, record a 
double-track for your comped solo line too, but this time include the comped line 
in your monitor mix while recording to get a sense of how that affects your ability 
to perform. 
 Assignment 1 should have given you an appreciation of the mechanics of the multi-take 
recording process from both engineer’s and performer’s perspectives, which means we can 
once again get a separate performer involved, and also experiment with a two-room setup.
 
■
 Select an existing project you can practice overdubbing on, and fi nd a player with a 
pickup-equipped instrument who can help you. Arrange a session with them, with the 
stated aim of generating one or more original parts, including at least one lead solo. 
Discuss the musician’s session requirements, provide them with any guide mixes or 
written material they need in advance, and fi nd out as much about the nature of the 
instrument and pickup system as you can (so you can prepare your recording chain). 
Also ask whether the instrument makes any signifi cant acoustic sound, and whether 
your player would prefer to hear that or the recorded signal during the performance.  
 
■
 However minimal your studio space, do your best to arrange some kind of two-
room setup for the benefi t of this assignment—if that means putting you or the 
performer in a corridor, a bathroom, or a closet, then so be it! Work out how to 
create a separate foldback mix for your performer, and set up a communications 
system with talkback/listen mics, dedicated hardware switching, and some means 
of listening to the foldback mix in your control room. If you’re going to use No 
Input monitoring, then make sure you can still hear the input signal in the control-
room monitor mix, and that you know how to feed playback from the recorder track 
through to the foldback mix when necessary. Immediately before the session, 
 Assignment 2: Two-Room Overdubbing 

Instruments with Pickups CHAPTER 3
113
check that all monitoring hardware is working, that the levels of the backing track 
and the communications mics are sensible in both the control-room monitor mix 
and the foldback mix. 
 
■
 At the start of the session, explain to the performer that you’re going to be working 
in two rooms, and check that the communications system works for both of you 
at the earliest opportunity. As in Chapter 2, be ready to hit Record the moment 
the performer starts playing along with the track. If you’re not yet happy with the 
sound by that point, take any opportunity to refi ne sonics while the basic parts are 
still under construction. 
 
■
 When it comes to recording the solo line, explain to the performer that you’ll be 
creating it using comping techniques, and that you’d like to record three raw tracks 
for the purpose. As such, they have more freedom to experiment without worry-
ing about making mistakes. Use a comp sheet to keep notes on your progress, 
noting down any of the performer’s preferences as well as your own views. If the 
performer would like to get involved with the comping process itself, by all means 
do the comp during the session, but otherwise leave the comping process until 
afterwards so that it doesn’t disturb the player’s creative fl ow. 
 
■
 For other parts, feel free to use the single-track punch-in procedure for recording a 
master take, but make a point of layering at least one of the parts, if only for the 
purpose of gaining more experience of what this technique can offer.  
 
■
 Use the ideas in Section 3.4 where possible to help the musician achieve the best 
part and performance, but also follow the musician’s lead if they suggest alter-
native approaches, and don’t be tempted to discount an idea before you’ve both 
heard what it sounds like. 
 
■
 As in Chapter 2, make notes after the session about anything you may want to 
refer back to in future, as well as contemplating any errors or misjudgments you 
made. After a day or two, listen back to all your overdubs from the session, and 
experiment with different balances of them against the backing parts to re-evalu-
ate the quality of the sonics, performances, and arrangement decisions. 
 
■
 Before progressing to Part 2, try to carry out another couple of sessions like this, 
preferably with different instruments and performers.  
  WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 some concrete examples of workable communications setups in specifi c software and 
hardware studio environments, as well as links to handy communications gadgets;  
 
■
 audio examples demonstrating different DI’ing approaches, the tonality of different 
string-instrument fi ngering positions, and the sound of guitar fret buzz; 
 
■
 further reading on audio editing techniques, slave reels, low-latency monitoring, and 
the preparation/maintenance of the main instruments mentioned in this chapter;  
 
■
 links to recommended resources about performance-direction and arrangement 
techniques. 
 http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch3.htm 

This page intentionally left blank

 One Source, One Mic 
 PART 2 
 PART 2 
 By working your way through Part 1, you should have acquired a bedrock of 
essential technical skills:
 
■
 Connecting line-level sources and instrument pickups to your recording sys-
tem’s inputs. 
 
■
 Line-checking and troubleshooting your studio rig for recording purposes.  
 
■
 Managing gain controls appropriately throughout the recording and mon-
itoring chain, and scotching all the most common signal-degradation 
problems. 
 
■
 Setting up suitable monitoring and communications equipment, and get-
ting the best out of a DAW’s software monitoring. 
 
■
 Using punch-ins, comping, and layering to prepare for mixdown.  
 
■
 Documenting all aspects of the session. 
 Furthermore, you’ll have been developing those intangible characteristics of 
the recording engineer that are just as important to the success of a session: 
being in the right place at the right time, and prepared for anything; getting the 
best out of the various personalities you meet in studios; supporting progress 
invisibly when the going’s good, but tactfully lending a hand where creative 
obstacles threaten the music. 
 So from now on I’m going to assume you’ve got that all under your belt, 
because it’s on that foundation that I want to begin building an understanding 
of microphone technique. 

This page intentionally left blank

117
 Recording vocals is one of the commonest requirements in any studio, but 
that’s not the only reason to start our discussion of microphone technique 
here, because vocal production is where the quality gap between amateur and 
big-budget projects tends to be starkest. Professionals know that the singing 
usually drives record sales more powerfully than all the other parts combined, 
so it’s commonplace for a large chunk of production time (or even the major-
ity) to be spent entirely on vocals. The more experience you gain recording 
singers, the classier your productions will sound. So that’s where we’re going 
to start. 
 Tutorials with titles like  Studio Vocals On A Budget!  are ten-a-penny these 
days, most of them based on a very similar formula—what I like to call the 
“vanilla” vocal-recording setup. There are excellent reasons why this setup is so 
often considered a safe bet, and indeed why the majority of commercial vocal 
tracks are recorded this way, but the unfortunate fact is that a lot of people 
really don’t seem to get very good results with it at all! So I’d like to dedicate 
this chapter to explaining how the vanilla setup works, why it’s so popular, and 
how to get the best out of it. 
 4.1  THE MICROPHONE 
 4.1.1  Condenser Design 
 There are many different ways of building a microphone, but the “condenser” 
or “capacitor” design is by far the most common choice for vocals, partly 
because it adds only a comparatively low level of noise to the output signal. 
The human voice has a greater “dynamic range” (the level difference between 
its loudest and softest sounds) than almost any other source you’re likely to 
meet in the studio, so a low-noise mic is vital if you want to capture a singer’s 
quietest utterances cleanly. 
 The other reason a condenser is usually preferred is because of the nature of 
its “diaphragm,” the bit in the mic’s business end that vibrates in sympathy 
 Basic Vocal Recording 
 CHAPTER 4 
 CHAPTER 4 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
118
with the air to transduce an electrical signal. The comparative thinness of this 
diaphragm means it can move fast enough to provide decent high-frequency 
response in general, and most large condenser-mic diaphragms also exhibit 
an inherent 8–12 kHz resonance, which contributes further upper-spectrum 
emphasis—the combined result being a glossier and more upfront vocal sound 
at mixdown. 
 The size of the diaphragm is a critical design parameter in any mic, and 
amongst condenser designs a relatively large diaphragm (around an 
inch across) is the overwhelming favorite for vocals. Not only do larger 
diaphragms typically provide lower noise, but they also have greater iner-
tia, so that they don’t respond quite as fast to transients or high-frequency 
extremes, lending the recording a slightly softer, smoother sound character. 
In addition, large-diaphragm condensers are almost always designed such 
that “on-axis” sound sources (i.e., those directly in the mic’s ﬁ ring line) are 
given a hefty high-frequency boost, a built-in brightness enhancement that’s 
usually welcomed as another means of getting the vocal to cut through the 
mix. 
 4.1.2    Cardioid Polar Pattern 
 An important concern when recording vocals in the studio is the amount of 
room reverberation picked up by the microphone. Most engineers do their best 
to minimize it, because:
 
■
 reverb tends to pull a vocal backwards into the mix, when the goal is often 
to have the singer out front; 
 
■
 a recognizable “medium cupboard” reverb character will make the produc-
tion sound cheap, as well as contradicting the spatial illusion from any arti-
ﬁ cially added delay/reverb effects; 
 
■
 otherwise dynamics processing applied to the vocal will sound less natural 
because it’ll effectively vary the apparent level of the reverb from moment 
to moment; 
 
■
 pitch-correction software is more likely to misinterpret a recording with 
reverb. 
 If your singer is on-axis to the microphone, then you can reduce the level of 
the primarily off-axis room reﬂ ections by using a “directional” microphone 
whose sensitivity tails away as you move off-axis, the most common being the 
“cardioid” type which reaches a “null” of maximum rejection at the mic’s rear. 
 Figure 4.2  plots this directional sensitivity on a circular graph called a “polar 
diagram,” and you can clearly see the characteristic inverted heart shape that 
gives the cardioid pattern its name. 
 4.1.3    Valves and Transformers 
 I’ve researched the mic preferences of hundreds of top-name engineers, and 
my conclusion is that most of them favor vocal mics which feature both a 
 FIGURE 4.1    
 In this picture of AKG’s 
C414B XLS large-
diaphragm condenser 
mic, you can actually see 
the circular diaphragm 
through the mic’s 
protective metal grille. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
119
valve (or “tube”) stage and an output transformer—both of which are pres-
ent in classic vocal mics such as AKG’s C12, Neumann’s M49, U47, and U67, 
Telefunken’s ELA M251, and Sony’s C800G. The subtle tonal colorations and 
distortions incurred by such circuit components often thicken vocal record-
ings in a ﬂ attering way, which is why the appeal of valves and transformers has 
endured despite technological advances that might arguably have rendered 
them obsolete. Where you’ve got several large-diaphragm condensers to choose 
from, this may help you narrow things down further. 
 4.1.4  Price and Reputation 
 In recent years, outsourced manufacturing has ﬂ ooded the microphone mar-
ket with ridiculously inexpensive mics, and there’s no denying that many great 
recordings have been made with mass-produced products like these. However, 
I regularly do shootouts between mics ranging in price from under $80 (£50) 
to well over $3000 (£2000), and I still maintain that you’re much more likely 
to get a great recording with a more expensive mic. Costlier mics will typically 
 FIGURE 4.2    
 This polar diagram shows the directional pickup characteristics of an idealized cardioid microphone. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
120
stay truer to the source, so rarely give a bad result, 
whereas I ﬁ nd that a cheap mic’s tonal colorations 
usually make it something of a one-trick pony for 
vocals: Once in a while the mic will beautifully 
complement a speciﬁ c singer, but in the major-
ity of cases it won’t, leaving you with a record-
ing that’s somewhere between mediocre and 
appalling. It’s hardly surprising, therefore, that 
the pot-luck ﬂ attery of a bargain-basement 
mic can occasionally outshine the more honest 
presentation of a pricier model for a certain indi-
vidual’s voice, and that shouldn’t mislead you into 
thinking that more expensive mics are a waste of cash. 
Once you’ve done dozens of shootouts, a more revealing 
trend surfaces: The expensive mics always tend to make the shortlist, whereas 
the cheaper mics frequently crash and burn. 
 But this isn’t the only reason why I’d instinctively always reach for more expen-
sive vocal mics. It’s also because cheaper mics tend to succumb to technical 
failures more quickly, in my experience—and usually right when you’re in 
the middle of a take! Whether this is because of cost-cutting on components, 
manufacturing tolerances, and/or quality control I couldn’t say, but I’ve had 
enough budget mics die on me mid-session that I’ve learnt to be a bit circum-
spect about using them for important vocal recordings. 
 And there’s one other thing that you should weigh up in your mind when 
it comes to mic selection. There are some microphone companies who 
have decades of experience in their R&D departments, a catalog full of well-
respected high-end studio products, and a hard-earned reputation to defend. 
And there are some companies who don’t. Given that both these types of com-
pany are now offering ranges of budget-friendly mics aimed at the project-stu-
dio market, whose do you think I’d recommend trying ﬁ rst? Hmm… 
 4.1.5    “Best Guess” Versus “Ideal” 
 Now don’t misunderstand my recommendations in this section. I’m deﬁ nitely 
 not  suggesting that anyone can pick the ideal mic for a given singer without 
using their ears. That’d be idiocy, because mic choices for vocals are so heavily 
dependent on the personality of the voice you’re recording. However, on real 
vocal sessions, it’s imperative that you’re prepared to catch lightning in a bottle 
the moment the artist steps up to the mic, which means taking an educated 
guess about which mic to put up ﬁ rst. “The very ﬁ rst time they sing might be 
the best take,” warns Stephen Lipson. 1 “That’s why having a go-to vocal chain 
is absolutely essential.” Clearly, if you have more than one microphone avail-
able, and a cooperative performer, the best way to narrow down the contenders 
is to compare them—something we’ll return to properly in Section 4.6.1.  
 “The pot-
luck fl attery of a 
bargain-basement mic can 
occasionally outshine the more 
honest presentation of a pricier 
model for a certain individual’s voice, 
but that shouldn’t mislead you into 
thinking that more expensive 
mics are a waste of 
cash.” 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
121
 CONNECTING, POWERING, AND CARING FOR CONDENSER MICS 
 It’s a doddle to connect up most condenser microphones: Just cable between their male XLR output 
connectors and the female XLR connectors of your recording system’s microphone inputs. All condenser mics 
are active devices, so they’ll normally need phantom power from the mic input to work—if phantom power 
is switchable, it’s best to switch it off before plugging or unplugging the cables, although hot-plugging XLRs 
shouldn’t usually cause any damage in practice. Some microphones are able to operate on battery power, but 
I don’t recommend using those most of the time, because their headroom and noise performance are often 
compromised as a result. 
 At the lower end of the market a recent trend is microphones that connect directly to a computer via 
USB, drawing their power from there. As much as it’s the job of any engineer to get the best results with 
whatever equipment’s available for a session, I wouldn’t seek out such mics personally. Some of my 
reservations about them are practical: It’s not as easy to put them 30 m away from the recording system; 
they force you to use software monitoring; and you can’t use them with non-computer systems. However, 
they’re also not a very future-proof investment. The moment you decide to record anything more than 
just the USB mic, you lay yourself open to software driver confl icts with other audio-interfacing hardware. 
In addition, you may be unable to use the mic with successors to the USB standard once it’s inevitably 
superseded. 
 Valve mics almost always require their own separate power supply, because phantom power isn’t capable 
of providing high enough voltages. A special multi-pin cable will usually connect the microphone to its power 
supply, and then you cable an XLR output on the power supply to a microphone input on your recording system. 
For best results, the valve should be properly warmed up before use—at least twenty minutes is ideal here, 
but you can usually get away with recording after fi ve minutes at a pinch. You won’t hurt a valve mic by hitting 
Record before it’s warmed up, but the tone just won’t have settled down properly, so you may subsequently fi nd 
it tricky to comp between early takes and later ones. 
 Finally, because a condenser mic’s diaphragm is so delicate, it can easily be damaged if the mic is dropped or 
hit. The diaphragm’s range of movement is utterly minuscule too, so you don’t want to let dust collect on it and 
degrade its performance: Keep the mic in a sealed protective case when not in use, and put something like a 
plastic freezer bag over it if you have to leave it set up overnight. Any moisture on the diaphragm will cause it 
to malfunction electrically (although usually not permanently), so be careful with vocalists who spit a lot while 
enunciating, and avoid condensation problems by allowing any newly arrived mics time to acclimatize to your 
studio temperature before getting them out of their cases. 
 4.2   MOUNTING AND CABLING 
 Although singers often use handheld mics on stage, in the studio it’s usually 
better to mount the mic on a stand so that you have more control over the 
positioning and can minimize handling noises. If you have a choice of similar-
sized mic stands available (or you’re buying your own) then the most reliable 
one will usually be the one that’s heaviest and which uses the least plastic in 
its construction. In addition, check over the main joints (particularly between 
the main shaft and the boom arm, and between the upper and lower segments 
of a telescopic shaft) to conﬁ rm that they’re in good nick. Now, I’m sure you’re 
not one of those people who abuse stands by repositioning them without 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
122
loosening the clamps (heh-hem!), but a lot 
of people do, which means every collection 
of small- studio mic stands always seems 
to have one or two which droop involun-
tarily no matter how hard you tighten them. 
Sometimes you can revive an ailing stand by 
cannibalizing bits of its fallen comrades, but 
cheaper hardware is much less likely to be 
ﬁ eld-serviceable in this way. This is a good 
reason to spend a little extra money on the 
pricier modular stands if you’re investing in 
hardware yourself, especially if the manu-
facturer has a full catalog of spare parts with 
which you can resurrect casualties, rather 
than having to buy whole new stands. 
 4.2.1    Stability 
 The quickest way to spot a recording newbie is by how they handle mic 
stands. The most common mistake is to compromise the stand’s stability by 
allowing the main stand shaft to protrude below the base, so some of the feet 
don’t rest properly on the ﬂ oor; by placing the stand’s base too far from the 
source, so you overextend the boom arm; or by failing to place one of the 
stand’s feet directly under the boom where possible. Save yourself the bills for 
mic repair and dental work—don’t let the stand topple onto the singer (or any-
where else for that matter)! If your mic is particularly heavy, then ﬁ nd some-
thing to counterweight the other end of the boom arm (those Velcro-strapped 
wrist/ankle weights used in ﬁ tness training, for example) or load down the 
stand’s base with some extra mass (ﬁ ve-liter plastic petrol cans ﬁ lled with sand 
are a cheap option there). 
 4.2.2    Shockmounts and Mic Clips 
 One problem with directional condenser mics is that they don’t just respond 
to vibrations in the air; they’re also liable to pick up any physical vibration that 
reaches their casing, whether that’s caused by something coming into direct 
contact, or it’s transmitted via the microphone stand or cable. This is why 
most large-diaphragm microphones are supplied with a special shockmount 
which suspends them ﬂ exibly, helping to isolate them from vibrations com-
ing through the stand—for example trafﬁ c rumble. If your mic doesn’t have its 
own suspension shockmount, then ﬁ nd out whether the manufacturer sells 
one separately or check out general-purpose replacements such as Rycote’s 
InVision series. To be honest, though, with vocal recordings it’s rarely a disas-
ter if the most suitable microphone has no shockmount, because generic low-
frequency rumble can easily be removed with high-pass ﬁ ltering at mixdown, 
and most other problems can be avoided by stopping the singer touching the 
mic stand or tapping their foot too vigorously. 
 FIGURE 4.3    
 Out yourself as a noob in 
one easy step…  

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
123
 3/8-INCH VERSUS 5/8-INCH THREADS 
 The threaded end of a microphone stand’s 
boom arm, which screws into the mic-
mounting clip, will normally have either a 
3/8-inch (9.5 mm) or a 5/8-inch (15 mm) 
gauge, the former being more common 
in Europe and the latter more common in 
the U.S.A. If your mic clip and boom-arm 
thread turn out to be incompatible, you 
can get cheap little adaptor widgets such 
as those shown in  Figure 4.4 to convert 
between thread gauges. Where fi tting such 
an adaptor into a 5/8-inch mic clip, make 
sure the slotted edge is facing outwards 
so that you can easily remove it again, 
if necessary, with a coin, a broad-bladed 
screwdriver, or (my personal favorite) a 
blunt old cutlery knife.  
 FIGURE 4.4    
 Adaptors for converting between 3/8-inch 
and 5/8-inch mic-stand screw threads. 
 Whether you have a proper suspension shockmount or not, another  classic 
beginner’s mistake is to spin the mic clip/shockmount to screw it onto the 
stand. Not only does this take ages, but if the mic is already in the clip, then 
you’re taking a big risk of dropping the mic while you’re twirling it around. 
A  much better method is to hold the clip/shockmount (already containing 
the mic, if you like) in one hand, and then, with the other hand, loosen the 
boom-arm clamp, twiddle the boom arm between your ﬁ ngers to screw it into 
place, and retighten the boom-arm clamp. 
 One thing that many home-studio folk don’t seem to understand is the pur-
pose of the little ﬂ at disc that screws onto the end of the microphone boom 
arm right underneath your microphone clip. This is called a “locking ring” or 
“jam nut,” and you can screw it upwards underneath the mic clip to hold it in 
place more securely. There’s often another one on the stand’s main telescopic 
shaft for locking the boom arm in place. These serve a very useful purpose in 
the cut and thrust of onstage miking, but most of the time I think they’re over-
kill in small-studio situations unless you’re particularly concerned about a mic 
clip or boom arm twisting under the weight of a heavy microphone. Don’t 
remove the locking rings, though, because you never know when they’ll even-
tually come in handy! 
 4.2.3  Cable Dressing 
 We’ve already talked about laying cables sensibly in the studio, but with micro-
phones you also need to consider how you “dress” the cable round the stand. 
If a cable hangs out of the bottom of a mic unsupported, or spans between 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
124
the mic and the stand with any tension, physical 
vibrations from the ﬂ oor or stand can defeat your 
suspension shockmount by traveling up the mic 
cable instead. To avoid this, I suggest looping the 
cable around the stand’s boom arm so that there’s 
about 12 inches of slack hanging beneath the mic. 
Alternatively, a plastic cable clip (provided with 
some mic stands) or some gaffer tape can achieve 
a similar end. In the latter case, just make sure to 
leave enough cable slack to allow repositioning of 
the mic, and it makes sense to fold the end of each 
gaffer strip back on itself about a half an inch so 
that it’s easier to remove at the end of the session. 
 Some people also employ plastic clips or tape to 
train the cable around the rest of the stand, so that 
if someone trips over the cable it pulls primarily on 
the lower section of the stand, not the boom arm, 
reducing the likelihood of the whole shebang keel-
ing over. However, I think life’s too short for that 
myself, so I usually just loop the cable a couple 
of times around the stand on its way to the ﬂ oor, 
which fulﬁ lls roughly the same function. (Obviously you don’t want to go mad 
with that either, otherwise disentangling the stand at home time becomes purga-
tory.) If you’re left with any spare cable between the mic stand and your record-
ing system, then it’s good practice to tidy that together somewhere close to the 
mic stand, since the stand’s the more likely to need moving during the session. 
 4.3    MIC POSITIONING 
 Almost all large-diaphragm mics are “side-ﬁ re” or “side-address” (as opposed 
to “end-ﬁ re/address”) designs, which means you’re meant to sing into them 
from the side. In the case of a cardioid mic, it’s most sensitive side (the “live 
side”) will usually be indicated on the casing by the manufacturer’s logo and/
or the mic’s model name. If it’s not clear, though, do take a couple of moments 
to plug the mic in and check it for yourself—singing into the wrong side of a 
cardioid mic sounds pretty horrid, but there always seems to be one student in 
every recording class who does it! 
 In order to place a vocal mic effectively, there are lots of things you need to 
know about how a singer projects sounds, and about how the microphone 
picks them up. 
 4.3.1    Miking Angle 
 No sound source ever radiates its spectrum evenly in all directions, and this 
is why the angle from which you mike a singer can make a big difference to 
 FIGURE 4.5    
 Three different locking-ring designs (above) and one  in situ 
on the end of a mic stand’s boom arm (below). 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
125
the recorded tone. The ﬁ rst thing to understand is that high frequencies by 
their very nature are more directional and easily obstructed/absorbed, whereas 
low frequencies are better at passing through or around physical objects. The 
human voice’s high frequencies project in a broad down-
wards “beam,” roughly along the line of the nose, which 
means that you get a brighter tone below nose level 
than you do above. Above nose level the high end 
will be more muted, but there’ll also be less 
sonic contribution from the throat and chest, 
so the midrange tone usually remains a little 
more consistent at different distances from the 
head when miking slightly from above. 
 It’s worth mentioning that some performers con-
tort their faces asymmetrically while singing, in 
which case miking from one side will have a signiﬁ -
cant bearing on the high-frequency balance. Mike Stavrou 2 
makes a point of listening for this while standing in front of the 
singer: “As they sing a long ‘ah,’ I sway from side to side listening to the tone 
of their voice. Lowering your head helps, so you can hear the treble bounce 
off their palate. Each side is always  different… You can’t equalize the left side 
 FIGURE 4.6    
 The microphone stand on the left displays many of the common mistakes made by novice engineers: The 
boom arm is overextended, and has been set up horizontally where it’s most prone to drooping; none of 
the stand’s feet is directly beneath the boom arm, which destabilizes the whole stand; the cable is pulled 
tight at the mic end, rendering the suspension shockmount less effective; and there’s no spare cable on 
the ﬂ oor by the stand in case it needs to be repositioned. The setup shown in the right-hand picture is 
more advisable, as it avoids these problems. 
 “The human voice’s 
high frequencies project 
in a broad downwards “beam,” 
roughly along the line of the nose, 
which means that you get a brighter 
tone below nose level than you do 
above. Certain consonants 
are also directional.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
126
to sound like the right, because the blend of harmonics leaving their mouth is 
actually different.” 
 Certain consonants are also directional. For example, “s” sounds (often 
called “sibilants”) typically project horizontally from the mouth, so any 
microphone position on that plane will normally overemphasize them. 
Plosive sounds (things like “p” and “b”) are created by releasing a sudden 
puff of air from behind the lips, which normally shoots directly forwards, 
therefore a mic directly on-axis to the mouth will be hit by this, producing 
a characteristic blast of low frequencies called “popping.” Mark Neill 3 and 
Elliot Scheiner 4 both mention miking vocalists from above lip level for this 
reason: “[It’s] a great way to get the sibilance and ‘p’ pops under control,” 
remarks Neill.   
 REDUCING PLOSIVES AND SIBILANCE WITHOUT MOVING THE MIC 
 Occasionally you may fi nd yourself in a recording situation where it’s tricky to move the vocal microphone out 
of the line of fi re of plosives (or indeed spit), in which case a “pop shield/fi lter/screen” can bail you out. This 
normally takes the form of two layers of fi ne nylon mesh supported by a lightweight hoop, and is held in front 
of the microphone via a fl exible gooseneck clamped to the mic stand. You can get purpose-built pop shields 
for under $30 (£20), but for an even cheaper alternative try one of those circular wire-mesh splatter guards for 
frying pans, or bend a wire coat hanger into a frame and cover it with a thin nylon stocking. Whatever design you 
go for, though, do leave at least four inches’ distance between the pop shield and the mic, otherwise it won’t 
 FIGURE 4.7   
 Although professional-looking commercial pop shields (lower 
picture) are reasonably affordable, an even cheaper (but still 
effective) option is to bend an old wire coathanger into a hoop and 
then cover it with thin nylon stocking material (upper picture). 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
127
 4.3.2  Miking Distance 
 How far away from the singer’s mouth should the microphone be? While 
there’s a broad consensus amongst professionals that it should probably be 
closer than 18 inches, there’s clearly no “industry standard”: for instance, 
Al Schmitt 7 has mentioned 9–12 inches, Steve Churchyard 8 and Elliott 
Scheiner 9 6–8 inches, and Eddie Kramer 10 4 inches. The reason for this, in my 
view, is that changing the miking distance has a powerful inﬂ uence on the 
recorded tone. 
 When you get within about 3 feet of any directional mic, it starts noticeably 
boosting the output signal’s low frequencies—a phenomenon called the “prox-
imity effect.” With a cardioid mic, the difference between 12-inch and 4-inch 
positions may be as much as 12 dB at 50 Hz, but even up around 300 Hz (well 
into the vocal range) you’ll get a 4–5 dB rise. Think about that for a moment: 
That’s a huge tonal change for only moving the mic 8 inches. This aspect of 
mic positioning is therefore an important tonal control. “If [the singer thinks] 
it sounds too boomy, then I’ll have them move back,” explains Steve Albini, 11
“and if it sounds too thin then I’ll have them move forward.” 
work properly. Bear in mind, though, that a number of 
high-profi le engineers, amongst them Bruce Botnick, 
question the acoustic transparency of pop shields, so 
you shouldn’t just set one up on refl ex unless it’s really 
necessary. “I still don’t like using them,” comments 
Botnick. 5 “I can hear them.” 
 Some people suggest shielding against plosives and/
or sibilance by taping a pencil to the body of the mic 
so that it covers the center of the diaphragm.The 
effectiveness of the “pencil trick” is a moot point 
amongst pundits, but whether or not it works for you, it 
will also affect the entire vocal sound to some extent, 
and its effi cacy will vary if the singer moves around, so I 
don’t favor it myself. 
 A fi nal tip for reducing the severity of plosives comes 
from Geoff Emerick: 6 Get the singer to replace every 
“p” with a “b.” You’d be forgiven for thinking that this 
would make a nonsense of the lyrics, but in practice 
the semantic context almost always insures that 
listeners still perceive the correct consonant, and the 
wind blast on the microphone diaphragm is usefully 
reduced. (Of course, argument still rages over whether 
Pink Floyd used this technique for “Another Brick In 
The Wall”…) 
 FIGURE 4.8    
 The pencil trick. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
128
 This isn’t the only tonal effect, though, because there’s also a fair bit of mid-
range variation with distance because of the way different bits of the singer’s 
anatomy interact, especially (as mentioned in Section 4.3.1) when you’re 
miking from below the nose line. Another issue is that a vocal’s non-resonant 
attributes (i.e., consonants and other lip noises) are produced by compara-
tively small bits of physiological apparatus, whereas the more resonant sounds 
are created by much larger areas of the body. What this means in practice is 
that the former reduce in level more quickly than the latter as you increase the 
miking distance. However, the scale of both these changes is dwarfed by that of 
the proximity effect, which is another argument for having a variable high-pass 
ﬁ lter in your recording chain, because raising the cutoff frequency can rein in 
any excess bass boost for whichever miking distance best suits the rest of the 
vocal spectrum. (In the absence of a variable ﬁ lter, a ﬁ xed-frequency ﬁ lter on 
the microphone or preamp can serve similar ends, but it’s a relatively blunt 
tool by comparison.) 
 4.3.3    Mic Orientation 
 Although many small-studio engineers assume that a microphone should 
always be used on-axis, alternative orientations of the mic can provide further 
timbral control. For any real-world directional microphone, moving the sound 
source off-axis doesn’t just change the mic’s output level, it also affects the recorded 
frequency response. Large-diaphragm cardioid designs are often the worst offend-
ers in this respect, especially budget models. Broadly speaking, the general trends 
will be a reduction in high-frequency energy and a weakening of the proxim-
ity effect’s bass boost as you move off axis (whether to the side of the mic or 
over the top of it), but every different mic will also contribute other more com-
plex tonal ﬂ uctuations as well. For cheaper mics, these spectral foibles mean 
it’s rarely wise to deviate beyond about 30° off-axis, but classier mics may still 
deliver useful vocal sounds at twice that angle. 
 You may have seen studio pictures of vocal mics hanging upside down from 
their suspension shockmounts, and this setup has practical advantages if your 
ceiling and mic-stand height allows it. The main advantage is that by moving 
the mic’s body, shockmount, and cable above its diaphragm, you get more 
space below the mic for things like music stands. In addition, there are sonic 
reasons for mounting valve microphones in this way, because the warm air ris-
ing from the valve in the mic’s casing can’t then generate turbulence noise by 
wafting past the diaphragm. 
 4.3.4    Positioning Consistency 
 Because small changes in microphone positioning can profoundly alter the 
recorded vocal sound, a singer’s natural performance movements can cause 
serious sonic difﬁ culties. Indeed, one of the toughest challenges any mix engi-
neer can be faced with is when the vocal tone becomes a moving target because 
of this. One way of mitigating such effects is to use more distant mic positions 

 FIGURE 4.9   
 These polar diagrams show the directional response of a real-world large-diaphragm cardioid condenser mic (in this case the Rode NT2) at three different frequencies. 
The increasing high-frequency directionality and decreasing low-frequency directionality are typical of large-diaphragm condenser mics. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
130
(around the 12–18 inches mark), because you get less change in proximity-
effect bass boost for a given front–back movement when you’re further away, 
and the singer also moves less off-axis for a given range of side-to-side motion, 
as shown in  Figure 4.10 . 
 However, where a closer mic distance is critical to the recorded tone, an alter-
native approach is to try to stop the performer moving as much. For stage 
vocalists, a much-prized skill is the ability to “work” the vocal mic while sing-
ing, modulating their level and tone by adjusting their position relative to the 
mic. In a recording situation, though, this usually causes more problems than 
it solves with the vanilla setup, especially with budget mics. John Hudson: 12 
“The way that a cabaret singer moves the mic… whenever he sings a loud note 
is the worst thing you can possibly have in a studio environment, because the 
whole sound changes.” Fortunately, many musicians can scale back such move-
ments if you ask them to, without any negative ramiﬁ cations for the quality of 
the performance. 
 More instinctive movements are a trickier issue, though, because those are 
often an intrinsic part of the musician’s natural response to the music—try to 
stop them and you may end up killing the vibe. The best tactic for squaring 
that circle is to provide the singer with some physical object that they can use 
to anchor their mouth roughly into position, but which still allows them to 
move the rest of their body to the music. This is where a pop shield can be 
 FIGURE 4.10    
 When the vocal microphone is close to the singer (left-hand diagram), movements during performance 
can put the sound source well off-axis to the microphone, leading to considerable inconsistencies in both 
level and tone. Miking from further away (right-hand diagram) reduces this problem, but at the risk of 
picking up too much reﬂ ected sound from the room. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
131
great, because it provides a clear visual distance indicator and will also work 
with singers who close their eyes while performing—they just have to keep 
their noses in contact with the mesh. Another alternative is to put up a second 
mic stand with just a mic clip on it, and get the singer to hold that clip in their 
hand, singing slightly over the top of it as if into an imaginary mic, so that the 
high frequencies aren’t blocked. 
 Maintaining a consistent position in relation to the mic can still be a prob-
lem even with the least animated of performers, because most vocalists will 
tend to sing in the direction they’re looking. For example, if you’ve set up your 
mic with the singer looking straight ahead, but they then perform lyrics from 
a music stand that’s below eye level, they’ll tilt their head downwards, upset-
ting your carefully adjusted sound. Personally I prefer to gaffer-tape the lyric 
sheet to the end of a mic stand at eye level, not only because this avoids the 
miking problem, but also because it gives me more ﬂ exibility when position-
ing the lyrics than when using a traditional music stand. If you position your 
microphone off-axis to the singer’s mouth (which is normally sensible), most 
singers will subconsciously counteract that by trying to sing directly at the 
microphone. Because of this, I like to explain the situation to the vocalist and 
ﬁ nd something else in the recording room that they can look at and “sing to” 
while overdubbing: a mark on the wall, the end of another mic stand, a life-
size cutout of Marilyn Monroe… 
 Finally, bear in mind that all vocalists have some leeway in terms of how they 
position their head while singing, and you can use this to your advantage. 
Singing slightly downwards tends to give a less strained and more resonant 
sound, for instance, while singing upwards makes the sound more raw and 
cutting—as Lemmy is undoubtedly aware! 
 4.4   ACOUSTICS CONSIDERATIONS 
 Recording vocals isn’t just a question of positioning the singer and the mic, 
though, because the studio environment’s acoustics are also a major concern. 
 4.4.1  Room Reﬂ ections 
 As discussed in Section 4.1.3, it’s sensible to minimize the amount of general 
room reverb you record along with your vocal signal. Although the directional-
ity of the microphone helps here, it’ll rarely be enough in any normal room, so 
putting some sort of acoustic padding around the singer is well-nigh  essential. 
If you already have some acoustic treatment in the recording room, then you 
may be able to get away with just locating the singer with their back to it, but 
in most cases it’s usually better to sling something behind them specially—it’s 
rear-wall reﬂ ections that are most problematic, because they bounce sound 
into the sensitive side of the mic. Blankets/curtains or winter quilts (the thicker 
and heavier the better) are project-studio staples in this role, and with good 
reason given that they can be easily mounted on spare mic stands, lightweight 
clothes rails, or wall/ceiling hooks. Try to bring them as close to the singer as 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
132
you can without cramping their style, 
and preferably treat the whole live 
side of the mic, all the way round to 
±90° off-axis—a cardioid polar pat-
tern only takes about 6 dB off the 
level of sounds arriving perpendicu-
lar to its ﬁ ring line, remember. Don’t 
forget that the ceiling is often the 
reﬂ ective surface closest to the micro-
phone, so it’s very important to treat 
that too. 
 Moving closer to the mic will increase 
the dry level of the vocal, but I’d prior-
itize tonal considerations (as discussed 
in Section 4.3.2) over reverb-reduction 
there. In other words, choose the mik-
ing distance for the tone, and then add 
more padding around the singer if 
you’re getting too much room sound. 
I often see people setting up a curved 
acoustic bafﬂ e (such as SE Electronics’ 
Reﬂ exion Filter) behind the micro-
phone when recording vocals. While 
such devices can be extremely useful 
for reducing spill in ensemble-record-
ing situations, when overdubbing 
with the vanilla setup the improve-
ment will be negligible unless you’re 
using a (usually dirt-cheap) micro-
phone that sounds horrible off-axis 
and the room you’re working in is less than about eight feet across. Most of 
the time the cardioid’s rear rejection will eliminate the room sound from that 
direction ﬁ ne on its own. However, if you do decide to use a bafﬂ e, I’d rec-
ommend putting it on a different stand to the mic, rather than mounting the 
mic on a bracket within the screen itself. This is partly because it gives you 
much more positioning ﬂ exibility, and partly because some of those screens 
are so heavy that it’s tricky to stop the stand collapsing or overbalancing under 
the weight. 
 General room reverb isn’t the only concern, though. Reﬂ ected sounds will 
always arrive at the microphone after the singer’s direct sound, because they 
have to travel further through the air, and (as we mentioned in Section 1.4.4) 
combining any sound with a delayed version of itself can cause an undesirable 
comb-ﬁ ltering effect. If you’ve already taken precautions to reduce room reverb, 
then you’ll likely have scotched any strong single reﬂ ections already, but it’s pos-
sible to be caught out none the less if the singer has a solid music stand within 
their padded cocoon. To avoid this, imagine that the music stand’s surface is a 
 FIGURE 4.11    
 When you want to capture a dry vocal sound with a cardioid mic, the 
most effective place to put absorptive materials is on the sensitive side of 
microphone—in other words behind and above the singer. Here you can see 
a typical small-studio vocal-recording setup where bedding quilts have been 
arranged over a cheap lighting stand to make effective use of this concept. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
133
 COMB-FILTERING: THE NITTY GRITTY 
 Now that we’re digging into mic technique in earnest, it’s helpful to understand a bit more about how mixing any 
signal with a delayed duplicate of itself results in the frequency-response undulations of comb-fi ltering. To start 
with, let’s consider a sine-wave signal, the simple audio waveform from which all complex musical sounds can 
theoretically be built. If I feed the same sine wave to two mixer channels, the peaks and troughs of the waveforms 
in both channels will be exactly aligned in time (“in phase”), which means that mixing them together will simply 
produce the same sine wave, only louder. If you gradually delay the audio going through the second channel, 
however, the peaks and troughs of the two sine waves shift out of time-alignment (“out of phase”). Because of 
the unique properties of sine waves, the combination of the two channels will now still produce a sine wave of the 
same frequency, but its level will be lower than if the two channels were in phase, and we say that “partial phase 
cancellation” has occurred. When the second channel is delayed such that its peaks coincide exactly with the fi rst 
channel’s troughs (and vice versa), the two waveforms will combine to produce silence (“total phase cancellation”). 
 Now let’s scale things back up to deal with real-world sounds, made up as they are of heaps of different sine 
waves at different frequencies, each one fading in and out as pitches and timbres change. If we feed, say, a 
vocal mic’s output signal to our two mixer channels, instead of a single sine wave, any delay in the second 
channel will have a dramatic effect on the tonality of the combined signal, rather than just altering its level. This 
is because, for a given length of delay, the phase relationships between sine waves on the fi rst channel and 
those on the second channel depend on the frequency of each individual sine wave. 
 So, for example, a 0.5 ms delay in the second channel will put any 1 kHz sine-wave components (the waveforms 
of which repeat every 1 ms) completely out of phase with those on the fi rst channel, resulting in total phase 
cancellation. On the other hand, any 2 kHz sine-wave components (the waveforms of which repeat every 0.5 ms) 
will remain perfectly in phase. As the frequency of the sine-wave components increases from 1 kHz to 2 kHz, 
the total phase cancellation becomes only partial, and the level increases toward the perfect phase alignment 
at 2 kHz. Of course, above 2 kHz the sine-wave components begin partially phase canceling again, and if you’re 
quick with your mental arithmetic you’ll have spotted that total phase cancellation will also occur at 3 kHz, 
5 kHz, 7 kHz, and so on up the frequency spectrum, whereas at 4 kHz, 6 kHz, 8 Hz, and so on the sine-wave 
components will be exactly in phase. It’s this characteristic series of regularly spaced peaks and troughs in the 
frequency response that we call comb-fi ltering. 
 It takes only a minuscule delay to cause audible comb-fi ltering: Just 0.000025 s (a 40th of a millisecond) 
between the two channels will cause total phase cancellation at 20 kHz, but you’ll also hear partial phase 
cancellation at frequencies below this. As the delay increases, the comb-fi lter response marches further down 
the frequency spectrum, trailing its pattern of peaks and troughs behind it, which themselves get closer and 
closer together. However, when the delay times reach beyond about 25 ms or so, the comb-fi ltering weakens as 
our ears begin to detect the delayed signal as a distinct echo instead. 
 What connects all this theory back to the subject of vocal mic technique is the fact that sound propagates 
through the air at about one foot per millisecond. So if your singer addresses a microphone one foot away, but a 
refl ection of their sound also travels a longer four-foot route by refl ecting off the music stand, you’ll get a delay 
between the direct and refl ected sounds of around 3 ms—generating a comb-fi ltering response with its lowest 
trough somewhere around the 350 Hz region. The severity of the comb-fi ltering will be weakened somewhat by 
virtue of the refl ected sound being lower in level than the direct sound, but you’ll still get suffi cient frequency-
response undulations to produce a noticeably unnatural tone. 
mirror, and then make sure that the singer can’t see the mic in the mirror—this 
often results in a ﬂ atter-than-usual stand angle, but you may also be able to tilt 
the stand more steeply if you peg/tape the sheets in place to stop them falling 
over. (Don’t forget the line-of-sight issues I raised in Section 4.3.4, though.)  

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
134
 FIGURE 4.12    
 If a music stand reﬂ ects sound from the singer 
directly back into the mic (top picture), the resultant 
comb-ﬁ ltering artifacts can damage the vocal tone. 
The problem can easily be avoided, however, simply 
by reangling the music stand (middle and bottom 
pictures). 
 If you’re using a signiﬁ cantly off-axis microphone ori-
entation on tonal grounds, you should pay particular 
attention to any discrete reﬂ ections that might arrive 
on-axis to the mic, because not only will they be cap-
tured at a higher relative level, but they’ll likely be cap-
tured more brightly (as mentioned in Section 4.1.2). 
Extra acoustic absorption may be sensible in this 
instance. 
 4.4.2    Resonances 
 Another concern with reﬂ ected sound arises when it 
bounces back and forth between room boundaries, 
resulting in room resonances (sometimes called room 
“modes”). Room resonances at high frequencies man-
ifest themselves as a “ﬂ utter echo” or metallic ringing 
which you’ll easily hear if you clap your hands at the 
singing position, but again those are usually warded off 
just ﬁ ne by the padding you’ve already used to tackle 
the room reverb. However, low frequencies are much 
harder to absorb with padding, the result being that the 
low-end spectral balance in most project-studio record-
ing environments is rather unpredictable—there will 
typically be frequency hot/cold-spots scattered all over 
the place, the exact locations of them dependent on the 
room’s speciﬁ c physical dimensions. 
 The cheapest way of tackling the effects of lower-
frequency resonances on your vocal recording is to 
experiment with moving the singer and their mic to 
different locations in the room. Most of the time you 
won’t want to go right up against a wall, because it 
makes it difﬁ cult to control reﬂ ections from that sur-
face. It’s also unwise to set up the singer or mic within 
12 inches of the centerpoint of any of the room dimen-
sions, because these areas will usually suffer most from 
room-resonance frequency artifacts. In rooms smaller 
than about eight feet square, however, it may prove 
impossible to ﬁ nd a sufﬁ ciently uncolored tone any-
where, in which case I’d recommend decamping to 
another room for recording purposes if at all possible. 
While you can use acoustic treatment to reduce small-
studio room resonances, it’s not cheap, because lower 
frequencies need heavier and thicker material to absorb 
them, so recording vocals in a different space will often 
be more cost-effective. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
135
 VOCAL BOOTHS 
 For some reason a lot of small-studio operators get a bee in their bonnet about wanting to build a vocal booth, 
but in most situations I really wouldn’t recommend it. The problem is that anything smaller than about six feet 
square will have such strong acoustic resonances in the vocal range that it’ll sound unpleasantly boxy—pretty 
much irrespective of the amount of acoustic treatment you try to pack in there. If you don’t have a separate 
live room, then you’ll get a better sound setting up in the control room and working on headphones, in my 
opinion. Those who are undeterred, however, should at least make sure no two dimensions of the enclosed 
space are within a foot of each other, and try to avoid the classic acoustic-treatment mistakes: Don’t cover the 
whole room in acoustic foam (concentrate on the ceiling and the walls behind/alongside the singer so that you 
don’t completely suck the life out of the booth’s high-frequency response); don’t use the same thickness of 
acoustic foam everywhere (tiles of different thicknesses will spread the absorption better across the frequency 
spectrum); and don’t rely on general-purpose materials like standard curtains, furniture foam, carpet, or 
eggboxes, because they’re likely to be more or less useless. (And besides, eating that many eggs can’t be good 
for your cholesterol…) 
 4.5   MONITORING REFINEMENTS 
 Hopefully it should be clear by now that there’s a lot more to vanilla-setup 
vocal miking than many simple tutorials would have you believe—just sticking 
a large-diaphragm cardioid condenser mic and a pop shield in front of your 
singer and hoping for the best is about as smart as choosing a random equal-
izer preset. By the same token, basic recording guides rarely offer much advice 
beyond “give the musician a pair of headphones,” and while using head-
phones is certainly the most popular approach for vocal overdubbing, it has 
plenty of nuances that warrant closer attention. 
 Closed-back headphones are usually preferred for vocal overdubbing, because 
that minimizes spill from the singer’s foldback mix onto the recording. One of 
the crucial questions with closed-back headphones, though, is how the singer 
hears their own voice. There are two main options. 
 4.5.1  Acoustic Vocal Monitoring 
 One approach is to ask the singer to slide one headphone off their ear in 
order to hear their sound acoustically in the recording room. A practical dif-
ﬁ culty, though, is that the singer may not hear their high frequencies well 
enough: They won’t reach their ear direct from their mouth, because high 
frequencies are more directional; and they won’t reﬂ ect back to their ear 
because they’re so easily absorbed—especially if you’ve put padding around 
the singer to reduce room reﬂ ections. So if you choose this monitoring 
approach, it can help if there’s some kind of acoustic reﬂ ector to bounce 
their voice directly back toward their ear. By “acoustic reﬂ ector” I don’t mean 
anything fancy, because any rigid surface can be pressed into service: a solid 
music stand, perhaps, or a clipboard gaffered to a mic stand. If you’re think-
ing “that’ll make sod-all difference!”, try singing something right now and 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
136
see how the sound changes when you hold this book open 
a foot in front of your face. (To hell with the librarian!) Of 
course, you mustn’t direct a strong reﬂ ection into the mic at 
the same time, but that’s perfectly feasible with a setup such 
as that shown in  Figure 4.13 . 
 The singer may prefer using No Input monitoring (as discussed 
in Section 3.2.2) in this case, but be prepared for any eventual-
ity, because sometimes they may still want to hear something 
of themselves in the headphones too. If they decide to leave 
one earcup completely off, mute that side of the foldback mix 
to reduce headphone spill—you might need to sum the mix to 
mono before you do this, though, so that any panning in the 
foldback mix doesn’t cause difﬁ culties. The main downsides of 
this approach are that the backing mix won’t feel as enveloping 
in mono, so the performer may have trouble “getting inside” 
the music emotionally; using No Input monitoring can make 
punch-in recording more awkward; and wearing the head-
phones one-sided may destabilize them on the singer’s head 
(although most performers will usually be happy to hold them 
in place by hand). 
 4.5.2    Vocal Foldback 
 The second vocal-monitoring option is to feed the vocal 
signal back into the foldback mix. Our approach so far has 
been to do this from the recording track’s monitor chan-
nel, because this allows us to use the Input/Auto monitoring 
modes, which make punch-in recording so convenient. 
However, because singers will always hear some of 
their sound directly, via bone conduction in the 
skull, “the induced latency will then cause a 
comb-ﬁ ltering effect,” explains Jay Graydon, 13 
“sounding like the vocal is in a ﬁ shbowl.” This 
can be quite disconcerting for some perform-
ers, signiﬁ cantly affecting their ability to judge 
performance inﬂ ections and pitching. One of 
the great advantages of overdubbing on ana-
log tape is that (a) you can monitor completely 
without latency and (b) you can use the Auto 
monitoring mode for punching in. With digital sys-
tems, however, you’re almost always forced to choose 
one or the other:  
 
■
 Even the best DSP-driven low-latency monitoring will only bring latency 
down to around 1 ms, which is still more than enough to cause notice-
able comb-ﬁ ltering against the singer’s bone conduction, so if you want 
 FIGURE 4.13    
 Where the singer is receiving insufﬁ cient 
acoustic feedback, a small reﬂ ector panel 
can make a big difference—just be careful 
not to bounce unwanted reﬂ ections back 
into the microphone otherwise you may get 
comb-ﬁ ltering problems. 
 “One great 
advantage of 
overdubbing on analog 
tape is that (a) you can monitor 
completely without latency and (b) 
you can use the Auto monitoring 
mode for punching in. With digital 
systems, however, you’re almost 
always forced to choose 
one or the other.” 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
137
to use Auto monitoring for punching in, you’ll have to sacriﬁ ce the fold-
back sound. 
 
■
 The only way to avoid the comb-ﬁ ltering completely is to set up true zero-
latency monitoring, using No Input monitoring and then feeding the singer’s 
input signal directly to the foldback mix from the analog side of the record-
ing chain. Of course, there’s no simple way of getting that analog foldback 
signal to mute automatically during playback, which is why you can’t use a 
recorder’s Auto monitoring mode under these circumstances. If you’ve imple-
mented No Input monitoring for the performer by switching off your DAW’s 
software monitoring, then you’ll also need to feed the input signal directly to 
the control-room monitor mix as well, although there’s no need to do that in 
the analog domain if there’s a more convenient method in the software.  
 Despite its complications, the second of these options will always be prefera-
ble for me wherever there’s adequate analog hardware to implement it, simply 
because it puts the needs of the performer before those of the engineer.  
 4.5.3  Vocal Compression 
 Right at the start of this chapter I mentioned that vocals have a very wide 
dynamic range, but this impacts on more than just mic choice. One of the 
central challenges with producing vocals is that it’s often in the interests 
of the production that the listener can hear their every detail at all times, 
necessitating a massive reduction in that dynamic range. Trying to imple-
ment this in a comparatively natural-sounding manner isn’t easy, and one 
of the key tricks is to squeeze the dynamic range through several different 
processing stages so that no single stage breaks a sweat. This is one reason 
why most professionals still record vocals through an analog compressor. 
Even engineers who usually record most things unprocessed often make an 
exception for vocals. “I don’t add EQ or compression or effects,” says Pierre 
Marchand, 14 for example, “apart from some compression when recording 
vocals, because they’re too dynamic.” As processing decisions go, compress-
ing a vocal on its way to the recorder is therefore comparatively low risk. 
 INPUT/BACKING MIX CONTROLS FOR ZERO-LATENCY MONITORING 
 Some microphone preamps aimed at the budget DAW recordist include a zero-latency analog monitoring facility. 
This is basically a mini-mixer which combines the preamplifi ed microphone signal with a backing mix from your 
DAW, and then feeds that to an onboard headphone preamp. As such, you get just two controls: an input/
backing mix knob and a headphone volume knob. Although this confi guration seems pretty neat in theory, users 
with less sensitive headphones (or who are driving two pairs of cans from a single headphone socket) can have 
trouble getting a loud enough vocal signal in the foldback mix when leaving suffi cient recording headroom, no 
matter how they set the monitoring controls. The simplest solution to this is to try a few other headphones, in 
case you can fi nd a more sensitive pair, but if that doesn’t work, then pass the mic preamp’s headphone signal 
to a second headphone amplifi er to boost its output—many budget-friendly headphone amps have a stereo TRS 
jack input which makes this very straightforward. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
138
The main thing to avoid is overdoing it—it’s easy to add more compression 
at mixdown if you undercook it. 
 There are practical beneﬁ ts to compressing the vocal input signal from a moni-
toring perspective too. Firstly, it reduces the levels of louder notes so that 
singers can monitor their voices louder, making it easier for them to hear 
the softer intricacies of their performance. That means that they’re less likely 
to oversing, and they’ll therefore typically sound more characterful and less 
strained in the mix. The second beneﬁ t is that the compression keeps the vocal 
levels more stable against the backing mix, which assists in judging the suit-
ability of the vocal tone in context. So even if you’re not conﬁ dent with the 
idea of compression in the analog domain as part of your input chain, you 
may still wish to compress the vocal track’s monitor channel. 
 You don’t actually need to understand a great deal about compression to use 
it for vocal recording, as long as you keep your ears open. (The links in this 
chapter’s web resources will give you full details if you really want them.) The 
main thing to watch is the compressor’s gain-reduction meter, which shows 
how much it’s turning down the levels of the singer’s louder notes, because as 
long as that doesn’t go beyond 6 dB or so, you’re extremely unlikely to do any 
irrevocable damage to your recording. If there’s any Ratio parameter (which 
determines how aggressively the compressor responds to the loud notes), I’d 
normally recommend setting it somewhere between 2:1 and 3:1 to be on the 
safe side, and if there’s a switch labeled “soft knee” it’s well worth engaging 
that too, because it’ll usually make the processing appear more transparent. If 
you get separate Attack and Release parameters, then you’ll usually be alright 
setting them to middle of their ranges, but if there’s some switch which will 
set them automatically, then that’s likely to be even lower risk.   
 4.5.4    Balancing and Processing the Backing Track 
 When recording vocals, most engineers like to have the complete arrangement 
going. Here’s Walter Afanasieff, for instance: “The rule of thumb is, it’s got to 
sound like it’s supposed to sound when you’re actually cutting the vocals.” 
However, John Hudson 16 highlights an important caveat here: “You’ve got to 
be very careful about playing the singer the whole track in the cans. It can be a 
bit overpowering, and then he or she will start to oversing.” 
 THE DOUBLE-TAKE TRICK 
 If you’re recording vocals to tape, then ideally you want to keep the levels quite high to minimize noise. At 
the same time, though, vocal levels can be very unpredictable, and you don’t want to scorch the tape on any 
surprisingly loud notes either. George Massenburg 15 told me a neat trick for dealing with this problem: Route 
the output of the recording chain to a second track on the recorder, but set its recording level 12–15 dB lower, 
and then record both tracks at once. That means that if you unintentionally overload the main track, you can 
be pretty certain that the second track will still be clean. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
139
 If you’re sending a vocal foldback signal to the performer, then its level is criti-
cal. “The more you tuck the vocal, the more the singer wants to perform, to 
hear themselves,” says Darryl Swann, 17 for instance, “When it’s way out front, 
they hold back.” There’s no technically “correct” level, though, warns Rafa 
Sardina, 18 because his experience is that different singers often have wildly 
contrasting preferences in this respect. Where either the vocal or the back-
ing track are too quiet, the tuning and/or timing can easily suffer too. Tuning 
problems may also be exacerbated by latency on the vocal foldback signal, 
in which case encouraging the singer to use acoustic monitoring (see Section 
4.5.1) or making the extra effort to implement true zero-latency monitoring 
may help. John Hudson 19 offers another tuning tip: “When there’s only a basic 
rhythm track, you normally put a pad in before someone does 
a vocal, even if you remove it afterwards. It makes the 
track more comfortable for the singer to pitch to.” 
By extension, an additional rhythmic layer (or 
even just a metronome click) may help keep a 
singer’s timing focused during moments in the 
arrangement where insufﬁ cient rhythmic cues 
are coming from other backing parts. 
 In general, it stands to reason that a great-
sounding headphone foldback mix is likely to 
give rise to a better performance. So given the qual-
ity of most small-studio headphones, it can be worth 
using equalization to compensate for their deﬁ ciencies. “I 
create an EQ curve just for the phones,” says Humberto Gatica. 20 
“I don’t care how good they are, at the end of the day they are these little 
things that are just blowing volume up your ears.” By reducing levels in the 
2–6 kHz region, you can make super-loud headphone mixes less fatiguing on 
the performer’s ears, and slapping on a mastering-style limiter preset can also 
help in this regard by rounding off the transients—a trick suggested by both 
Stephen Hague 21 and Phil Ramone. 22 
 GUIDE-TRACK SPILL 
 If you’re using a guide track with additional “helper” parts which won’t appear in the fi nal mix (most often 
metronome click), it’s important that you prevent them breaking through onto the vocal mic as foldback 
spill. Closed-back headphones will usually take care of this, but it’s easy to get caught out none the less. 
For example, you might have to switch to a one-sided cue mix to avoid leakage if the talent chooses to slip 
one earcup off their ear, and special super-isolating headphones (effectively industrial ear defenders with 
headphone drivers in them) may be necessary where a performer wants to hear the guide particularly loud. 
You may even have to turn down or mute some guide tracks during sparse passages of the arrangement and 
for end-of-song fade-outs, because those are situations where even the slightest foldback spill can become 
uncomfortably audible. 
 “Tuning problems 
may be exacerbated by 
latency on the vocal foldback 
signal, in which case encouraging 
the singer to use acoustic monitoring 
or making the extra effort to 
implement true zero-latency 
monitoring may help.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
140
 4.5.5    Comfort Effects 
 Minimizing the amount of room sound you capture while recording vocals 
has many practical advantages, but it does cause one problem where the singer 
is relying on headphone foldback to hear themselves: The vocal will sound 
unnaturally dry and exposed. In musical styles that rely heavily on vocal 
delays/reverbs at mixdown, such a stark presentation may prove quite inhibit-
ing to the performance, so you may be able to make the musician feel more 
comfortable by applying such effects just for monitoring purposes, without 
recording them. Some people assert that reverb can also help a performer’s 
tuning, but I have to say I’ve never found that myself, and remain slightly scep-
tical about that particular claim. 
 Adding “comfort effects” is best done using a send–return effect conﬁ guration, 
rather than by inserting things directly into the vocal track’s monitor channel. 
This allows you to keep the control-room monitor mix dry if you wish (per-
haps to make it easier to judge the raw recording quality) and also avoids add-
ing any additional latency from digital effects units into the vocal foldback. If 
you’re using Input/Auto monitoring for the performer, here’s how to sort out 
the routing (see  Figure 4.14A ):
 
■
 Use a pre-fader send from the vocal track’s monitor channel to feed the 
effects processor. 
 
■
 Make sure the effects processor only outputs the effects signal, and not any 
dry signal—as is standard practice for any send–return effect setup. 
 
■
 Send the effects-only signal to the foldback mix using a pre-fader send on 
the effect-return channel. 
 Where you’re implementing a No Input monitoring mode (so that perform-
ers can monitor themselves acoustically or use zero-latency analog vocal fold-
back), here’s the simplest way to add comfort effects (see  Figure 4.14B ):
 
■
 Send a signal to the effects processor from the recording path, rather than 
the monitor path. Ideally, the signal should come from a point in the input 
chain after any compression, otherwise it’ll sound like you’re turning the 
effects levels up whenever the singer lets rip. 
 
■
 Send the effects-only signal to the foldback mix using a pre-fader send on 
the effect-return channel. 
 Whether you implement these sends and returns with an analog mixer, with 
a DSP mixer (in a multitracker or audio interface), or with a DAW’s software 
mixer is pretty much immaterial. Any latency incurred is unlikely to cause 
problems, because the most common comfort effects (echo and reverb) are 
based around delays anyway, and a few milliseconds’ more delay shouldn’t be 
noticeable. However, the use of pre-fader sends is a two-edged sword: On the 
upside, it means that the main control-room monitor mix and the performer’s 
foldback mix remain completely independent in terms of balance, but on the 
downside, it means that when you change the vocal level in the foldback mix, 

 FIGURE 4.14   
   (A) Implementing vocal “comfort effects” when you’re using the recording system’s Input or Auto monitoring modes to provide vocal foldback.  (B) Implementing vocal 
“comfort effects” when you’re using a split-input monitoring system for vocal foldback to reduce latency. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
142
the level of any comfort effects will stay the same. Some engineers are content 
to work around this by just juggling two different aux sends at once and lis-
tening to the foldback mix in the control room to conﬁ rm the correct dry/wet 
effects balance by ear. However, a more elegant solution (especially where you 
prefer analog zero-latency monitoring) is to use a separate mini-mixer to create 
the foldback mix. Here’s how that works (see  Figure 4.15 ):
 
■
 Rather than sending the vocal and backing-mix foldback signals direct to 
the singer’s headphones, you send them to separate channels on the mini-
mixer instead, and then feed the vocalist’s headphone ampliﬁ er from the 
mini-mixer’s main outputs. 
 
■
 You can then feed the effects processor from a post-fade send on the mini-
mixer’s vocal channel, and return the processor’s effects-only output to 
another mini-mixer channel. The result: Adjusting the mini-mixer’s vocal-
channel fader should maintain a consistent balance between the dry vocal 
and the comfort effects in the foldback mix. 
 FIGURE 4.15    
 Using a separate mini-mixer to implement vocal comfort effects. Because the send to the effects is 
post-fader, the reverb level will remain in proportion if you adjust the mini-mixer’s vocal-channel fader. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
143
 What’s great about this scheme for small-studio users is that you can buy a 
suitable little analog mixer for about $75 (£50) these days, and it’ll usually 
have a headphone amp built in. If you’re lucky, there may also be onboard 
equalization you can apply to the backing mix as well. Moreover, this approach 
lets you pull together simple “more me” foldback mixes at extremely short 
notice if needs be, by skipping the process of building an independent back-
ing mix via pre-fader aux sends and sending the main control-room monitor 
mix to the mini-mixer in its place. (This won’t work if there’s any extra latency 
delay on the vocal heard in the control room, though, because that’d cause 
comb-ﬁ ltering against the analog “more me” vocal signal in the foldback mix.) 
 Now if you’re thinking to yourself that all this routing sounds teeth-gnashingly 
convoluted, then I agree with you! In fact, it’s partly because it’s such a faff 
that I normally try to avoid using comfort effects wherever possible. However, 
Wyn Davis 23 also points out an important psychological effect of keeping fold-
back effect free: “I think it keeps everyone really honest. If someone wants 
some reverb or delays it’s not a problem, but I try to keep it down to the very 
least that they’ll accept.” Phil Thornalley 24 feels comfort effects can actually be 
counterproductive: “You’ve got to confront the reality of what you’re doing, 
and a bunch of delays and echoes may be vibey, but may also just add beauti-
ful confusion.” Whatever your views on this, though, it’s good to prepare for 
all eventualities, because if it turns out you need comfort effects, then it’ll cer-
tainly speed up the session if you’ve already dealt with any routing in advance, 
found a couple of promising-sounding presets, and checked that the effects sig-
nal is reaching the headphones intact.
 4.6   ON THE SESSION 
 Once you’ve got the gear hooked up and your talent’s on the mic, setting 
levels shouldn’t present any additional problems unless you’re working with 
an absolute foghorn, in which case you may ﬁ nd that the singer distorts the 
microphone’s own internal preampliﬁ cation. Many large-diaphragm condenser 
mics have a pad switch to deal with this, although it’s best left at its unity-gain 
position unless you actually need it, as with all input-chain gain controls. 
 Because of the amount of compression typically used on vocals, you should also 
remain on guard against background noise, wherever it might 
originate from. “You had to make sure that [Gabrielle] 
took off her jewelry,” noted Johnny Dollar, 33 for 
instance. “She wears a lot of it, and it makes her 
jangle quite a bit.” 
 4.6.1  Reﬁ ning the Sonics 
 With any acoustic sound, it’s vital that you lis-
ten to it acoustically, because that gives you a 
direct impression of the source itself, and there-
fore helps you plan and evaluate your microphone 
 “Because every 
voice is different, 
matching the singer to the right 
microphone at the start of each 
project is something that numerous 
top-name engineers mention 
making time for.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
144
 ENGINEER’S QUICKSTART GUIDE: VOCALISTS 
 As with any instrument, getting the best out of a voice requires good preparation. As an engineer, you can 
do your bit by keeping the recording room at a reasonable temperature, because the throat tends to lock up 
when cold. Providing plenty of (room-temperature) water is also a good idea, because singers lose a good deal 
of water vapor when they sing, and dehydrated vocal cords work less effi ciently and tire more quickly. Avoid 
providing carbonated drinks, not only to avoid unwanted emissions (pardon  me !), but also because they’re 
usually quite acidic, as are citrus fruit juices. Alcoholic/caffeinated beverages, smoking, and salty snacks tend 
to be counterproductive (physiologically, at least!) because they all dehydrate your throat, although it has to 
be said that it’s probably better for a singer to be drinking alcohol during the session than the night before, 
because its dehydrating effects only really kick in after about four hours. Dairy products coat your vocal cords 
in a way that can cause phlegm to become an unnecessary distraction, and trying to record within a couple of 
hours of a heavy meal is rarely a good idea either, because a full stomach restricts the breathing—plus the 
effort of singing may cause refl ux, bathing the vocal cords in 
digestive acid. Eww… 
 If you have the opportunity to talk to the singer before the 
session, do your best to convince them to memorize their part, 
because it makes an enormous difference to the performance. 
“[Madonna] locks the melody into her head and memorizes the 
words immediately,” says Shep Pettibone. 25 “She doesn’t even 
have to read the words off the paper while she’s singing.” Young 
Guru 26 emphasizes the engineering advantages of this when 
working with Jay Z: “Jay doesn’t write his ideas down, he does 
everything in his head… Once he has the verse memorized, he’ll 
go into the booth to recite it. From a recording point of view, this 
works much better than someone reading from a piece of paper, 
and having his mouth tilted to one side.” Bruce Swedien 27 has 
similar memories of working with Michael Jackson: “I don’t think 
I ever saw Michael [Jackson] with the lyrics in front of him. He’d 
always been up the night before memorizing the lyrics and he 
sang the songs from memory.” But that’s not the only tip worth 
taking from the King Of Pop. “Every day that we recorded vocals,” 
continues Swedien, “he warmed up for an hour beforehand. That 
made a big difference.” While an hour is probably a bit OTT for 
most small-studio musicians, it’s certainly not unreasonable to 
expect any vocalist who’s recording to give 15 minutes of their 
time to limbering up. If you need a fairly foolproof warm-up routine, try gently humming simple hymn tunes within 
your most comfortable pitch range: By nature, hymns have a fairly restricted pitch range, so they don’t tire you 
out prematurely with excessively high/low notes. 
 Inexperienced singers may not understand how to get the best out of their voices on a session, so here are a 
few practical pointers:
 
■
 Pay attention to the time of day you record, because it can make a big difference. “With some vocalists,” 
comments Stephen Street, 28 “they sound better later in the evening than they do fi rst thing in the morning.” 
You also need to catch the singer when they’re in the right state of mind, as Johnny Dollar 29 did when 
recording Gabrielle’s hit song “Rise”: “We managed to record at quite an opportune moment: Gabrielle had 
split up with her boyfriend just before she came in to do the vocal, and that gave the vocal an immediate 
emotional content. She actually burst into tears in the middle of one take!” Here’s Alan Winstanley 30 too, 
 FIGURE 4.16    
 The most important maintenance equipment 
for singers: a glass of water. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
145
recalling his work with Madness: “Occasionally, we might have to take [Suggs, the lead singer,] to the pub, 
get a few beers in him to loosen him up, and then go back to do another vocal.”  
 
■
 Taking a sip of water before each take is worthwhile, and swallowing causes less vocal fatigue than 
coughing if the vocalist needs to clear phlegm. Some professional session singers use a small $35 (£25) 
steam inhaler before/after sessions and during breaks to keep their vocal cords moist and sinuses clear. 
While that might seem like overkill for sporadic sessions, it isn’t a bad investment if you’ve got to get a lot 
of vocals down in a hurry. Just don’t use the steamer in the studio itself, because the water vapour can 
cause condenser mics to malfunction. 
 
■
 If the performer is raising their shoulders/ribcage and sucking in their stomach when they inhale, they’re 
probably not breathing very effectively. They’ll breathe more deeply and with better control if they keep their 
shoulders down and let their tummy move outwards as they breathe in. If they can’t get the hang of this, 
then a couple of sessions with a good singing teacher would be advisable, to get at least that technique 
sorted, no matter what style of singing they do. “You won’t come out a different person, with a different 
sound,” reassures John Leckie, 31 who is fi rm advocate of singing lessons, “but… at the end of the day you’ll 
sell more records.” 
 
■
 Standing up while singing will usually promote better breathing by allowing freer diaphragm movement. 
However, this may not be the overriding concern from a production point of view. “I prefer singers to sit 
down, to be relaxed, even though there may be certain problems that you get with breathing,” comments 
Neil Davidge, 32 for instance. “You get a presence and a conversational kind of thing… You listen to the 
record and you feel they’re talking to you, singing to you.” 
techniques. “[With vocals it] can be a little embarrassing,” says Mike Stavrou, 34 
“but it’s well worth the effort. While the singer is in the control room, play 
the track loud and ask them to sing along for a moment so you can hear their 
voice in real life… Those few seconds are worth an hour of ﬁ ddling with mics 
and EQ.” 
 Because every voice is different, matching the singer to the right microphone at 
the start of each project is something that numerous top-name engineers men-
tion making time for, Joe Barresi’s 35 approach being pretty typical: “While cut-
ting tracks I’ll put a couple of mics out and see what the singer sounds like. On 
vocal days, I’ll then put up a couple of mics again and listen and do a shoot-
out.” He also mentions varying the miking per song, as do both Mike Clink 36 
and Rich Costey. 37 For example, here’s Costey talking about his work with 
Muse: “In terms of vocal mics, we would switch between different ones accord-
ing to the song. I’m a big believer in that.” Leslie Ann Jones 38 emphasizes the 
importance of judging such mic selections in context, though: “You can’t really 
hear what a mic is going to sound like on someone’s voice if they’re not sing-
ing along with the [backing]. There are too many characteristics that may not 
show up. It might sound ﬁ ne if they’re all by themselves, but then you stick 
them with the track, and it’ll sound completely different.” 
 Not that shooting out mics is always feasible, of course, given the impor-
tance of getting the right performance. “If a singer is excited and ready to per-
form,” says Jay Messina, 39 “and you take twenty minutes to satisfy your own 
ego by getting the best possible vocal sound until that person no longer feels 
like singing, you’ve defeated your purpose.” In fact, with the best singers, you 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
146
shouldn’t count on any setup time at all, says Joe Chiccarelli: 40 “Working with 
Etta [James], you’d better guess the mic preamp level, you’d better guess the 
compressor, because chances are from note one it’s going to be great.” “In the 
end what really matters is the performance,” adds Stephen Street. 41 “I’d rather 
have a great vocal slightly dodgily recorded than a pristine version of a bad per-
formance. If someone has captured the moment it doesn’t matter if the vocal 
has a few imperfections.” One workaround is to arrange a separate shootout 
session in advance of the actual recording date. “I will try different mics,” says 
Paul Epworth, 42 “but… I always ﬁ nd it works better if it’s a totally separate pro-
cess to actually committing to a vocal performance, because it gets them think-
ing too much. It’s like it switches the brain on, when actually you want the 
brain off and the heart on.” 
 If, by hook or by crook, you do manage to interest the singer in doing a mic 
shootout, then here’s my suggested workﬂ ow:
 
■
 First concentrate on positioning your best-guess mic as well as possible, lis-
tening to its sound in the context of the whole production. The advantage 
of doing this ﬁ rst is that you can immediately skip on into doing takes if 
the singer begins losing interest, and it also means that you’re not subse-
quently comparing different mics in a hopeless mic position. A good way 
to audition a lot of different mic positions is to set the mic up at about chin 
height, and then get the singer to try addressing the mic at different angles, 
heights, and distances while you listen—moving the singer is a whole lot 
easier than moving the mic stand! Once you ﬁ nd a promising position, 
adjust the stand to replicate that position for the singer’s natural posture.  
 
■
 Set up all the other mic contenders as close as possible to your best-guess 
mic and then do a short take, recording all the mics onto separate tracks. 
Once you’ve got that recording, get the singer to join you while you play 
with the balance of each vocal-mic track against the backing mix and whit-
tle down the options in discussion. As well as any general tonal decisions 
you may make, listen particularly for whether the lyrics are coming through 
 MICROPHONE PREAMPS 
 Read a few interviews with high-profi le producers, and it won’t be long before they’ll be extolling the virtues of 
some high-end preamp or another, or comparing the benefi ts of different preamps for different mics or sources. 
As such, it should be pretty clear that this hardware choice makes a difference. However, if you take the time to 
compare lots of different preamps (3D Audio do some educational demo discs for this), what you’ll discover is 
that the differences between them are much less signifi cant than the differences achievable by changing mics 
or adjusting mic technique. Because of this, I don’t think hugely expensive preamps are the best use of money 
for many small-studio owners, because money spent on microphones will give you more bang for your buck. As 
a rough guide, if you add up the total value of your mic collection, I’d suggest spending around a quarter of that 
money on your preamps. That said, you can get stung at the low end of the market by products which sound 
unnatural, add excessive noise, or incur unattractive distortion, so you’re generally safer spending at least $75 
(£50) per preamp, as well as avoiding preamps with valves in them until you’re well out of that price range, 
because they often over-hype the valve character. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
147
clearly at lower fader levels, and whether sibilance becomes overbearing at 
higher fader levels. Remember that you’ll naturally tend to be biased toward 
louder sounds, so be careful to match subjective volume using the monitor-
channel fader for each track. 
 4.6.2  Takes and Comping 
 Building up master takes with punch-ins and comping was a major topic in the 
previous two chapters, and all that material continues to apply when tracking 
singers, except that the stakes are higher. Lead vocals are usually so important 
to commercial productions that I’d almost always suggest comp-
ing them, and from at least ﬁ ve takes. Just to give a bit of 
perspective here, it’s not uncommon for mainstream 
chart productions to involve more than 20 vocal 
takes, and a comping process lasting 8–12 hours, 
according to Mark Bright. 43 Ben Allen 44 indi-
cates that top-ﬂ ight artists such as Christina 
Aguilera may go even further. “Incredible voice, 
insane work ethic,” he elaborates. “[She] sang 
the song for six hours until it was done—didn’t 
leave the booth once and didn’t make a single 
phone call… That song was probably comped from 
a hundred different takes! She nailed every single 
one, but she wants to comp it until she’s in love with it… 
To argue about the validity of it is silly. It’s whatever gets you to the 
destination.” 
 One thing you have to be wary of, though, is tiring out the singer. Anyone 
other than a professional session singer is likely to start running out of 
steam within a couple of hours if they’re really committing to their perfor-
mance, so if you need to get a complete vocal during that time it’s impor-
tant to pace the session astutely, as well as scheduling short breaks at least 
every hour or so. “There’s a kind of crispness to a voice when it’s fresh,” says 
Simon Climie. 45 “and sometimes if you’ve sung too many times it becomes 
over-compressed and loses that edge—literally, the EQ of the voice changes 
dramatically.” 
 If you’re concerned about the singer’s stamina, it’s usually more efﬁ cient to 
work on a song in sections, rather than going for too many full-length takes, 
because you don’t want to waste energy rerecording simpler parts of the line 
more often than necessary. Easier, quieter, and lower-register sections can be 
good to help the singer get into the swing of performing, and may also pro-
vide welcome respite from working on higher-energy phrases. Try to keep the 
loudest and least restrained sections until close to the end of the session, so 
that if they leave the singer sounding a bit ragged, it won’t affect the vocal tone 
in the remainder of the song. That said, if there’s a quieter section that needs 
more vulnerability or rawness, then the very end of a session may actually be 
the ideal time to attempt that, for similar reasons. 
 “Anyone other than 
a professional session 
singer will start running out 
of steam within a couple of hours 
if they’re really committing to their 
performance, so if you need a 
complete vocal during that time 
it’s important to pace the 
session astutely.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
148
 Back in Section 3.3.2 I talked about looking for “moments of magic” while 
recording takes for comping purposes, and nowhere is this more important 
than for lead vocals. Focus particularly on the starts of verses, where it’s crucial 
to really demand attention, and of course also the run-up to any hook, as well 
as any memorable pay-off lines. Real nuggets are more likely to occur when the 
musician is feeling slightly off-guard, which is why the very ﬁ rst take of a song 
is frequently full of them. Any situation where the singer feels less inhibited is 
also fertile territory. Dave Jerden 46 regularly records warm-ups, for example, and I 
remember watching Gerry Kitchingham 47 surreptitiously recording the “rehearsal 
run-throughs” of less conﬁ dent vocalists, because he knew that their musical 
responses would be more instinctive when they thought they weren’t yet being 
recorded—and those takes frequently featured heavily in the ﬁ nal mix as a result.  
 One of my own favorite tricks for the end of a vocal overdubbing session (once 
I already have enough takes to comp a respectable master take) is to give the 
musician a couple of additional tracks they can sing whatever the heck they 
like on. I’ll make it clear that we’ve already got a master take in the bag, so 
they’ve got nothing to lose by trying even the most bizarre ideas that come into 
their head. Somehow this never fails to unearth one or two absolute gems that 
really elevate the performance as a whole, and it often brings the session to a 
close in a really upbeat way too, which is good for general morale. “Assuming 
the vocalist is not too tired, you’ll get some incredible stuff out of that,” says 
Mark Bright, 48 who uses an almost identical tactic himself. 
 If time is on your side, then another alternative mentioned by Dave Jerden, 49 
Clarke Schleicher, 50 Stephen Hague, 51 Steve Levine, 52 and Stuart Price 53 is to 
comp the vocal from the ﬁ rst session, send a rough mix of it to the singer, and 
then reconvene for further takes later. “Very often you have to do a comp in 
order for them to hear how it needs to go,” comments Levine. 54 This often 
results in a signiﬁ cantly more assured second date where the performer feels 
more conﬁ dent to take risks in search of greater creative rewards. 
 When you’re selecting vocal takes, don’t forget to think about how the singing 
relates to the lyrics. Mike Clink 55 is just one of the top names who keep the lyric 
sheet close to hand while tracking for this reason. “I’m trying to see in my mind 
if the singer is telling me the same story as [they’ve] written down lyrically,” 
he says. “If I’m not feeling it from a vocalist, I’ll tell them so. I’ll get them to 
draw from within, to tell that story.” Critical to the transmission of the lyrics, of 
 THE PRE-ECHO TRICK 
 When recording vocals, it’s very common for the fi rst entry of any new section to be substandard, because it 
takes a few moments for a singer’s voice to get going again (and for them to lock onto the right pitch) if they’ve 
been silent during the pre-roll. The solution to this is to get them to “pre-echo” the fi rst line a couple of times 
during the pre-roll, so that their voice is poised and ready for the real entry. You can always edit away the pre-
echoes, or even use them as additional take options when comping, if any of them were particularly good. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
149
course, is the singer’s diction, so this is something to pay special attention to. In 
particular, try to put yourself into the position of someone who doesn’t know 
the lyrics beforehand—would they be able to understand them easily? There are 
many things you can do at mixdown to improve a vocal sound, but it’s almost 
impossible to salvage lyrics that aren’t sung clearly. And on a practical note, an 
emotionally compelling delivery is always more important than perfect timing/
tuning, especially now that sophisticated audio editing and pitch-correction are 
standard features in almost every DAW. (Not that they excuse you from provid-
ing the most favorable monitoring conditions for the performer, of course…) 
 4.6.3  Talkback and Performance Directions 
 Recording vocals is extremely demanding on the musician both physically 
and mentally, so it’s important to help them all you can. “A guitar player can 
change his strings or ampliﬁ er,” explains Tony Platt, 56 “and a drummer can 
change drums and sticks, but a singer has only got one voice. Psychologically 
that’s not an easy place to be, and it’s the most difﬁ cult thing that a singer has 
to deal with. So a lot of vocal production is about putting the singer at ease.” 
In this context, the session-framing techniques I covered back in Section 2.1.4 
expand in importance, and it’s also usually wise to minimize the number of 
people in the studio while vocals are being cut. “Lead vocalists always insist 
that the other band members aren’t there,” says Steve Levine. 57 “They like to do 
it on their own, sometimes even with the lights off.” A speciﬁ c example of this 
comes from Mike Shipley, 58 talking about his work with Alison Krauss: “She 
doesn’t like to have many people in the room when she’s recording vocals, so 
most of the time it’d be just her and me.” Phil Ramone 59 takes things even fur-
ther: “Be careful about soloing a vocal in the control room. It should be done 
with no guests or musicians in the control room.”  
 LAYERED BACKING VOCALS 
 One of my biggest gripes about low-budget productions is layered backing vocals, because too many amateur 
singers seem to think they don’t need to perform them with as much gusto as they do lead vocals. In fact, the 
opposite is the case: Because of the inherent homogenizing effect of the layering process (see Section 3.3.1), 
you often need to ham up the expression to steer clear of blandness. Overenthusiastically pitch-correcting 
backing vocals to save editing time only compounds the problem. So don’t just toss off the backing parts at the 
end of the lead-vocal session—take a break and come at them fresh. Jeff Bhasker 60 has another tip, which he 
used while recording Fun’s enormo-hit “We Are Young”: “I never let them sing to previous vocal takes. I would 
always let them sing by themselves, and I’d then add the different vocal takes together. You get a stronger 
performance that way, because the overdubs are rubbing against each other… It was the rubbing of the vocals 
against each other that made them sound big.” 
 Another thing to be aware of when layering vocals is that there’s a considerable difference in sound between 
tracking up the same singer and layering several different singers—the former will tend to sound thinner and 
take up less space in the mix, whereas the latter is more likely to give the thicker texture that small-studio 
producers more often appear to be seeking. If you’ve only got one singer available, though, try recording 
different takes through different mics, a technique that Walter Afanasieff 61 and Billy Bush 62 have both 
mentioned using on their records. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
150
 In a two-room recording conﬁ guration, setting up communications is  simpliﬁ ed 
because the main vocal mic doubles as the listen mic. Despite this, however, 
some producers feel that direct face-to-face conversation is so critical for a vocal 
session that they’ll forgo the technical advantages of a two-room setup and 
track everything in the control room. “You can react immediately with a sim-
ple thumbs up or even by jumping during the take,” says Phil Thornalley. 63 “If 
necessary, you can also sing the next chorus [to] show the singer where they’re 
getting the melody wrong.” His own early memories as a young singer lacking 
self-conﬁ dence were also formative in persuading him against the two-room 
method: “The producers were in the control room. Paranoia would set in. ‘Are 
they ordering pizza, or are they calling around for someone better?’ I learned 
from that experience.” 
 But if you  are  using talkback in a two-room environ-
ment, don’t let technical inconveniences stop you 
working your socks off with it. “The worst thing 
you can ever do,” continues Tony Platt, 64 “is 
stop the tape and have complete silence. The 
moment you stop the tape you need to be 
pushing the talkback and making some form of 
communication. It’s a lonely place on the other 
side of the glass and the ﬁ rst thing the singer 
is going to want to know when the tape stops, 
especially in the middle of the song, is how they 
are doing. It’s of absolutely paramount importance to 
maintain that communication.” 
 If you’re called on to provide suggestions for improving the performance, then 
Section 3.4.1 should already provide plenty of tools you can use, but I’d like to 
stress the importance of using posture and movement as a means of inﬂ uenc-
ing the outcome. Getting the singer to dance along with the track while sing-
ing can completely transform the rhythmic vibe of a take, for example, while 
upwards/downwards hand motions, raising of the eyebrows, and exaggerated 
smiling are all well known to inﬂ uence pitching. Another key issue to clarify 
with less experienced rock vocalists is that singing as loud as you can will usu-
ally just make you sound thin in the ﬁ nal mix, because individual narrow-
band resonances and harmonics will dominate over the rest of the spectrum 
under such circumstances. The secret to achieving a powerful rock vocal record-
ing is learning to sing  as if  you’re hammering it out, while actually delivering 
only a comparatively restrained acoustic level in the room so that the mic cap-
tures a well-balanced mixture of frequency content. 
 4.7    AND ANOTHER THING… 
 As we’ve seen, even the vanilla setup presents you with an awful lot of variables 
to think about, which is perhaps why so many ﬂ edgling engineers come a bit 
unstuck with vocals. However, there are lots of less mainstream techniques that 
 “Getting the singer 
to dance along with 
the track while singing can 
completely transform the rhythmic 
vibe of a take, while upwards/
downwards hand motions, raising of 
the eyebrows, and exaggerated 
smiling are all well known to 
infl uence pitching.” 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
151
can be more suitable than the plain vanilla approach on occasion, and we’ll 
move on to exploring some of those in the next chapter—once you’ve had a 
chance to consolidate what we’ve learned so far.   
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 The most popular vocal microphone is a large-diaphragm cardioid condenser, preferably 
with valves and transformers in the signal path. Although cheap mics can sound great on 
occasion, pricing remains a good indicator of quality. With cheaper mics, think carefully 
about the manufacturer’s reputation. 
 
■
 Valve mics will usually have their own power supply, but most other condenser 
mics will require phantom power. I’d avoid battery-powered and direct-to-USB 
microphones.  
 
■
 Set up the mic stand stably, counterweighting it if necessary, and preferably use a suspen-
sion shockmount. When arranging the cables, plan for someone tripping over them and 
try not to defeat the shockmount. 
 
■
 Certain vocal sounds are quite directional, which helps with positioning the mic and 
reduces the need for additional interventions against plosives and sibilants. Changing the 
mic’s orientation can provide off-axis frequency contouring, but this may not sound very 
pleasant with cheaper mics. A variable high-pass ﬁ lter is extremely useful for controlling 
proximity effect, giving more leeway in reﬁ ning the subtler midrange and high-frequency 
effects of miking distance. Keeping the singer’s mouth position consistent makes mixing 
easier, but be careful not to cramp the singer’s style. 
 
■
 It’s usually wise to place sound-absorbing materials around the singer to minimize 
recorded room reﬂ ections and high-frequency resonances, especially if your singer’s off-
axis to the mic diaphragm. Lower-frequency resonances are more tricky/expensive to con-
trol, so try to avoid recording in small spaces where they impact most negatively on the 
vocal spectrum. 
 
■
 If a singer wants to monitor themselves acoustically, try rigging an acoustic reﬂ ector to 
help them and be prepared to try different input-monitoring modes. True zero-latency 
vocal foldback will likely give a better performance, but rules out Auto monitoring on 
digital systems. 
 
■
 Moderately compressing vocals during recording can improve the singer’s headphone 
foldback experience and aid mixdown. There are numerous ways of routing comfort 
effects to the singer if they want them, but the most elegant for small studios is to use a 
separate analog mini-mixer. 
 
■
 To perform at their best, vocalists should be well rested and warmed up, and should pref-
erably have memorized their part too. Singers should be well hydrated, so they should 
avoid diuretic foods/drinks and smoking; sip water regularly throughout the session; and 
consider using a steam inhaler for extended vocal sessions. 
 
■
 If you have time, do a microphone shootout to ﬁ nd the best model for each new vocal-
ist, but make a point of listening to the singer acoustically as well, not just through your 
mics. Find a good position for your best-guess mic ﬁ rst and be sure to audition different 
mics at comparable levels against the backing mix. 
 
■
 Voice fatigue is a major concern on vocal sessions, so carefully organize and pace your 
workﬂ ow to reﬂ ect each performer’s stamina. Maximizing the number of star moments 
is also a high priority, so don’t waste opportunities to record the singer when they’re off 
guard, and try to give the performer the chance to throw caution to the winds for at least 
a couple of takes. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
152
 Assignment 1: One-Room Dry-Run 
 This assignment is about preparing both you and your studio setup for the demands 
of a vocal session. For this you’re going to record yourself speaking, because our ears 
are more sensitive to subtle tonal changes with speech than with singing—and there’s 
no need to worry about a backing track that way either.
 
■
 Find about 100 words of text you can read aloud—a bit of  Mr Tickle  by Roger 
Hargreaves is a good bet, because it’s well known amongst linguistics profession-
als for its wide range of English speech sounds. Deal with the general session 
preparations discussed in Part 1, and then fi nd the most suitable single-room 
recording venue you can, with reference to Section 4.4.2. 
 
■
 Decide on a best-guess vocal mic choice (Section 4.1), as well as a suitable clip/
shockmount, stand, and cable to go with it. 
 
■
 Time yourself as you unfold and set up the mic stand; put the mic into its clip/
shockmount and fi x that to the stand; and connect a cable between the mic and 
your recording system’s microphone input. If that takes you more than a minute, 
then I’d suggest putting in some practice to get your speed up! The same applies 
when packing those bits away: If you can’t fold up the stand, coil the cable, and 
tidy away the mic and its clip/shockmount within a minute, you’re in danger of 
leaving a slimy trail…  
 
■
 Work out how to rig acoustic absorption around yourself and the microphone for 
recording purposes, and be very careful with the positioning of any refl ective sur-
faces within four feet of the mic stand. 
 
■
 Record your chosen text using several different mic positions, ideally including: 
four inches and twelve inches away, at the level of your lips; above, below, and 20° 
to either side of your nose, all four positions eight inches away from the mouth; 
with the microphone rotated so that you’re addressing it 30° off-axis. Spend a 
good half hour comparing these recordings to get a feel for the scale of the dif-
ferences, and refi ne the microphone position further, using high-pass fi ltering or a 
pop shield to increase your options if necessary.  
 
■
 If you’ve not done so already, now’s the time to set up a headphone foldback 
mix so you can hear the input signal while recording. With digital recorders, try to 
implement analog vocal foldback in some way to get fi rst-hand experience of the 
subjective difference between zero-latency and latency-delayed monitoring from 
the performer’s perspective. You should also sort out how to compress the vocal 
input signal, process the backing track for monitoring purposes, and add comfort 
effects to the vocal in the foldback mix, so that you’re on top of your game for 
Assignment 2.  
 
■
 Communication is vital for any successful vocal session, so don’t let talkback logistics 
get in the way of that. If the vocalist needs performance direction, suggestions involving 
posture and/or movement will often prove most effective, and the lyrics can also provide 
inspiration. Singing very loud typically gives a thin recorded sound, so aim for emotional 
intensity more than sheer volume, and don’t fall into the trap of underperforming lay-
ered vocal parts, otherwise they’ll sound bland. 

Basic Vocal Recording CHAPTER 4
153
 Assignment 2: Overdubbing a Singer 
 Following your preparations in Assignment 1, we can move on to recording the perfor-
mance of a separate vocalist over a backing track.
 
■
 Find a friendly singer to practice overdubbing with, and offer them a choice of 
pre-written songs to sing lead vocals on. (There are some in this chapter’s web 
resources if you don’t have anything suitable of your own.) Once they’ve chosen 
a song they’re comfortable with, provide them with a rough mix (including a guide 
melody) to listen to before the session and a lyric sheet.  
 
■
 Choose a suitable venue for recording, whether that’s a one-room or two-room 
setup, and prepare appropriate session-framing, printed materials, and monitor-
ing/communication in advance. Have your best-guess mic already set up in a best-
guess position, and make sure any other mics you want to compare are set up on 
stands, plugged in, and line-checked too. Immediately before the session, check 
that all monitoring and communications devices are still working properly, and that 
comfort effects are primed in case they’re required. 
 
■
 When the singer turns up, be ready (as always!) to hit Record the moment they 
rock up to the mic. If they are amenable to working on sounds fi rst, listen to them 
singing acoustically and then refi ne your best-guess mic’s positioning before 
 putting up any comparison mics alongside. However, if the performer’s stamina or 
patience begins to fl ag, be ready to go straight into doing takes. 
 
■
 Whether you decide to create a master take with punch-ins or (preferably) comp-
ing, explain the workfl ow to the performer. Check whether they can hear their vocal 
and the backing mix well enough, and ask them whether they’d prefer to have a lit-
tle vocal echo/reverb in their headphones while performing. Once takes are under-
way, do everything you can to help the musician achieve the best performance, 
adjusting the foldback mix (or indeed anything else) as necessary.  
 
■
 After the session, make notes for future reference, and think back over any prob-
lems that arose. After a day or two, listen back to the recordings to re-evaluate the 
sonics and performances, comping a master take if necessary.  
 
■
 Before progressing to Chapter 5, try to carry out another couple of sessions like 
this, preferably with different singers. Try also to do at least one session where 
you add layered backing vocals alongside a previously recorded lead part.  
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 further reading on the technicalities of condenser-mic design, acoustic treatment, 
zero-latency monitoring, and compression; 
 
■
 several pre-recorded songs for overdubbing lead vocals, complete with backing mix, 
guide parts, and lyrics; 
 
■
 links to manufacturers of mic-mounting and acoustic-treatment products;  
 
■
 audio demonstrations of vocal dispersion, mic positioning/orientation, acoustic 
treatment techniques, and different plosive-reduction techniques. 
 
  http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch4.htm 

This page intentionally left blank

155
 The vocal setup I described in Chapter 4 is a great workhorse, especially when 
you understand how to get the best out of it. However, there are some scenar-
ios where going slightly off the beaten track in terms of studio technique will 
better serve the music, so in this chapter I’d like to concentrate on why and 
how you might want to stray beyond the vanilla approach. 
 5.1  ALTERNATIVE MICROPHONE TYPES 
 5.1.1  Other Polar Patterns 
 Useful as directional mics can be, they’ll rarely sound as clear and natural 
as mics which have been designed to pick up sound equally from any angle 
(“omnidirectional mics” or “omnis”), especially amongst cheaper designs. 
Al Schmitt: 1 “I keep the vocal mic in omnidirectional. I ﬁ nd the sound richer 
and more pleasing.” Omni mics exhibit no proximity effect and are virtually 
immune to “popping” on plosives, so you have more freedom to position the 
mic, plus you get much less level/tone variation if the singer moves around 
while singing. Phil Ramone 2 and Michael Tarsia both mention the latter in 
interview: “Sometimes you encounter a singer who just has to move with the 
music, or even dance,” says Tarsia. 3 “That’s when I consider 
using an omni-pattern microphone and carefully place 
the mic for the most consistent pickup of the vocal 
performance.” Omnis are very insensitive to 
stand/cable-borne vibrations too, which means 
they can usually even be handheld without suf-
fering signiﬁ cant handling noise. (It’s worth 
singing slightly past them in this instance, 
though, to avoid water vapor in the singer’s 
breath from condensing on the diaphragm.) 
 Clearly, room reﬂ ections are more of a concern 
with omnis, although the lack of proximity effect 
 Beyond Vanilla Vocals 
 CHAPTER 5 
 CHAPTER 5 
 “Omni mics exhibit 
no proximity effect 
and are virtually immune to 
“popping” on plosives, so you have 
more freedom to position the mic, 
plus you get much less level/tone 
variation if the singer moves 
around while singing.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
156
does mean you can use mic positioning to counteract this. “Sing up close to 
the mic,” says Keith Olsen, 4 “and all of a sudden the room means nothing.” 
You can further dry up the sound with acoustic padding behind the mic, or by 
using something like an SE Electronics Reﬂ exion Filter. In my experience, room 
reﬂ ections therefore rarely militate against using an omni mic for vocal over-
dubbing, so anyone who glibly dismisses omnis as “too roomy” is frequently 
cheating themselves out of a better sound—particularly anyone working on a 
tight budget. 
 The other common polar pattern to mention is “ﬁ gure-eight” or “bidirec-
tional,” which is equally sensitive at its front and rear and has rejection nulls 
at 90° off-axis. Figure-eights can sound just as good as cardioids on vocals, but 
they do struggle with singers who move around a lot, for two reasons: Firstly, 
the frontal sensitivity region is narrower, so the singer only has to move 45° 
off-axis to drop 3 dB in level and the −6 dB point is only 15° further out; and, 
secondly, a ﬁ gure-eight mic’s proximity effect is stronger, changing the low-
frequency tip-up more for a given front–back movement. Figure-eight mics are 
also more prone to physical vibration and plosive air blasts. 
 Some condenser mics incorporate a back-to-back pair of diaphragms, rather 
than just a single one, and the beneﬁ t of these dual-diaphragm designs is that 
they allow the circuitry to control the polar pattern. Affordable multipattern 
microphones of this type are usually switchable between cardioid, omni, and 
ﬁ gure-eight polar patterns, but more expensive large-diaphragm mics are more 
likely to offer other intermediate polar patterns, including subcardioid, super-
cardioid, and hypercardioid (see  Figure 5.1 ), and may even have a smoothly 
variable pattern control. For vocal recording, what’s important is the polar pat-
tern’s frontal width (which tells you how careful you need to be about keep-
ing the singer still) and the strength of the proximity effect (which affects how 
bassy the vocal will sound for a given miking distance). However, proximity 
effect isn’t the only tonal consequence of changing patterns, because you’ll 
also get less predictable smaller-scale frequency variations across the rest of the 
spectrum. 
 I mentioned a whole list of classic vocal mics in Section 4.1.4 to demonstrate 
the professional preference for valves and transformers, but what is also notable 
about these mics (and indeed the Neumann U87, which seems to be the only 
non-valve mic that’s used as widely) is that they’re all multipattern. One of the 
reasons for this preference is that, assuming you’re recording vocals in a fairly 
well-damped space (as most professionals are), you can access alternate sonic 
colors just by switching the polar pattern, without recourse to any separate signal 
processing. “I usually try both cardioid and omni modes with the [mic],” says 
Alex Clarke, 5 “because there’s a subtle difference in the low end between them—
you have to decide which one works best for each particular vocalist, and with 
Tom [Jones] it sounded more open when it was in omni.” Be careful, though, to 
mute the input signal before operating any polar-pattern switches, because these 
can sometimes send powerful signal “thumps” though the recording chain. 

Beyond Vanilla Vocals CHAPTER 5
157
 FIGURE 5.1   
 A range of commonly available polar patterns. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
158
 5.1.2    Dynamic Mics 
 While large-diaphragm condenser microphones are certainly the most com-
mon choice for studio vocal recording, there are nonetheless many situations 
where other designs are preferred. One of the main difﬁ culties is that condens-
ers can be a bit delicate for loud and/or aggressive singers, even when you’re 
using the mic’s built-in pad. In these cases, the most common solution is to 
switch to a dynamic microphone instead, because dynamic mics are usually 
rugged enough to withstand any abuse and their poorer noise performance 
ceases to be a concern when the singer’s hammering the level. Here’s Bill Price 6 
talking about recording the Sex Pistols, for instance: “Although we had a beau-
tiful pair of Neumann U47s…when I put one in front of Johnny [Rotten] for 
his overdubs it sounded awful and died after thirty seconds of being gobbed at 
due to him using his middle register as loud as he could. So…I put him back 
on the [Shure] SM58 and thereafter always used that.” 
 But it’s not just technical concerns that prompt many engineers to go for 
dynamic models, because these mics offer a gutsy sound that often suits male 
rock vocalists better—which is good news for small-studio budgets, because 
dynamic mics are much cheaper on the whole! The Shure SM58 mentioned 
by Bill Price is no stranger to studio work: Robbie Adams, 7 Flood, 8 Ann 
Mincieli, 9 and Stephen Harris 10 have all mentioned that Bono (of U2) prefers 
it for recording; John Leckie 11 recorded Ian Brown with that mic for The Stone 
Roses’ debut album; Garth Richardson 12 recorded Zack de la Rocha with one 
for Rage Against The Machine’s debut album; Dave Eringa 13 used it for James 
Dean Bradﬁ eld when working on The Manic Street Preachers’ biggest album, 
 FIGURE 5.2   
 The frequency response 
of a multipattern large-
diaphragm condenser 
mic changes as you 
switch between its 
different polar patterns. 
Here, for instance, 
are the polar plots for 
three polar patterns of 
the classic Neumann 
M49 large-diaphragm 
condenser mic. 

Beyond Vanilla Vocals CHAPTER 5
159
 This Is My Truth, Tell Me Yours ; and Bob Clearmountain 14 tracked some of Bryan 
Adams’ vocals on it for  Reckless . Its sibling, the Shure SM57 (a very similar 
design which sounds slightly different because it lacks the SM58’s ball-shaped 
grille) also featured on Anthony Keidis during The Red Hot Chili Peppers’ 
 Californication sessions (according to engineer Jim Scott 15 ), and Eddie Kramer 16 
regularly used it for Paul Rodgers of Free and Bad Company. 
 An important part of the sonic character of the SM57 and SM58 is a strong upper 
midrange “presence” peak, which helps the sound cut through mixes laden 
with cymbals and electric guitars, but some engineers prefer Shure’s smoother-
sounding (and therefore more general-purpose) SM7 instead. “To me, that sounds 
quite a bit better than your more typical SM58,” remarks Rich Costey, 17 and many 
other engineers have also mentioned it in interview. For example, Joe Chiccarelli 18 
used this mic for Jack White of The White Stripes; AC/DC’s Brian Johnson went 
through one during Mike Fraser’s 19 sessions for  Black Ice ; Michael Barbiero 20 
recorded some of Whitney Houston’s vocals with an SM7; and many of Michael 
Jackson’s most celebrated lead parts were tracked with it by Bruce Swedien. 21 
Shure mics don’t have some kind of monopoly, though, because other afford-
able dynamic models are also well known for studio vocals. The Beyerdynamic 
M88, for instance, was for a long time Hugh Padgham’s 22 ﬁ rst choice for Phil 
Collins, and it was also singled out for Bernard Sumner’s vocals when Stephen 
Hague 23 was producing New Order, and for Dion’s voice by Eric Schilling. 24 The 
Electrovoice RE20 is another favorite (Steve Albini 25 is amongst its fans), not least 
because it employs a unique design that minimizes proximity effect. 
 Because on-stage vocal mics are so often end-ﬁ re dynamic models, another 
crucial advantage of using one is that the musician can perform with it in the 
same way they would during live shows. “A lot of people feel comfortable 
with a handheld,” explains Mike Hedges, 26 “even if they are not holding it, 
 FIGURE 5.3   
 Some of the most 
enduringly popular 
dynamic mics for 
vocal recording (left to 
right): Shure SM57 and 
SM58; Beyerdynamic 
M88; Shure SM7; and 
Electrovoice RE20. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
160
but have it on a stand instead. It’s more natural, because it isn’t a big thing, 
so they can get as close as they want. This helps the performance, because the 
vocalist is relaxed.” Of course, if the vocalist holds the mic in their hand and 
is monitoring over loudspeakers rather than headphones (of which more in 
Section 5.3), you should try to persuade them not to stroll about too much (a 
few bits of gaffer tape on the ﬂ oor can provide useful positioning guides here) 
and to keep facing the speakers so that the microphone’s cardioid polar pat-
tern can do its job properly. Some singers have a habit of wrapping their hand 
around the grille of their handheld mic, presumably in an attempt to shield 
it from spill, but this is actually counterproductive, because the directionality 
of dynamic microphones is created using vents at the sides/rear of the head 
assembly—so if you cover those up you’ll get more spill, not less! One ﬁ nal 
cautionary note comes courtesy of Stephen Hague, 27 and should make sense in 
the light of what we learnt about vocal frequency dispersion in Section 4.3.1: 
“Things can get out of control very quickly when sibilant singers use a hand-
held mic.”
 
 THE BEST MIC ISN’T ALWAYS THE BEST-SOUNDING MIC 
 On occasion the best mic may not be the best-sounding one. Stephen Lipson 28 remembers Paul McCartney 
letting Ringo Starr use a dodgy-sounding vocal mic simply because he felt that the retro look of it would inspire 
him to sing better, for instance. Joe Barresi 29 relates a similar studio experience with an Electrovoice 666: “I 
told the band, ‘Hey, this is the mic of the beast—it’s the devil mic,’ and… I swear, the guitar solo was one take, 
the piano was one take, and the vocal was one take.” 
 
 5.1.3    Ribbon Mics 
 Ribbons were top of the tree quality-wise from the 1920s until condenser 
designs really began taking the industry by storm during the 1950s. Their 
understated high frequencies give them a slightly dull tonality to modern 
ears, but even if you equalize them to reintroduce brightness at mixdown they 
nonetheless retain a uniquely smooth sonic personality that remains popular 
to this day. For vocals, what most matters is that the resonant frequency of the 
mic’s diaphragm (a super-thin “ribbon” of metal foil) will be located toward 
the low extreme of the audible frequency range, which means you don’t get 
that high-frequency “condenser zing”—and sometimes that’s exactly what the 
doctor ordered, for example if your singer has an unpleasantly harsh edge to 
their voice, or you’re simply after the syrupy retro timbre of Doris Day or the 
Rat Pack. Almost all ribbon mics have a ﬁ gure-eight polar pattern by the very 
nature of their design, and many also capture a slightly different tonal balance 
depending on whether you sing into the front or the rear, so this is something 
worth experimenting with. 
 The biggest practical difﬁ culty with ribbon mics is taking good care of them. 
The ribbon element is quite fragile, so even though it’ll happily record 
extremely loud sounds, it can easily be deformed or torn if hit by a puff of air. 

Beyond Vanilla Vocals CHAPTER 5
161
With vocals, that means it’s sensible to use a pop shield at all times to defend 
the ribbon against plosives, but you also need to be careful of anything else 
that might create gusts—ribbons have been known to break just from someone 
closing the lid of the mic-storage box too abruptly or slamming a door nearby! 
It’s a good idea to store the mic with the ribbon vertically as well, to avoid it 
sagging over time. Ribbon mics have a large and powerful magnet in them, so 
be careful to keep the mic away from any small metal objects/ﬁ lings that might 
be drawn into the works—this is a good reason to avoid ever putting ribbon 
mics down on the ﬂ oor without a dust cover on them. Most ribbon mics don’t 
need power to operate, and feeding phantom power to them may even damage 
them, so make sure it’s switched off unless you happen to be using one of the 
more recent phantom-powered active ribbon designs. 
 The ﬁ nal issue with ribbon mics is that they only put out a very weak signal, 
so you have to push your mic preamp gain close to maximum, at which point 
cheaper preamps can start getting very noisy. One workaround is to use some-
thing like the Cloud Microphones Cloudlifter, a phantom-powered device 
that connects in-line between the mic and your recording system and provides 
roughly an extra 20 dB of clean gain so that your preamp doesn’t have to strain 
as hard. Alternatively, investigate active ribbon mics, as they typically have 
 FIGURE 5.4   
 If you’re using budget 
preamps, active ribbon 
mics such as the 
Sontronics Sigma (above 
left) or Superlux R102 
(above right) shown here 
may give you quieter 
recordings than passive 
designs. Alternatively, 
one of the Cloudlifter 
boxes (below) from 
Cloud Microphones 
can achieve similar 
noise-ﬂ oor reduction for 
passive ribbon models. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
162
much higher output. (Before we go on, let me also clarify my terminology a 
little. Strictly speaking, ribbon designs are actually a subtype of the dynamic 
microphones. In this book, however, I’ve adopted the more widespread col-
loquial usage I hear amongst small-studio engineers, who generally treat rib-
bon mics and dynamic mics as totally different beasts. So whenever I have 
something to say about ribbon mics here, I’ll always name-check them directly 
rather than lumping them in with other dynamic designs.)
 
 SMALL-DIAPHRAGM CONDENSERS? 
 Small-diaphragm condensers are usually slim end-fi re designs (hence their “pencil mic” nickname) with 
diaphragm diameters of less than half an inch or so. Although such designs often have better high-frequency 
extension and are less likely to fl inch in the face of extreme sound levels, their noise performance usually 
lets them down a bit by comparison with large-diaphragm models. I don’t think this is the main reason they’re 
hardly ever mentioned by professional engineers for vocal recording, though: It’s because they don’t enhance 
the vocal sound in the same fl attering way, which means that the recorded timbre often ends up sounding 
rather hard and unappealing. While there are no hard-and-fast rules when it comes to mic selection (small-
diaphragm mics were used for many Motown hits, for instance), I think it’s probably fair to say that a small-
diaphragm condenser for vocals should probably be considered rather a long shot while overdubbing. 
 
 5.2    USING ACOUSTIC REFLECTIONS 
 Although we spent a lot of time in Chapter 4 talking about removing room 
reﬂ ections from a vocal (because that’s what people do most of the time), you 
can also make a virtue of them. Bruce Swedien, 30 for instance, deliberately used 
an array of cylindrical reﬂ ectors (ASC’s Studio Traps or “Tube Traps”) to intro-
duce a dense and controllable pattern of reﬂ ections which enhanced the lead-
vocal sound on Michael Jackson’s later records, and which also had the effect 
of keeping the miked sound a little more consistent as Jackson danced around 
the mic while performing. Another example comes from Steve Bush, 31 talking 
about recording Kelly Jones for The Stereophonics’ debut album: “If we used 
the small stone room at Real World Studios, all the vocals had a really rich 
enhanced sound from the room… All the best singing went down in this par-
ticular room, because of its sound.” This is also part of the reason why so many 
people like singing in the shower or in the front seat of their car, where there’s 
a hard acoustic reﬂ ector right in front of them. 
 But it’s not just tonal enhancement that the reﬂ ections offer, because they can 
also help blend the vocal into the mix. “When you’re recording a vocal, you 
have to think about how you want the vocalist’s voice to sit in the track,” says 
Paul Epworth. 32 “If you’re doing a rock tune and you’ve got the singer right up 
against the microphone, you’re going to have to work really hard with EQ to 
try and make it sound like it sits in the track. Something I learned from John 
Leckie: You record the vocalist where you think you want to position them in 
the piece of music, and with a rock singer it’s better to record them an arm’s 
length away so that it seems to sit on that scale in the track.” 

Beyond Vanilla Vocals CHAPTER 5
163
 If you’d like to pursue these ideas, however, let 
me offer a couple of hints. Firstly, a spread of 
reﬂ ections is what you’re looking for, not just 
a couple of isolated ones that’ll cause obvious 
comb-ﬁ ltering problems, so you’re unlikely to 
get a good result just by dragging a spare plank 
into an otherwise padded environment. Much 
better to hunt around for a room that has a 
more lively sound, and then experiment a lit-
tle with positioning the singer and mic within 
that. By the same token, though, you rarely 
want an obvious reverb “tail,” so you may still 
want to soak up some of the more indirect 
reﬂ ections, especially in larger rooms—this 
is where Bruce Swedien’s setup is so canny, 
because cylindrical reﬂ ectors placed behind 
the singer within a larger studio room will 
provide reﬂ ections which primarily arrive at 
the mic within about 10 ms of the dry sound. 
Room reﬂ ections can help thicken up layered 
vocals too if you get the singer to take a step 
or two back from the mic for each different take—a well-worn studio trick that 
Swedien 33 used for Michael Jackson’s “Rock With You,” for instance. 
 5.3   LOUDSPEAKER MONITORING 
 Most working engineers will tell you that some singers hate recording 
with headphones on, but even those who aren’t allergic to cans will often 
give a more emotionally uninhibited performance when monitoring via 
loudspeakers instead. “Many times I’ve recorded singers using stage moni-
tors instead of headphones,” says Joe Chiccarelli, 34 “and I’ve even had 
vocalists sing in the control room while listening to studio monitor speak-
ers. It’s better to ﬁ nd an alternative solution than sacriﬁ ce what might have 
been a great performance.” Clif Norrell 35 also asserts that speaker 
monitoring helps singers with their pitching. It’s a crying 
shame, therefore, that this approach is almost univer-
sally ignored in small studios, presumably because 
of anxiety over foldback spill. There’s actually a lot 
you can do to reduce foldback spill to manageable 
levels, and besides (to quote Eddie Kramer 36 ), “if 
you get a great performance, who cares if there’s 
a little leakage?” The only golden rule is to make 
sure you don’t put anything into the foldback mix 
that won’t appear in the ﬁ nal mix—so you can’t 
have a metronome click in there to help with timing, 
for instance.  
 FIGURE 5.5   
 A group of cylindrical 
reﬂ ectors behind the 
singer adds a complex 
pattern of early-onset 
reﬂ ections to the 
recorded signal. This can 
provide a subjectively 
enhanced sound that 
doesn’t change as much 
when the performer 
moves. Just a few of the 
potential reﬂ ection paths 
are illustrated here. 
 “Some singers 
hate recording with 
headphones on, but even 
those who aren’t allergic to cans 
will often give a more emotionally 
uninhibited performance when 
monitoring via loudspeakers 
instead.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
164
 The various methods of implementing loudspeaker foldback are differentiated 
primarily by how they tackle the foldback spill. Whichever technique you use, 
it’s best to stick to a No Input monitoring mode if you can, so that feedback 
into the vocal mic doesn’t end up comb-ﬁ ltering the recorded vocal timbre at 
all. As such, the balance between the backing mix and the vocalist will effec-
tively be set by the volume of the loudspeakers. Where the singer insists on 
higher-volume monitoring for the general vibe, and this begins to make it hard 
for them to hear themselves, then try reﬂ ecting more of their vocal sound back 
at them acoustically in the ﬁ rst instance, as discussed in Section 4.5.1. 
 5.3.1    Speakers in the Mic Null 
 “Using a fairly directional mic prevents much spill in the ﬁ rst place,” says Steve 
Levine, 37 and this plays into your hands if you’re already using such a mic to 
keep room reﬂ ections down. In this respect, though, ﬁ gure-eight mics will fre-
quently out-perform cardioids, because:
 
■
 the cardioid’s single null makes it less good at rejecting sound from a stereo 
pair of speakers; 
 
■
 ﬁ gure-eight nulls are, by their very nature, signiﬁ cantly more effective across 
the whole frequency range; 
 
■
 the tonality of foldback spill arriving from the back of a cardioid is usually 
rather nasty, not least because the proximity effect of dual-diaphragm con-
denser designs is always bidirectional (so it remains strong at the rear even 
when you switch to a cardioid polar pattern). This is particularly the case 
with cheaper microphones; 
 
■
 the ﬁ gure-eight mic may enable you to place the speakers closer to the 
singer—alongside the microphone as opposed to behind it (see  Figure 5.6 ). 
 That said, loudspeaker monitoring seems to be most commonly used in con-
junction with dynamic mics, which can’t easily be designed to offer a ﬁ gure-
eight polar pattern. Al Stone 38 describes a typical setup here: “We used to 
do vocals in the control room with a handheld dynamic with the monitors 
up as loud as you could get without feedback. Then I’d stand right back and 
[Jamiroquai lead singer Jay Kay would] just perform in front of the desk.” 
Fortunately, however, dynamic models happen to be a little less sensitive to 
off-axis spill than condensers on the whole, so the rejection should still be 
pretty good, especially given that on-stage vocal mics deliberately recess their 
low-end response so that you can sing closer to them without sounding too 
bassy. 
 5.3.2    Polarity Inversion Techniques 
 If your singer can be persuaded to use a mono foldback mix (“Hey, it was good 
enough for the Beatles…”), one way to reduce spill is to feed that to two speak-
ers equidistant from the microphone and then invert the polarity of the sig-
nal feeding one of them. What this means is that as the drivers in one speaker 
cabinet are moving outwards, the drivers of the other will be moving inwards, 

Beyond Vanilla Vocals CHAPTER 5
165
creating opposite pressure waves which cancel each other out at the mic posi-
tion. Here’s Jay Messina 39 talking about this approach: “A trick I learned from 
doing jingles was to put the speakers out of phase while the mic was at the 
cancellation point of those two speakers, and this allowed Steven [Tyler of 
Aerosmith] to sing without using headphones and, therefore, with a little more 
energy and the vibe of being with the band.” The single-sided polarity switch-
ing used to be easy when most people had passive speakers driven by a sepa-
rate ampliﬁ er, because you could simply swap over the two speaker wires at 
the back of one of the speakers. Now that so many small-studio monitors have 
built-in ampliﬁ cation you can’t do this, so you’ll probably need to invert the 
polarity of one channel within your recording system. Alternatively, if your 
speaker connections are balanced, you might use a polarity-inverting XLR 
adaptor or one of the cables shown in  Figure 5.7 instead. 
 FIGURE 5.6   
 Placing foldback 
monitoring loudspeakers 
to take advantage of the 
rejection nulls of cardioid 
(top) and ﬁ gure-eight 
(bottom) polar patterns. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
166
 FIGURE 5.7   
 These two wiring diagrams (left) illustrate how to construct a polarity-inverting balanced audio cable using either TRS or XLR 
connectors. Make sure to label the cables clearly so they don’t get confused with normal ones! An alternative means of inverting 
the polarity of a signal coming out of an XLR cable is to use an off-the-shelf polarity-inverting XLR adaptor such as the DAP Audio 
XGA37 (right). 
 While this approach might seem sensible in theory, to be honest I’ve never 
been very fond of it in practice. For a start, only the direct sound from each 
speaker achieves any signiﬁ cant cancellation, so reﬂ ected sound will still be 
picked up, and the cancellation you do get will mostly be at lower frequencies 
because it’s impossible to match the speaker distances well enough to align 
shorter high-frequency wavelengths. In addition, the inverted-polarity mono 
listening experience is rather unsettling, and generally makes you feel like your 
brain’s being sucked out your ear! So I wouldn’t recommend this technique as 
a ﬁ rst port of call for small-studio users. 
 Besides, there’s a much more effective means of using polarity inversion 
to reduce spill, which also allows a natural-sounding stereo foldback mix. 
The trick is to make sure you keep the speakers and the mic stationary while 
recording, and then, once you’ve recorded all your takes for each section, 
record one more where the singer simply stands at the mic without making a 
noise. The waveform of this “cancellation pass” can be polarity-inverted within 
your recording system and mixed with any of the recorded takes to neutralize 
their foldback spill. This gives extremely good spill reduction, and can often 
reduce it to a level you’d associate more with open-backed headphones than 
loudspeakers. The downside, though, is that any movement of the microphone 

Beyond Vanilla Vocals CHAPTER 5
167
during takes will reduce the effectiveness of the spill cancellation, so it’s clearly 
not appropriate for hand-held dynamics, and even with stand-mounted mics 
you should make sure the stand is well tightened to avoid drooping and that 
you’ve warned the singer not to touch it. This technique also won’t function 
correctly if you’re compressing the recording chain, because the compressor 
won’t react the same way during the cancellation pass.
 
 POLARITY INVERSION OF FOLDBACK SPILL AT MIXDOWN 
 With any recording that has signifi cant foldback spill, whether from headphones or speakers, the track’s signal 
polarity may have some effect on how this spill interacts with your mixdown balance. So at the very least you 
should check the overall mix sound with different polarity settings to make sure you’ve got the best one, or 
else investigate variable phase-adjustment—something I’ll explore properly in Section 7.2.1. 
 
 5.3.3  Tackling Loudspeaker Reﬂ ections 
 Whether you use polarity-inversion techniques or not, you’ll get less foldback 
spill if you can minimize sound reﬂ ecting from a speaker into the sensitive 
regions of your vocal mic’s polar pattern. This is where placing the speakers 
closer to the microphone can pay dividends, because the speaker volume then 
doesn’t need to be as high for the same apparent monitoring loudness from 
the singer’s standpoint. Additional acoustic absorption may also be sensible. 
 5.3.4  Filtering Fixes 
 High-pass ﬁ ltering the foldback mix can help avoid problems with a car-
dioid mic’s rear proximity effect, while removing the top octave of the fold-
back mix with low-pass ﬁ ltering can signiﬁ cantly improve spill-reduction 
when using polarity-inversion techniques, without substantially affecting the 
singer’s listening experience—and of course monitor mixes with less high end 
will also fatigue the ear less at higher playback volumes. Where you’re using a 
directional mic, high-pass ﬁ ltering the recorded signal also lets you position 
the singer closer to the microphone (for less spill) without overblown prox-
imity-effect bass boost, especially if you’ve decided to use a ﬁ gure-eight polar 
pattern. 
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 Omni polar patterns normally give a more natural sound, they’re almost immune to 
proximity effect and handling noises, and they won’t punish a singer’s movements 
with big tonal changes. Concerns about capturing excess room reverb are frequently 
unfounded, because DIY acoustic treatment can be quite effective at vocal frequencies, 
and omnis can be used closer to the singer with fewer sonic problems anyway.  
 
■
 Figure-eight polar patterns may cause greater difﬁ culties with mobile singers, because of 
their narrower frontal sensitivity and strong proximity effect, and they’re also more prone 
to plosive “popping” and picking up physical vibrations than cardioids. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
168
 
■
 Varying the polar pattern of a dual-diaphragm mic gives you extra tonal control without 
additional processing. 
 
■
 Where condenser mics struggle to deal with high signal levels, condensation (from 
breath), or spit, dynamic mics may provide a more rugged alternative. However, the main 
reasons producers use dynamic mics in the studio is for a different sonic character and/or 
so that the musician can perform as on stage. 
 
■
 If your vocalist is using a handheld mic, make sure their grip doesn’t defeat the mic’s 
polar pattern, and be wary of excess sibilance. 
 
■
 Ribbon mics need to be handled with care and can initially appear dull-sounding, but 
they nonetheless have a smooth sonic ﬂ avor that can be very useful for vocals on occa-
sion. Small-diaphragm condenser mics, on the other hand, are a rarity on professional 
vocal sessions. 
 
■
 Acoustic reﬂ ections can enhance your vocal tone if carefully managed: Strong discrete 
reﬂ ections and excessive indirect reﬂ ections can both cause problems. 
 
■
 The performance advantages of loudspeaker monitoring are frequently worth the cost in 
terms of captured foldback spill. To minimize the spill, make good use of the mic’s polar 
pattern; try polarity-inversion tricks; minimize speaker reﬂ ections reaching the mic; and 
consider ﬁ ltering the foldback mix or the recording signal.  
 Repeat Chapter 4’s second assignment, but this time give the vocalist loudspeaker 
monitoring in the fi rst instance. Use mic polar patterns, polarity-inversion tricks, 
acoustic treatment, and fi ltering to minimize foldback spill. However, make sure you 
have a fully functional headphone foldback system waiting in the wings in case your 
loudspeaker monitoring proves unworkable or turns out to be detrimental to the 
performance. 
 Assignment 1: Alternative Vocal-Miking Techniques 
 Repeat Chapter 4’s fi rst assignment, but this time:
 
■
 try to locate a dual-diaphragm microphone and make a point of experimenting with 
the tonal possibilities of different polar patterns;  
 
■
 shoot out a few different mics for your speech, preferably including at least one 
dynamic, one ribbon, and one small-diaphragm condenser, in addition to your favor-
ite large-diaphragm condenser; 
 
■
 deliberately try to introduce some “single-bounce” room refl ections into the record-
ing, so you can hear the kind of sonic impact they make. 
 Assignment 2: Loudspeaker Foldback Monitoring 

Beyond Vanilla Vocals CHAPTER 5
169
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 further reading on different microphone designs and the cancellation effects of 
polarity inversion; 
 
■
 links to the SE Refl exion Filter and Cloud Microphones’ Cloudlifter;  
 
■
 audio demonstrations of different microphone polar patterns and design types, 
and the relative effectiveness of different techniques for reducing spill when using 
loudspeaker foldback monitoring. 
 
  http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch5.htm 

This page intentionally left blank

171
 The time has now come to expand your miking repertoire beyond vocals to 
encompass solo instruments as well, albeit still using a single mic. So for this 
chapter’s assignments you’ll be free to record pretty much any performer you 
like, with the exception of those who play several different instruments at the 
same time—things like drum kits and singing guitarists both present addi-
tional complications which we’ll tackle in later chapters. 
 6.1  BEFORE YOU REACH FOR A MIC 
 When miking any instrument, the single best piece of advice is this: Use your 
ears ﬁ rst. “I always tell guys to go out in the room and listen,” says Al Schmitt. 1 
“Listen to what the instrument sounds like. Then go inside [the control room] 
and try to duplicate it. That’s what your job is.” Bruce Swedien 2 stresses the 
point, illustrating how this essential studio truth has been handed down 
through generations of professionals: “I remember [Bill Putnam] saying ‘Don’t 
just sit down here in the control room. Go see what it sounds like in the studio 
and listen to the music.’” Now if this seems like I’m illuminating the blindingly 
obvious, then great—it means your instincts are already pointing you in the 
right direction. However, my own experience of hundreds of small-studio ses-
sions suggests that the enlightened are also the minority, so indulge me while I 
scratch the surface of this subject a little deeper. 
 6.1.1  Guessing a Mic Position 
 Beyond checking the instrument’s tuning, the ﬁ rst thing you’re listening for is 
roughly where you’re going to put the mic. This mic position will inevitably be 
a guess, and will usually be revised somewhat once you hear the result through 
your speakers, but the  process  of ﬁ nding that position will furnish you with a 
ton of essential information about the instrument and the recording room, 
and will make it a heck of a lot easier to get the recorded sound you need. 
 So you just stroll around the room until you ﬁ nd a good-sounding spot, and 
then put the mic there, right? Unfortunately, this seductive notion actually 
 Single-Mic Instrument 
Recording 
 CHAPTER 6 
 CHAPTER 6 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
172
leads people to inappropriate miking positions more often than not, because 
of the nature of the human ear’s directionality. While the speciﬁ cs of this are 
extremely complex, in practice the polar pattern of your hearing system is 
broadly similar to that of a subcardioid mic, which means that common omni, 
cardioid, and ﬁ gure-eight polar patterns will pick up something substantially 
different to what you’re hearing in any good-sounding head loca-
tion—for example an omni will sound too wet (i.e., it’ll 
pick up too much reﬂ ected sound), while a cardioid or 
ﬁ gure-eight will typically sound too dry. 
 One solution to this is to compensate mentally: 
Supercardioid or hypercardioid mics will want 
to be roughly 50% more distant than your 
favored listening position to achieve a similar 
dry/wet balance, whereas cardioid or ﬁ gure-
eight mics need only be about 25% further away. 
Omnis, on the other hand, can usually afford to 
be about 25% closer in. The snag there, though, is 
that miking distance also affects other attributes of the 
instrument’s timbre (not least because of the comb-ﬁ ltering 
and room-resonance issues I mentioned in Section 4.4), so the rest 
of the sound may not be nearly as good in the mentally adjusted position. One 
way to work around this involves listening in two stages:
 1.  Find the head position which gives the most appropriate dry/wet balance, 
without getting too hung up on the quality of the rest of the sound.  
 2.  Estimate what the actual miking distance should be (depending on the 
polar pattern of the mic you’re planning to use), move your head to this 
distance, and scout around there until you ﬁ nd a position where the instru-
ment sounds its best—while trying to ignore the fact that it’ll sound too 
dry/wet at that location. 
 Where you’re using a cardioid mic, though, there’s a trick that can provide a 
shortcut here: Arrange your hands vertically just behind your ears, perpendic-
ular to your line of sight, thereby blocking some of the sound from behind 
you and making your hearing a bit more cardioid. You’ll look a bit of a twerp, 
but it does seem to work quite well in terms of allowing you to make a rea-
sonable judgment of both the dry/wet balance and the general timbre simul-
taneously—and it translates pretty well for ﬁ gure-eight mics too. However, be 
careful not to cup your hands or bend your pinnae (the anatomical term for 
the outer ear ﬂ aps) forward when pulling this stunt, because that usually has 
fairly drastic side-effects for the frequency response you’re hearing. 
 If you have a choice of polar patterns available, this obviously gives you a bit 
more ﬂ exibility in terms of where you place your mic, although the amount 
of room ambience each pattern captures won’t be the only factor to consider, 
as we’ve already touched on in Section 5.1.1. Proximity effect will have a big 
impact for close-miking positions, of course, but when you’re miking from 
 “Common omni, 
cardioid, and fi gure-eight 
polar patterns will pick up 
something substantially different 
to what you’re hearing—for example, 
an omni will sound too wet, while 
a cardioid or fi gure-eight will 
typically sound too dry.” 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
173
more than about a meter away you’ll also typically ﬁ nd that an 
omni mic will give the most extended and natural-sounding 
low-end response, and that as you shift from omni through 
cardioid to ﬁ gure-eight the sound becomes progressively thin-
ner and less realistic at low frequencies. This is one of the big 
reasons why so many engineers working on classical/acoustic 
music favor omni microphones for more distant placements. 
“I like to start with an omni before anything,” says Telarc’s 
Michael Bishop, 3 for instance.  
 Some people suggest putting your ﬁ nger in one ear so that 
you’re hearing in mono (as a single mic does), but I’ve never 
had much luck with this myself. The problem is that block-
ing the ear canal causes something called the Occlusion Effect, 
which makes any vibration reaching the ear canal by other 
means much more audible, as well as boosting that ear’s 
perceived low-end response by around 20 dB. Even if you stand motion-
less to avoid your muscles or breathing apparatus transferring vibrations 
to the blocked ear via bone conduction, you’ll still hear the low-register 
rushing noise of your own blood ﬂ ow, and probably the high-pitched 
“hissing” of nerve activity too. For me, these noises have always proved 
too much of a distraction when trying to concentrate on the sounds out-
side my own head! Pressing or cupping a hand over one pinna is unlikely 
to help either, because some sound will unavoidably leak into the ear canal, 
and it’ll be so tonally colored that it’ll skew your perception of what you’re 
hearing with the free ear. So I’d personally stick with the natural two-eared 
approach if I were you. (What will often help, though, is closing your eyes, 
because this focuses your attention more on what you’re hearing, and 
makes you less likely to be biased by visual input, as we already discussed in 
Section 2.3.2.) 
 If the instrument and recording space happen to be well suited to your needs 
already, then this kind of listening approach can deliver a pretty good starting 
mic position in a matter of seconds. It’s always a buzz to strike it lucky like this, 
but every small-studio engineer must face the fact that the job won’t be nearly 
that easy 90% of the time. What usually happens is that you get your head at a 
distance where you suspect your planned mic polar pattern will pick up a rea-
sonable dry/wet balance, but you simply can’t ﬁ nd a sound you’re happy with 
from any angle—either the different elements of the instrument’s sound aren’t 
balanced (you get too much breath, bow, or stick noise, say) or the overall sub-
jective timbre of the instrument just isn’t as appealing as you’d like. 
 In this situation, you may be able to improve an unpromising live-room 
sound with some odd-ball mic technique or by applying signal-processing 
in the recording chain, but why ﬁ ght an uphill struggle? “If a recording starts 
off bad, every other step after that is struggling to make it up,” asserts Stuart 
Sullivan. 4 “I’m not going to say that if it starts bad there’s no way anything can 
 FIGURE 6.1   
 Although some engineers 
like to plug one ear 
while listening for mic 
positions, the Occlusion 
Effect may undermine 
the usefulness of this 
approach for you in 
practice. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
174
get better—that’s ridiculous—but with anything you lose at the beginning, you 
can’t get as much back and it gets harder and harder to add to it.” “It’s not 
about  getting  a great sound,” adds Trina Shoemaker, 5 “it’s about capturing a 
great sound that’s already there.” It’s usually far quicker and easier to address 
sonic problems before the technology gets involved, and working that way also 
means you spend more of your time in the live room (where the magic’s really 
happening!) building valuable relationships with the musicians. “I do not like 
being in the control room during recording sessions,” remarks Elliot Mazer, 6 
for instance. “I like being with the [musicians]. It gives me a sense of who they 
are, a sense of what they need in order to get a good performance.”  
 DON’T FORGET THE HEIGHT 
 I can’t tell you how often I’ve seen amateur (and not so 
amateur!) engineers walking all round their recording room, 
intently looking for a good-sounding spot—but without 
substantially changing the height of their head! This is 
particularly daft in small studios, where the fl oor and ceiling 
are the closest room boundaries for the majority of listening 
locations, and are therefore most likely to infl uence the 
timbre acoustically when you move your head in relation to 
them. So don’t be shy: Crouch down, stand on a stepladder, 
form a human pyramid… “I’ll always get up on a ladder and 
get up in the air to listen for where the sweet spots are,” says 
Michael Bishop, 7 for instance.  
 FIGURE 6.2   
 With a stepladder on hand you can listen to a lot more 
potential miking positions. 
 6.1.2    Your Friend, The Musician 
 If you’re not hearing a good sound in the recording room, ﬁ rst ask the player to 
help you improve it. “I always tell engineers,” says Al Schmitt, 8 “your best friend 
in the studio is the musician. He wants to sound good, you want him to sound 
good, you’re a team.” Joe Zook 9 is just one of many who echo Schmitt’s view: 
“Recording instruments is a team sport. Nine times out of ten a great acoustic 
guitar sound happens when the player makes subtle adjustments…It’s all in 
the hands of the player.” This is something I already mentioned with regard to 
electronic instruments back in Section 2.2.4, but it’s even more pertinent where 
acoustic sources are concerned. Unless you happen to be The Artist Formerly 
Known As Squiggle, most of the performers you record are likely to be more 
accomplished instrumentalists than you are, so it’s borderline criminal not to 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
175
take advantage of their experience while you’re still at the stage in the produc-
tion process where the sound can be changed most radically. Besides, a lot of 
players will feel ﬂ attered by your inquiries, and will like nothing more than 
showing off their arcane instrument knowledge and technical expertise. 
 Sadly, a lot of musicians these days have become rather blasé about crafting 
sounds properly at source, because they feel that anything can be ﬁ xed in the 
mix. Yes, it’s true that a lot can be done to salvage poor multitrack recordings 
(as I’ve demonstrated in  Sound On Sound  magazine’s Mix Rescue column), 
but what I can also tell you categorically is that trying to “ﬁ x it in the mix” is 
extraordinarily inefﬁ cient—in most of those Mix Rescue projects a few more 
hours well spent during tracking would have saved me days of tedious reme-
dial work! To quote Trevor Horn: 10 “The mix is the worst time to do anything.” 
Although accommodating and adapting to the needs of the musician is a recur-
ring theme throughout this book, this is one issue where I urge you to stand 
ﬁ rm: Don’t let musicians sit on the fence about their sound! “The stupidest 
thing that any musician can do,” asserts Tony Platt, 11 “is to just plug in and 
play and say ‘make that sound good.’ I will always say to the guitar player, for 
instance, ‘Is that sound coming out of your ampliﬁ er the sound you want to 
hear? If it isn’t, show me what it is and we’ll try to get somewhere close to that 
before we even put a microphone on.’ It’s a waste of everybody’s time to sit 
there tweaking stuff until somebody says, ‘Oh that’s good.’” 
 6.1.3  Tonal Adjustment at Source 
 Even the most apathetic player will usually come up with a few ideas for 
changing the sound when prodded. (If not, consider a cattle prod.) However, 
there are some tactics that are so regularly useful that any engineer should 
always keep them at the front of their mind (in addition to those discussed 
back in Section 3.4):
 
■
 Change the Instrument.  This may seem obvious, but the most difﬁ cult thing 
to work around in the studio is the wrong choice of instrument. This is par-
ticularly relevant for anything that relies on a resonant wooden body, because 
very small variations in construction can give rise to surprisingly large sonic 
differences. Orchestral string instruments, harps, mandolins, and acoustic 
guitars all fall squarely into this category, for instance, which is why most pro-
fessional producers lay great emphasis on ﬁ nding the right tool for the job. 
“I once asked Daniel Lanois for advice on how to get a good acoustic gui-
tar sound,” recalls Pierre Marchand. 12 “His answer was: Get a good-sounding 
acoustic guitar.” Different instruments will often suit different arrangement 
roles too, as Bob Bullock 13 notes here in relation to acoustic guitars: “The 
choice of instrument is just as critical as the microphone. A big Gibson J200 
gives you a very full, rich sound, which is great for padding the track. Taylor 
guitars offer a sharper, edgier sound, which is good for licks and solos.” But 
complex resonant characteristics are also inherent to piano soundboards, 
drum shells, and guitar speaker cabinets, and there again the choice of 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
176
instrument is frequently paramount—so much so, in fact, that one of the best 
arguments for a small-studio owner to shell out for commercial studio time is 
if it gives them access to an extensive collection of instruments.  
 
■
Change the Playing Implement.  Another thing that’s often straightforward 
to change is the implement used to play the instrument. We already men-
tioned switching guitar picks in Chapter 3, and the design of the mallets/
sticks used to hit percussion instruments affects their recorded sound just as 
much. The same goes for struck strings—even where there’s only one set of 
hammers available, these can sometimes be hardened or softened, and tales 
abound of people sticking drawing pins into the hammers of an upright 
piano or sliding a sheet of material between its hammers and the strings.  
 BACKGROUND NOISE AND SYMPATHETIC RESONANCE 
 While you’re listening in the recording room, keep your ears open for any unwanted noises that you’d rather not 
record. It’s extremely easy to miss persistent repetitive background noises (lighting buzz, ticking clocks, traffi c 
rumble, birdsong) while you’re concentrating hard on the sound of the instrument, so make a conscious effort 
to switch your focus briefl y at some point. One specifi c thing to listen for is anything that’s vibrating in sympathy 
with the instrument you’re recording, especially when tracking bass instruments. Unused snare drums are 
common culprits, their snare wires rattling along sporadically, but luckily these can be silenced in most cases 
using the “throw-off” lever on the side of the drum, or if necessary a sheet of kitchen towel between the wires 
and the drumskin. And, speaking of drums, listen out for the rattling of any loose hardware when recording those.  
 FIGURE 6.3    
 A scrap of gaffer tape can easily silence most drum hardware rattles—as in this 
picture, where the mounting lugs (circled) on a kick drum have been immobilized 
following the removal of the resonant drum head. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
177
 
■
 Change the Tuning.  Drums are frequently retuned on commercial sessions. 
Not only does tuning provide a wide range of control over the sound’s tone 
and sustain characteristics, but it can also improve the instrument’s ability 
to blend into the mix if pitched resonances are harmonically consonant. 
Guitars are also frequently used with alternate tunings, and even orches-
tral string instruments have some leeway in this regard, although I’d stick 
to fairly conservative downward retunings of any acoustic instrument if the 
player’s in any doubt about whether changes in string tension may dam-
age their instrument. Particular mention should be made of the so-called 
“Nashville” guitar tuning, where the bottom three or four strings play an 
octave higher than their conventional pitches. “It has this great, clear, open 
sound that’s not just for Country,” explains John Merchant. 14 “If you go 
back and listen to Keith Richards’ guitar on ‘Jumping Jack Flash,’ that was 
accomplished using Nashville tuning.” 
 
■
 Change the Pressure/Angle.  The pressure with which a player applies their 
ﬁ ngers, bow, and/or lips to most melodic instruments is a crucial tonal vari-
able, as is the angle of their breath or bowing action. Even the sound of a 
guitar pick will vary according to the pressure of the player’s ﬁ ngers on it 
and the angle it hits the strings, as mentioned in Section 3.4.1. 
 
■
 Change the Volume.  Almost all instruments will sound tonally different 
when played at different volumes, and acoustic instruments (just like vocals) 
often give fuller-sounding recordings when they’re not played too loud. “The 
more quietly you play,” says T-Bone Burnett 15 for example, “the less attack 
there is and the more tone there is. If you hit a guitar too hard, it chokes 
the note off.” (Justin Niebank 16 says almost exactly the same in relation to 
drums.) Smokier timbres in particular are difﬁ cult to get from wind/brass 
instruments unless you can keep their notes quiet enough so that low-level 
noise components come through clearly. That said, overdriven electric gui-
tar amps may simply not sound right for rock music unless 
they’re rattling the furniture. Even then, however, 
smaller amps don’t necessarily mean a diminu-
tive sound on record. “At high volume, smaller 
ampliﬁ ers give a bigger sound than big amps 
most of the time,” afﬁ rms Chris Lord-Alge, 17 
for instance. “If you go back to Duane 
Allman and Eric Clapton on ‘Layla,’ they 
used little ampliﬁ ers like Fender Champs, 
and it sounds pretty damn large.”   
 
■
 Change the Damping.  One of the deﬁ ning 
sonic attributes of instruments that are struck or 
plucked is the duration of each note’s decay, and 
there is usually a way to shorten this if you wish by apply-
ing some kind of additional damping. With things like harps, guitars, cym-
bals, and gongs, the player is often able to damp them with their hands as 
part of their playing technique, but other instruments (most notably drums—
see the “Engineer’s Quickstart Guide: Drums” box) are less easy for the musi-
cian to control in this way, so some additional intervention may be useful.  
 “Almost all 
instruments will sound 
tonally different when played 
at different volumes, and acoustic 
instruments (just like vocals) often 
give fuller-sounding recordings 
when they’re not played 
too loud.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
178
 ENGINEER’S QUICKSTART GUIDE: DRUMS 
 There’s not much you can do to change the basic sound of a cymbal (other than choosing a different one!), but 
there’s masses of stuff that will alter the tone of a drum. The choice of drum head is a crucial tonal component, 
and it’s usually best to put fresh heads onto a drum before important recording dates if you can, and to have a 
couple of spare heads lying around if your drummer is a particularly heavy hitter. Whatever playing implement is 
used, the exact point of contact makes a big difference to the timbre, so if consistency of tone is important to 
a part you’re recording (for example, a backbeat), then alerting the drummer to the importance of careful aim 
can make life much easier at mixdown. If a kick-drum pedal or drum stool squeaks undesirably, you can usually 
silence it with a quick squirt of light oil. 
 Tuning drums affects not only their pitch, but also their tone and sustain, so the process is something of a 
black art, as well as a hot topic of debate amongst performers. Unless you’re a drummer yourself, I’d entrust 
the musician you’re recording with tuning decisions. (If you want to do a quick confi dence check for yourself, 
press down gently on the center of the drum head with one fi nger to damp it, and then tap the drum skin lightly 
a couple of inches from each lug—normally the tuning should be the same all the way round.) That doesn’t 
mean you shouldn’t bring up the subject, though, because although most drums will have a natural shell 
resonance which determines the range of useful tunings, there’ll still be plenty of scope to alter their attack, 
tone, and sustain within that range. 
 Another contentious issue is whether, and how, to damp a drum’s vibration in the studio. On the one hand, 
much of the power and harmonic complexity of any drum comes from its complex resonant characteristics, 
so some players resist using 
damping on the basis that it 
robs the sound of its richness 
and personality. On the other 
hand, there are lots of situations 
in music production where you 
may want to reduce the overall 
decay tail of a drum, or scotch an 
overprominent pitched resonance, 
and applying damping materials 
is a quick and effective means 
of achieving that. My advice is to 
be upfront about discussing the 
sound with the musician, and let 
them take the lead when it comes 
to choosing damping tactics. If 
they can reshape the sustain 
characteristics suitably with 
careful retuning, or by changing 
drum heads, then great; if not, 
then you can explore damping 
possibilities together instead. 
 My favorite damping method is to 
take a six-inch strip of gaffer tape, 
fold it into a “T” shape creating 
a one-inch fl ap in the middle, and 
then stick that somewhere on 
 FIGURE 6.4   
 A strip of gaffer tape, folded as shown to leave a small ﬂ ap poking up into the air, 
provides a usefully moderate degree of damping—and you can usually get away with 
using two of those, if required, before you start obviously dulling the instrument’s 
overall tone. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
179
the drum skin. This produces a usefully moderate damping effect, and you can usually put one or two of these 
onto a drum without murdering its high-frequency tone. Bear in mind that the exact positioning of the damping 
will determine which of the drum’s overtones are most heavily targeted, so don’t be afraid to pick the gaffer up 
by its fl ap and reposition it a few times if you don’t get a promising result at fi rst. As a rough guide, damping 
positions at about 1/4 and 3/4 of the drum skin’s diameter will tend to produce the biggest changes, so you 
can make the effect more subtle if you need by pulling the gaffer more toward the edge. Wherever you put the 
tape, though, make sure it’s not going to be hit, because it’ll affect the tone and feel of the drum’s attack, as 
well as making an ungodly mess once the player wears a hole through it. One of the great things about using 
gaffer tape is that you can damp the underside of single-skinned drums if you need more positioning fl exibility, 
and this is particularly relevant to hand drums of any kind, where the whole drum skin is frequently used for 
different playing techniques. Where more overtly damped sounds are required, you can add mass to a gaffer 
patch using a coin or two, or tape down one end of a small bundle of tissue paper to increase air drag.  
 Gaffer tape isn’t the only damping option you’ll see in studios, though. Little squishy blue pads called Moongel 
are popular with a lot of drummers, and they have the advantage of being reusable, although they won’t hold to 
the underside of a drum skin like gaffer can. A cigarette packet or wallet on the snare isn’t uncommon either. 
“[Ringo Starr] always used to have a half-empty soft packet of Lark cigarettes on the top of the snare, which 
gave it a certain sound,” recalls Geoff Emerick, 19 for instance. Tea towels or sheets have even been put over 
drums on many commercial records, and not just where super-dry disco beats were the aim. Emerick did this 
with the Beatles too, and here’s Andy Smith 20 talking about Paul Simon’s album  So Beautiful So What : “There 
are several tracks that have a standard drum kit, but Paul usually wanted them to sound a bit different. On 
many of the tracks…the drummer placed towels over each drum so they’d have more of a muffl ed quality, 
leaving more room for the higher-frequency percussion stuff.”  
 Kick drums deserve a special mention as far 
as damping is concerned. If the instrument’s 
resonant head (the one the drummer isn’t hitting) is 
completely intact, you’ll generally get more sustain, 
whereas using a resonant head with a hole in it, or 
removing that head completely, alters the sound’s 
decay characteristics. Many drummers will have a 
towel or small cushion of some type nestling in the 
bottom of the drum to stop it ringing on too long, 
but home-studio engineers do sometimes get a bit 
carried away, packing the thing so full that they end 
up with a featureless thud which is easily lost in 
the mix. This makes the drum respond unnaturally 
for the player into the bargain, which is arguably the 
greater sin. A folded towel (anchored into position 
with some kind of weight) is usually fi ne, and you 
can moderate the nature of the damping by sliding 
it so that different amounts of fabric come into 
contact with each of the two heads. If you feel you 
need more damping than that, then you’ll probably 
be better served by removing the resonant head in 
the fi rst instance, rather than just stuffi ng in your 
whole laundry basket. 
 FIGURE 6.5   
 Here you can see that the snare has both a piece of Moongel 
and a small ﬂ ap of gaffer tape applied to it for damping 
purposes. Any more damping than that, and you start running 
the risk of destroying the drum’s high-frequency tone. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
180
 
■
 Other Tonal Controls.  Many instruments will sound very different when 
using a mute, and you may even be able to choose between several different 
designs, each with its own unique timbre. The position of a player’s hands 
can have a big inﬂ uence too, especially with French horn and harmonica. 
A guitar amp’s built-in equalizer controls are fair game as well (“Let’s avoid 
EQ later, let’s use the EQ on your amp,” says Bob Weston 18 ), although it’s 
poor etiquette to start mucking around with those without asking the gui-
tarist ﬁ rst.  
 
■
 Specialty Performance Techniques. Every instrument has a few non-
standard performance techniques that are fairly common currency—things 
like ﬂ ute ﬂ utter tongue, violin  col legno , and guitar pinched harmon-
ics. Performers will rarely use them instinctively, though, especially when 
improvising, so it’s sometimes worth asking a musician directly about what 
specialty tricks might be on the menu. 
 6.1.4    The Role of the Room 
 Recording isn’t just about the instrument and the mic. The room is equally 
important, and affects the sound of both, even when using very close mic posi-
tions. “The room the amp is in still has a huge effect on the tight-mic sound,” 
says Daniel Lanois 21 with regard to recording electric guitar. “I believe that the 
ampliﬁ er responds to the room, and the two become one.” Comb-ﬁ ltering may 
detract from the sound if your instrument is particularly close to a hard ﬂ at 
surface, in which case acoustically dampen-
ing that (as discussed in Section 4.4) may 
reduce the unwanted tonal coloration. 
Cymbals in low-ceilinged rooms are com-
mon offenders here, so a couple of square 
meters of acoustic foam on the ceiling 
above them can work wonders. You don’t 
need to ﬁ x it permanently—just taping it 
between a couple of spare mic stands will 
do the job.  
 It’s not always easy to absorb your way out 
of comb-ﬁ ltering problems, though, so 
working engineers will frequently transplant 
an instrument to different positions in a 
room (or a different room entirely), where 
the reﬂ ections aren’t as strong or where dif-
ferent path-lengths for the reﬂ ected sounds 
transform the frequency-response undula-
tions of comb-ﬁ ltering from a curse into a 
blessing. Few sources beneﬁ t more from 
this kind of experimentation than small 
 FIGURE 6.6   
 A sheet of acoustic 
foam slung across 
the top of an 
overhead cymbal 
mic can help absorb 
reﬂ ections from a 
low ceiling, thereby 
reducing comb-
ﬁ ltering artifacts in 
the recorded sound. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
181
electric-guitar cabinets, which rarely sound their best when left standing on 
the ﬂ oor. This is one of the reasons I keep a couple of collapsible tilting ampli-
ﬁ er stands in my own mic-stand bag, but a chair or table can also be usefully 
pressed into service here. 
 Comb-ﬁ ltering isn’t the only side-effect of strong reﬂ ections, though. Although 
low frequencies will happily just pass though window panes, doors, and light-
weight stud walls, any boundary that’s sturdy enough to reﬂ ect them will 
simply reinforce (rather than comb-ﬁ lter) the low-end response of any instru-
ment placed nearby—the so-called “boundary effect.” (In room corners the 
bass boost becomes more pronounced because of the cumulative effect of 
two boundaries.) You can use the boundary effect to warm up instruments 
that are sounding thin (the nearer they are to the boundary, the bassier their 
sound gets), or move something like an upright piano away from the wall to 
avoid woolliness. 
 Room resonances are another crucial concern, which is why you’ll see some 
engineers walking around an unknown recording room clapping (because 
this produces a giveaway metallic timbre when high-frequency ﬂ utter-echoes 
are present) and making a general racket (to gauge the character of the lower-
frequency resonances and reﬂ ections more generally). “The place that you like 
the reﬂ ected sound is a good place to start,” explains Steve Albini. 22 “A lot of 
studios are designed to have very little reﬂ ected energy and support from the 
room, and those can be very frustrating environments to record in…Non-
professionally designed studios [can] be more ﬂ attering acoustically.”  
 Even if you’re Barry White incarnate, though, vocal frequencies aren’t going 
to tell you much about resonances for low-end instruments, so an element of 
suck-it-and-see instrument repositioning will be par for the course with those. 
“I had a cellist in,” recalls Tony Visconti, 23 for example, “and I moved her 
until I got a good sound. Once I put her in one particular corner, her cello just 
sang…It’s not so much the instrument; the room is very much a part of the 
sound.” Mike Stavrou 24 makes a point of experimenting with the location of 
low drums. “Have the drummer, or better still your assistant, drag the [drum] 
around the area while you keep listening as he keeps banging it. The more 
you listen the more you’ll hear. You will ﬁ nd positions where it sounds much 
thicker, and also dramatically thinner.” Bear in mind that it’s usually a whole 
lot easier to move the instrument and player before you’ve set up mics, head-
phones, or any acoustic treatment, so do your best not to postpone questions 
of instrument placement beyond the initial listening stage, otherwise you’ll 
never get round to it. 
 All the same acoustics issues will also inﬂ uence the sound at your head posi-
tion while you’re listening in the recording room—and subsequently the 
sound picked up by a mic there too. However, comb-ﬁ ltering effects won’t 
be as apparent to your two ears as they’ll be to the single microphone, so the 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
182
main things to concentrate on while reﬁ ning your head position will be the 
strength of any boundary effect (especially near the ﬂ oor) and whether the 
low-frequency resonances at different spots in the room help or hinder your 
goals. In particular, pay close attention to the subjective balance of different 
pitches when recording bass-guitar cabinets or upright bass, because getting 
sufﬁ cient low-end evenness with these instruments is one of the biggest chal-
lenges of small-room engineering.
 
 FLOOR RESONANCE 
 The resonance of a studio’s fl oor can affect the low-end sound of any instrument physically coupled to it—
especially things like kick drums, speaker cabinets, and upright basses. When fi rst checking out unknown 
rooms, John Kurlander 25 stamps on the fl oor to test this. “[If] there’s a little bit of give,” he says, “the bass 
response will be a lot more generous than if it feels like a thick concrete slab.” One way to combat this 
interaction is to construct some kind of riser, a tactic Jay Graydon, 26 Jack Joseph Puig, 27 Bruce Swedien, 28 and 
Shelly Yakus 29 have all mentioned in interview. “It will add clarity to the sound because the amp is no longer 
coupling to the fl oor and reinforcing the bass frequencies.” explains Puig. 30 
 
 FIGURE 6.7   
 Using a tilting ampliﬁ er 
stand is a good way to 
adjust the nature of the 
comb-ﬁ ltering caused 
by sound reﬂ ections 
from the ﬂ oor. Another 
advantage is that it 
brings a standing 
player more on-axis 
to their ﬂ oor-standing 
cabinet, which usually 
means they’re hearing 
something closer to the 
recorded sound while 
performing. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
183
 6.2   HOMING IN ON A MIC POSITION 
 While careful listening in the recording room can ﬁ nd you a ballpark mic posi-
tion at warp speed, that must always be considered a ﬁ rst guess, especially if 
you’ve been unable to investigate a loud instrument’s close-miking possibilities 
by ear without risk of hearing fatigue/damage. The only reliable way to place 
a mic is to adjust your initial miking position while monitoring the results 
through your recording system—and you should normally expect to change it 
several times before reaching a really dependable sound. 
 6.2.1  Adjusting Your Initial Mic Position by Ear 
 The ideal studio conﬁ guration for comparing mic positions is where the per-
former is in a separate live room and you’ve got a willing assistant to move 
the mic around. That way you can direct proceedings via a sight-line or 
over talkback, quickly auditioning hundreds of different mic positions through 
your control-room loudspeakers as the mic’s swept around. This is a magniﬁ -
cently swift method which is one of the biggest beneﬁ ts of overdubbing in 
a traditional two-room studio environment—but because it’s beyond the 
reach of most small-studio users, I’d like to talk about some alternative 
approaches too. 
 If all you’re missing is an assistant, then ask the player to ﬁ ll that role if pos-
sible. A lot of instrumentalists can easily move their performance position 
with relation to the mic, and once you’ve hunted down a good sound in that 
way, you can recreate that mic position by adjusting the mic stand relative to 
the performer’s natural performance posture. Where the musician can’t easily 
move the sound source, or you’re restricted to a one-room setup, many writers 
on music-technology matters recommend putting on a pair of closed-back cans 
and then moving the microphone around for yourself. Eminently sensible as 
this seems in principle, however, I’ve always found it disappointingly hit-and-
miss. Except with the very quietest instruments, a signiﬁ cant amount of the 
direct sound will always ﬁ nd its way past the bafﬂ ing effect of the headphones 
to skew your perception of the input signal—and if you try turning up the 
headphones to ﬁ ght this you’ll quickly fall foul of loudness-related subjective 
biases and ear fatigue. Although the delayed monitor-mix dodge I described 
in Section 3.2.4 can mitigate some of these problems, that still won’t protect 
you from the natural human inclination to favor louder sounds—keeping the 
input signal’s level constant while you’re busy waving the mic around is rarely 
feasible (unless you have prodigious toe control), so louder mic positions 
will almost always win out irrespective of whether their tone actually suits the 
arrangement. 
 Therefore, where time allows in a one-room situation I always prefer to reﬁ ne 
my own mic positions via a series of test recordings, because that means I can 
make decisions without being misled by direct-sound contributions or subjec-
tive loudness differences. If you have two similar microphones, you can make 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
184
this approach even more effective by routing them to separate recorder tracks 
and operating them as a kind of tag-team. Here’s how:
 
■
 Overdub a test recording (against the backing track) with both mics in dif-
ferent positions, and then ask the performer to give you a minute or two to 
listen back. 
 
■
 Balance the two tracks to similar subjective levels and compare their sonics.  
 
■
 Once you’ve decided which mic signal works better in context, leave that 
mic where it is and move the other one to see if you can beat it.  
 
■
 Repeat this process at least a couple of times, and preferably until both 
mic positions feel equally usable—at which point either just choose one 
of them for capturing your proper takes, or record both so you can decide 
between them at leisure after the session. 
 The big advantage of this tag-team placement technique is that you’re always 
comparing how the mics respond to exactly the same source sound, whereas 
there will inevitably be performance variations between separate test-recording 
passes done with a single mic.  
 FIGURE 6.8   
 The tag-team miking method, using two identical mics on cello. Figure 6.8A shows the ﬁ rst two guesswork positions. Let’s say 
that, on auditioning, Mic 2 doesn’t sound as promising tonally as Mic 1, but Mic 1 sounds too wet. In response, we might move Mic 
2 to address the instrument from the same angle as Mic 1 (for better tone), but from closer up (for a drier sound)—as shown in 
Figure 6.8B. That might then lead to Mic 2 sounding better than Mic 1 at the next listen, at which point we might choose to move 
Mic 1 to the same miking distance as Mic 2, but experiment with another lateral positioning, as shown in Figure 6.8C. The idea is 
to continue this process until each mic signal, while different, is equally appealing subjectively. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
185
 6.2.2  Improving Your Guesswork 
 If you follow the guidelines I’ve set out so far, ﬁ nding a decent microphone 
position for any instrument should be mostly a question of time. However, 
time is frequently in short supply on real-world sessions, so the big challenge 
is to speed up this process—primarily by improving the quality of your guess-
work, thereby cutting down the amount of time spent on trial-and-error tests. 
 It doesn’t take much Googling to turn up dozens of miking diagrams for dif-
ferent instruments, and it’s clear to me that small-studio engineers frequently 
take their cue from these. You’ll ﬁ nd no such list here, though, simply because 
I don’t think that kind of cheat sheet is much use in practice. Indeed, hav-
ing trawled through thousands of low-budget productions, I’d say that over-
reliance on miking “templates” probably causes greater sonic dam-
age than almost any other factor—the very worst record-
ings I hear tend to be those where someone has clung 
to a recommended mic position as if it were gospel, 
despite copious contradictory evidence from their 
own ears. 
 There’s also a misleading assumption underlying 
generic miking suggestions for any instrument: 
that there’s some kind of “industry standard” 
sound for commercial recordings. I spend a lot of 
my time comparing commercial releases (not least 
for  Sound On Sound  magazine’s Mix Review column), 
and I can tell you there is no such thing. The sound of 
the same instrument can change considerably between different 
musical styles, between different artists within a given musical style, and even 
between different songs by the same artist. Unless you can listen to an audio 
example of the miking setup described (which you rarely can), you really have 
no idea whether it might deliver a sound you like, or one which suits the style/
arrangement of the production you’re working on.  
 Another thing that really bugs me about per-instrument miking recipes is 
that they rarely give any useful idea of what to do next (beyond a vague “try 
moving the mic”) if the prescribed positions don’t immediately work. Given that 
the vast majority of initial mic positions won’t be optimal (no matter how expe-
rienced you are), it’s far more important to learn how to use mic  movements  in an 
intelligent manner to get closer to the sound you want, so you aren’t just left 
ﬂ oundering around more or less at random. There’s also a tendency for pub-
lished miking suggestions to be based on what top-ﬂ ight performers use in large 
professional studios, but many of these rigs don’t scale down at all well to small-
studio environments where musicians aren’t as accomplished, and where gear 
and acoustics are less forgiving. 
 “The very worst 
recordings I hear tend 
to be those where someone 
has clung to a recommended 
mic position as if it were gospel, 
despite copious contradictory 
evidence from their 
own ears.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
186
 Enough of the rant, though. Sufﬁ ce to say that I’d like to follow a differ-
ent path myself, explaining some of the underlying principles you can use to 
judge where to mike any instrument (whether or not you’ve encountered it 
before) and also how you might sensibly move that mic when it’s not sound-
ing up to scratch. 
 6.2.3    Piggy-Backing 
 There’s no need to reinvent the wheel every time you put up a mic if you can 
piggy-back on the session experience of others. “If you’re a new engineer,” 
advises Al Schmitt, 31 “and you’re not sure of anything, and a guy comes in with 
an instrument that you’ve never seen before, ask him where to put the mic. 
He’ll say, ‘Well, the last time the guy put it here and it was a good sound.’ Now 
you’ve got a place to start!” This mic-placement tip has much more going for 
it than anything cribbed off the Internet, because it’s related to that speciﬁ c 
player and instrument, and may also be well suited to the style you’re working 
on if that musician was chosen expressly for the project. Plus you can ask more 
questions about the speciﬁ c context within which that mic position was used if 
you need. 
 If you ﬁ nd yourself working in a shared college studio, there’s a lot to be 
gained by speaking to any other students who may be more experienced using 
it than you are—or, even better, the studio technicians who have frequently 
spent years observing student follies and working on their own projects dur-
ing studio downtime. It’s for similar reasons that high-proﬁ le engineers will 
frequently consult the resident staff in any unfamiliar studio environment, 
because they’ll have had the opportunity to compare the outcome of dozens of 
sessions by different engineers and producers in the past. “It helps to talk with 
the engineers who have worked in the room if you’re in it for the ﬁ rst time,” 
says David Thoener, 32 for instance. “They can help with some of the best loca-
tions for [different instruments], and this will cut down the time you might use 
in experimenting.”  
 THE “RECORDING SECRETS” LIBRARY OF MIC POSITIONS 
 You’re the only person who can decide what sound you like, so no-one can choose a mic position on your 
behalf. Therefore, as part of this chapter’s web resources I’ve set up a “library of mic positions” which uses 
audio examples to demonstrate the effects of different placements—use your own ears to judge which might 
be most promising for your productions! Unlike most other miking demonstrations you may have heard, I’ve 
done each set of examples by recording a single performance with multiple microphones of the same model, 
so that the differences you hear are solely attributable to mic technique. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
187
 6.2.4  High-Frequency Beams and Shadows 
 While talking about vocal miking in Section 4.3.1, I mentioned that high 
frequencies are more directional and more easily absorbed than low 
frequencies—information which is just as useful when miking instruments. 
Reed and brass instruments all create a prominent “beam” of high-frequencies 
in the direction of their open end(s), for example, and deciding how much of 
that beam hits your mic gives you powerful control over the tone, especially 
since the on-axis sound may not be the most desirable. “If you put the mic too 
close into the bell of the horn,” says Shelly Yakus, 33 “the result may seem to be 
exciting-sounding when you are listening to the horn soloed on the speakers at 
a loud volume. But when you drop it back into the track, it is going to be this 
little farty sound.” 
 Any other sound source which uses a horn-style contraption will usually 
act in much the same way: Bass amps sometimes have horn-coupled high-
frequency drivers, for instance, while Leslie speakers use rotating horns to 
implement their characteristic modulation effect. Speaker cones also exhibit 
high-frequency directionality, and moving the microphone slightly off-axis is 
a common means of avoiding unpleasant edginess when close-miking over-
driven electric guitar amps. With individual cymbals and gongs, the high end 
tends to be projected perpendicular to the plane of the instrument in both 
directions, although a hi-hat refocuses half this energy from its two cymbals 
through the narrow gap between them, producing an even stronger HF bias in 
the horizontal plane. 
 ENGINEER’S QUICKSTART GUIDE: WIND INSTRUMENTS 
 Let’s state the obvious to start with: Players of wind instruments need breath! Even if you aren’t a wind player 
yourself, as an engineer you can still help the musician improve their performance simply by discussing with 
them where they’re going to breathe, and if necessary by using punch-ins and comping to build longer legato 
lines out of shorter breath-punctuated segments. Another thing to listen for is the player’s use of “tonguing,” 
which is when they articulate the starts of notes by briefl y interrupting the fl ow of air through the mouthpiece 
with their tongue. This is an important aid to phrasing, and (as with string bowing) you can’t assume that a 
performer will instinctively arrive at the most appropriate result straight away, especially if the part in question 
is still quite new to them. 
 Mic technique can’t do much to downplay excessive mechanical noises from the keys/valves of woodwind 
instruments, because they emanate from right across the instrument, so if this is a problem you should 
try to bring it up with the performer, because they can sometimes remedy things by adjusting their playing 
technique. Finally, remember that wind instruments can be tiring to play, especially when high notes are 
involved, so try to plan your session workfl ow to minimize fatigue, much as you would when recording a 
vocalist (see Section 4.6.2). 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
188
 The shadowing effect of the player can have a big impact on the high-frequency 
content the mic picks up, which is why so many instruments sound brighter 
in front than behind—the French horn being a notable exception, of course, 
because of its rear-facing bell. Instruments in the accordion family, with sep-
arate left and right reed chambers, may project their high frequencies side-
ways, however, and harmonica players may also cause sideways HF dispersion 
depending on how they hold the instrument in their hands. Harmonica isn’t 
the only instrument where you need to be wary of the HF shadow of the play-
er’s hands, either. “With the mandolin [I’m] watching where the hand moves,” 
says Bill VornDick, 34 “making sure the mic is placed so it actually gets the 
instrument and you don’t have the masking effect of the hand going in front 
of the mic.” Some engineers like to take advantage of the fact that many of 
the noisy components of pitched instruments are focused into the upper part 
of the spectrum. So, for example, the mechanical noises of a tuba are often 
less prominent behind it, and VornDick 35 also suggests miking ﬁ ddles from the 
rear if you need to tone down unwanted breathing sounds from the player.  
 With some instruments the shadowing effect of the instrument’s casing is 
another big factor. This is a reason why most engineers miking from outside a 
piano like to use microphone positions that still “see” the high strings. With 
grand pianos that usually means keeping the lid open and miking from audi-
ence perspective at a height somewhere between the level of the piano frame 
and the line of the lid, but if the lid has to remain closed for whatever reason, 
then miking from behind the performer can still afford the mics a valuable 
glimpse of the high strings. With upright pianos, you can aim a microphone 
into the open lid to catch the high strings direct, but it’s preferable to remove the 
instrument’s whole front panel from above the keyboard instead, affording you 
greater ﬂ exibility to position the mic. (It’s usually pretty easy to do this, because 
upright pianos are designed to have their panels removed for tuning purposes.) 
 FIGURE 6.9   
 Miking from behind a 
violinist can help reduce 
breathing noises on the 
recording. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
189
 6.2.5  Air Resonances 
 Most instruments with strings typically have some kind of resonating wooden 
body that serves to amplify the sound. The resonant characteristics of wood 
are fantastically complex, and vary a great deal even between quite similar-
looking instruments, so it’s very difﬁ cult to predict which frequencies will be 
projected in which directions—thus making these instruments quite chal-
lenging to record. However, most wooden instrument bodies are also hollow, 
and the air in the cavity will have a well-deﬁ ned resonant frequency which 
will project powerfully from the body’s carved vents—for example, from the 
“F” holes of orchestral string instruments or the central soundhole of acous-
tic guitars. For the latter, the resonant frequency lies around 90–100 Hz; violin 
and viola air cavities resonate higher, at around 300 Hz and 220 Hz; and cellos 
and basses have their air resonances in the 100–110 Hz and 60–70 Hz regions 
respectively. Choosing how much air resonance to capture is a critical tonal 
decision, and you should pay particular attention to how it affects the subjec-
tive balance of the instrument’s lower notes, otherwise it’s easy to make a few 
notes with fundamentals around the resonant frequency dominate over all the 
others. Single-skinned drums such as bongos, congas, and djembes will also 
exhibit more “boom” from air resonance if you mike close to the open end.  
 Naturally, the issue of air resonance inﬂ uences any mic placements inside the 
body of an instrument—the most common studio scenario being the rock-
music technique of miking the kick drum through a hole cut into its resonant 
head. In this case, the sound ﬁ eld within the cavity will be peppered with hot 
and cold spots at different frequencies, a little like a tiny resonant room, and 
what this means in practice is that small mic-placement changes will result in 
much bigger tonal shifts than you’d expect elsewhere. I also ﬁ nd that central 
mic positions are often rather odd-sounding within a drum, which stands to 
 FIGURE 6.10    
 Miking an acoustic 
guitar right in front of 
its soundhole is rarely 
a good idea in the 
studio, because the 
sound in that position 
will be dominated 
by the instrument’s 
booming 90–100 Hz air 
resonance. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
190
reason given that the spectral effects of the air resonances will be most pro-
nounced there. Internal air resonances also complicate miking inside a closed 
or semi-open grand piano, and they’re another reason why engineers often 
remove the panels from an upright piano for recording purposes—the sound 
comes across as less “boxy” that way.
 
 THE BACK-OF-THE-HAND TRICK 
 Here’s a drum-mic positioning trick Chuck Ainlay 36 once showed me, saying he’d learnt it from Ed Cherney. If you 
hold the back of your hand close to any drum, the hairs there will actually allow you to feel the air vibrations. 
With a little practice you can use this feeling to improve the reliability of your initial mic-position guesses. Mike 
Stavrou 37 explains what he tends to look for in this respect: “It’s all too easy to fi nd the hot spot up close, 
but that’s not your prime target. Instead, feel for where the vibrations are at their most intense at the greatest 
distance away from the drum. With practice, you will discover that different locations also vibrate the hairs 
slower and for longer. This is your target area.” 
 
 6.2.6    Balancing Instrument Facets 
 Every instrument produces different facets of its sound from different physical 
components, so there’s a lot you can do to mold your recorded sound sim-
ply by modifying the mic’s position in relation to these. Much of the tone of 
reed instruments comes from the open ﬁ nger holes, for instance, so micro-
phone positions which pick those up fairly equally will typically sound much 
more natural than placements directly in line with the bell. “I don’t ever mic 
[saxophone] directly coming out of the bell,” says Jeff Powell, 38 for instance. 
“I’ll put it off to the side a little bit, to the side where the keys are.” With 
stringed instruments a crucial tonal decision for the engineer is how to bal-
ance the “zing” of the strings themselves against the mellower contributions 
of the wooden body’s resonating panels. So, for example, a common mic posi-
tion for acoustic guitars in country, pop, and rock music is around the twelfth 
fret where the string component is fairly strong and can be balanced with the 
body resonances using small horizontal adjustments; but there are nonetheless 
many engineers (Steve Albini, 39 Al Schmitt, 40 and Jim Scott 41 amongst them) 
who use positions slightly above/below the soundhole to capture more of the 
instrument’s resonant character, especially in acoustic styles where the guitar 
can hold its place in the mix without overemphasizing the string brightness. 
Similarly, the string and ﬁ ngerboard details of an upright bass can be balanced 
against the lower-frequency body/air resonances by varying the miking height. 
“My favorite miking technique was…up near the plucking ﬁ nger, about six 
inches above the bridge,” says Norbert Putnam, 42 for instance. “This gave you 
the added attack of a heavily callused ﬁ nger and the ability to use all sorts of 
jazzy, buzzy sliding sounds.” 
 Pianos present similar issues, because close-miking the strings favors their 
bright tone over the complex 100–1000 Hz resonances of the instrument’s 
soundboard—frequently a beneﬁ t in busier styles which beneﬁ t from a clearer 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
191
sound, but also rather lacking in natural character and body where the instru-
ment is more exposed. On the other hand, miking from the underside of a 
grand or the back of an upright delivers a gutsy, retro timbre that may be great 
for an alternative/indie project, but will usually just add woolliness to any 
mainstream mix. With an instrument as large as the piano, the physical spread 
of the strings also becomes a signiﬁ cant factor when you’re miking up close, 
so you have to be wary of overemphasizing the ones the mic’s closest to. This 
is one reason why some engineers choose to close-mike where the higher and 
lower strings cross over, so that more of the strings are roughly the same dis-
tance from the mic.  
 Playing any acoustic instrument creates some unpitched mechanical noises, 
and your mic technique can help balance those appropriately against the main 
body of the timbre. Oftentimes you’re just dealing with one main source of 
mechanical noise that’s pretty well deﬁ ned: the scraping of the bow at its con-
tact point with a cello string; the turbulent breath noise at the ﬂ ute’s embou-
chure hole; stick noise on a cymbal or hi-hat. In these cases it’s mostly just a 
question of setting the mic’s distance and angle in relation to that location—
perhaps even moving so that the direct path between the noise source and the 
mic is obstructed in some way (as mentioned in Section 6.2.4). 
 Things can get trickier where an instrument generates more than one type of 
mechanical noise. The most common culprit here is acoustic guitar, where 
pick noise, string buzz, and fret squeak are all everyday occurrences, and this 
means that different musical parts may respond best to different mic positions: 
Excessive pick noise from hard strummed chords might be tamed somewhat 
by a mic position on the fretboard side of the soundhole, for instance, while 
moving the mic to the other side of the soundhole may better suit delicate 
 FIGURE 6.11    
 You can bring more of 
a grand piano’s strings 
within range of a single 
close mic by positioning 
it where the mid- and 
low-register strings 
cross over. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
192
ﬁ ngerpicking parts where fret noise is a greater concern. Piano can also be awk-
ward in this respect, because of different noises coming from the hammers, the 
dampers, and the different pedal actions.
 
 MIKING WHAT THE PLAYER HEARS 
 When looking for microphone positions, don’t forget that what the player is hearing might actually be the sound 
you’re looking for, especially if the performer happens to have written the music you’re recording. “One of the 
things I’m really big on is miking from player perspective,” says Jon Brion. 43 “Everybody that learns to play an 
instrument…has learned the balance from where their head is.” 
 
 With a ﬁ gure-eight mic, the polar pattern’s side-nulls offer an additional 
option—to reject some elements of the instrument’s sound. Again, this can be 
great for reducing mechanical noises or soundhole boom when close-miking 
acoustic guitar, but piano hammer noise, the bow scrape of orchestral string 
instruments, or the rotor whirr of a Leslie cabinet could all be tackled in a sim-
ilar way. 
 6.2.7    Spotlighting and Reﬂ ections 
 Many small-studio engineers come unstuck because they try to place direc-
tional mics too close, unnaturally “spotlighting” only a small part of a com-
plex resonating body. Part of what misleads people, I think, is that they transfer 
onstage close-miking practices into the studio, even though these have usually 
been optimized for minimizing PA feedback howlround rather than maximiz-
ing sound quality. “Acoustic guitar sounds terrible with a cardioid mic too 
close to it,” comments Keith Olsen, 44 for example, and many of the home 
recordings I hear bear this out! Drums can also really suffer when you put the 
mic too close, because it’ll tend to magnify a few of the skin’s pitched reso-
nances at the expense of the rest of the drum’s timbre—which is probably why 
low-budget snare-drum recordings so often seem 
to go “donk!” Mike Fraser 45 doesn’t like close-
miking cymbals either: “If you mike cymbals 
too closely the sound just opens and shuts very 
quickly; you need your mic a bit further away to 
make sure the sound tails out nicely.”  
 What’s more, it’s ﬁ ddlier to ﬁ nd a good mic 
placement when you’re spotlighting only a frac-
tion of any instrument, because the sound will 
change more for small positional adjustments, 
and will also stay less consistent if the instru-
mentalist moves around at all while perform-
ing. Using an omni mic can alleviate some of 
these problems where you want a really close-
up sound, but in most cases this rule of thumb 
 FIGURE 6.12    
 If you mike your snare 
drum from this close, 
you’ll be spotlighting 
just a fraction of its 
sound-producing 
mechanics—which 
usually means seriously 
misrepresenting the 
instrument’s overall tone. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
193
from Roger Nichols 46 gives a rough idea of the kind 
of distance where spotlighting becomes less of a 
problem: “[Place] the microphone the same dis-
tance away as the size of the main body of the 
instrument. The body of an acoustic guitar 
is about two feet long, so place the micro-
phone about two feet away. A cello is about 
three feet long, so place the microphone 
about three feet away.” 
 The big exception to this, though, is when 
you’re miking ampliﬁ ed electric instruments, 
especially in rock music. “In terms of rock gui-
tar and overdriven guitars,” says John Porter, 47 “the 
closer you can get [the mics], the punchier it’ll sound.” John 
Leckie 48 echoes this sentiment: “I always have the mics right up close to the 
guitar cabinet, literally touching the speaker cloth, and never two feet back.” 
Although other engineers may leave a few inches’ gap, this kind of close-
miking approach has been used on so many inﬂ uential records that the listen-
ing public are now thoroughly accustomed to it, so many engineers actively 
choose extreme close-miking even though no-one ever hears an amp from 
that perspective acoustically. In this context, the dramatic effects of small mic-
position tweaks (and the ability to choose between the different drivers in a 
multi-speaker cabinet) are frequently viewed as a positive side-effect, giving 
the engineer greater power to design the recorded tone, especially given that 
the cabinet won’t move during the performance and disturb the ﬁ nal delicately 
honed setup. Bear in mind, though, that there are some big names (such as 
Alan Parsons 49 ) who aren’t fans of such close mic placements even on elec-
tric instruments, so don’t just blindly follow the herd. And then there’s Paul 
McCartney’s classic bass sound on  Sergeant Pepper , where Geoff Emerick 50 
miked up his speaker cabinet from 6–8 feet away with an AKG C12 in ﬁ gure-
eight mode. Mitch Easter 51 tried the same approach on REM’s debut album: 
“I’d probably just read that Geoff Emerick miked Paul McCartney from about 
eight feet away… and, sure enough, it worked!” 
 The main difﬁ culty with trying to avoid spotlighting is that moving the mic 
further away or switching it to a less directional polar pattern will inevitably 
increase the amount of room reverberation it picks up. But that’s no reason to 
just put up with an anemic tone—draw the curtains, sling some quilts around 
the place, upend the sofa! It’s surprisingly easy to shut down a good deal of a 
room’s reverberation without specialist equipment. Another trick is to deliber-
ately reﬂ ect more of the direct sound emanating from the instrument back into 
a close microphone so that it catches a more holistic picture. With instruments 
such as oboe, clarinet, and soprano sax, for instance, hard ﬂ ooring will natu-
rally direct some of the strong HF energy from the open end of the instrument 
up toward frontal mic positions, as will positioning a French horn player with 
a wall behind them. “I’ll put the mics in front,” remarks Al Schmitt, 52 “with a 
 “It’s fi ddlier to fi nd 
a good mic placement 
when you’re spotlighting only a 
fraction of any instrument, because 
the sound will change more for small 
positional adjustments, and will 
also stay less consistent if the 
instrumentalist moves around 
at all while performing.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
194
reﬂ ector behind the horns so the sound will come off of it…or I put them in a 
spot in the room where they’re going to reﬂ ect off a wall.” 
 Wooden-bodied instruments respond particularly well to this technique, I ﬁ nd, 
perhaps because their frequency dispersion characteristics are so complex—
by reﬂ ecting different perspectives of the instrument toward the mic, you 
can get a fuller and more consistent sound across the frequency spectrum, 
and the sound also won’t change as much if the performer moves around. 
The sideways projection of many accordion-style instruments can also be cor-
ralled toward a single mic by similar means. A reﬂ ective environment will nor-
mally ﬂ atter high-frequency percussion too by smearing the transients slightly 
in time—especially with short, sharp sounds like handclaps, claves, and ﬁ nger 
clicks.  
 RECORDING ELECTRIC GUITARS ON THE QUIET 
 Miking up electric guitars can present a problem for home studios 
in particular, because a lot of guitar sounds rely on a valve 
amplifi er being overdriven to skull-crushing volume. Capturing 
these kinds of timbres without the neighbors complaining is easy 
with a digital amp-modeling device (whether hardware or software), 
and in Section 3.2.4 we already talked about using powersoaks 
to bring the volume down post-amplifi er, but many guitarists 
feel that both these methods dilute the true sound character of 
their instrument unacceptably. Two other solutions remain open, 
though. The fi rst is to use some kind of speaker isolation cabinet, 
which is essentially a soundproofed box containing a speaker 
cabinet (or just a single speaker) as well as some means of 
rigging microphones in front of it. The speaker is fed from your 
guitar amplifi er via a jack socket on the outside of the cabinet, 
and XLR sockets alongside connect the internal microphones to 
your recording system. 
 Although there are commercial guitar isolation cabinets on the 
market, they aren’t cheap, so you can save a lot of money if you 
build your own instead. (See this chapter’s web resources for 
links to further information about this.) The biggest practical 
problem with any design is that standing waves within the enclosed space can make it rather boxy-sounding, so 
if you’re going the DIY route, try to make the unit as big as you can to leave plenty of space for sound-deadening 
acoustic treatment inside, and try to make all three internal dimensions different so that the frequency effects 
of any remaining resonances are comparatively well spread out in the spectrum. The issue of how to prevent 
potentially damaging heat build-up in the isolation box also needs thought. 
 The second alternative for avoiding antisocial noise levels is to investigate one of the dedicated low-power valve 
amplifi ers now available specifi cally for practice and recording purposes, because these can be “cranked” for 
their overdrive sound without producing too much real volume in the room. Although these products sometimes 
look rather unimpressive, they’re capable of close-miked sounds which are surprisingly comparable with those 
of their larger, louder cousins.  
 FIGURE 6.13   
 A dedicated low-power recording ampliﬁ er, 
such as Cornford’s Harlequin for instance, 
can help solve the problem of trying to 
mike up overdriven guitar sounds without 
antagonizing the neighbors. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
195
 Using isolated reﬂ ections like this doesn’t 
mean adding appreciably to the recorded room 
reverb, because the overall recording envi-
ronment can still be kept extremely damped 
if you wish, but you do need to be aware that 
combining direct and reﬂ ected sounds at the 
microphone may result in some comb-ﬁ ltering. 
This isn’t usually a deal-breaker by any means, 
though—you just have to be prepared to move 
the player and/or microphone in relation to 
the reﬂ ective surfaces until you ﬁ nd a particu-
lar comb-ﬁ ltering ﬂ avor that sounds appealing. 
Personally, though, I prefer to use bits of hard 
furniture or hardboard offcuts as impromptu 
reﬂ ectors, partly because multiple reﬂ ections from smaller objects tend to 
cause less audible comb-ﬁ ltering than a single strong reﬂ ection from a wall, 
and partly because I’d rather move them than the mic/musician if I want to 
adjust what I’m hearing in the control room. 
 One ﬁ nal piece of general advice on mic positioning: As when recording 
vocals, there will be a tendency for any instrumentalist to play toward the 
microphone, and this may be exactly what you  don’t  want if you’ve deliberately 
avoided putting it directly in the line of ﬁ re of a brass instrument’s bell or an 
acoustic guitar’s soundhole. It’s equally common for musicians to slowly edge 
closer to a microphone that you’ve carefully distanced to avoid spotlighting. 
Thankfully, it’s not usually difﬁ cult to deal with this by discussing your inten-
tions with the performer, but even then it often helps if you provide them with 
some visual guide so that they can check their own position prior to each take. 
Some gaffer tape on the ﬂ oor can quickly indicate chair and/or toe positions, 
but sometimes a more elaborate “dummy mic” setup may prove necessary 
so that the player has something concrete to point their instrument at. (Or if 
they’re just a dummy.)   
 FIGURE 6.14    
 You can pick up a 
more holistic picture 
of a wooden-bodied 
instrument’s complicated 
frequency dispersion 
through a single mic 
by using rudimentary 
acoustic reﬂ ectors—here 
just strips of ﬁ berboard 
propped against spare 
mic stands. 
 SIZE AND PROJECTION 
 Larger components of any given instrument will tend to project sound further than smaller components, and 
the same goes for resonant sounds in comparison to non-resonant sounds. I already mentioned this concept 
in passing in Section 4.3.2 with relation to singers, but it’s much more widely applicable with instruments. 
So, for example, you’ll get lots of pick noise and string jangle from an acoustic guitar up close, whereas more 
distant positions will focus more on the pitched sustain. This principle also underlies many problems that beset 
low-budget engineers at mixdown: overemphasized bow/breath/key noises on string and wind instruments; 
distractingly obtrusive stick transients on cymbals, hi-hats, and tuned percussion; and merciless hammer noise 
on pianos. Moving the mic further away makes these all-too-common affl ictions much more manageable—you 
can always hang up a few extra blankets and/or switch to a more directional polar pattern if you need to keep 
the recorded reverb levels in check. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
196
 6.3    CHOOSING MICROPHONES 
 So far I’ve studiously ignored the crucial question of how to choose an appro-
priate mic, because I think you need to appreciate the main principles of mic 
positioning before you can properly tackle that thorny topic. I already intro-
duced some of the main attributes of dynamic, ribbon, and condenser models 
in Section 5.1, so let’s continue building from there. But allow me to reiterate 
one vital thing ﬁ rst: The only truly reliable way to decide on the right micro-
phone for any overdub is by listening. Although the following pages will offer 
a number of generalized suggestions on the subject, the best they can do is 
improve the odds of making a respectable microphone choice when time is 
against you, or if you have to put up a mic “blind” and hope for the best while 
sprinting to keep pace with an artist. When you’ve got the time, always try to 
compare at least two microphones on every overdub you do, so that you con-
stantly increase your understanding of each model’s comparative strengths and 
weaknesses. 
 6.3.1    Large-Diaphragm Condenser Mics 
 Although large-diaphragm condenser mics are usually the ﬁ rst call for vocals, 
their high-frequency resonance and typically brightened on-axis response 
suit some instruments better than others—especially with microphones 
under about the $750 (£500) mark, which tend to be overhyped in this 
respect. Mellower-toned acoustic guitars and harp frequently beneﬁ t from 
 FIGURE 6.15    
 Using gaffer tape to 
mark the locations of 
chairs and mic stands on 
the ﬂ oor can help keep 
the mic position, and 
hence the recorded tone, 
more consistent between 
takes during extended 
overdubbing sessions. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
197
the extra high-end sheen, but the same tonal modiﬁ cation can easily render 
orchestral string/brass instruments and metallic percussion rather abra-
sive, especially at close quarters. The slightly “soft-focus” timbral 
character and extended low end of large-diaphragm condens-
ers make them popular for capturing bass instruments and 
kick drums warmly, although close-miking the latter may 
push some models into audible distortion even where 
there’s an onboard pad switch available. Any instru-
ment’s transients will be smoothed a little by a large 
diaphragm’s inertia, especially if they’re picked up off-
axis, which can give an appealing roundness to plucked 
strings and tuned percussion, as well as fattening toms 
and snare drums. 
 The real Achilles heel of budget large-diaphragm condensers 
is the lumpy off-axis response of their cardioid-family polar patterns. 
When recording any acoustic instrument up close, you only get a compara-
tively small proportion of the sound arriving from directly in front of the mic, 
which means the mic will signiﬁ cantly misrepresent the natural frequency bal-
ance a lot of the time. Once you get more than about 60° off axis the color-
ations can start turning pretty nasty, which makes recording in more reﬂ ective 
environments more challenging and complicates miking inside a grand piano 
especially, given that a lot of sound will reach the back of the mic by bounc-
ing off the underside of the open lid. “But surely a cardioid mic rejects sound 
from the rear?” I hear you cry. Well that’s the theory, but actually you’ll only 
get about 15–20 dB rejection right in the null(s) of any cardioid pattern, and 
plenty of dreadful-sounding reﬂ ections will still be coming in quite strongly 
from either side. 
 In this respect the omni and ﬁ gure-eight patterns of a large-diaphragm con-
denser microphone are usually better behaved (despite sharing some reduction 
in HF sensitivity at the sides), and the ﬁ gure-eight pattern’s deep side-rejection 
nulls can help attenuate unwanted background noises or early reﬂ ections from 
nearby room boundaries, especially when recording ﬂ oor-standing electric-
guitar cabs. Finding a good distance for ﬁ gure-eight mics can be a little tricky 
to manage, however. Although some producers make a virtue of the strong 
proximity effect at close distances (notably Steve Albini 53 and Bob Weston, 54 
who both use it to bolster electric bass guitar tones), this bass boost and the 
narrow pickup tend to discourage very close positioning, while more distant 
placements typically lack low-end weight and may require additional measures 
to avoid excessive room sound being picked up by the mic’s rear sensitivity 
lobe. As such, an omni pattern is usually my ﬁ rst choice when using cheaper 
large-diaphragm condensers for instrument close-miking. Even in omni, 
though, you do still need to be careful, because the large-diaphragm’s narrow 
upper-spectrum directionality still carries a danger of spotlighting, and needs 
to be aimed carefully to avoid emphasizing undesirable mechanical noises in 
particular.   
 “The real 
Achilles heel of 
budget large-diaphragm 
condensers is the lumpy 
off-axis response of their 
cardioid-family polar 
patterns.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
198
 6.3.2    Small-Diaphragm Condenser Mics 
 Although small-diaphragm condensers are rarely used for vocal recording, they 
really come into their own with instruments. Compared with large-diaphragm 
designs, they can cope with louder sources without distorting and tend to have 
a smoother and more extended high-end response, partly because the upper 
resonances of the smaller diaphragm are further up the frequency spectrum 
where they’re easier for the designers to control. They also respond faster to 
transients on the whole, something that Al Schmitt 58 actively takes advantage 
of: “For percussion, I’ll use an AKG C452 or one of the Schoeps or B&K mics, 
because these mics are a little faster.” In addition, the directional response of 
small-diaphragm mics is normally much more predictable—you still get some 
frontal high-frequency boost which wanes progressively as you move off axis, 
but otherwise the sound remains comparatively natural over a wider range of 
sound arrival angles. For this reason, such microphones perform well where 
room reﬂ ections are an important part of the target sound, and are frequently 
the most natural-sounding close-miking choice for acoustic instruments of all 
sizes, particularly when you’re working on a budget and want to use a cardioid 
polar pattern to minimize recorded room reverb. 
 FIGURE 6.16   
 When using budget large-diaphragm condenser microphones that offer multiple patterns, the omni option will usually produce the 
most natural-sounding results in close-miking applications, because of its negligible proximity effect and reduced spotlighting. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
199
 MECHANICAL FILTERS 
 The majority of this book is focused on trying to make recordings that faithfully represent the sounds of the 
voices and instruments being recorded (albeit with a modicum of fl attery on occasion), rather than being about 
sculpting unnatural timbres for creative ends. I make no apologies for that, though, because my view is that 
small-studio engineers encounter far greater diffi culties when trying to match sounds they’re hearing in the 
recording room than when expressly trying not to! However, on those occasions where you decide to throw 
realism and fi delity to the winds, one of the most powerful ways to achieve fresh timbres is by using what Tchad 
Blake 55 refers to as “mechanical fi ltering,” describing it as “anything that alters the sound you’re getting into 
the mic. Something like a pipe or a didgeridoo, metal pipes, metal plates that I would put the metal pipes up 
to, trash cans, tin cans. Anything you can fi nd that you can put a mic in or on top of.” He’s by no means the 
only person doing this kind of thing, either—Roy Thomas Baker 56 mentioned “putting microphones down metal 
and concrete tubes to get more of a honky sound” when working on the guitar parts for Queen’s “Bohemian 
Rhapsody,” while Tom Syrowski 57 talks about “putting an SM57 in a garbage can and putting that in front of an 
amplifi er.”  
 FIGURE 6.17    
 Some examples of mechanical ﬁ lters: a large-diaphragm condenser in a metal jug and a small-diaphragm condenser in the end 
of a length of plastic tubing. 
 A small-diaphragm’s cardioid pattern is achieved in a different way to that of a 
large-diaphragm, and while the upside is better off-axis sound, the downside is 
that the polar pattern isn’t easily switchable (notable exceptions being Shure’s 
KSM141 and the Schoeps CCM5). Some small-diaphragm models do offer 
alternate polar patterns, but you usually have to physically unscrew the mic’s 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
200
head unit (the “capsule”) and replace it with a different one to implement the 
change. Another side-effect of this design difference is that small-diaphragm 
omnis will usually have their lowest high-frequency sensitivity to the rear, 
whereas large-diaphragm models tend to have theirs at the sides.  
 The main technical concern with small diaphragms is that their recordings will 
be a touch noisier than those of large diaphragms in the main. As long as you 
set up your gain controls sensibly, though, even inexpensive small-diaphragm 
microphones are still so quiet that you’re very unlikely to notice their circuit 
hiss over the background noise levels in any real-world project studio—particu-
larly when the recording is combined with other parts into a mix. 
 The harder, clearer tone of small-diaphragm mics is appropriate for a lot of 
instruments in modern chart-style productions where focused, detailed sounds 
are the norm, although most engineers still seem to prefer large diaphragms 
for a less clinical sound on bass instruments, and you do have to be a little 
bit careful how you angle the mic with strings, brass, percussion, and distorted 
electric guitars if you’re to steer clear of shrillness. Where more laid-back, 
vintage-style timbres are the order of the day, the clarity and precision of small-
diaphragms become less desirable.
 
 ELECTRET OR CONDENSER? 
 Electret mics are similar in design to condensers, and are stalwarts of project studios because they can often 
be manufactured more cheaply. They work by storing an electrical charge within the transducer assembly, 
and early electret microphones got a bad rap for losing this charge over time, resulting in deteriorating 
performance. The technology has advanced tremendously since then, however, so for all intents and purposes 
you can treat electrets in exactly the same way you would condensers these days. 
 
 FIGURE 6.18   
 Most small-diaphragm mics that allow you to change their polar pattern do so by virtue of interchangeable capsules (left). Only very 
few models, such as Shure’s KSM141, are switchable (right). 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
201
 6.3.3  Other Condenser Designs 
 Although almost all large-diaphragm microphones feature circular dia-
phragms, a few microphone companies use rectangular ones instead, in a 
similar side-ﬁ re conﬁ guration. This approach weakens the high-frequency 
diaphragm resonances, so although you still get the kind of high-end 
sensitivity you’d expect of a circular diaphragm, the sound is usually 
smoother in a way that’s reminiscent of ribbon designs. The rectangu-
lar diaphragm also affects the polar response, giving the horizontal plane 
a more even tonality akin to a small-diaphragm condenser (assuming that 
the diaphragm’s longer axis is mounted vertically within the mic body, as 
it usually is). These attributes mean that rectangular diaphragms have a lot 
to recommend them for instruments such as pianos, strings, percussion, 
distorted guitars, and brass. However, a side-effect is that the polar pattern 
isn’t symmetrical, and is considerably narrower in the vertical plane, so 
mounting the mic horizontally is advisable if you want to avoid spotlight-
ing vertically oriented instruments.  
 Miniature condenser microphones are routinely used as clip-on mics in 
broadcast situations, but aren’t nearly as common in studio environments 
because of the unnatural sound of extreme close-miking. However, the abil-
ity to ﬁ x such microphones directly to an instrument can bail you out on 
occasion if you’re trying to achieve a super-dry recording of a player who 
moves around a lot during performance. Again, I’d personally recommend 
going for an omni polar pattern in this scenario so you don’t have to worry 
as much about spotlighting and proximity effect. 
 A less common condenser design which has interesting applications for small 
studios is called the “boundary” mic, a microphone element built into a ﬂ at 
disc or panel 4–9 inches across. The idea is that you place the panel on a 
large solid surface (typically the wall, ﬂ oor, or ceiling of your recording space) 
where it uses the boundary effect to boost its output level. This gives it a 
couple of unique characteristics that can play into your hands if you’re record-
ing in small rooms with questionable acoustics:
 
■
 The frequency response captured by the microphone is far less affected by 
the room resonances. 
 
■
 Reﬂ ections from the boundary in question don’t cause comb-ﬁ ltering of the 
mic signal—in other words, the sound’s as uncolored as if the boundary 
weren’t there at all. This is great news if you’re recording in a small space, 
or you want to mike an instrumentalist from above in any room with a low 
ceiling. It also means that you don’t get tonal changes from comb-ﬁ ltering 
effects if the musician moves around while playing.  
 The simplest boundary-mic polar pattern is hemispherical, based around an 
omni microphone element, which means it has excellent resistance to vibra-
tion and no proximity effect. Therefore many engineers put it on the ﬂ oor 
because it’s easy to reposition there, although it’s actually pretty simple to 
 FIGURE 6.19    
 The Pearl Microphones 
Priority, with its 
rectangular diaphragm 
clearly visible through 
the protective wire grille. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
202
gaffer-tape one wherever you need it. Sticking one to the inside of a grand 
piano’s lid is quite a popular trick, in fact, given that boundary mics usually 
have very tidy off-axis frequency response, because you pick up a pretty good 
balance of all the strings from that vantage point. As far as wet/dry balance, a 
hemisphere polar pattern is probably closest to a subcardioid, which means 
it “hears” roughly the same wet/dry balance as your ears do. As such, when 
you’re recording in a small room it affords you most of the advantages of a 
freestanding omni microphone, but without picking up as much room reverb. 
More recently manufacturers have also begun producing more directional 
boundary mics with half-cardioid or half-supercardioid patterns for confer-
ence and presentation use. However, these often have frequency-response 
plots which have been mangled to promote speech intelligibility, and their 
off-axis pickup also isn’t as good, so I’d personally suggest sticking to the non-
directional variant for studio purposes.  
 The low-frequency balance of a boundary mic is dependent on the size and 
solidity of the surface it’s placed on, which means it’ll sound thinner if you 
stick it on a tabletop or the side of a gobo—a surface diameter of six feet 
effectively shelves 6 dB off the low end below about 250 Hz, for instance, 
and that shelving frequency moves up to around 1.5 kHz if the surface 
size is further reduced to one foot. This may be a useful tonal tool on occa-
sion, but in my experience boundary mics are often manufactured to sound 
rather bright as it is, so the traditional mounting approach is invariably my ﬁ rst 
port of call. 
 Even though dedicated boundary-mic designs only became widely available in 
the ’70s, some people were already making use of their basic operating prin-
ciple prior to that by simply laying a small-diaphragm omni mic on the ﬂ oor 
(sometimes wrapped in a thin piece of foam) or taping it to the wall. Although 
this is capable of great results, the mic’s diaphragm doesn’t get quite as close 
 FIGURE 6.20   
 Three affordable boundary microphones with hemispherical polar patterns (left to right): the Superlux E304, the AKG CBL99, and 
the Samson CM11B. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
203
to the boundary as in true boundary-mic designs, which means that comb-
ﬁ ltering reduces the levels of extreme high frequencies somewhat. You’ll get the 
greatest high-end roll-off for instrument positions perpendicular to the mic, 
but if you address it at an angle the high-frequency reduction is quite subtle—
and not necessarily a bad thing if you’re using a cheaper small-diaphragm mic 
at close range! The high frequency pickup will also tail off toward the rear of 
the mic, just as you’d expect if it were freestanding, which again may be viewed 
as a beneﬁ t, but otherwise you can get more symmetrical off-axis response by 
 PRE-SESSION MIC TESTING 
 If you fi nd yourself faced with microphones you’ve not used before, you can save yourself quite a bit of time in 
the heat of the actual recording session by taking a few minutes to test them out beforehand—if only because 
you’ll be able to check that they actually work! Here’s how Mike Stavrou 59 goes about it: “Get one mic lead 
and one set of headphones. Listen to each mic, one at a time, while you count to ten out loud…This unusual 
exercise can save you hours of swapping mics later.” The great thing about Stavrou’s suggestion of using 
speech as a test signal is that it’s the sound us humans are most sensitive to, so it’ll show up differences in 
microphone tonality more clearly than anything else. And, of course, using your voice means you can carry out 
the tests without having to enlist any outside help. 
 My main tips for making the most of this process would be to judge the sound from playback, not via live 
headphone monitoring, so that you’re not misled by bone-conduction; and to retest one or two mics you 
already know for comparison purposes, because 
tonal judgments made without the benefi t of 
a solid benchmark won’t be very reliable. I’d 
also recommend addressing the microphone 
from different distances and angles to get an 
impression of its proximity effect and off-axis 
response—just remember to say what you’re 
doing so it’s clear what you’re actually listening to 
on playback! 
 Another revealing little test is to jangle a bunch 
of keys around six inches from the mic. This 
generates a tremendously complex high-frequency 
spectrum packed with delicate transients, and 
as such it severely taxes the clarity and fi delity 
of any mic’s high-end response. High-frequency 
roll-offs will be very apparent, as will rounded 
transients, and the more a given mic makes it 
sound like you’re crumpling up a bit of paper, 
the more it’ll struggle with harmonically rich 
acoustic instruments such as twelve-string guitar, 
harpsichord, and sitar. (For all you old hippies still 
out there.)  
 FIGURE 6.21   
 Recording a jangling bunch of keys is a revealing test for any 
microphone. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
204
mounting the mic on a stand so that it points directly at the boundary, mak-
ing sure to leave a minuscule gap so that the air can reach the diaphragm—just 
wide enough for a credit card to slide through should be ﬁ ne. (And of course, 
as in so many other situations, try to use someone else’s credit card if you can 
get away with it!)  
 6.3.4    Ribbon Mics 
 We already explored some of the features of ribbon mics in Chapter 5, but 
there are additional considerations when it comes to using them for instru-
ment recording. One of their most common applications is for rounding off 
the overly bright sound some instruments deliver at close range. “No instru-
ment beneﬁ ts as much from the attributes of a ribbon microphone as distorted 
electric guitar,” says Steve Albini, 60 for instance, but things like 
trumpet, trombone, violin, piano, resonator guitar, cym-
bals, accordion, and high percussion are all commonly 
miked with ribbons too. What’s more, the transient 
response of a ribbon is usually pretty good, so you 
don’t lose any attack despite the more restrained 
tone—in fact, where condensers sometimes 
seem to overemphasize transients and mechani-
cal noises, ribbons normally respond very natu-
rally in this respect. 
 With less brash sounds, the initial impression from 
a ribbon can feel a little underwhelming because of 
 FIGURE 6.22   
 Two alternative conﬁ gurations for setting up a small-diaphragm omni condenser as a boundary mic: If 
you aim the mic directly at the boundary (left), you’ll get a more even, symmetrical off-axis response, 
whereas laying the mic ﬂ at against the boundary will favor sounds in the mic’s ﬁ ring line—especially at 
high frequencies. 
 “Although 
condensers can handle 
most day-to-day overdubbing 
tasks in a small studio, ribbon 
microphones are an excellent 
antidote to the harshness 
problems that affl ict many 
home-brew recordings.” 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
205
the design’s high-spectrum roll-off, and this puts a lot of small-studio users off 
trying one. However, if you reinstate the brightness with equalization (typi-
cally increasing the levels above 6 kHz by 4–8 dB) you get a result that’s very 
different from the sound of a condenser mic, and many musicians feel it’s truer 
and more musical-sounding too, especially where pushy chart-oriented son-
ics aren’t necessarily the goal. Although large-diaphragm and small-diaphragm 
condensers can handle most day-to-day overdubbing tasks in a small studio, 
ribbon microphones are an excellent antidote to the harshness problems that 
afﬂ ict many of the home-brew recordings I receive for  Sound On Sound  maga-
zine’s Mix Rescue feature, so I’d strongly suggest that any studio owner who 
already has two or three condenser mics should make a ribbon the next addi-
tion to their recording arsenal—you can get remarkably capable candidates for 
well under $500 (£300) these days.
 
 COMBATING MOISTURE AND DUST 
 All microphones will work better and require less maintenance if you take steps to protect them from air-borne 
moisture and dust. Keeping one of those packets of silica gel with each of your mics to absorb moisture is 
wise, and these should be dried out in an airing cupboard or on top of a water radiator periodically to maintain 
the effectiveness of the desiccant. Mics are better kept in a sealed case when not in use, but if you do leave 
any set up in your studio between sessions, place a polythene freezer bag over the top of each one to protect 
it from dust. Just don’t seal the bag at the bottom, otherwise changes in the room’s ambient temperature may 
cause condensation within it. 
 
 Although ﬁ nding the right miking distance for any mic with a ﬁ gure-eight 
polar pattern requires a little care (as discussed in Section 6.3.1), a ribbon mic 
can usually be pulled a bit further away from the sound source before its low-
end begins to thin out, maybe because of the way its inherent low-frequency 
diaphragm resonance bolsters the timbre. Even though ribbon microphones 
can typically capture very loud sounds up close without distortion, you do 
have to be careful of any part of the instrument that might send damaging air 
gusts toward the ribbon: the bell of any wind instrument; the speaker cone or 
bass-reﬂ ex port of a loud speaker cabinet; any vent holes in a drum shell, or 
the hole in a kick drum’s resonant head; the moving strumming hand of an 
acoustic guitarist; the whirling rotary horn/bafﬂ e of a Leslie speaker; and the 
closing action of a hi-hat, which sends out a strong horizontal jet of air that 
can even cause plosive-style popping on dynamic and condenser mics. A good 
safety measure is to put your hand into the prospective mic position to feel 
for any gusts, and it’s not a bad idea to use a pop shield with ribbon mics rou-
tinely. It can also help if you angle the microphone 30°–45° away from the 
direct line of ﬁ re of brass instruments, bass drums, and speaker cones when 
you’re miking any closer than about two feet away, so that any wind blasts 
don’t hit the diaphragm head-on. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
206
 6.3.5    Dynamic Mics 
 Because dynamic mics are by nature noisier than condensers or ribbons, 
they’re seldom used professionally for quiet instruments or distant miking. 
Few dynamic mics can manage anything like the same frequency bandwidth 
or response linearity either (some notable exceptions being the Sennheiser 
MD441, Electrovoice RE20, and Heil Sound PR40), so captur-
ing the harmonic complexity of delicate acoustic sounds 
really isn’t their forte either. What they really do excel 
at, however, is adding character and solidity to loud, 
aggressive, and percussive instruments such as drums, 
horns, and guitar/keyboard ampliﬁ ers. 
 It helps that they can take pretty much whatever level 
you throw at them without overloading, so you can 
stick a dynamic right inside a kick drum or a trom-
bone’s bell without worrying about distortion. In addi-
tion, because dynamic-mic diaphragms are comparatively 
heavy (at least by comparison with those of condensers and 
ribbons), they naturally round off transients, and in a lot of situations 
this actually ends up making close-miked drums and percussion sound subjec-
tively meatier—once the attack “spike” becomes less prominent, the body and 
sustain of the instrument become more of a feature. 
 Condenser mics generally provide greater ﬁ delity in their presentation of the 
frequency spectrum, whereas dynamic mics are rather more wayward in their 
tonality. However, recording engineers throughout history have made a virtue 
of this by using each speciﬁ c model’s unique colorations to enhance the instru-
ment they’re recording, leaving less work to do at mixdown. Indeed, over the 
years certain microphones have become renowned for certain roles, and while 
many of these classics are no longer commercially available, three in particu-
lar are worth knowing about because they’re still current products priced well 
within range of budget studios:
 
■
 Shure SM57.  Despite the fact that you can pick this up for under £100 
($125), it’s without a doubt the commonest choice for two of the most 
important instruments in modern music production: snare drum and 
ampliﬁ ed electric guitar. Designed with a low-frequency roll-off to compen-
sate for the strong proximity effect of extreme close-miking, it has two other 
pertinent tonal characteristics that tend to help in those applications: a little 
low midrange frequency-response dip which reduces muddiness in the mix; 
and a broad 2–12 kHz emphasis which lends clarity and “bite.” 
 
■
 Sennheiser MD421.  More expensive than the SM57, at around $400 
(£300), this microphone has a more extended low end without the SM57’s 
low-midrange suck-out. When used close up, the proximity effect causes 
a bass boost which, together with a hefty high-frequency emphasis from 
 “What dynamic 
mics really do excel 
at is adding character and 
solidity to loud, aggressive, 
and percussive instruments 
such as drums, horns, 
and guitar/keyboard 
amplifi ers.” 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
207
1 kHz upwards, provides what count-
less engineers consider a winning com-
bination for kick drum and bass-guitar 
cabinets—i.e., ample low-end weight, but 
also enough high–midrange deﬁ nition so 
that the kick drum’s beater “slap” and the 
bass guitar’s upper harmonics are clearly 
audible on small mass-market listening 
systems. The MD421 is extremely popu-
lar for tom-toms and electric guitars too, 
not least because of a ﬁ ve-position rotary 
switch next to its XLR connector which 
can reduce the bass level by up to 16 dB 
below 100 Hz. (Shame the plasticky stand-
mounting clip isn’t more robust—every 
commercial studio seems to have a couple 
of broken ones lying around!) 
 
■
 AKG D112.  At around $200 (£150), this distinctive egg-shaped micro-
phone is arguably the most well-known studio kick-drum mic. A resonant 
cavity within the casing gives it condenser-like bass extension, as well as 
an extra helping of 100 Hz “beef,” while frequency-response bumps up 
around 3 kHz and 10 kHz really help the drum’s beater to carry through 
the mix—in other words, it’ll pretty much give you an instant rock kick-
drum sound without EQ. “I haven’t used anything else for kick drum for 
the past ten years,” remarks David Luke, 61 for instance. “It sounds clos-
est to what I want. I don’t have to EQ it too dramatically; it just gives a 
good basic sound.” Some people also like the D112 for recording 
bass-guitar cabs, but its heavily scooped midrange timbre isn’t quite as 
general-purpose in this role, and can also compromise the relative balance 
of different pitches, so I’d personally treat that recommendation with more 
caution.  
 There are plenty of other excellent dynamic microphones besides these, 
of course, but I think a lot of small-studio owners are unfortunately being 
wooed away from them by the glut of budget-friendly condenser microphones 
now available. Back when analog tape was in the ascendant, condenser mics 
had a more important part to play in combating the high-frequency degra-
dations imposed by the recording medium, but nowadays you can afford to 
have a much more varied mic collection when recording digitally. In my 
view, there are lots of absolutely terriﬁ c dynamic models in the sub-$750 
(£500) range that actually represent better value for money than similarly 
priced condensers in terms of providing extra tonal scope and more musically 
appealing sonics.
 FIGURE 6.23    
 Three established 
classics amongst the 
ranks of affordable 
dynamic microphones 
(left to right): The 
Sennheiser MD421, the 
Shure SM57, and the 
AKG D112. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
208
 INTERPRETING MICROPHONE FREQUENCY RESPONSE CHARTS 
 When you don’t yet have much experience of what different mics sound like, something you can use to inform 
your mic-selection guesswork is the mic’s published frequency response, which is usually available from 
the manufacturer’s website—although most of the time I prefer using the excellent Microphone Data site at 
 http://www.microphone-data.com , which has a vast collection of frequency-response data carefully formatted 
for easy comparison. Here are a few things to look out for when scanning through the graphs:
 
■
 Low - Frequency Roll - Off. The extent of a directional microphone’s low-frequency roll-off may infl uence whether 
you choose it for close or distant miking. For example, the well-extended low end of Audio-Technica’s budget-
friendly AT2020 may require signifi cant equalization to keep a natural sound when close-miking, whereas a 
Shure SM57 will start to sound a bit thin if you set it up more than about a foot away, because the proximity 
effect won’t counteract it’s inherent sub-200 Hz roll-off. (Bear in mind, though, when comparing technical 
specifi cations, that the low-end response curve of any directional mic will depend on the measurement 
distance, which isn’t always explicitly stated by some manufacturers.) 
 
■
 Sub - 1 kHz Lumpiness. A lot of pitched instruments have their strongest frequency components in the 
bottom half of the audible frequency spectrum, and the strength of those frequencies has a big effect on 
the instrument’s apparent overall level in a mix. Microphones with obvious nonlinearities below 1 kHz can 
therefore cause some of an instrument’s pitch ranges to seem out of balance, such that smoothly played 
melodies become uneven—something I’ve already mentioned in relation to using AKG’s D112 for bass 
cabs. As a result, I prefer to reserve microphones with sub-1 kHz vagaries for unpitched percussion or any 
parts that remain within a limited pitch register to avoid making a rod for my own back at mixdown.  
 
■
 Vocal Presence Boost. Many microphones designed with vocalists in mind (such as the dynamic models 
I mentioned in Section 5.1.2) deliberately offer a presence boost in the 2–6 kHz zone to aid speech 
intelligibility. Even with vocals this can backfi re a little by overemphasizing the sibilance of certain singers, 
but it can also cause problems with brass instruments and saxophones, which are usually more than 
strident enough in that region already. As noted above, a lot of producers use the SM57’s presence boost 
to enhance snare drums and guitars, but you do need to be careful not to record too much of your whole 
production with exaggerated presence frequencies, otherwise you’ll face a nightmare trying to get the 
vocals to cut through all that at mixdown. Indeed, part of the appeal of some large-diaphragm condenser 
microphones is that they understate the presence region, which nicely complements presence-heavy 
recordings from other mics. 
 
■
 Free - Field Versus Diffuse - Field High - Frequency Balance. When you point a microphone directly at an 
instrument to capture predominately its direct sound, this is sometimes called “free-fi eld” miking. By 
contrast, if you pull a mic away far enough that the recorded signal is dominated by refl ected sound 
arriving from all angles, you’re said to be miking in the “diffuse fi eld.” To capture the most realistic free-
fi eld tone, it’s desirable to have a mic with a fl at on-axis frequency response at the high end. However, 
because almost all microphones are duller-sounding off axis, a mic with a fl at on-axis frequency response 
will actually sound too dull in the diffuse fi eld where only a very small proportion of the sound is hitting the 
diaphragm head-on. Published frequency-response plots typically show only a mic’s on-axis characteristics, 
so if you see a fl at response above 5 kHz it can hint that the microphone is better suited to free-fi eld use 
(i.e., closer positioning), while a strong emphasis in the top two octaves of the spectrum suggests that 
the microphone has been designed to represent sounds most naturally from a few paces away. (Not that 
realism is necessarily the primary concern in a lot of studio situations, where unnatural fl attery may actually 
be preferred!) 
 All that being said, I’d like to stress that a mic’s on-axis frequency-response chart provides a rather one-
dimensional view of its subjective tone, because its resonant characteristics, the way it reacts to off-axis sound, 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
209
 6.4   FURTHER MONITORING TIPS 
 The assignments in Chapters 3, 4, and 5 should already have given you a good 
idea of how to set up appropriate monitoring for you, the musician, and any-
one else involved in the session, whether you’re working in one room or two. 
However, there are a few little reﬁ nements I’d like to add here. 
 Whenever extreme close-miking of the speaker cabinet is used for ampliﬁ ed 
instruments, the player may encounter difﬁ culty dialing up appropriate sounds 
on the ampliﬁ er, because the sound they’re hearing at their performing position 
bears little relation to what’s being picked up by the mic. This is a big reason 
why electric guitarists/keyboardists often prefer to perform overdubs while lis-
tening to the studio’s main monitors, running a speaker cable from their amp 
and its transient response are all equally important in defi ning its sonic identity. So by all means use published 
frequency-response charts to help improve your guesswork when time is against you, but do still take every 
opportunity to experiment with microphones irrespective of whether they “look” suitable, so that you can build 
up real fi rst-hand experience of their tonal qualities.  
 FIGURE 6.24   
 The Rycote Microphone Data site is a fantastic resource for comparing the speciﬁ cations of microphones from different 
manufacturers. 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
210
to a cabinet miked up in another room. That way any adjustments made to the 
ampliﬁ er settings can be heard in the way they’ll be recorded. However, if the 
performer prefers to play while sitting in the recording room, perhaps to take 
advantage of feedback from the speakers to the instrument, then it’s sensible 
to try to lift or angle their cabinet so that they hear more of its direct, on-axis 
sound, because that’ll bear a closer resemblance to the mic signal. 
 You can also run an instrument cable between the control room and the live 
room, but that’s less preferable because you’ll have to go into the live room to 
adjust ampliﬁ er settings. The long instrument cable will be more prone to pick-
ing up unwanted electromagnetic interference too. “If you use a cable longer 
than about twelve feet,” says Jack Joseph Puig, 62 “the pickups will have trouble 
driving the line.” However, you can work around that if necessary by using a 
pair of passive DI boxes to temporarily convert the pickup signal to a micro-
phone signal for transmission purposes. Here’s how you do it:
 
■
 Using short instrument cables, connect the instrument’s output socket to 
the ﬁ rst DI box’s input socket, and plug the second DI box’s input (yes, 
input!) socket to the ampliﬁ er’s input socket. 
 
■
 Connect the XLR output sockets of the two passive DI boxes together using 
a suitably long XLR microphone cable. You’ll need female connectors at 
both ends of the cable to achieve this, so either spend $15 (£10) or so on a 
little female-to-female XLR adaptor or wire up a special cable for the same 
purpose. 
 TO EQ OR NOT TO EQ 
 This book focuses on recording technique rather than equalization (or “EQ”), so I’m not going to go into the 
details of equalizing here—there’s further reading on EQ in the web resources if you need it. It’s not that I’m 
against EQ for some dogmatic reason, it’s just that I’ve observed time and again that small-studio engineers 
almost always get the best results most quickly if they concentrate on the mic and what it’s pointing at, rather 
than trying to process an uninspiring mic signal. Frank Filipetti 63 is one of many producers who also treat EQ 
as a last resort: “A change in the microphone or position is worth a lot more than tweaking EQs. [If] you start 
tweaking EQs too soon, then you’re going to miss some obvious things.” Robert Carranza 64 adds an important 
technical concern too, should recorded parts need repairing later in the production process: “I’ve learned in the 
past that you want to use very little EQ during recording, because if you later want to drop in a fi x, you’ll never 
match it.” 
 That said, there are certainly times when using EQ can be in the best interests of the session workfl ow. For 
example, if you’ve got an otherwise appealing sound from the mic, but it’s just a bit too bright/dull, a ten-second 
fi x with EQ may be a more pragmatic solution than spending another ten minutes hunting for an equally nice-
sounding mic position with the desired spectral “tilt”—especially when working with ribbon mics, as mentioned 
in Section 6.3.4. The danger, of course, is that it’s human nature to work less hard with mic technique if you 
feel you can take up the slack with EQ, thereby slowing down the development of your engineering skills. So if 
you want to improve your chops as quickly as possible, I’d strongly recommend fi nding some maxim which helps 
you reinforce your own self-discipline in this respect. Personally, I like to operate a “one band per track” rule: In 
other words, if I feel the need to use more than one band of EQ on a mic signal, then I take that as a signal to 
ditch the EQ and change something in the live room instead. 

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
211
 Headphones can cause some practical problems with instrumentalists. With 
cellists, for instance, the cans may clunk against the instrument’s neck during 
performance, in which case perhaps investigate DJ-style headphone designs 
which allow one earcup to pivot up out of the way under the headband. 
Headphones for DJs are usually also a little more stable on the player’s head 
when used one-sided, which is an important consideration given that most 
instrumentalists can’t spare a hand to steady them like singers can.  
 6.5   THE EFFICIENCY AND ART OF MIC TECHNIQUE 
 Once you’ve got to the point of hitting Record, you should be back on 
familiar territory, and can run the session much as in the previous chapter 
assignments—just remember to check tuning regularly as you work, keep 
an eye on your paperwork, and do your best to maximize the quality of the 
performance using the suggestions in Section 3.4 (which are equally applicable 
when recording acoustic sources). 
 I’ve condensed a lot of information about mic technique into this chapter, but 
I don’t want that to imply that you should therefore be making a huge meal 
out of choosing and positioning the mic during a real session. On the con-
trary, the whole point of learning about the underlying principles involved is 
that it allows you to work more efﬁ ciently, homing in on the best sound  within 
the time available . On occasion you may have the luxury of fafﬁ ng about with 
different mics and placements for days, but in the normal run of things you 
rarely get more than about ﬁ fteen minutes’ setup time, because attaining sonic 
Nirvana is of lower priority than catching the music before the creatives start 
going off the boil. This is why it’s paramount that you’ve got all your techni-
cal setup out of the way in advance, so you can maximize the 
value of every minute you’re given for sound-hunting. If 
you have to spend ten minutes setting up headphone 
foldback, say, your only opportunity to tweak the 
sound may just have gone up in smoke. 
 It must also be said that one of the biggest differ-
ences between home-brew and professional record-
ings is that amateur engineers tend to give up  way 
too early in the recording room. As long as you stay 
on your toes, ﬁ fteen minutes is plenty of time to try a 
different guitar, switch drum sticks, experiment with half 
a dozen alternate mic positions, rig up a couple of quilts or 
reﬂ ectors, and maybe swap out the mic a couple of times. Even if 
each of those stages makes only a minuscule improvement, their cumulative 
effect will still be signiﬁ cant. So don’t just chuck up a mic and then park your 
backside in the control room twiddling knobs—to be honest, if I see any engi-
neer sitting down before they’ve actually hit Record, it’s usually a pretty reli-
able indicator that they’re not working hard enough on getting the sound right 
 “One of the 
biggest differences 
between home-brew and 
professional recordings is that 
amateur engineers tend to 
give up  way too early in the 
recording room.” 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
212
at source! Don’t waste a moment of the available setup time to question and 
reﬁ ne your initial choices, because even if this doesn’t reward you with a bet-
ter, more mixable sound on the current session, you’ll still be gaining invalu-
able experience that’ll improve your results on future dates. No matter how 
much you think you know about mic technique, there’s always room to learn. 
“I experiment with different microphones, comparing them against a main mic 
I’m happy with,” remarks Steven Epstein, 65 an engineer with more Grammies 
than ﬁ ngers. “That’s how you evolve, that’s how you hone your art.”    
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 Start by listening in the recording room to assess the instrument’s sound and ﬁ nd a ball-
park mic position (for both dry/wet ratio and timbre), compensating for the directional-
ity of your hearing if necessary. Keep an ear open for background noises and unwanted 
sympathetic resonance. 
 
■
 When adjusting the instrument itself, ask the player for help. Common tactics include: 
switching the instrument or playing implement; changing the tuning, damping, or play-
ing volume; and adjusting the playing technique or ampliﬁ er controls. If you can’t turn 
the room acoustics to your advantage by moving the instrument and/or microphone, 
combat them using acoustic absorption, a riser, or a boundary mic. 
 
■
 On the whole, the more directional a mic, the less well extended the low-end response, 
despite the increasingly powerful proximity effect. 
 
■
 Be wary of prescribed miking “recipes.” Instead, try asking the performer or someone else 
familiar with your studio for miking suggestions, because they’re more often useful. 
 
■
 If you have no assistant to move microphones while you listen, ask the performer to 
help. Failing that, a series of dual-mic “tag-team” test recordings works well. When decid-
ing where to move a mic, consider the instrument’s high-frequency beams/shadows and 
air resonances, and the location/size of its different sound-producing components. Try 
to avoid spotlighting one area of an instrument unduly. Reﬂ ectors can help recording 
instruments with unpredictable frequency dispersion, as long as you tweak any comb-
ﬁ ltering to taste. 
 
■
 Overdubbing electric instruments with the musician and ampliﬁ er in the control room 
and the close-miked speaker isolated elsewhere makes it easier for the player to evaluate 
their sound. If they’re performing in the recording room with a close-miked cab, try to 
angle/lift the cab so that it ﬁ res more toward their ears. 
 
■
 Large-diaphragm condensers will usually sound less natural for extreme close-miking or 
more reverberant pickup, because of their on-axis brightness and off-axis coloration, but 
they’re popular for capturing bass instruments with warmth. Most budget models will 
sound best if you can switch them to an omni polar pattern. 
 
■
 Small-diaphragm condensers are good all-round performers, although their more clinical 
high-frequency presentation can sometimes make bright instruments sound abrasive.  

Single-Mic Instrument Recording CHAPTER 6
213
 This assignment is designed to familiarize you with some of the characteristics of the 
different microphones at your disposal, and you’re going to be supplying the sound 
sources so that you can proceed with this important exercise at your own pace.
 
■
 Collect together a good selection of different mics, preferably including large- and 
small-diaphragm condensers and a few different dynamics, as well as ribbon or 
boundary mics if you have any available. 
 
■
 For each mic in turn, record yourself speaking a few pre-scripted lines of text 
several times: fi rst on-axis at distances of 1 foot, 3 feet, and 10 feet; and then off-
axis at 90°, 130°, and 180°, all at a distance of 1 foot. (Use a pop shield to pro-
tect any ribbon mics from plosives.) In addition, record the key-jangling test, and 
clap a few times from a couple of feet away too. Make sure you’re using appropri-
ate gain settings for each sound source, so that you’re always getting as clean a 
recording as you can. 
 
■
 Put all these recordings onto separate tracks in your DAW and line up the timing of 
the sections so that you can switch between them easily. Compare the recordings, 
adjusting levels from the faders if necessary to avoid loudness bias. Once you’ve 
had a chance to compare their characteristics, save a copy of the DAW project and 
ask a friend (perhaps the same helpful soul we met in Chapter 1, Assignment 2) 
to delete the track names and shuffl e the track order while you’re out of the room. 
When they’re done, see if you can identify which track is which by ear. 
 
■
 Miniature omni condensers are handy for especially mobile performers, while boundary 
mics provide omni-like sound quality with reduced reverb pickup, as well as some resis-
tance to room-acoustics problems. 
 
■
 Don’t disregard ribbon mics because they initially sound a little dull—once EQ’d they 
have a smooth high-frequency sound that’s subjectively very appealing and helps tame 
harsh-sounding sources. 
 
■
 Dynamic mics will handle the loudest instruments without distortion problems, and are 
arguably better value than condensers for expanding a small-studio recordist’s tonal pal-
ette. Three absolute classics (SM57, MD421, and D112) are well within small-studio bud-
gets too. 
 
■
 Pre-testing unknown microphones with speech can save a lot of session time. Frequency-
response plots provide some application clues too—pay particular attention to any low-
frequency roll-off, sub-1 kHz lumpiness, presence boost, or general high-frequency lift. 
 
■
 The hairs on the back of your hand can help you position drum mics, as well as warning 
of ribbon-busting air blasts. 
 
■
 Amateur engineers usually give up work in the recording room too quickly—most great 
sounds require numerous adjustments to the instrument, acoustics, and mic selection/
positioning. Although equalization can be useful on occasion, you’ll stunt the develop-
ment of your recording technique if you persistently use EQ as a crutch. 
 Assignment 1: Pre-Session Mic Tests 

PART 2 One Source, One Mic
214
 Assignment 2: Overdubbing a Solo Instrument 
 You now have free rein to overdub pretty much any solo instrument you like, although 
still over an existing backing track. Where I prescribed many of the session param-
eters in previous chapters, that’s all now wide open, so it’s your own responsibility to 
choose the approach that best supports the performer within your own studio environ-
ment. This means you need to make a series of important decisions:
 
■
 If there’s any choice, which room is likely to give you the best sound? Will you use 
a one-room or two-room monitoring setup? Who will monitor on loudspeakers, and 
who on headphones? Will the performer monitor through DAW software, via a low-
latency DSP mixer, or in the analog domain? Will you set up any comfort effects for 
the performer’s foldback mix? Do you need any communications system? 
 
■
 What parts are you going to record? Should you supply the performer with any 
audio/written materials in advance? What paperwork should you have prepared 
in advance for your own benefi t? Are you going to use punch-ins to build a mas-
ter take, and if not, then how many takes will you comp from? Do you need any 
double-tracks or harmonies? 
 
■
 Who is deciding on the target sound? If it’s not you, then how are you going to lock 
onto the decision-maker’s preferences? Which mics will you have plugged up in 
advance? What absorbers/refl ectors should you have set up or ready on standby? 
 As in previous chapter assignments, make notes following the session and reconsider 
any problems that arose, returning to the recordings after a couple of days to attend to 
any comping and to re-evaluate the quality of your results generally. Before proceeding to 
Chapter 7, try to record at least one member of each of the following groups of instruments. 
To speed up your progress, schedule more than one instrumentalist (in series) per session:
 
■
 upright bass or amplifi ed bass guitar; 
 
■
 amplifi ed electric guitar/keyboards; 
 
■
 trumpet, trombone, or saxophone; 
 
■
 acoustic guitar, mandolin, Dobro, banjo, harp, or harpsichord;  
 
■
 grand/upright piano or tuned percussion; 
 
■
 any woodwind instrument; 
 
■
 any bowed string instrument; 
 
■
 any drum; 
 
■
 cymbal, hi-hat, or tambourine. 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 the “Recording Secrets” Library Of Mic Positions, as mentioned in Section 6.2.2;  
 
■
 audio fi les demonstrating many of the mic-positioning principles discussed in 
this chapter and comparing the sounds of different mic designs on different 
instruments; 
 
■
 further reading on equalization, drum tuning, and DIY guitar isolation cabinets.  
 
  http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch6.htm 

 One Source, Multiple 
Mics 
 PART 3 
 PART 3 
 In Part 2 we were laying the foundations for robust, general-purpose mic tech-
nique, as well as gaining valuable experience of different microphones, mik-
ing positions, and acoustics tricks. In Part 3, we’re going to head into more 
specialist territory, by looking at why the highest-proﬁ le professional engineers 
so often record single instruments with multiple microphones simultaneously, 
rather than just using a single mic as we’ve done thus far. This is where the sub-
ject begins to get quite complex, so it’s best approached only once you’re fully 
comfortable with the material in Parts 1 and 2—both in theory and in practice.  

This page intentionally left blank

217
 7.1  COINCIDENT MULTIMIKING 
 7.1.1  Phase-Aligning Multiple Mics 
 First of all, I’d like to explore “coincident” multimiking techniques, where 
microphones are set up with their diaphragms as close to each other as possible, 
the idea being that the sound from the instrument arrives at all the diaphragms 
simultaneously, and all the recorded signals therefore remain in phase with 
each other. However, trying to phase-align mics by eye can be tricky, because the 
exact location of a given mic’s diaphragm is frequently obscured by a grille bas-
ket (or some such protective apparatus), so most engineers rely on the follow-
ing time-honoured trick for phase-aligning pairs of microphones by ear:
 1.  Stick a stationary sound source in front of the mics.  
 2.  Fade up each microphone signal to roughly the same level in your control-
room monitor mix. 
 3.  Invert the polarity of one of the two signals.  
 4.  Leaving one mic stationary, adjust the miking distance of the other to 
achieve the best phase-alignment, which will be where the mic signals can-
cel each other out most strongly. (They’ll never completely cancel each other 
out, though, because their signals won’t be exactly identical.)  
 5.  Remove the polarity inversion applied in step 3. 
 This should allow you to mix the two mics freely without 
signiﬁ cant comb-ﬁ ltering artifacts. To phase-align any 
further mics, just repeat the process. If you’re quick 
on your feet, you can actually do this from scratch 
on the session, but I prefer to save time by phase-
aligning my chosen line-up of mics in advance—a 
portable radio provides an excellent sound source for 
this, and keeps you abreast of the Test Match results 
into the bargain! Once you’ve aligned the mics relative 
to each other, label each one with masking tape (as shown 
 Multimiking in Mono 
 CHAPTER 7 
 CHAPTER 7 
 “Once you’ve 
aligned the mics 
relative to each other, label 
each one with masking tape 
so you can easily recover the 
alignment should it be disturbed 
accidentally during the 
session.” 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
218
in  Figure 7.1 ) so you can easily recover the alignment should it be disturbed acci-
dentally during the session. With end-ﬁ re mics, some people just gaffer-tape the 
mics together, which has the advantage that you require one less mic stand, but 
I’m not a huge fan of this because it makes it a hassle to swap out one of those 
mics later. Phase-aligning multimic rigs in advance can also reveal if any mics or 
cables are actually wired with inverted polarity, something that’s also worth mark-
ing in some way to avoid confusion in the heat of a session. 
 The one disadvantage of using phase-aligned mic arrays is that even the slight-
est accidental movement of the microphones can signiﬁ cantly damage the 
recorded sound, so do guard against this. Once your multimiked sound has 
been given the green light, lock down those mic stands so that they don’t 
sag, and maybe take a picture of the setup on your phone just in case disaster 
strikes. Having a word with the performer about this issue is a good idea in this 
context, because they might not think it’s a particularly big deal to move the 
mic slightly while getting out of their chair as long as they put it back roughly 
in the right place. Make it clear that you need to know if any mic is inadver-
tently nudged, so that you can recheck the phase-alignment. 
 7.1.2    Combining Polar Patterns 
 So what’s the point of using coincident mics? Well, ﬁ rstly it allows you to custom-
ize the directionality of the multimic array as a whole. The simplest scenario is 
where you combine a directional mic with an omni, both mics pointing in the 
same direction. Balancing the two mic signals against each other then effectively 
 FIGURE 7.1    
 A good way to phase-align coincident multimics prior to your recording session is using a portable 
radio—remember that the best phase alignment often won’t be the best visual alignment! Once you’ve 
got the mics in phase with each other, mark their relative positions with masking tape, just in case they 
get knocked out of line for any reason. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
219
provides any pattern between them—in fact, every one of the cardioid-family pat-
terns if the directional microphone happens to be a ﬁ gure-eight. (The “Strauss 
Paket” scheme pioneered by renowned classical engineer Volker Strauss applies the 
same concept, using gaffered-together omni and cardioid small-diaphragm con-
densers to create the less commonplace subcardioid directionality.) Advantages of 
this approach over a single-mic setup are that you can control the pickup response 
freely from the control room, and that you get access to a full range of intermedi-
ate cardioid-style polar patterns between the standardized ones. 
 Angling coincident microphones relative to each other opens up many other 
useful options, though. Imagine you have a coincident pair of cardioid mics, 
both facing an instrument head-on and mixed at equal levels to a single 
recorder track. The combined pickup of this two-mic array will clearly still be 
cardioid. However, if you splay the two mics relative to each other, the width of 
their combined polar pattern will increase. 
 If all mics had theoretically perfect polar patterns, this “crossed pair” technique 
wouldn’t be big news, because you could just get a wider pattern from a single 
subcardioid or omni with less hassle. But crossed pairs really shine with real-
world mics because they enable you to counteract the high-frequency spotlight-
ing effect of close-miking, given that most mic designs are markedly brighter 
on-axis. By turning the mics in slightly different directions, the two spotlights 
diverge, giving good high-frequency coverage across a larger area of the instru-
ment. With cheaper large-diaphragm condensers (the worst off-axis culprits), 
the effect is particularly striking, but the beneﬁ ts also extend to well-behaved 
small-diaphragm mics, albeit in subtler form. In this scenario, it’s inadvisable 
for the “mutual angle” (or “splay angle”) between the ﬁ ring directions of the 
two mics to go much beyond 90° with large-diaphragm models, otherwise you 
begin to lose too much high-frequency deﬁ nition directly in front of the mul-
timic rig, but even with smaller diaphragms there’s usually little to be gained, 
because you’ll just get more room reverb without further weakening the spot-
lighting effect substantially.  
 The crossed pair’s combined polar pattern won’t be symmetrical in three 
dimensions either. The vertical pickup of a horizontally splayed pair will be 
narrower, for instance, so it will pick up slightly less room reverb than a single 
mic with the same horizontal pickup width. As with rectangular-diaphragm 
condensers (see Section 6.3.3), you should consequently take care how the 
pair’s orientation relates to that of the sound source. For example, if you’re 
multimiking an acoustic guitar from somewhere in front, you might splay the 
microphones horizontally to match the width of the instrument, whereas with 
a harp you might choose a vertical orientation to take in its height. 
 Because crossing a pair of mics alters their combined polar pattern, you’ll have 
to account for this when listening for promising mic positions (as discussed 
in Section 6.1.1) and managing the acoustics in your recording space. In this 
context, my own impression is that a crossed pair of cardioids or ﬁ gure-eights 
roughly approximates the dry/wet balance of a subcardioid, while crossed 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
220
 MOUNTING HARDWARE FOR MULTIMIKING 
 Mounting a coincident mic array on a single stand makes it much more convenient to move around without 
upsetting the phase-alignment. The most common gizmo for doing this is called a “stereo bar,” fi tting to the end 
of a normal mic-stand’s boom arm crossways so that two microphones can be attached to it at different (and 
preferably adjustable) positions along its length. You can get good-quality eight-inch stereo bars for under $15 
(£10) apiece which will accommodate the majority of end-fi re crossed-pair confi gurations, but such a short bar 
rarely provides enough leeway to set up crossed pairs with bulkier mics such as large-diaphragm condensers and 
ribbons. If getting hold of a longer specimen for these situations is a bit pricey for you, check out K&M’s 238 
Microphone Holder, because this little $15 (£10) metal bracket will let you clamp an additional mic to almost any 
part of a normal mic stand. In fact, because it’ll fi x to practically any solid piece of furniture, it’s generally a good 
choice for low-budget studios where there aren’t enough proper mic stands to go round, and it’s tremendously 
handy for location recording too—I have a half a dozen in my kit bag, and use them to death! Budget-friendly 
multimic mounting hardware does have one downside, however: It’s often a bit fi ddlier to set up than a collection 
of individual stands, so I highly recommend doing battle with that before the talent turns up.  
 FIGURE 7.2     
 Here you can see some different mic-mounting approaches for crossed pairs (clockwise from top left): screw-on mic-mounting 
brackets; separate mic stands; and a short stereo bar. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
221
supercardioids or hypercardioids more closely resemble a 
single cardioid in this respect. 
 Crossed pairs aren’t just for cardioid-family mics, 
because crossed large-diaphragm omnis will also ben-
eﬁ t from much wider high-frequency pickup at close 
range than a single mic. However, crossing ﬁ gure-eight 
close mics is rarely worthwhile, because the polarity of 
the rear-facing sensitivity lobes are (by the very nature 
of the design) inverted with respect to the front lobe—so 
the rear-facing lobe of the right-facing mic counteracts the 
frontal pickup of the left-facing mic, and  vice versa . (Crossed 
ﬁ gure-eight mics are deﬁ nitely useful when you’re recording in stereo, 
though, as we’ll see in Chapter 8.)
 7.1.3  Balancing Instrument Facets 
 A crossed pair of directional mics can also balance sounds emanating from dif-
ferent parts of the instrument. So, for example, a crossed pair over the strings of 
a piano just behind the music stand might have one capsule pointing toward 
the high strings and one toward the low strings, allowing you to rebalance 
those against each other easily from the control-room faders. The big beneﬁ t 
here is that it becomes quicker to get a respectable sound directly out of the 
mics without processing, which is a godsend for fast-moving sessions where 
you may not have the opportunity to move your mics before takes start going 
down. Moreover, if you record the two microphones to separate recorder tracks, 
it becomes possible to change the piano’s low/high balance at mixdown too. 
 Another extremely widespread application of the crossed pair (and a favorite 
of Nashville engineers such as Chuck Ainlay 1 and Bob Bullock 2 ) involves put-
ting the mics in front of an acoustic guitar, roughly in line with the twelfth 
fret: One diaphragm points toward the fretboard to catch the direct sound 
of the strings, and one is angled toward the instrument’s body for its richer 
resonances. Andy Johns 3 mentions a similar idea for electric guitars, whereby 
two SM57s are used on the same guitar speaker at a 45° angle to each other. 
“Put them together, and it always works…As long as you position them so that 
they’re equidistant from the speaker, they’re in phase and one of them will give 
you all the high end you want and the other one will give you the bottom.” 
With larger speaker cabinets, this technique allows you to blend the qualities 
of the different driver cones. “They’re supposed to sound the same,” comments 
Roy Thomas Baker, 4 “but if you’re using a 4×12 cabinet, each of those four 
speakers may sound different.” 
 The crossed pair can also provide control over a recording’s dry/wet balance. 
For example, Ken Nelson 5 mentions crossing a cardioid and a ﬁ gure-eight mic 
for this when recording acoustic guitar: The cardioid faces the instrument to 
pick up mostly direct sound, while the ﬁ gure-eight has its null plane aimed at 
the instrument so that it picks up mostly room sound. 
 “Crossed pairs 
aren’t just for cardioid-
family mics, because 
crossed large-diaphragm omnis 
will also benefi t from much 
wider high-frequency pickup 
at close range than a 
single mic.” 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
222
 FIGURE 7.3    
 Crossed-pair mic strategies in action (top to bottom): balancing the high-register and low-register strings 
of a grand piano; blending an acoustic guitar’s string and body tones; and capturing a mixture of two 
different guitar-amp speakers. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
223
 7.1.4  Mixing Microphone Flavors 
 Coincident multimiking is tremendously popular amongst professionals who 
like to mix and match the sonic ﬂ avors of different mics on a single instrument, 
with electric guitar/bass speaker cabinets, snare, and kick frequently receiving 
this treatment in studios. “There’s an amazing difference in the sound and col-
oration you get from adjusting the balance of each of the mics,” remarks John 
Leckie, 6 “and you can get radically different textures depending on your mix 
of [them].” Chris Lord-Alge 7 is another fan: “Rather than jamming one mic in 
front of an amp and grabbing the EQ, a couple of mics will give you better tone 
without the EQ and all the phase problems you get when cranking up the EQ.” 
Again, a big advantage of this tactic is speed, because the sound-blending process 
is so intuitive: If you put up a ribbon mic and an SM57, you immediately have 
an idea which fader will give you warmth and which presence, and because the 
two mics are phase-aligned, those two sound characters will combine in a fairly 
natural way without comb-ﬁ ltering artifacts. In addition, I’ve found that I get a 
much better recorded sound using low-budget mics if I combine them like this, 
rather than using them singly, whereas the quality difference between single-mic 
and multimic techniques seems less dramatic with more expensive hardware. 
 Making the most of this technique involves selecting contrasting mics, because 
that gives you a wider sonic range when you balance them against each 
other. Mic-pairing maxims from various high-proﬁ le engineers bear this out: 
“cheap”/“expensive” (Stephen Street 8 ), “bright”/“dark” (Steve Albini 9 ), and 
“good”/“bad” (Jim Scott: 10 “Between the two you can ﬁ nd the ideal sound, 
and you can get brightness and fullness.”). My other tip is to try to get hold of 
variable high-pass ﬁ ltering for all the mic channels, because this allows you to 
moderate the amount of proximity-effect bass boost contributed by each mic, 
multiplying the number of usable sounds from your mic array without add-
ing much extra operational complexity. In addition, Frank Filipetti 11 makes the 
important point that adding an extra mic to the mix will also make the com-
bined signal louder, biasing your judgment. “[I] make sure that when I take the 
mic away, my level is still the same,” he says. “That gives me a much truer taste 
of whether that mix is adding something.” 
 Although often used for studio recording, multimiking is very rarely used on 
vocals. This might initially seem surprising, given the amount of time and atten-
tion lavished on reﬁ ning vocal sonics by other means, but there are two good 
reasons for it. Firstly, because upper-spectrum “air” frequencies above 10 kHz are 
so important for vocal clarity, the phase-alignment of the microphones would 
have to be matched extremely accurately to avoid dulling them; and, secondly, 
any movement of the singer off-axis would subtly affect the phase alignment 
and introduce more-or-less random variations in the high-frequency timbre. 
Occasionally, though, you might still consider putting up two mics if you’re 
recording someone with the projection of an air-raid siren, in order to insure 
against your ﬁ rst-choice microphone overloading. In that case, a high-qual-
ity dynamic, a small-diaphragm condenser, or even a boundary mic (as John 
Hudson 12 used for Tina Turner) might serve as a useful safety net.  

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
224
 USING SPEAKERS OR HEADPHONES AS MICS 
 The transduction principle which most dynamic microphones use to convert air-pressure waves into electrical 
signals is the same one which (in reverse) allows loudspeakers and headphones to convert electrical signals 
into air-pressure waves. Because of this, it’s perfectly possible to wire up passive speaker/headphone drivers 
to operate like dynamic mics. As you might imagine, they’ll give you a very colored sound, not least because the 
inertia of the super-large diaphragm provides very little transient detail and typically recesses the high-frequency 
response, and you’re unlikely to get great noise or distortion performance either. However, any of these 
attributes can become positives within the context of creative multimiking, by providing starkly contrasting tones 
to complement other more hi-fi  mics. 
 Although a small handful of commercial products have operated on this principle (notably Beyerdynamic’s 
M380, constructed around one of their headphone drivers), the most well-known application of this idea is the 
hoary old pro-studio trick of wiring up a spare Yamaha NS10 woofer to a mic input and hanging it in front of a 
kick drum (or indeed any other instrument)—Jim Abbiss, 13 Joe Barresi, 14 Jerry Boys, 15 and Mike Fraser 16 have 
all mentioned it in interview, for instance. The speaker cone is heavy enough to prevent much in the way of 
pickup above 500 Hz, and it responds inordinately well to the sub-80 Hz frequency range. However, I suspect 
the popularity of that particular driver has more 
to do with the ubiquity of NS10s in commercial 
studios for mixing purposes (maintenance 
departments always have a few spare woofers 
lying around) than it has to do with their specifi c 
sound, and other engineers such as Dan Austin, 17 
Mike Poole, 18 Eric “Mixerman” Sarafi n, 19 and 
Michael Wagener 20 have all mentioned using other 
speakers instead. The idea predates the NS10 
too, because Geoff Emerick 21 was already using it 
for Paul McCartney’s bass sound on “Paperback 
Writer” in 1966. Yamaha eventually adapted the 
idea into a robustly engineered product called 
the Subkick, but given that it’ll set you back 
around $400 (£300), there’s still a good case for 
soldering up something yourself if you’re working 
on a budget. (See this chapter’s web resources for 
further information on the do-it-yourself approach.) 
 7.2    NON-COINCIDENT MULTIMIKING 
 7.2.1    Combining Close Mics 
 Although crossed-pair coincident miking can expand your polar pickup when 
close-miking and provide control over the levels of different instrument facets, 
it still only picks up the instrument from one location. With wooden-bodied 
instruments in particular, it’s difﬁ cult to achieve a full picture of the source in 
this way because the complex body resonances cause such unpredictable fre-
quency dispersion. Close-miking from different angles can therefore pick up 
a more credible spectral balance. As a mainstay of popular music, the acoustic 
guitar probably receives this treatment most frequently. Here’s Bill VornDick 22
 FIGURE 7.4     
 A speaker can operate as a dynamic mic if wired up appropriately, 
although it will typically have very poor high-frequency response. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
225
describing his setup, for instance: “I have one [mic] where the neck joins the 
body, pointed…where the high transients are. Then I have another one that 
looks down from where his right shoulder is…covering the area in the middle 
between the wrist and shoulder—that microphone emulates what the guitarist is 
hearing, and will be deeper in timbre.” Notice again how he’s deliberately cho-
sen contrasted timbres, increasing the tonal range available to him when balanc-
ing the mics in the control room. “You can bring out the high mic or the low 
mic without having to do anything EQ-wise except high-pass ﬁ ltering,” he adds. 
Another approach popular with Gary Paczosa 23 and Eric Valentine 24 is to use two 
mics in front of the instrument, with “one looking down at the strings from the 
top, and one looking up from below,” to quote Valentine himself. 
 With grand piano, we’ve already seen that balancing the lower and higher strings 
is frequently the goal, and Al Schmitt 25 takes this approach by using large-
diaphragm omnis behind the music stand, angling the mics to control their 
high-frequency directionality: “The close mics are usually a couple of feet off the 
high end and a couple of feet off the low end, kind of at a 45° angle to each 
other.” Another common alternative used by Brian Tankersley 26 involves posi-
tioning one mic to cover the low and mid-register strings at the point where 
they cross over each other, and one mic to catch the higher strings closer to the 
hammers. Tony Visconti, 27 on the other hand, prefers to place both his multim-
ics pointing toward the soundholes for more wood resonance and less hammer 
attack, while Ed Cherney 28 and Jay Newland 29 place an additional mic toward 
the foot of the piano to warm up the otherwise pristine sound of a crossed pair 
of high-quality small-diaphragm condensers hovering behind the music stand. 
 Spaced multimics are usually the most convenient choice for upright piano too, 
whenever the instrument’s front panels are removed. By comparison, crossed 
coincident pairs can be awkward to position, given the player’s central seating 
location. (At least without the aid of a surgical saw.) However, I ﬁ nd that spaced 
multimic arrays somehow overlay a hint of “honky-tonk” onto pretty much 
any piano that’s not a lovingly tuned nine-foot grand, so I usually recommend 
coincident approaches for small-studio practitioners multimiking less reﬁ ned 
instruments. 
 The use of multi-speaker cabinets for electric guitars frequently prompts engi-
neers to set up independent close mics for different cones. “It seems a little dif-
ferent than just using one mic,” says Steve Churchyard. 30 “It’s not twice as good, 
but it’s just mixing the character of two different speakers.” And why not take 
advantage of the different ﬂ avors of different mic designs while you’re at it? Don 
Smith 31 mentioned setting up an SM57 and an AKG C452 small-diaphragm con-
denser for his work with The Rolling Stones, for instance, while Toby Wright 32 
and Sylvia Massy 33 have both used a combination of SM57 and MD421. 
 Kick drums are regularly captured with spaced techniques. One mic is often 
aimed directly at the beater contact point to achieve better attack deﬁ nition, 
with some engineers (e.g., Steve Marcantonio 34 and Tony Visconti 35 ) suggesting 
a position inside the drum and others (e.g., Robbie Adams 36 and Steve Albini 37 ) 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
226
choosing a position on the batter-head side, particularly where the drum’s 
resonant head is intact. This beater “click” signal might then be balanced with 
a fuller-sounding mic within the drum or fairly close to the resonant head. 
Similar approaches are often taken with upright bass too, frequently involving 
a mic near the instrument’s bridge to capture the low power and another higher 
up to provide mid-range tone—a setup referred to by both Steve Chandler 38 
and Bill VornDick. 39  
 The main price you pay for the expanded tonal options of non-coincident mul-
timiking is that the mic signals don’t mix together as intuitively as you’d expect 
with coincident arrays, because they’re not phase-aligned. In other words, you 
don’t just get a simple addition of each mic’s tonal attributes when you blend 
them—you also get comb-ﬁ ltering artifacts which will vary in strength depend-
ing on how similar-sounding the signals are, and what relative levels you mix 
them at. You can reduce this comb-ﬁ ltering somewhat by moving the mics 
close enough to spotlight different areas of the instrument (thereby making 
the signals less similar), but this carries with it the danger of a rather unnatu-
ral sound. Myself, I think it’s easiest to get good results if you ﬁ rst concentrate 
on carefully positioning a single microphone to catch a fairly solid representa-
tion of the whole instrument, because you can then use any additional mic at a 
comparatively low level for subtle enhancement without drastic comb-ﬁ ltering 
penalties.
 FIGURE 7.5    
 Spaced-pair multimiking 
is particularly useful for 
upright piano where the 
instrument’s front panels 
are removed, because 
the mics can be placed 
conveniently either side 
of the player. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
227
 
 Either way, though, you’ll never eliminate phase-cancellation between the mics 
completely, so you have to learn to work with it. For a start, be careful using 
spaced microphone arrays with instrumentalists who move around a lot, other-
wise the comb-ﬁ ltering response will maraud around the frequency spectrum, 
giving an inconsistency of tone that’s extremely difﬁ cult to handle at mixdown. 
You also need to realize that although moving a mic an inch or two may not 
have a huge affect on the sound of that mic in solo, it can signiﬁ cantly alter 
the nature of the comb-ﬁ ltering effect when multimic signals are mixed. This 
may act in your favor if you happen to ﬁ nd a pair of microphone positions that 
you like the sound of, but which comb-ﬁ lter unpleasantly when combined, 
because very small mic-position changes can often tweak the phase-cancella-
tion into a more appealing form without upsetting the essential qualities of 
each separate signal. Any ﬁ ltering or equalizing you do to individual mic chan-
nels will also become less predictable, because those processes don’t just affect 
a signal’s frequency response—they also affect its “phase response” (i.e., the 
phase relationships between its individual sine-wave components), and hence 
its contribution to any comb-ﬁ ltering effect. 
 Because comb-ﬁ ltering plays such an important role here, a polarity-inversion 
switch on every mic channel becomes well-nigh essential, because for any given 
phase-relationship between two microphones, switching the polarity of one 
of them will swap the positions of the comb-ﬁ ltering response’s spectral peaks 
and troughs, doubling the number of tonal ﬂ avors you can choose from. Where 
more than two mics are used, the sonic variations multiply according to the 
number of different polarity permutations available across all the component 
mic channels. So every time you multimike an instrument with a non-coincident 
 PHASED ARRAYS 
 We’ve already seen how multimiking can be used to adjust the effective polar pickup of a coincident array, but 
you can also increase the directionality of a non-coincident rig by setting up several microphones in a line, all 
pointing at your sound source from the same distance—a confi guration called a “phased array.” Anything arriving 
at the array head-on will arrive at all the mics in phase, whereas anything arriving off-axis won’t be picked up as 
effectively, because it’ll arrive at the mics at different times, resulting in phase-cancellation effects. The more 
mics you add to the array, the more on-axis sources will be favored. What complicates matters from a practical 
perspective, however, is that the action of a phased array is frequency-dependent. The basic dilemma is this: 
On the one hand, widening the array allows the system’s directionality to extend further down the frequency 
spectrum, so larger mic spacings are benefi cial from that perspective; but, on the other hand, comb-fi ltering of 
off-axis sound becomes more severe for wider arrays, so narrower spacings will provide a clearer tone. 
 As such, I wouldn’t actively seek out phased arrays for directionality reasons while overdubbing, since 
swapping/moving mics or increasing acoustic absorption in the recording space can achieve similar ends 
without the comb-fi ltering damage. However, once you understand how phased arrays work, it provides 
additional insight into the side-effects of other multimiking approaches. So, for example, the small but 
unavoidable spacing between the diaphragms in a side-by-side coincident pair will narrow the array’s combined 
polar pattern at high frequencies in the horizontal plane, and it also means you’ll probably get clearer off-axis 
tonality above and below the array than you will from the sides. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
228
array, creating a representative mixed sound in the control room becomes as 
much about comparing the suitability of different polarity settings as it is about 
juggling fader levels—something that can take a little getting used to. 
 Polarity inversion is particularly important if you decide to mike up any instru-
ment at roughly equal distances on opposite sides. This is most common in the 
case of snare drum, where Jon Astley, 40 Bill Price, 41 and Alan Winstanley 42 are 
just a few of the engineers who routinely mike it both from above and below, 
allowing them to decide how much buzz they want from the snare wires. (This is 
by no means an inviolable standard, though, with John Leckie, 43 Alan Parsons, 44 
and Elliott Scheiner 45 all expressing reservations about under-snare mics.) You 
might also capture open-backed guitar cabinets using front and back mics for 
a thicker low–midrange tone. “Gerry had an open-back amp that I miked 
from behind with a Sennheiser 421,” recalls Tony Visconti 46 of David Bowie’s 
“Heathen” sessions, “because I found I got more low end by positioning the mic 
there if that’s what was called for. I sometimes also did that with David on his 
Supro amps, which are open-back too.” 
 Where more nuanced manipulation of phase relationships is required, then you 
may wish to investigate variable phase adjusters, which provide a whole con-
tinuum of alternate tonal colors by shifting a channel’s phase response in less 
straightforward ways. These aren’t exactly cheap in the analog domain, unfor-
tunately: The Radial Phazer’s good value, for instance, but still won’t leave you 
much change from $350 (£300). However, if you’re working in software the good 
news is that there are much cheaper alternatives available in plug-in form, which 
are just as powerful (see this chapter’s web resources for some suggestions). 
 Further tonal variations can be accessed by using a digital delay processor to 
adjust the relative timing of individual signals in a multimic rig. Given that 
 FIGURE 7.6    
 Here you can see two dual-miking setups where polarity-inversion of one of the mics will usually be 
advisable: miking an open-backed guitar amp from the front and rear simultaneously; and using top and 
bottom snare-drum mics in tandem. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
229
phase cancellation occurs most obviously with timing offsets below about 
20 ms, you’ll need a delay with decent parameter resolution for this—delay-
time increments of 5 ms will only give a handful of different tones compared 
with steps of 0.1 ms. (Many DAW systems have built-in high-resolution “sample 
delay” plug-ins which work well for this, but again I’ve put some plug-in sugges-
tions in this chapter’s web resources as well.) Bear in mind, however, that if the 
effects of your delay processing are audible in the musician’s foldback signal, 
you may seriously tamper with their ability to perform, so I wouldn’t suggest 
using anything more than a few milliseconds of artiﬁ cial delay for tone-control 
purposes unless it’s easy to set up a separate cue mix without it.
 
 7.2.2  Creative Use of Phase Relationships 
 In some cases, comb-ﬁ ltering can become a deﬁ nite virtue, most commonly 
when miking ampliﬁ ed electric instruments. As I mentioned in Section 6.2.7, 
close-miking techniques have long been used to sculpt an ampliﬁ er’s tone 
into something that scarcely resembles what’s heard in the recording room. 
Coincident multimiking expands on this concept a little, but it’s non-coincident 
mic arrays that really up the stakes, giving you the power to utterly transform 
the recorded timbre through creatively applied comb-ﬁ ltering, without recourse 
to traditional EQ processing. Jack Douglas 47 refers to this as “phase EQ,” and 
suggests that a sound created in this manner will hold its place much more 
solidly in the mix. “Not only that, it won’t wipe out everything else,” he adds, 
“because it will have such a separate and distinct sound character.” 
 The “phase EQ” is easily my favorite guitar overdubbing technique, because it’s 
so easy to experiment with new sounds and textures, and great to do this in 
collaboration with the guitarist themselves if they’re sitting in the control room 
with you. It’s also excellent when you’re layering up several distorted guitars, 
because being able to give each layer its own unique sound tends to create a 
much thicker and more impressive multitracked texture. However, this pow-
erful method can also be applied to acoustic instruments, something which 
both Eddie Kramer 48 and Frank Filipetti 49 have talked about in interview. 
“[You] can create certain [comb-ﬁ ltering effects] that work to your advantage,” 
remarks Filipetti, for instance, “and sometimes work better than doing it with 
an equaliser.” 
 WHICH POLARITY SETTING IS CORRECT? 
 With coincident multimiking, you’ll almost always want to choose the polarity setting which gives the loudest 
combined sound. However, with non-coincident arrays, there is no “correct” setting, because there will always 
be some phase-cancellation whichever polarity relationship you choose between the mic signals—so you 
just have to use your ears! One thing I have noticed, though, is that if I’m having trouble deciding which 
polarity setting I prefer for a spaced pair of mics, then it’s an indication that I should adjust the mic positions. 
Somehow, good mic positions usually seem to have one polarity relationship that’s clearly more attractive-
sounding than the other. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
230
 With acoustic instruments, though, any mic 
technique that relies on strong comb-ﬁ ltering 
will be heavily compromised if the sound 
source moves, so more-or-less stationary 
instruments such as drums, keyboards, and 
tuned percussion are most likely to reward 
the effort. Even then, however, the inherent 
artiﬁ ciality of creative comb-ﬁ ltering between 
the mics may prove a sticking point, simply 
because most listeners have a strong impres-
sion of how acoustic instruments should 
sound naturally—whereas a much wider range 
of timbres is fair game with electric instru-
ments because there’s not really a “natural” 
sound people can measure against. 
 7.2.3    Ambience and Room Mics 
 Spaced mics also can balance an instrument’s 
close-miked sound with a more distant per-
spective. In some cases “more distant” just 
means ﬁ lling out a spotlighted sound with 
a full-instrument picture, for example when 
Al Schmitt 50 mentions putting an ambience 
microphone up by the curve of a grand pia-
no’s lid to enhance his spaced close-mic array. This approach is quite common 
for “catching the air” around an electric guitar too: Jon Kelly 51 had Neumann 
U87s close and four feet away on Kate Bush’s “Wuthering Heights”; a simi-
larly distanced AKG C414 was used by Robbie Adams 52 to complement a close 
Shure SM57 for U2’s The Edge on “Achtung Baby,” while the guitars on Shania 
Twain’s “Up!” were recorded with a comparable setup by Bob Bullock; 53 and 
Toby Scott 54 used Neumann’s KM86 small-diaphragm condenser instead of the 
C414 for the guitars on Bruce Springsteen’s “Born In The USA.” On kick drum 
a similar role is commonly ﬁ lled by a large-diaphragm condenser, traditionally 
the classic Neumann supercardioid U47 FET placed a foot or more away from 
the drum’s resonant head, but cheaper products will usually serve pretty well 
too, as long as they can take the level without distorting. 
 As with any other non-coincident conﬁ guration, the relative polarity/phase/
timing of the mic signals will require careful attention, because the more dis-
tant mic will still be picking up some direct sound, so you’ll need to massage 
the comb-ﬁ ltering response to obtain the best tone. Where the aim is to faith-
fully represent the timbre of an acoustic musician with this kind of multimic 
rig, some engineers like to use digital delay to time-align the instrument’s 
direct sound in each mic signal, thereby minimizing comb-ﬁ ltering arti-
facts. You can do this in the same kind of way we phase-aligned coincident 
mics in Section 7.1.1, ﬂ ipping the delayed signal’s polarity to search for the 
 FIGURE 7.7    
 A “phase EQ” multimic 
recording rig in action. 
You can get a vast array 
of different guitar tones 
from a setup like this 
simply by combining the 
mic signals with different 
levels and polarities. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
231
 FIGURE 7.8    
 Analog and digital phase alignment tools: the Little Labs IBP Junior (above) and the Voxengo PHA-979 
plug-in (below). 
 MANAGING EXPECTATIONS 
 If you’re recording your own music, it’s entirely up to you to decide what sound you chase when recording any 
instrument in the studio. The moment you’re working on anyone else’s material, though, you’re dealing with other 
people’s expectations, which usually means doing a bit of research before the session to fi nd out what kinds of 
sounds they prefer. In this respect it’s really useful to get hold of any previous recordings the artist/band may 
have done, as well as fi nding out what kinds of music they listen to. Take the time to thrash out what they do 
and don’t like about each of these productions, and which parts of the current project they relate to—it’s no use 
taking your inspiration from a specifi c single’s guitar sound if the band actually like that record for the bass! 
 Listening to live performances and rehearsals can also be revealing, because they show you how a performer 
is used to hearing themselves while playing, which can inform the way you set things up on your recording 
session. If you go to a band’s rehearsal room and see the bass player’s rig in a corner (incurring serious 
boundary effect) and the guitarist’s combo on the fl oor fi ring directly at his knees (putting his ears off-axis to its 
high-frequency beam), then you can take those sonic preferences into account when molding the amp sounds 
for those same musicians in a studio environment. 
 Diffi culties can arise, however, where expectations confl ict. For example, an acoustic guitarist may complain 
that your recording isn’t capturing the full warmth and depth of their instrument, even though that kind of 
low midrange might be of no use to the shiny pop arrangement you happen to be overdubbing on. If a little 
explanation doesn’t immediately resolve this, then it’s rarely a good idea to argue about it in principle, as I 
mentioned in Section 3.4—let the musician have their way in the fi rst instance, and once you’ve got something 
to listen to, it should become pretty obvious to everyone whether the tone feels right in context. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
232
setting which yields the greatest cancellation. (You can quickly get into the 
right ballpark by remembering that sound travels roughly one foot per mil-
lisecond.) However, the downside of this kind of time-alignment is that the 
level and timbre of the direct sound (and therefore also the apparent dry/wet 
balance) become very sensitive to small movements of the instrument, so I 
wouldn’t recommend it unless you’re dealing with a stationary source such as a 
stand-mounted drum or acoustic piano. At least not if you value your sanity at 
mixdown. 
 Once you back off (or angle) the more distant mic, such that reﬂ ected sound 
from the instrument begins to dominate over direct sound, comb-ﬁ ltering 
begins to impinge less powerfully on the multimic array’s combined tone, and 
the “room mic” becomes more a tool for moderating your recording’s dry/
wet balance. Despite the ease of adding digital reverberation to dry sounds at 
mixdown, room mics remain a ﬁ xture on many professional sessions. “There’s 
a lot more character to real rooms,” explains Husky S. Hoskulds, 55 “and they 
don’t have that ﬂ ag on them that shouts ‘Reverb!’ Room sound has dimen-
sion to it, because a real room has real dimensions.” One of the big reasons 
why room reverb often sounds better, in my view, is that a real room reﬂ ects 
sound from the whole instrument, whereas an artiﬁ cial reverb can only work 
with the limited proportion of the instrument’s sound that’s picked up by 
the close mics. (That said, if the room or recording chain are too noisy, then 
digital reverb may turn out to be a lesser evil.) As long as you try to ﬁ nd a 
room that suits the sound you’re looking for, ﬁ nding a room-miking position 
is primarily just a case of using your ears, as discussed in Section 6.1.1, but 
remember to pay particular attention to the low-end response of what you’re 
hearing, because room resonances can make a big difference to the sound, and 
the boundary effect may be able to counteract timbral thinning of directional 
mics used at a distance. 
 If you decide to try mic placements in excess of about 30 feet, this may affect 
your mic choices. For quieter instruments, the noisiness of dynamic and rib-
bon models will eliminate them from the shortlist in most cases. Even if you 
are able to capture a ribbon cleanly enough for distant miking, however, its 
muted high-frequency response may be an issue unless you’re delib-
erately seeking out more rounded timbres. When sound 
travels larger distances, the air itself absorbs some high-
frequency energy, and any mic with a duller tonality 
will exacerbate that effect. (The exact amount of 
high-frequency damping depends on how humid 
the air is, but you may potentially lose as much 
as 3 dB at 10 kHz if you’re miking from 30 feet 
away.) Small-diaphragm condensers are also 
noisier in the main than large-diaphragm mics, 
although the downside with large diaphragms is 
that their colored off-axis tone may cause problems 
 “Although omnis 
are a good general-
purpose choice for room 
mics, in smaller rooms a cardioid 
or fi gure-eight mic with its null 
directed toward the sound source 
can actually create an illusion 
of increased room 
size.” 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
233
when sound’s arriving from all angles. I usually opt for the 
truer small-diaphragm sound myself, especially when work-
ing with cheaper mics, even though that gives me a little more 
noise.
 Although omnis are a good general-purpose choice for room 
mics, in smaller rooms a cardioid or ﬁ gure-eight mic with its 
null directed toward the sound source can actually create an 
illusion of increased room size. Both Tony Visconti, 56 and 
Stuart Sullivan 57 mention directing mics toward a wall or win-
dow in this situation to emphasize the reﬂ ections. “The reﬂ ec-
tion not only gives me a little more delay,” says Sullivan, “it 
also takes away a little of the edge and smears it so the image 
isn’t quite as clear.” 
 Simon Dawson 58 and Ben Hillier 59 take advantage of another 
time-honored stunt: “If I needed more ambience,” recalls 
Hillier, “I’d just open the door to the corridor and stick a mic 
down the end. It makes for a more colorful sound.” What’s 
particularly good about capturing the ambience separately 
like this is that you can still keep the close-mic signal very dry 
and tight—something that wouldn’t be as easy if the instru-
ment itself had been put into a more reverberant space. Even 
in purpose-built recording venues there’s much to recom-
mend this approach, and you can hear “non-studio” spaces being corralled 
into service on many famous records: a concrete loading bay on Brian Adams’s 
“Cuts Like A Knife” and “Reckless”; 60 a bathroom at Coast Recorders for Kim 
Deal’s singing on the Breeders’  Last Splash ; 61 and another bathroom (pink-tiled 
this time!) for Madonna’s vocals on “Like A Virgin.” 62 
 Steve Albini 63 makes another useful small-studio suggestion: “I’ll some-
times delay the ambient microphones by a few milliseconds, and that has 
the effect of getting rid of some of the slight phasing that you hear when 
you have microphones at a distance and up close…When you move them 
far enough away, they start sounding like acoustic reﬂ ections, which is what 
they are.” However, phase-cancellation isn’t the only factor at work here, 
because increasing the delay between a close mic and a room mic also has 
the psychological effect of moving the instrument closer to the listener. This 
is because, in natural listening, the direct sound from a close source will 
reach your ears much quicker than the reﬂ ected sound, whereas the reﬂ ected 
sound of a more distant source will follow the direct sound more closely—as 
illustrated in  Figure 7.9 . (You may also hear this perceptual distancing illu-
sion when adjusting timing offsets between the signals of quite closely spaced 
mics, as discussed in sections 7.2.1 and 7.2.2, but frankly the effect is nor-
mally pretty small by comparison with the massive tonal changes incurred by 
comb-ﬁ ltering.) 
 FIGURE 7.9    
 When a musician is right 
next to the mic (position 
A), the distance their 
direct sound has to 
travel to reach the mic is 
only a small proportion 
of the distance that 
sonic reﬂ ections from 
the room must travel. 
As the musician moves 
away from the mic 
(position B), these path-
lengths become more 
comparable, so the time 
offset between the direct 
and reﬂ ected sounds 
decreases. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
234
 You do have to be a bit wary, though, when delaying room mics, or indeed 
when placing room mics more than about 30 feet away, because this can per-
ceptually separate the onset of the room mic’s signal from that of the close-
mic’s, creating an audible “slapback” echo effect. While this has a certain retro 
appeal in some styles, it can quickly become an annoying distraction for the 
listener, especially in more naturalistic acoustic genres.
 
 7.3    MULTI-AMPING AND REAMPING ELECTRIC 
INSTRUMENTS 
 7.3.1    Multiple Ampliﬁ ers 
 With ampliﬁ ed instruments, especially electric guitars, there’s another situa-
tion where multimiking becomes almost inevitable: when the instrument is 
feeding several ampliﬁ ers at once. On the simplest level, a multi-amp approach 
just increases your tonal options, as Glen Kolotkin 65 remarked while discussing 
Carlos Santana’s “Supernatural” sessions: “He was playing through an assortment 
of ampliﬁ ers at the same time, and by using multiple microphones I was able to 
get just the right blend.” Dave Jerden 66 suggests a more structured plan of attack 
here, though: “Instead of [having] one sound and one amp [and] using EQ, I’ll 
use an amp basically dedicated to lows, one delegated to midrange, and one for 
high end. I might use a Vox or Matchless cabinet like an AC30 with a Big Muff—
that will give a big bottom end, especially with a Les Paul. Then for midrange I’ll 
use some kind of Marshall, a 50- or 100-Watt lead, or a Bogner. And for high end 
I’ll use a Soldano or another Bogner for a more piercing sound.” And it’s not just 
for guitars—Jerden triple-amps bass too. 
 Eric Valentine 67 and Mike Hedges, 68 on the other hand, use multiple amps to 
adapt the guitar texture to different sections of the arrangement without having 
to use layered parts. Hedges, for instance, uses amps with different amounts of 
drive, so that at mixdown he can fade up the more heavily driven signals for 
song sections when thicker guitar textures are required, obviating the need for 
additional overdubs. 
 COMBINING SIGNALS FROM PICKUPS AND MICS 
 Although pickup signals are sometimes used on their own for studio purposes (most commonly for electric bass 
guitar and electromechanical keyboards), they’re much more widely recorded in combination with a microphone 
signal—especially on bass guitar, but also with acoustic guitar and upright bass. Because an instrument’s 
vibrations don’t have to travel through the air to be transduced by a pickup system, DI’d signals will always 
arrive ahead of any signal from a microphone, whether that mic’s trained directly on an acoustic instrument or 
a speaker cabinet. As such, you’ll be exposed to the same phase-cancellation issues that crop up between the 
signals in a multimic array. So if you don’t initially get the combined sound you’re looking for, try moving the 
microphone a fraction, fl ipping its signal polarity, or applying some kind of variable-phase or delay processing 
before reaching for the EQ. “With bass [there’s] usually a DI and a [mic] on the amp,” says Andy Johns, 64 for 
instance, “and then what I do is run it through a delay line so I can pull it back about 3 or 4 milliseconds so it’s 
in phase with the amp.” 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
235
 Multi-amping can also buy you mixdown ﬂ exibility when the guitarist insists 
on feeding delay/reverb effects directly to the amp. Here’s Ken Nelson 69 talking 
about putting this tactic into action with Coldplay’s Jonny Buckland: “Jonny 
has a Fender Twin Reverb, and he has all these delays going into it, and…I 
just wanted the option of a bit more dryness. They had another Twin Reverb, 
a slightly different version, and I said, ‘What would be great would be if you 
could use both amps, one having all your delays going into it, and one that’s 
completely dry.’ So every time we’d record both amps.” Jez Coad 70 used a simi-
lar technique when recording Simple Minds, where three amps were used for 
Charlie Burchill’s guitar parts, the central one dry and the others panned to 
the sides of the stereo picture layering in effects: “You got the best of both 
worlds,” says Coad. “You got all the power in the middle, and then you got all 
the lovely, diffused, echoey chorus and any other kind of modulation coming 
out of the side ones, so we could balance the amount of power to the amount 
of psychedelia going on!” 
 7.3.2  Reamping Electric Guitars 
 A more common means of insuring against Death 
By Guitar Pedals is to record a clean DI feed from 
the guitar (usually alongside the miked ampli-
ﬁ er signal), so you can reamp it if a cleaner or 
drier sound is required at a later date. But there’s 
another big reason why reamping is becoming 
increasingly popular. “It’s just such a lifesaver,” 
says Dan Austin. 71 “It means you can keep a really 
great performance and worry about the sound later.” 
If driven by a desire to avoid boring the talent senseless 
while you’re tending to technicalities (or by the need to 
record a performer’s amp while the neighbors are out!), 
then I can see the appeal of this method, but it should 
also be said that a great sound can help inspire a great 
performance, so I wouldn’t advise routinely chicken-
ing out of ﬁ nding guitar sounds during tracking. Also, 
bear in mind that some players are suspicious of engi-
neers wanting to record DI signals, because they worry 
you’re going to airbrush their unique tonal personal-
ity into something unrepresentative at mixdown. Some 
instrumentalists may also have strong views about the 
presence of a DI box’s circuitry in their signal path unac-
ceptably altering the tone and/or feel of the instrument, 
and if they do, I wouldn’t ever try to force the issue—in 
the grand scheme of things, a happy player will always 
sound better! 
 The mechanics of reamping are pretty straightfor-
ward, but you won’t get the best sound just by plug-
ging a line-level output into a guitar ampliﬁ er with 
 “A more common 
means of insuring 
against Death By Guitar Pedals 
is to record a clean DI feed from 
the guitar (usually alongside the 
miked amplifi er signal), so you can 
reamp it if a cleaner or drier 
sound is required at a later 
date.” 
 FIGURE 7.10    
 An affordable reamping device (such as the Radial Pro 
RMP shown here) has many applications for small-
studio work. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
236
 SOME TIPS FOR OVERDUBBING ON LOCATION 
 There are a lot of instruments that you may be unable to record within your studio space—the neighbors may 
complain if drums or electric guitars start thrashing away, while getting things like timpani, grand pianos, and church 
organs up the stairs may be a challenge! And, of course, a lot of budget studios have distinctly dodgy acoustics 
too. So pretty much anyone doing serious recording on a budget will sometimes have to contemplate the idea of 
recording on location. Fortunately, this is easier nowadays than it’s ever been, because project-studio equipment 
is so portable—you can realistically carry an entire overdubbing rig on the train, even if you’re multimiking. And 
Mark Howard 76 argues that working in different locations is benefi cial both commercially and creatively: “For each 
project I work on, I do an installation with my own gear.… I set up, I do the record, and I tear the installation down. 
It’s a great way to make records, because there are no budgets anymore these days, and like this I don’t have any 
overheads. You also don’t fall into the same routines with always the same drum setup in the same place.… It 
allows for a lot of creative accidents to happen, and as a result I’m always discovering new sounds.” 
 Planning sessions for evenings and weekends can often get you out-of-hours access to offi ce conference rooms, 
school gymnasiums, and churches for free if you ask nicely, and background noise levels may well be lower 
at those times too. To get the best results for overdubs on a budget, I’d suggest investing in the best pair of 
open-backed studio headphones you can afford, because these will give better monitoring fi delity than closed-
back designs—and you can only record as well as you can hear! Although open-backed cans won’t isolate you 
from the instrument’s sound in a one-room recording setup, it’s usually possible to listen from outside the door 
on the end of a headphone extension cable if you want to make critical sound judgments while the musician’s 
performing. (If not, have another look at the one-room workarounds in Section 3.2.4.) 
 Here are few more specifi c tips if you’re considering taking the plunge:
 
■
 Try to check out the recording venue beforehand, so you can estimate your gear requirements. Note the 
positions of power sockets, and pace out the distance between your proposed recorder and instrument 
locations to work out what cables you’ll need. Switch lights on to check for buzzes, and have a careful listen 
for background noise from things like heaters, plumbing, air-conditioning units, and traffi c. If you have to 
coordinate your session with a building’s security staff, confi rm opening/closing times and make sure you 
know where to get/return any necessary keys. Few things can hinder a session more than surly janitors, but 
if you appear trustworthy and treat them as the important folks they are, you’d be surprised how often they’ll 
go out of their way to help you. 
 
■
 A simple mains-tester plug is a must for checking that the venue’s power supply is correctly wired, as is 
a Residual Current Device (RCD) or Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) so that no-one gets fried in the 
event of an electrical mishap. 
 
■
 After your reconnaissance mission, draw yourself a quick diagram of the setup you’re going to use, because 
this makes it much easier to work out all the cables and stands you’re going to need. I fi nd it’s helpful to 
give separate consideration to power wiring, input-chain wiring, monitoring/foldback/talkback wiring, and 
digital/data wiring—you’re more likely to miss something out if you try to tackle them all at once. 
 
■
 If it’s a bit of a trek to the venue, try to build some redundancy into your setup, so that if something fl akes 
out it doesn’t ruin the session. In particular, make sure you’ve got at least one extra cable of every type 
you’re using, a spare pair of headphones, and an extra mic or two if possible. 
 
■
 Write yourself a full kit list before you go. The fi rst time you do this, it’ll feel like a chore, but trust me: It’ll 
be worth its weight in gold. Not only will it stop you leaving anything behind after the session, but it’ll also 
make planning similar jaunts much easier in future. 
 
■
 A roll of gaffer tape should always be on the essentials list, but watch that you don’t stick gaffer on anything 
it can’t cleanly be removed from—at least if you ever fancy recording in that venue again! 
 
■
 I always take a small pair of locking pliers and a multi-tool with me on location, because I seem to need at 
least one of them on every job. A torch regularly comes in handy too. 
 
■
 All battery-powered equipment should be given fresh batteries, and you should also carry spares.  

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
237
 
■
 Old towels/blankets/quilts are tremendously helpful, whether for impromptu acoustic dampening, covering 
over cable runs, or just holding doors open. Although you can rig up quilts with gaffer, I prefer to fi x cheap 
carabiners to them and then use bungee cords to hang them up, because gaffer always seems to lose its 
grip just when you’re in the middle of a take! (If you really want to kill your singer, then I imagine there are 
more entertaining methods than smothering them.) A mic stand set up at full height with the boom arm 
horizontal makes a “T” shape that’s good for hanging blankets over.  
 FIGURE 7.11   
 When recording on location, a cheap mains tester plug like this one comes in very handy—here it’s showing that the socket’s 
live and neutral pins have been connected in reverse. 
FIGURE 7.12 
 It’s a lot easier to hang up blankets/quilts for recording purposes if you ﬁ x little carabiners at strategic points around the edge.

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
238
a balanced-to-unbalanced adapter lead. An instrument ampliﬁ er’s input is 
designed to receive an instrument-level signal from instrument-impedance cir-
cuitry, so you need something to bring the level down by 30–40 dB and deal 
with the impedance-matching. There are dedicated reamping boxes that will 
do this for less than $150 (£100), but you can sometimes get away with just 
turning down the output level in your recording system and then using a pas-
sive DI box in reverse, as we did when extending a guitar instrument cable in 
Section 6.4. 
 7.3.3    Other Applications of Reamping 
 Electric guitars are by no means the only instruments you might consider 
reamping. “When I was recording with Michael [Jackson] and Quincy [Jones],” 
remarks Bruce Swedien, 72 “what I did was pick a really good room and record 
the synths through amps and speakers.… The direct sound output of a syn-
thesizer is very uninteresting, but this can make the sonic image fascinating.” 
Gareth Jones 73 followed a similar approach when creating the dense ambi-
ences of Depeche Mode’s “Some Great Reward.” Some producers reamp acous-
tic guitar too, although with more of an emphasis on adding distortion rather 
than room ambience. “I actually prefer the ampliﬁ ed acoustic sound in some 
situations,” says Daniel Lanois, 74 “because it can give you a little more person-
ality, a little more harmonic distortion.” To hear a speciﬁ c record which uses 
this, check out Eric Rosse 75 ’s production of Sara Bareille’s “Love Song,” where 
he felt the reamping “gave the acoustic guitars a little bit more edge.”
 7.4    THE JOY OF COMMITMENT 
 While multimiking and reamping offer many operational and sonic beneﬁ ts, 
they do also encourage you to defer important sonic decisions until mixdown 
by recording all the mic/DI signals to separate tracks. I always urge small-studio 
producers to avoid doing this if they can possibly help it, though. First of all, 
handling all the separate tracks almost always slows down your workﬂ ow: A 
ballooning track-count makes it more difﬁ cult to navigate around the project, 
more difﬁ cult to edit between takes, more difﬁ cult to set up monitor/foldback 
mixes, and more time-consuming to back things up. Plus a computer’s CPU 
and/or hard drive are more likely to run out of bandwidth with huge numbers 
of tracks, increasing the likelihood of system instability. 
 If you get into the habit of recording multimiked sounds to a single track (and 
of recording any reamped audio at the earliest opportunity), it forces you to 
shoulder the responsibility of capturing timbres that actually suit the produc-
tion while you’re working. Too many people in project studios use “leaving my 
options open” as an excuse for not deciding what each multimiked instrument 
should sound like. They put up mics rather aimlessly, without any real sense 
of the tone they’re searching for, and end up with several different shades of 
“inappropriate” and/or “rubbish” preserved for posterity. And the moment 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
239
you leave an instrument in your monitor mix with 
a sound that isn’t properly serving the produc-
tion, it means you’re having to assess any 
subsequent overdubs within a question-
able context, so you’ll be more likely to 
misjudge those timbres too.
 So do everyone a favor: Commit, com-
mit, and then commit some more! 
“Making records is about making deci-
sions,” comments John Leckie. 77 “If you 
delay those decisions, you pay the price 
of having to sort them out later. And they 
mount up, so the sooner you make them, the 
better.” Sure, you’ll muck up a decision from time to 
time, but the worst-case scenario is that you have to rerecord 
something once in a while—big hairy deal! The worst-case scenario for dith-
erers, on the other hand, is that every project takes ages and culminates in a 
mix engineer’s sweat-drenched nightmare, which is a much bleaker prospect. If 
you really can’t muster the conﬁ dence to jettison individual multimic signals, 
at least bounce them down to a single track and archive the constituent com-
ponents somewhere out of sight before trying to overdub any new parts along-
side, so that you keep pushing yourself to form an opinion about how the ﬁ nal 
mix should sound. 
 That said, if the purpose of your multimiking or reamping approach is to 
give you dry/wet control over an instrument’s recorded room reverb or delay/
reverb effects, then playing safe becomes a lot more defensible, because it’s 
not a bad idea to leave those judgments until the mixdown stage. “It’s easy to 
make something more live-sounding or roomy-sounding after the fact,” says 
John Porter, 78 “but it’s impossible to make something less roomy-sounding 
after the fact…once it’s in that position in the room, you can’t bring it any 
closer.”  
 “Too many people in 
project studios use ‘leaving 
my options open’ as an excuse 
for not deciding what each multimiked 
instrument should sound like. They put 
up mics rather aimlessly, without any real 
sense of the tone they’re searching for, 
and end up with several different 
shades of ‘inappropriate’ and/
or ‘rubbish’ preserved for 
posterity.” 
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 Coincident multimic arrays allow you to blend different mic signals together in an intui-
tive way, and can speed up ﬁ nding a good sound. Microphones can be mounted con-
veniently on a single stand with appropriate hardware and phase-aligned by ear using 
polarity inversion. 
 
■
 Crossed pairs of coincident mics effectively provide customized polar patterns, and can 
also control the levels of different facets of an instrument’s sound or alter the recording’s 
dry/wet ratio. 
 
■
 Arrays combining different mic designs increase your timbral options, especially if the 
mic tonalities are contrasted and you have access to variable high-pass ﬁ ltering on each 
signal. 
 
■
 Non-coincident miking offers even greater tonal potential than coincident multimiking, 
but is less intuitive to control because of comb-ﬁ ltering effects between the microphones. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
240
Per-channel polarity inversion facilities are vital when using non-coincident techniques, 
and variable phase/delay-adjustment tools are also useful if you need more nuanced con-
trol of the sound. Just bear in mind that offsetting mics against each other in time can 
also affect the instrument’s perceived distance.  
 
■
 Multi-amping electric instruments can increase the range of available tones, as well as 
offering a way of controlling guitar effects balances at mixdown. If you record an electric 
instrument’s DI signal, you can later reamp it to completely change the ampliﬁ ed sound. 
Reamping also has applications for synths and acoustic instruments.  
 
■
 Don’t use multimiking and reamping techniques as an excuse for indecisiveness. You’re 
more likely to work efﬁ ciently and effectively if you commit to sound decisions as early 
as you can. 
 
■
 Overdub at least one of the following instruments with a crossed pair of mics: 
acoustic piano, acoustic guitar/mandolin/banjo/harp, tuned percussion. 
 
■
 Overdub any electric guitar or electromechanical keyboard through an amplifi er 
using a coincident array of tonally contrasted microphones—preferably a con-
denser, a ribbon, and a dynamic. Take a DI feed from the instrument as well, so 
that you can experiment with mixing that with the microphones too.  
 
■
 In both cases, prepare and phase-align the microphone array in advance of the 
session. Double-check the phase-alignment with the instrumentalist at the start 
of the session. Record all microphone and DI signals to separate tracks, but make 
sure you aim for an appropriate mix of them on the session, just as much as you’d 
concentrate on getting a good sound if you were restricted to using a single mic. 
 
■
 Following the session, return to the recordings in order to reevaluate and experi-
ment with the microphone and DI signals. In particular, try reamping both mic and 
DI signals to get a feel for how this adds to your sound palette, and so that you can 
further experiment with multimiking techniques without pressure from the musician.  
 Assignment 1: Coincident Multimiking and Reamping 
 Assignment 2: Non-Coincident Multimiking 
 
■
 Overdub at least one of the following instruments using non-coincident multimiking 
techniques: acoustic piano, acoustic guitar/mandolin/banjo/harp, upright bass. In 
addition to a combination of close mics, also record at least one room mic. 
 
■
 Overdub one of each of the following groups of instruments using a non-coincident 
array of tonally contrasted microphones, including at least one room mic: amplifi ed 
electric guitar or electromechanical keyboard; any orchestral string, wind, or brass 
instrument. Take a DI signal in addition to the microphones wherever possible. 
 
■
 Keep all mic and DI signals on separate tracks, but aim for an appropriate mix of 
them on the session, as in Assignment 1. 
 
■
 Following the session, return to the recordings in order to reevaluate and experi-
ment with the microphone and DI signals. In addition to using polarity reversal 
facilities, try to get hold of a variable phase/delay-adjustment device to explore 
the fi ner tonal shades this makes available. 

Multimiking in Mono CHAPTER 7
241
 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 a demonstration of the phase-alignment technique described in this chapter, and 
audio fi les showcasing the tonal scope offered by a wide selection of multimiking 
techniques on different instruments; 
 
■
 links to affordable multimic mounting hardware and phase-adjustment devices;  
 
■
 further reading about using speakers and headphones as microphones.  
  http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch7.htm 

This page intentionally left blank

243
 Multimiking in Stereo 
 CHAPTER 8 
 CHAPTER 8 
 To ease the learning curve with mic technique, I’ve so far only considered 
recording in mono. The fact remains, however, that anyone with two function-
ing ears hears the world in stereo, detecting the position of sound sources in 
a variety of ways. Any noise arriving from one side of the head will reach the 
nearer ear both earlier and at a higher level, for instance, and our hearing sys-
tem has evolved to deduce a sound’s angle of arrival remarkably accurately 
based on that basic information. The vast majority of stereo recordings use this 
fact to generate their sound-positioning illusions, recreating the same kinds of 
inter-ear time and level differences for the listener via a pair of loudspeakers 
and headphones. It is possible to create such recordings using just a pair of 
mics conﬁ gured in one of several traditional stereophonic arrays, and it’s these 
that I’d like to explore in this chapter. 
 8.1  COINCIDENT XY ARRAYS 
 8.1.1  Stereo from Level Differences 
 One of the simplest methods of stereo miking is to use a coincident mic pair 
called an “XY” array. In Section 7.1.3, we talked about crossing coincident 
directional mics to pick out different facets of an instrument, and this concept 
is easily adapted for stereo purposes. If the mics are crossed so that they favor 
the left and right sides of an instrument and/or recording room, panning their 
monitor channels hard left and right will spread the array’s combined polar 
pattern between your loudspeakers to create a stereo panorama. (I’ll ignore 
headphones for the moment, although we’ll return to them in Section 8.5.2.) 
 To be a bit more speciﬁ c, any sound arriving from directly in front of the array 
(i.e., on its axis of symmetry) will be picked up equally well by both mics 
and will emanate from both speakers at the same level, so that the sound will 
appear to be located at the center of the monitored stereo ﬁ eld. By contrast, 
any sound arriving from, say, the left side of the array will hit the left-point-
ing microphone’s diaphragm more on-axis, resulting in a louder left-channel 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
244
speaker signal which will position that sound to the left-hand side of the mon-
itored stereo ﬁ eld. Assuming that your monitors are set up in the traditional 
“equilateral triangle” conﬁ guration (described in Appendix 1), every 5 dB of 
level difference between the mics will move the sound roughly 10° off-center 
in the stereo playback, and by the time you get to about 15 dB level difference 
the sound will be pretty much glued to the louder speaker. (Level differences 
beyond 15 dB can be largely disregarded in this context, because they make 
very little difference to the stereo positioning.) 
 Using mics to create a stereo image in this way, via inter-channel level differ-
ences, has several important ramiﬁ cations:
 
■
 Increasing the mutual angle between the mics will cause greater level dif-
ferences for off-center sounds, thereby widening the stereo image. Likewise, 
decreasing the mutual angle will narrow the stereo image. Another use-
ful way of looking at this is in terms of the “acceptance angle” (or “stereo 
 FIGURE 8.1 
 The correlation 
between mutual angle, 
acceptance angle, and 
playback image width for 
an XY stereo mic setup. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
245
recording angle”), which is the pickup angle which any speciﬁ c array will 
present as a full-width stereo panorama on playback: When the mutual 
angle is increased, the acceptance angle decreases, as illustrated in  Figure 
8.1 . (Take a moment to make sure you’re absolutely clear about what I 
mean by these terms, because I’m going to be using them a great deal 
from now on!) Note that some engineers will only apply the “XY” moni-
ker to crossed pairs with 90° mutual angles, but most practitioners (myself 
included) use it more loosely to indicate any coincident crossed-pair stereo 
rig. 
 
■
 Narrowing the panning of the two microphone monitor channels will also 
decrease inter-speaker level differences, which gives you a simple means 
of reducing the stereo width from the comfort of your control-room chair. 
Although this means that each speaker will be playing a blend of both mic 
signals, this shouldn’t normally cause a change in the instrument’s subjec-
tive tone, given that coincident setups rarely suffer from phase-cancellation 
issues. 
 
■
 For a given mutual angle, switching both mics to a more directional polar 
pattern will increase the inter-channel level differences, widening the resul-
tant stereo image (in other words narrowing the acceptance angle). For 
symmetrical stereo imaging, two microphones of the same model and polar 
pattern should be used. Some manufacturers offer factory-matched pairs 
speciﬁ cally for stereo recording, which can offer small imaging improve-
ments compared with unmatched mics of the same model and vintage. 
However, I remain to be convinced that matched pairs actually justify any 
extra outlay in project studios, unless they’re part of a package including 
additional mic-mounting accessories (such as suspension shockmounts or 
stereo bars) that you’d otherwise have to buy separately.  
 
■
 Any crossed-pair conﬁ guration that is unable to deliver at least 15 dB level 
difference between the two mics won’t ﬁ ll the whole stereo ﬁ eld. Obviously 
that rules out omnis for anything but narrow images, and crossed sub-
cardioids can also only manage 8–10 dB even when placed back to back, 
so a subcardioid XY rig will always sound a bit constricted horizontally. 
However, the more directional cardioid-family mics will also fall foul of 
this if you use too small a mutual angle. 
 As long as you keep these points in mind, the mic techniques you’ve already 
learnt for mono applications should equip you to deal with most of the chal-
lenges of placing an XY stereo rig. You’ve learnt something about preparing 
instruments and recording environments for tracking purposes. You know 
how to translate the timbre and dry/wet balance you’re hearing in the record-
ing room into promising mic selections and placements. And you can reﬁ ne 
your initial decisions efﬁ ciently by ear, applying your knowledge of frequency-
dispersion principles and drawing on your experience of the different micro-
phone types at your disposal. The only major question that remains, in fact, is 
how to balance those general considerations of mono mic technique against 
the need to achieve an appropriate stereo image. Here’s my preferred method. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
246
 8.1.2   Choosing the Mics and 
Guessing the Distance 
 My ﬁ rst recommendation is to make it 
a priority during your initial listen-
ing reconnaissance to decide which 
mics you’re going to use. Having to 
switch out the mics in a stereo array 
mid-session for tonal reasons is a 
hassle, and not just because of the 
sheer mechanics of it—changing the 
mics will almost certainly mean having 
to reassess the miking distance and/or 
mutual angle of the array. From a purely 
tonal perspective, the experience you’ve built 
during previous chapter assignments should enable 
you to make a pretty good mic choice on instinct, but if you fade up your input 
channels for the ﬁ rst time and discover that luck’s not on your side, then don’t 
hang around—swap out those mics as early in the session as possible, well 
before you think of fafﬁ ng around with the ﬁ ner points of stereo imaging. 
 If tonal considerations alone don’t determine which pair of mics you’re going 
to use, then the next most important consideration will be which polar pattern 
provides the truest off-axis sound, because this will affect the precision of the 
stereo positioning and the tonal clarity of any recorded room reverb. In this 
respect, anyone restricted to cheaper equipment will usually ﬁ nd that small-
diaphragm condensers give them the best results, and that dual-diaphragm 
condensers will do best in ﬁ gure-eight mode. 
 Once you’ve taken a punt on which mics you’re going to try ﬁ rst, you can esti-
mate an initial miking position based on the wet/dry balance you’re hearing in 
the room and how that relates to the polar patterns you’re working with. My 
own rule of thumb here is to:
 
■
 treat crossed cardioids or ﬁ gure-eights as a single subcardioid, placing the 
array roughly at my preferred head position; 
 
■
 treat crossed supercardioids or hypercardioids as a single cardioid, placing 
them about 25% further away from the source. 
 “Make it a priority 
during your initial listening 
reconnaissance to decide which 
mics you’re going to use. Having to 
switch out the mics in a stereo array mid-
session for tonal reasons is a hassle, and 
not just because of the sheer mechanics of 
it—changing the mics will almost certainly 
mean having to reassess the miking 
distance and/or mutual angle of 
the array.” 
 ALIGNING XY ARRAYS 
 With XY stereo arrays, you’re typically arranging the microphones to pick up the width of the instrument/room, 
which means you’ll want to position one of the mic diaphragms directly above the other to avoid phased-array 
side-effects (see Section 7.2.1) in the horizontal plane. If bulky mics leave you with no alternative but to place 
them side by side, then at least make sure they’re facing outwards so that neither mic acoustically shadows the 
frontal pickup of the other. You can phase-align the mics in an XY pair using the same approach as in Section 
7.1.1, so long as you put the sound source directly in front of the array—and once you’ve phase-aligned once, 
you’ll know how best to arrange the mics against each other for every future session. With simple stereo bars 
it may not be possible to create a crossed-pair confi guration without angling the mics slightly up/down, but I 
wouldn’t lose any sleep over this because it makes very little difference to the sound. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
247
 8.1.3  From Acceptance Angle to Mutual Angle 
 Having a rough idea of the miking distance allows you to make a more 
informed judgment about what acceptance angle your array is likely to need. 
When close-miking with XY arrays, it’s quite common practice for people 
to match the acceptance angle to the physical dimensions of the instru-
ment, thereby spreading the instrument across the entire stereo ﬁ eld. This 
gives the mix engineer complete ﬂ exibility to adjust the eventual image 
width using their pan controls later on. However, where room reﬂ ections 
form an important part of the sound, narrowing the panning of the mic sig-
nals at mixdown will narrow not just the instrument, but also its acous-
tic space, which won’t often be desirable. In those cases you need to make a 
deﬁ nite decision during tracking about how much of your stereo ﬁ eld is to be 
occupied by the instrument, and choose your acceptance angle accordingly. 
When doing this, bear in mind that a wider-sounding instrument image will 
naturally suggest that the musician is closer to the listener, so it’s important 
to ask yourself whether the chosen width is appropriate for the production as 
a whole. 
 A quick scour of the Internet will furnish you with all sorts of mathematical 
tables, graphs, and software calculators which can generate the theoretical 
mutual angle required to achieve a given acceptance angle for any ﬂ avor of 
XY array—but what I’ve noticed is that very few small-studio musicians seem 
to derive much beneﬁ t from them! This is partly because different authorities 
disagree about the facts, partly because the blizzard of math intimidates the 
mildly technophobic, and partly because the tools can’t easily be internalized 
for swift and unobtrusive use on the ﬂ y—rightly or wrongly, most musicians 
will feel less conﬁ dent in your abilities if it looks like you’re relying on a bit of 
software or some printed graph to tell you how to set up the mics! So I’d like 
to describe a more “broad brush” method of working out mutual angles that 
even a cicada should be able to remember and apply in practice (assuming it 
can shut up for long enough to beneﬁ t). Idealized mathematical models only 
ever approximate the operation of real-life mics, so I think there’s little point 
agonizing over theoretical minutiae when you’ll always have to tweak calcu-
lated acceptance angles by ear anyway. 
 First I estimate the required acceptance angle in degrees. There are spe-
cialized gadgets for this if you’ve got money to burn, but a simple plastic 
protractor on the ﬂ oor is just ﬁ ne—you only need to be accurate within 10° 
or so. If you’d like something a little larger and easier to read, there’s a PDF ﬁ le 
you can download from this chapter’s online resources to print out at what-
ever size you like. Alternatively, if you’re caught on the hop, the resources also 
describe how you can quickly fold a piece of scrap A4 paper into a template 
for any angle you like. The tripod base of many mic stands may also come 
in handy here, given that the legs should have 120° between them if equally 
spaced. 
 Once you know the acceptance angle in degrees, you can translate that ﬁ gure 
into a mutual angle using  Table 8.1 . Let me explain how the table works. For 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
248
each microphone array, I’ve suggested three different mutual angle values, each 
with a corresponding suggested acceptance angle based as much on my own 
real-world studio tests as on theoretical considerations:
 
■
 The central mutual-angle value (in bold face) gives an XY array with a fairly 
even level balance across the acceptance angle—in other words, sounds 
arriving from anywhere within the acceptance angle should retain roughly 
their natural level relationships when heard over stereo loudspeakers. 
 ALL-IN-ONE STEREO MICROPHONES 
 A few manufacturers sell dedicated stereo microphones which feature two independent diaphragms within a 
single casing, and there are also many portable recorders which now have a stereo microphone setup built in. 
These are undeniably convenient if you do a lot of coincident miking (especially with bulkier large-diaphragm 
and ribbon designs) and they also tend to encourage more experimentation with stereo techniques while 
overdubbing, which I’d consider no bad thing. However, because you do lose out on some fl exibility compared 
with two independent microphones (especially if the angle between the two diaphragms is fi xed), I don’t think 
they’re particularly good value for money in the small studio unless you regularly record in more specialist 
situations where setup convenience and portability rank high on your list of priorities. 
 FIGURE 8.2   
 Some single-body stereo microphones: the Studio Projects LSD2 (left), based around a pair of large-diaphragm condenser 
capsules; the Rode NT4 (center), which uses two small-diaphragm condenser capsules; and the Royer SF12 (right), a double-
ribbon design. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
249
 
■
 The smaller mutual-angle value (to the left of the bold-face ﬁ gure) is the 
lowest I’d suggest using with each type of array. At this angle the apparent 
volume of centrally located sources will usually be increased by a couple 
of decibels compared with sources at the edges of the acceptance region, 
and you’ll also struggle to get a full-width stereo picture at any lesser angle 
than this. 
 
■
 The larger mutual-angle value (to the right of the bold-face ﬁ gure) is the 
highest I’d suggest using with each type of array. At this angle the apparent 
volume of centrally located sources will usually be decreased by a couple of 
decibels compared with sources at the edges of the acceptance region, and 
the tonal coloration of central sounds by your microphones’ off-axis fre-
quency response will likely become obtrusive at any greater angle than this.  
 Table 8.1   Suggested Mutual Angles and Acceptance Angles for XY Stereo 
Arrays 
 XY Stereo Array 
 Mutual Angle 
 Acceptance Angle 
 Crossed Cardioids 
 90°… 110° …140° 
 200°… 160° …130° 
 Crossed Supercardioids 
 70°… 90° …120° 
 170°… 130° …100° 
 Crossed Hypercardioids 
 60°… 80° …110° 
 150°… 110° …80° 
 Crossed Figure-Eights 
 50°… 70° …100° 
 130°… 90° …60° 
 By memorizing just three pairs of numbers for any array (hardly a Herculean 
labor), you not only have an indication of its usable range of mutual angles 
and acceptance angles, but also the likely balance side-effects of different setups 
within that range. For example, if you wanted to create a crossed-cardioids array 
with a 140° acceptance angle, you might reasonably interpolate between the 
ﬁ gures in  Table 8.1  to come up with a 130° mutual angle, and would be fore-
warned that central sound sources might be recessed by a decibel or so compared 
with sources (or room reﬂ ections) arriving at the edges of the acceptance region. 
 Whether the center-versus-edge balance of a given XY rig is a blessing or a curse 
will depend on what you’re trying to achieve. Whenever the instrument you’re 
recording occupies only a small proportion of the acceptance angle, the relative 
level of the center region may have a considerable effect on the apparent dry/
wet balance, for instance: A center boost will make the recording seem drier, 
whereas a center cut will make it seem wetter. When close-miking larger instru-
ments, on the other hand, large mutual angles can be useful to compensate 
for the inherent level dominance of those parts of the instrument closest to 
the mic array—by recessing the center level, you effectively fade up the more 
distant instrument components to the sides. This is particularly relevant when 
close-miking inside a grand piano using crossed cardioids behind the music 
stand, because a 120°–140° mutual angle can help to avoid overemphasizing 
the middle-register strings directly beneath the array. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
250
 OUTSIDE THE ACCEPTANCE ZONE 
 Although it’s natural to focus the majority of your attention on what’s happening in the acceptance zone of 
an XY setup, what happens outside this region warrants some thought too. With cardioid-family microphones 
(especially low-cost ones) any sound approaching within about 60° of the array’s rear axis will be given a rather 
unnatural timbre. For single-instrument overdubbing that shouldn’t present much of a problem, though, because 
the instrument will be in front of the mics, and if the polar pattern doesn’t adequately attenuate odd-sounding 
room refl ections from the back of the array, they can usually be soaked up with impromptu acoustic treatment. 
Any parts of the instrument outside the mic rig’s acceptance region will just be perceived as coming from the 
very edge of the stereo panorama. 
 You need to be warier with crossed fi gure-eights, however. The biggest problem is that any sound arriving from 
more than about 20° outside the acceptance zone will start to hit one mic’s rear-facing sensitivity lobe (which, 
if you recall, picks up with inverted polarity), resulting in a polarity mismatch between the mic output signals. 
Not only does this cause a rather disconcerting “outside the speakers” effect when listening in stereo, but it 
also gives poor mono compatibility, because polarity-mismatched signals cancel each other out if the left and 
right channels are summed. I regularly see recording students falling foul of this when close-miking with the 
classic “Blumlein” stereo array (a crossed pair of ribbon mics at a mutual angle of 90°) without realizing how 
narrow its acceptance angle is, and it can also cause serious mono compatibility problems when recording 
inside a grand piano, because of 
strong sound refl ections from 
the instrument’s lid. That said, 
the fairly narrow acceptance 
of the Blumlein arrangement 
makes it well suited to room 
miking, where the out-of-polarity 
elements can actually add a 
pleasant spaciousness to the 
diffuse refl ections without the 
overall tone collapsing in mono. 
 Any sound arriving from the rear of 
a fi gure-eight XY setup won’t suffer 
from polarity mismatch, because 
the sound will be picked up by both 
mics with inverted polarity, but the 
stereo imaging will be reversed 
in that situation, so you still have 
to be a bit careful—strong early 
refl ections arriving at the rear of a 
fi gure-eight XY array will effectively 
overlay themselves on the 
frontal pickup, and may confuse 
the imaging. (Hypercardioid 
mics also have a signifi cant 
rear-facing sensitivity lobe with 
inverted polarity, so all the above 
considerations apply to them too, 
albeit to a lesser extent.) 
 FIGURE 8.3    
 This diagram shows the front-acceptance, rear-acceptance (with reversed stereo 
image), and out-of-acceptance (with left–right polarity mismatch) zones for a classic 
“Blumlein” coincident stereo setup, i.e., a crossed pair of ﬁ gure-eight mics at a 90° 
mutual angle. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
251
 8.2   COINCIDENT MS ARRAYS 
 8.2.1  The Middle–Sides Stereo Format 
 Most of the time we think of stereo recordings as being made up of one sig-
nal for the left-hand speaker and one signal for the right-hand speaker, but 
there’s actually another useful way you can encode a stereo recording into two 
channels: One channel contains the mono elements at the center of the stereo 
image (the Middle signal) and the other channel contains the elements which 
appear off-center (the Sides signal). As a sound moves off-center in stereo, its 
level reduces in the Middle signal and increases in the Sides signal, its polarity 
in the Sides signal indicating which side of the stereo ﬁ eld it happens to be on. 
 Given that Left–Right (LR) and Middle–Sides (MS) formats contain exactly 
the same stereo information (just in different forms), and that it’s very easy 
to convert between them, why bother with MS at all? Well, one big reason is 
that altering the relative level of a stereo recording’s Sides signal will adjust 
the width of the recorded stereo image—more Sides level will widen it; less 
Sides level will narrow it. When working in a DAW, Voxengo’s freeware cross-
platform MSED plug-in is my own go-to LR-to-MS conversion option, but you 
can also work from ﬁ rst principles on any system that allows you to ﬂ ip signal 
polarity, as follows:
 
■
 Encoding LR Stereo to MS Stereo.  Mix the Left and Right channels 
together and reduce the combined level by 6 dB to create the Middle chan-
nel. Polarity-invert the Right channel, mix it with the Left channel, and 
reduce the combined level by 6 dB to create the Sides channel.  
 
■
 Decoding MS Stereo to LR Stereo.  Mix the Middle and Sides channels 
together to create the Left channel. Polarity-invert the Sides channel and 
mix it with the Middle channel to create the Right channel.  
 FIGURE 8.4   
 If your recording software doesn’t have an MS encoder/decoder built in, try Voxengo’s freeware MSED 
plug-in, which is compatible with most DAW platforms. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
252
 In addition, you can record directly into MS-format using a different coincident-
miking method. Like traditional LR stereo, this uses a crossed pair, but the 
Middle-channel microphone is aimed directly along the array’s central axis, 
while the Sides-channel microphone operates at right-angles to it using a 
ﬁ gure-eight polar pattern to reject central sound sources (see  Figure 8.5 ). To 
listen to the recording over your speakers, you have to decode the MS signal 
to LR format in your monitoring chain. In practice, there are lots of situations 
where MS rigs can work really well in small-studio situations, so allow me to 
explain the concept in more detail. 
 8.2.2    Acceptance Angles for MS Arrays 
 Although the Sides mic has to have ﬁ gure-eight pickup characteristics, the 
Middle microphone can have any directionality you like, and by varying that 
polar pattern in conjunction with the Sides-signal level you can emulate the 
stereo pickup characteristics of any of the XY stereo arrays in Section 8.1. 
Indeed, thinking of MS setups in terms of their corresponding XY rigs is very 
handy, because it means you can use  Table 8.1  to help you choose a sensible 
acceptance angle. A lot of people getting started with MS microphone tech-
niques harbor the misconception that MS gives you complete freedom to 
choose whatever stereo width you like, but in reality changing the acceptance 
 FIGURE 8.5   
 A comparison of XY and MS coincident stereo mic setups. Note that only ﬁ gure-eight microphones have 
been considered here: You might choose a different directional polar pattern for the two mics in the XY 
setup (as long as they’re matched); and you have a free choice of polar pattern for the Middle mic of an 
MS setup. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
253
angle of an MS rig affects the balance of sounds coming from different posi-
tions within the acceptance zone, just as it does when using an XY mic pair. 
 The correspondence between MS and XY rigs is probably simplest when you’re 
using a ﬁ gure-eight Middle mic. This MS setup operates in a very similar manner 
to a ﬁ gure-eight XY array, for which  Table 8.1  suggests acceptance angles in the 
60°–130° range. In this case, changing the Sides-mic level of the MS array has a 
similar effect to adjusting the mutual angle between the XY rig’s mics. If you can 
match the input-gain settings of the two mics, then the 60°, 90°, and 130° accep-
tance angles can be achieved by offsetting the Sides-channel fader level by roughly 
+2 dB, −3 dB, and −6 dB respectively. However, gain matching isn’t as practical 
with other Middle-mic polar patterns, so I normally prefer to set my miking dis-
tance to give an appropriate acceptance angle ﬁ rst, and then tweak the Sides level 
by ear until I’m hearing the desired image width coming out of my loudspeakers. 
 If you use a cardioid-family Middle mic, increasing the Sides level causes a 
slightly more complicated widening effect, roughly akin to what you’d expect 
from an XY array if you simultaneously increased the mutual angle  and made 
the mic polar patterns more directional. In practice, though, I ﬁ nd that an MS 
array with a regular cardioid Middle mic seems to react closely enough to a 
supercardioid XY array that the acceptance angles for supercardioids in  Table 
8.1  provide a reasonably good guide. In a similar vein, a supercardioid Middle 
mic gives an MS array which quite closely matches the suggested hypercardi-
oid-pair acceptance angles. For a hypercardioid middle mic, I’d suggest using 
acceptance angles between 70° and 140°. Using MS techniques with a sub-
cardioid as the Middle mic can lead to difﬁ culties ﬁ lling the stereo panorama 
without unduly dipping the levels of sounds arriving from dead center, but the 
most promising acceptance angles will tend to hover around 130° or so. 
 An omni Middle mic will cause your MS setup to act like a back-to-back XY 
array, the directionality of the notional left and right mics dictated by the 
Sides-signal level. Although you can achieve a full stereo width in this manner 
by fading up the Sides channel sufﬁ ciently, central sounds will then be around 
3 dB down in the stereo balance compared with sounds arriving at the edge of 
the acceptance angle, so using this conﬁ guration requires some caution. 
 8.2.3  Should I Choose XY or MS? 
 Although it’s useful to think in terms of equivalent MS and XY setups to help 
you choose an appropriate acceptance angle, the two approaches tend to suit 
quite different applications in practice. For example, the decreasing high-
frequency sensitivity of most microphones as you move off-axis to their ﬁ ring 
line causes some XY arrays to dull the center of the acceptance zone, whereas 
the risk with MS rigs is dulling the edges. This means that MS has a lot to rec-
ommend it if you’re miking your musician from a reasonable distance in order 
to create a limited-width instrument image within a full-width room sound. 
However, where you’re spreading the instrument itself further across the ste-
reo ﬁ eld using a closer miking position, the wider horizontal HF pickup of a 
crossed pair may simply catch more of the instrument’s upper spectrum. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
254
 That’s not to say that MS rigs should be disregarded for close-miking applica-
tions, though, because they can really shine under those circumstances too. On 
a practical level, MS pairs have the advantage that the array’s frontal sound (and 
indeed mono-compatibility) shouldn’t suffer as much from high-frequency 
comb-ﬁ ltering should the phase-match between the microphones be less than 
perfect, and tonal changes as the musician moves off-axis to the array are typi-
cally less pronounced compared with a similar XY setup. However, the biggest 
beneﬁ t of MS stereo is that it increases the selection of microphones you can 
use for the Middle pickup, including less directional models. Mike Stavrou 1 
explains the thinking: “Some people think that using a cardioid in place of an 
omni is OK. Not so. In fact, it’s a really bad idea.…Using a cardioid means that 
the left and right extremities of the stereo are created by combining the beauti-
fully ﬂ at response on the ﬁ gure-of-eight with an incredibly dull response of the 
off-axis cardioid. The end result it a stereo image that loses reality as you stray 
toward the edges. What’s more, when you collapse this picture 
to mono you lose all the deﬁ nition from the sides.…
You only hear the center.” Whereas a crossed pair 
of omnis or subcardioids will sound narrow, 
an omni or subcardioid Middle mic can still 
provide a full-width image within an MS 
conﬁ guration—and the center-versus-edge 
balance issues of both those MS conﬁ gu-
rations may also help compensate for the 
spotlighting effect of the close placement. 
 Finally, the ability to adjust stereo width 
from the control room really shouldn’t be a 
huge consideration when choosing between XY 
and MS stereo techniques. Some people still make 
 LOW-FREQUENCY SHUFFLING 
 Because real-world microphones tend to become less directional at low frequencies, coincident stereo 
techniques will inherently narrow the low end of the reproduced panorama to an extent. Not only does this 
degrade the accuracy of the stereo positioning, but also tends to reduce the subjective “warmth” of the fi nal 
result. For this reason some engineers like to use a low-frequency “shuffl er” which compensates for the width 
loss by boosting the relative level of the recording’s Sides signal below 500 Hz or so. This is very straightforward 
to implement with a combination of MS encoding/decoding and EQ (a couple of specifi c setups are 
demonstrated in this chapter’s web resources) and boosts of around 3–6 dB would be typical in this application. 
Do listen, though, for potentially unwanted side-effects of the processing, such as undesirable changes to the 
recording’s dry/wet ratio. 
 As a brief aside, it’s as well to point out that the term “shuffl er” is applied to different things by different 
engineers. What’s particularly confusing is that it’s also used to refer to an earlier design of phase-shifting 
network which was developed to enhance the imaging of non-coincident stereo microphone setups. Although 
this type of shuffl er also has its devotees, it’s rather more complicated to implement and therefore trickier to 
justify grappling with in a small-studio context. 
 “The ability to adjust 
stereo width from the 
control room really shouldn’t be 
a huge consideration when choosing 
between XY and MS stereo techniques—
these days it’s pretty easy to apply MS 
post-processing to any type of mic 
array within your recording system 
if you want that kind of 
control.” 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
255
a big song and dance about this being an advantage of MS rigs, but these days 
it’s pretty easy to apply MS post-processing to any type of mic array within your 
recording system if you want that kind of control.
 8.3   NON-COINCIDENT AB ARRAYS 
 8.3.1  Stereo from Time Differences 
 The XY and MS mic techniques both use level differences between your left 
and right speakers to create the illusion of stereo positioning. However, 
there’s another fundamental way you can conjure up a stereo image: using 
inter-speaker time differences. For example, if a sound emanates from the left 
speaker fractionally earlier than it does from the right one, that sound will 
appear to come from the left-hand side of the stereo image. The most common 
way to capture this time-difference information is by setting up a matched pair 
of mics in parallel with a gap between them, creating the so-called “AB” array 
shown in  Figure 8.6 , with each mic being hard-panned to feed a single speaker. 
Any sound originating from the left-hand side of the AB rig will reach the 
left-hand mic earlier, and will therefore appear at the left speaker earlier too. 
Because of the mic matching and parallel placement, level-difference stereo 
information is eliminated (unless the sound source happens to be very close to 
the mics, a special case I’ll get on to in Section 8.5.2). 
 A timing offset between the mic signals of around 1 ms is enough to push a 
sound’s position very close to the edge of the stereo loudspeaker panorama, 
so the time differences involved here are clearly very small. However, as we 
already discussed in Chapter 7, even sub-milisecond timing offsets between 
similar signals can trigger comb-ﬁ ltering when those signals are mixed 
together. The audibility of this comb-ﬁ ltering is negligible when the mic sig-
nals are being mixed acoustically during stereo playback (which lulls many 
a newbie into a false sense of security), but it’s still vital that you check the 
mono-compatibility of any non-coincident stereo mic technique during track-
ing to avoid problems later on. This isn’t just about planning for cheap end-
user playback systems either, because bad mono-compatibility will also punish 
you with nasty tonal changes if you attempt to adjust the stereo image of your 
AB recording during mixdown. 
 8.3.2  Acceptance Angles, Mic Spacings, and 
Polar Patterns 
 As with coincident stereo miking, you’ll need to guess a suitable miking dis-
tance before you can make any decision on suitable acceptance angles. This 
should be straightforward, though, given that two mics operating in parallel 
like this will pick up roughly the same dry/wet balance as one. Adjusting the 
acceptance angle of an AB array to suit your proposed miking distance will 
then involve adjusting the distance between the mics—the wider you space 
them, the narrower the acceptance angle becomes. Again, different theorists 
disagree substantially about the exact ﬁ gures involved, so let me make a few 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
256
suggestions in this respect from my own practical experience. Firstly, spacings 
below about a foot won’t really give you a full-width stereo picture. While 
this may not concern you unduly if room reﬂ ections aren’t a big factor in the 
sound, it’s a shame to narrow the apparent recording space if you’re pursuing a 
more natural acoustic vibe. 
 The second thing to say is that most AB recordings I hear coming out of small 
studios seem to have been recorded with the microphones too far apart, such 
that most of the instrument’s sound comes from the edges of the loudspeaker 
panorama and the center of the image feels very unstable—a situation that 
 FIGURE 8.6    
 The correlation between inter-mic spacing, acceptance angle, and playback image width for an AB stereo 
mic setup. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
257
 One of the big advantages of AB techniques is that you can choose whatever 
polar pattern you like for the mics without affecting the quality of the ste-
reo imaging—as long as the patterns are well matched. Omnis are probably 
employed most commonly, given their typically clearer timbre compared with 
other polar patterns, but it’s a mistake to think that AB isn’t possible with 
other mics. Although ﬁ gure-eights won’t provide the same low-end extension 
as omnis, so may require low-end EQ compensation, the clarity of their off-
axis response makes them otherwise well suited to AB techniques. Renowned 
classical engineer Tony Faulkner has frequently used this kind of setup com-
mercially, for example. As it happens, ﬁ gure-eights provide some distinct 
advantages over omnis in some cases: Firstly, you can place them further away 
than omnis without drowning in room reverb (an important consideration 
in light of the narrow acceptance angles in  Table 8.2 ); secondly, the polar 
pattern’s null plane rejects room reﬂ ections entering from the sides of the 
array, where the time-offset between the mics is greatest, improving mono 
compatibility; and thirdly, in narrow or low-ceilinged spaces the mics will 
reduce pickup of the typically more colored-sounding reﬂ ections across the 
room’s shorter dimensions. The sensitivity of a ﬁ gure-eight mic will already be 
roughly 3 dB down once you get 45° off-axis, though, so be aware that this 
may tamper with the natural balance between sounds coming from the center 
and the edges of the acceptance region. Cardioid-family mics will also work 
in an AB conﬁ guration, although cheaper ones are best used in drier acoustics 
where you can count on most of the sound arriving from in front, otherwise 
nasty colorations imposed on the rear pickup can really pollute the overall 
recorded tone. 
 Table 8.2  Suggested Mic Spacings and Acceptance Angles for 
AB Stereo Arrays 
 Spacing 
 Acceptance Angle 
 12 inches (30 cm) 
 110° 
 18 inches (45 cm) 
 80° 
 24 inches (60 cm) 
 60° 
 30 inches (75 cm) 
 50° 
 36 inches (90 cm) 
 40° 
invariably goes hand in hand with poor mono-compatibility. For this reason, 
the acceptance angles I suggest for different mic spacings are smaller than some 
authors suggest, and can be seen in  Table 8.2 . (If you don’t have a ruler on-
hand, it can be useful to remember that a sheet of A4 paper measures roughly 
12 × 8 inches.) 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
258
 8.4    COMBINING LEVEL DIFFERENCES AND TIME 
DIFFERENCES 
 8.4.1    Designing Near-Coincident Arrays 
 Although XY, MS, and AB stereo arrays can all generate a stereo picture, there 
is a distinct subjective difference between the imaging and reverb qualities of 
coincident and non-coincident techniques: Level differences give a solidity and 
precision to the stereo imaging that time-difference techniques can’t match; 
but at the same time pure level-difference stereo can feel rather sterile and 
clinical compared to the involving spaciousness that time differences provide. 
So it should come as no surprise that recording techniques combining both 
level-difference and time-difference information are very popular. Some people 
also ﬁ nd these hybrid methods more intuitive to work with, because they more 
closely mimic the mixture of inter-ear level and time differences that our own 
hearing system naturally presents us with. 
 The most common scheme introduces a spacing between the mics of an XY 
pair, creating what’s known as a “near-coincident” rig. The stereo time dif-
ferences work cumulatively with the stereo level differences in this case, nar-
rowing the XY rig’s acceptance angle. However, if you wish to retain the same 
acceptance angle, you can just reduce the mutual angle between the mics to 
compensate—the stereo widening effect of the increased time-difference con-
tribution is balanced by the stereo narrowing effect of the decreased level-
difference contribution. The exact way in which mic spacing and mutual 
angle interact is pretty complex, so once again I prefer to rely on a simpliﬁ ed 
approximation which can easily be called to mind in the heat of the moment. 
 Table 8.3  expands the information from  Table 8.1  to show how the acceptance 
angles of different XY arrays will be affected by each inch (2.5 cm) of spacing 
introduced between the mics. So, for example, given that I’d normally use a 
cardioid XY setup at a mutual angle of 110° to capture an acceptance angle of 
160°, I’d expect the acceptance angle to shrink below 100° if I introduced an 
eight-inch (20 cm) spacing between the mics. While this “back of an envelope” 
math isn’t perfect, it’s nonetheless accurate enough to be remarkably useful 
 GAIN-MATCHING XY AND AB RIGS 
 In order to adequately judge the imaging properties of an XY or AB stereo mic array, you should try to match 
the gain settings of the two mics as closely as you can. Probably the most accurate means of doing this is to 
set up a sound source at the dead center of the array’s acceptance region, and then use the polarity-inversion 
technique described in Section 7.1.1, but adjusting the relative mic gain settings in step four of the procedure, 
rather than their positions—the better the cancellation between the mics, the better the gain match. However, 
such exact gain-matching feels like overkill to me for most small-studio sessions, especially if the musicians 
have to hang around while you do it. As long as you keep your ears and eyes open while tweaking your 
mic preamps’ gain controls, my experience is that any vestigial stereo lopsidedness can almost always be 
redressed at mixdown with negligble side-effects. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
259
 But what’s the best combination of mutual angle and spacing? Well, there are a 
variety of factors to consider. At the most elementary level, the lower the mutual 
angle you use, the drier (and therefore closer) the recording will sound, because 
you’ll be narrowing the array’s combined polar pattern. Where an XY cardioid 
array will sound roughly as wet as a single subcardioid mic in that location, an 
AB pair of cardioids will only sound about as wet as a single cardioid (although 
obviously more spacious on account of the time-difference cues), so juggling 
the spacing and mutual angle of a cardioid near-coincident array lets you ﬁ nesse 
its dry/wet balance within those boundaries. However, trading off mic spacing 
and mutual angle doesn’t make an enormous difference to the apparent balance 
between sounds at the center and edges of the acceptance angle—for a given 
microphone polar pattern, widening the stereo image will always tend to recess 
the center of the acceptance zone, whatever mixture of level and time differences 
is responsible, so I think you should still be careful using any acceptance angle 
outside the ranges I already recommended for pure coincident arrays. 
 I’ve stressed repeatedly that the mics used in budget-conscious studios often 
have dodgy off-axis response, and this can cause problems when using larger 
mutual angles—large-diaphragm models being the worst offenders. If you’re 
using mics at, say, a 140° mutual angle, central sounds will be arriving 70° off-
axis to each mic, and each mic’s on-axis response will also over-emphasize the 
brightness of reﬂ ections from outside the array’s 120° acceptance region. This 
is where near-coincident arrays can provide a useful workaround, because they 
let you implement the same acceptance angle with a lower mutual angle. So the 
aforementioned 120° acceptance angle could instead be created using cardioids 
with a 90° mutual angle and an eight-inch (20 cm) spacing, putting central 
sounds only 45° off-axis to each mic and moving the brighter on-axis pickup 
within the acceptance angle. The result: a more even tone across the accep-
tance region, and a more natural-sounding room reverb. (For similar reasons, 
 Table 8.3   Suggested Mutual Angles and Acceptance Angles for XY and Near-Coincident 
Stereo Arrays 
 XY Stereo Array 
 Mutual Angle 
 Acceptance Angle 
 Acceptance-Angle 
Reduction Per Inch 
(2.5 cm) of Mic Spacing 
 Crossed Cardioids 
 90°… 110° …140° 
 200°… 160° …130° 
 10°… 8° …6° 
 Crossed Supercardioids 
 70°… 90° …120° 
 170°… 130° …100° 
 8°… 6° …4° 
 Crossed Hypercardioids 
 60°… 80° …110° 
 150°… 110° …80° 
 7°… 5° …3° 
 Crossed Figure-eights 
 50°… 70° …100° 
 130°… 90° …60° 
 6°… 4° …2° 
for guessing initial array setups during the cut and thrust of a real recording 
job. (Again, a sheet of A4’s 12 × 8-inch dimensions can easily be folded to give 
spacing templates for 2, 3, 4, or 6 inches if you’ve no ruler with you.) 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
260
angling the mics of an omni AB array slightly outwards can usefully widen its 
high-frequency coverage when working with large-diaphragm mics.) However, 
this has to be weighed up against the issue of mono-compatibility, because 
widening the mic spacing to narrow the mutual angle will increase the likeli-
hood of comb-ﬁ ltering problems if you sum the channels.  
 BAFFLED STEREO TECHNIQUES AND DUMMY HEADS 
 Beyond the basic XY, MS, AB, and near-coincident stereo techniques, there are plenty of less mainstream 
methods. One group of these takes inspiration from the way the human ears are separated by the head 
during natural listening, and therefore places some kind of baffl e between a spaced pair of microphones. This 
introduces high-frequency shadowing effects which add extra level-difference stereo information, sharpening and 
widening the stereo imaging and adjusting the nature of the reverb pickup. 
 One of the best-known baffl ed-stereo rigs is the OSS system, where the baffl e is a 12-inch (30 cm) absorptive 
disc—often called the “Jecklin Disc” after its inventor. This is vertically positioned midway between two omni 
microphones spaced about 8 inches (20 cm) apart. Budget recordists quite often experiment with OSS, because 
building a passable Jecklin Disc yourself isn’t that diffi cult or costly. However, in my experience the technique 
rarely seems to offer the tonal clarity of a regular AB rig, because of midrange comb-fi ltering introduced by 
residual baffl e refl ections, and the array also seems to dull the top octaves somewhat overall. So if you really 
want HF level-difference information when working with omni mics, I’d suggest angling them slightly outwards 
as a fi rst port of call before getting any baffl e involved. Alternatively, try mounting your spaced omnis either 
side of a football instead, right next to the surface of the ball. This should reduce the comb-fi ltering effects 
to a small loss of extreme high-end, and although you’ll suffer a couple of decibels of upper midrange boost 
courtesy of the boundary effect (the ball’s too small to reinforce frequencies any lower than that), that’s easier 
to compensate for with EQ than heavier comb-fi ltering. If you have a pair of boundary mics available, a further 
simple option is to mount them on either side of a large, heavy panel. Again, you may have to add some low-end 
with EQ, because any manageably sized panel is only likely to provide a useful degree of boundary effect above 
about 200 Hz. 
 Drawing even greater inspiration from human hearing are systems which use an anatomically modeled “dummy 
head” (based on Ozzy Ozbourne’s, I trust) with mics fi tted into prosthetic ears, or else place the mics into 
the engineer’s own ears. The resulting “binaural” recording captures subtle directional frequency-response 
variations imposed by the human pinnae, and when auditioned on headphones it can recreate uncannily 
accurate sound-positioning sensations from all around the listener—including from above and behind. However, 
that realism doesn’t translate very well to speaker systems, where the imaging typically becomes rather vague, 
with an overwide stereo spread. That’s not to say that some high-profi le engineers don’t use binaural techniques 
in the studio—Tchad Blake 2 and Michael Bishop 3 are enthusiastic proponents, for instance—but given the cost 
of a proper dummy-head system, or the inconvenience of having to sit out in the recording room with miniature 
mics in your ears while tracking, I wouldn’t really recommend binaural methods for most small-studio folk. 
 8.4.2    Case Study: NOS or ORTF? 
 Small-studio recordists lacking the conﬁ dence to design their own near-coinci-
dent array are often drawn toward a handful of well-known standardized car-
dioid setups with impressive-sounding abbreviations. In practice, though, this 
doesn’t make their lives much easier, because they still have to work out which 
to choose and how best to use it. So as a means of consolidating what we’ve 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
261
covered so far in this chapter, I’d like to demon-
strate how the guidelines I’ve given above might 
enable you to make a more informed choice 
between two of the most well-known: NOS 
( Nederlandse 
Omroep 
Stichting ), which 
has a 90° mutual angle and a spacing 
of 12 inches (30 cm); and ORTF ( Ofﬁ ce 
de Radio - Télévision Française ), which has 
a 110° mutual angle and a spacing of 7 
inches (17 cm).
 Looking at  Table 8.3  suggests that 90° and 
110° XY arrays will give me 200° and 160° 
acceptance angles respectively, and that I’d expect 
the NOS and ORTF mic spacings to reduce those ﬁ gures 
to 80° and 104° respectively. Because both these acceptance angles fall outside 
the “safety zone” for XY arrays, sound sources at the edges of the acceptance 
region are likely to be favored in the level balance no matter which I use—an 
effect that will be emphasized by any natural on-axis brightness of the micro-
phone design, because the mutual angle happens to match the acceptance 
angle quite closely for each of the arrays. 
 For a more spacious presentation (albeit at the expense of lesser mono-com-
patibility), I’d choose the NOS rig, given its heavier reliance on time-difference 
information, whereas ORTF would, conversely, suit applications where slightly 
sharper imaging were desirable. If my ability to distance the mics from the 
instrument were restricted, then I’d probably lean toward the ORTF setup on 
account of its larger acceptance angle, although this might depend on whether 
the slightly roomier sound of its wider mutual angle proved suitable. However, 
with budget large-diaphragm mics, the NOS setup might begin to become 
more attractive irrespective of miking distance if I wanted to maximize the 
brightness of an instrument (or instrument component) at the center of the 
acceptance region. 
 8.5   STEREO MIKING IN THE WILD 
 So far I’ve restricted the discussion to traditional stereophonic techniques, 
where imaging realism is a primary concern. However, high-proﬁ le profession-
als frequently choose to sacriﬁ ce realistic imaging when using mics in stereo 
day to day, so it’s as well to consider why and how you might also want to do 
this yourself. 
 8.5.1  Tonal Balance Versus Stereo Balance 
 Where the mics in any close-up stereo array spotlight different sonic facets of 
the instrument, it’s not uncommon for tonal concerns to take priority over 
stereo imaging. For example, if you had placed a cardioid XY array somewhere 
around the twelfth fret of an acoustic guitar, you might decide to boost the 
 “Small-studio 
recordists lacking in 
confi dence are often drawn toward 
a handful of well-known standardized 
cardioid setups with impressive-sounding 
abbreviations. In practice, though, this 
doesn’t make their lives much easier, 
because they still have to work out 
which to choose and how best 
to use it.” 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
262
mic facing the strings for more “zing” (as mentioned in Section 7.1.3), in spite 
of this stretching the whole stereo picture toward the right-hand speaker. Sure, 
you could spend a few minutes repositioning the whole mic array to ﬁ nd a 
zingier overall timbre without skewing the stereo image, but under time pres-
sure most engineers will simply nudge the right-facing microphone’s pan con-
trol inward to counteract the image shift, just as long as narrowing one side of 
the overall stereo image in this way doesn’t sound too awkward in context. 
 MIKING FOR SURROUND 
 Although stereo mic technique might seem a bit involved at times, it’s not a patch on the complications of 
surround-sound miking! For this reason, I’d strongly advise against tangling with surround miking until you’ve 
gained a good deal of practical experience with stereo techniques, and have supplemented the practical advice 
in this book by delving into some of the more technical literature about stereo and surround systems. Because 
vanishingly few small-studio users ever use surround mic techniques, I also won’t deal with them in this book, 
but if you’d like to pursue the subject further, I’ve included some links to further reading in this chapter’s web 
resources. 
 A very similar situation can arise where an instrument is miked up so that its 
pitch range is spread across the stereo panorama, with low notes on one side 
and high notes on the other. If you adjust the levels of your stereo mic rig to 
compensate for a weak-sounding higher register, say, you may ﬁ nd yourself 
pulling the whole stereo image off-center. As before, repositioning the mics 
is the ideal solution to this problem, but panning adjustments may be more 
expedient when the clock’s ticking. 
 8.5.2    Beyond the Bounds of Acceptance 
 The mutual angles and mic spacings recommended in  Tables 8.1, 8.2, and 
8.3  are designed to help you capture a full-width stereo picture without seri-
ously misrepresenting the level balance of sound sources within the acceptance 
region. On occasion, however, an engineer might have good reasons for using 
unusual acceptance angles in order to rebalance sounds coming in from differ-
ent angles. For example, narrow acceptance angles can be used with coincident 
or near-coincident arrays to avoid overemphasizing those parts of the instru-
ment nearest to the array when close-miking—this is something I’ve already 
mentioned in relation to piano recording, but it’s equally applicable with 
things like acoustic guitar and tuned percussion, which also present a compar-
atively wide target to any close-mic setup. (A word of warning, though, when 
using this concept: If the performer moves a lot while playing, you’ll not only 
get them bouncing around the stereo image, but also ducking and diving in the 
level balance.)
 Stereo room mics may also beneﬁ t from the weakened central image of a 
narrow acceptance angle where they’re supplementing signals from separate 
close mics. This allows the room mics to add maximum spaciousness in stereo, 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
263
without clouding the close-mics’ details at the center 
of the stereo image. You risk unpleasant phase-
cancellation, though, if the room mics are ever 
summed to mono, so you should check for 
this while recording. If precise directional 
information is unnecessary (as it often is 
when room-miking), you can also maxi-
mize the reverb pickup within a given 
room by using the rather odd near-coinci-
dent arrangement of a spaced pair of ﬁ gure-
eight mics at a mutual angle of 180°, because 
this rejects the instrument’s direct sound arriv-
ing from the front of the array. 
 Acceptance angles are also narrowed whenever AB arrays 
are used in close proximity to an instrument, because the moment the mics 
begin to pick up signiﬁ cantly divergent timbres they’ll effectively be intro-
ducing stereo level-difference information between the channels. Even under 
normal circumstances AB techniques give quite narrow acceptance angles, 
so it’s easy to arrive at an excessively wide stereo image with an unstable 
 “If precise 
directional information 
is unnecessary, you can also 
maximize the reverb pickup within a 
given room by using the rather odd near-
coincident arrangement of a spaced pair 
of fi gure-eight mics at a mutual angle 
of 180°, because this rejects direct 
sound arriving from the front 
of the array.” 
 FIGURE 8.7    
 Non-coincident close-miking setups such as the one shown here are commonly seen in small studios, 
because they allow you to catch more of an acoustic guitar’s timbral components without picking up too 
much room reverb. However, if you treat these two mics as an AB stereo pair, the combination of level-
difference and time-difference information will yield a very narrow acceptance angle, which means you’ll 
likely have to narrow the mics’ panning to avoid a disconcertingly wide stereo image. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
264
center when close-miking, especially if directional mics are used. As such, 
it’s usually necessary to narrow the panning of the microphone channels 
when using AB rigs up close. “I’m never panning them hard left and right,” 
remarks Gary Paczosa, 4 for instance, when talking about AB-miking ﬁ d-
dles, “I’m only opening them maybe…from eleven o’clock to one o’clock.” 
Fortunately, the increased tonal difference between the two mic signals under 
 WORKING WITH HEADPHONE MONITORING 
 Recording with stereo mic techniques is made more diffi cult for small-studio engineers if they’re forced to 
monitor on headphones while tracking. Although $200 (£150) or so should get you fairly classy-sounding cans 
from a tonal point of view, no matter how much you spend, they’ll still give a very different stereo listening 
experience than speakers do. For a start, the ±90° positioning of the headphone drivers means that the stereo 
fi eld covers a 180° angle, three times the normal 60° loudspeaker panorama. In addition, each ear only hears 
the output of one microphone on headphones, whereas both ears hear both mics on loudspeakers. Together, 
these two effects not only make it tough to judge the suitability of your mic array’s acceptance angle, but also 
affect your perception of dry/wet balance, because refl ected sounds are much more spread out spatially. 
 The mutual-angle and mic-spacing suggestions earlier in this chapter can help here, of course, but there are 
a couple of additional workarounds that can further improve the likelihood of workable results. The most 
useful thing you can do is fi nd a commercial recording that you like the sound of, and then import it into your 
recording system to use as a yardstick when judging your own mic array’s stereo width, dry/wet balance, and 
center-versus-edge level balance. The other really helpful tool is a vectorscope, a special type of metering 
display, which is very revealing of stereo width/
balance issues that might not otherwise catch your 
attention. This needn’t cost you anything if you’re 
recording with DAW software, because there are a 
number of free cross-platform vectorscope plug-ins 
available (see this chapter’s web resources for some 
suggestions). 
 Several manufacturers now provide affordable 
software which claims to simulate the speaker-
listening experience for headphone listeners, but 
none of the ones I’ve heard are particularly helpful 
in this particular context. For a start, they often alter 
the overall tone of what you’re recording, and some 
of them add simulated room reverb at the same 
time, both of which confuse matters. In addition, 
many of the algorithms are based on averaged data 
about how the human hearing system works, so they 
suit some people’s ears much better than others. To 
be honest, I think the traditional headphone stereo 
experience is no less usable for recording purposes 
than any of these systems, just as long as you have 
some commercial reference tracks on hand for 
comparison. 
 FIGURE 8.8    
 A vectorscope (such as the freeware Melda MStereoScope 
shown here) is very handy for checking a recording’s stereo 
width when you’re forced to monitor on headphones. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
265
such circumstances tends to reduce the severity of the comb-ﬁ ltering between 
them, which makes panning adjustments less damaging to the combined 
tone than they would be for more distant placements. Some engineers delib-
erately design their AB setups to take advantage of this. Mike Shipley, 5 for 
example, mentioned consciously separating the mics by three times the mik-
ing distance to minimize comb-ﬁ ltering when he recorded Alison Krauss’s 
“Paper Airplane,” and Bill VornDick 6 has also talked about using that 
same idea. 
 Large acceptance angles can also be useful to avoid a disconcertingly wide 
image when close-miking. If you reduce the array’s mutual angle, Sides level, 
or spacing enough (or indeed narrow the monitor-channel pan controls), 
then the instrument’s stereo image functions more as a width enhancement 
than as a true stereo picture—an effect that’s extremely popular with engi-
neers who want to create full-sounding mixes using only a few instruments. 
This kind of stereo spread can be heard in Tony Platt’s 7 guitar recordings for 
AC/DC, for instance, as well as on myriad acoustic, jazz, folk, country, and 
bluegrass productions. “I stereo-mike everything,” says Gary Paczosa, 8 for 
instance, “or at least I use two microphones; it’s not always a true stereo con-
ﬁ guration.” A nice bonus feature of the tag-team positioning trick I suggested 
back in Section 6.2.1 is that it’s usually very good for this kind of subtle image 
widening if you use your ﬁ nal two mic positions as a stereo pair—the sig-
nals will usually end up being quite similar, so the widening remains fairly 
natural-sounding (as long as you take care with phase-cancellation), and you 
can also normally afford to mix the mics at fairly equal levels, which avoids 
lopsided stereo.  
 8.5.3  Stereo Setups with Unmatched Mics 
 If you’ve no choice but to try capturing a natural stereo image without having 
any mics of the same model, then you’ll probably get best results with MS 
techniques, because even if frequency-response differences between the mics 
blur the spectrum, at least central images should be solid and the stereo pan-
orama as a whole should remain symmetrical. (This assumes, however, that 
the ﬁ gure-eight mic has symmetrical front and back lobes, which isn’t always 
true of ribbon mics.) After MS, a pair of unmatched omnis in AB conﬁ guration 
would perhaps be the best bet, as the subjectively more diffuse nature of pure 
time-difference stereophony is more likely to disguise any extra blurring of the 
stereo picture. 
 However, when you don’t need anything beyond a nebulous sense of width 
from your stereo recording, there’s nothing to stop you spreading any of 
Chapter 7’s multimic setups across the panorama using your pan controls—
indeed, this practice is extremely popular on a commercial level. Just 
remember to be wary of mono-compatibility problems when panning any 
non-coincident rig, especially if heavy phase-cancellation effects between the 
microphones have been used to sculpt the timbre, as in Section 7.2.2. 

PART 3 One Source, Multiple Mics
266
 8.6    BEYOND STEREO PAIRS 
 Although we’ve covered a wide range of stereo recording methods this chapter, 
that’s by no means all there is to know about stereo recording. But more com-
plicated stereo setups usually only make sense within the context of ensemble 
recording, so we’ll take those up in Part 4 once you’ve had a chance to gain 
some practical experience of the techniques we’ve covered thus far.   
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 Most stereo mic techniques use level differences and/or time differences between the 
microphone signals to generate the stereo panorama. Pure level-difference techniques 
(XY, MS) have more precise stereo imaging and (if you’re careful) excellent mono-
compatibility; pure time-difference techniques (AB) give a more spacious impression and 
allow you to use a wider range of microphones; and hybrid near-coincident techniques 
afford greater ﬂ exibility to angle the microphones for better dry/wet balance and over-
all tonality. Bafﬂ ed stereo or binaural techniques have their uses, but won’t provide very 
good value for money in most small studios. 
 
■
 Don’t choose an MS mic rig just for its ability to control stereo width, because you can 
do that with any mic array using MS post-processing. More important features of MS are 
its typically brighter and more solid central images; its ability to use an omni Middle 
mic; and its symmetrical stereo image even when using unmatched mics.  
 
■
 You can decrease the acceptance angle of an XY array by increasing the mutual angle or 
using more directional polar patterns; of an MS array by increasing the Sides mic’s level; 
and of an AB array by increasing the spacing between the mics. With near-coincident 
arrays, the acceptance-narrowing effects of mutual angle, mic polar pattern, and inter-mic 
spacing accumulate. 
 
■
 All stereo arrays have a range of acceptance angles for which they’ll give their most even 
level balance across the acceptance region, but there are situations where tampering with 
center-versus-edge levels can be used creatively. Some arrays won’t give you a full-width 
image at all, although this may play into your hands if you’re overdubbing dry sounds.  
 
■
 Don’t assume that AB recordings have to be made with omni mics; other patterns 
can also be very useful. Coming in very close to an instrument with AB will add level-
difference information, narrowing the acceptance angle, in which case panning adjust-
ments may be required to avoid an overwide stereo image. 
 
■
 Swapping out the mics in a stereo array can be a pain, so do your best to decide which 
mics to use before messing around too long with stereo-speciﬁ c setup issues. Dedicated 
stereo mics and factory-matched mic pairs are rarely a good investment when you’re 
working on a budget. 
 
■
 Stereo miking techniques are best judged on loudspeakers, but if you have to monitor on 
headphones then use reference tracks in conjunction with a vectorscope to improve your 
guesswork. 

Multimiking in Stereo CHAPTER 8
267
 Record at least one of each of the following groups of instruments in stereo: acous-
tic piano, acoustic guitar/mandolin/banjo/harp, tuned percussion; any monophonic 
orchestral instrument; any amplifi ed electric guitar or electromechanical keyboard.
 
■
 For each session, make a point of comparing two different types of stereo array, 
preferably one each of the following: XY versus MS; XY versus AB; and AB versus 
near-coincident. 
 
■
 Feel free to choose whichever mics you’d like for each stereo confi guration in 
pursuit of the most appealing result, evaluating each rig for general tone; stereo 
width; dry/wet balance; and mono-compatibility.  
 
■
 This assignment will be most revealing if you record both mic pairs simultaneously, 
but on separate tracks. Following the recording session, compare the two stereo 
arrays in detail, and take the opportunity to experiment with MS post-processing 
on each one to get a feel for how they respond. 
 Assignment 1: Close-Miking Instruments in Stereo 
 Record any solo instrument you like, but from a distance which allows you to take 
advantage of the recording space’s reverb—if the room refl ections in your normal 
recording space sound a bit dodgy, consider recording on location for this assignment.
 
■
 For each session, make a point of comparing two of the following stereo arrays: XY, 
MS, AB, and near-coincident. 
 
■
 Feel free to choose whichever mics you’d like for each stereo confi guration in 
pursuit of the most appealing result, evaluating each rig for general tone and 
stereo width (both of the instrument and the reverb); dry/wet balance; and 
mono-compatibility. 
 
■
 If possible record both mic pairs simultaneously, but to separate tracks. Following 
the recording session, compare the two arrays in detail and experiment with the 
possibilities of MS post-processing. 
 Assignment 2: Stereo-Miking Instruments with Room Reverb 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 audio demonstrations of a variety of stereo setup issues;  
 
■
 a downloadable stereo protractor printout in PDF format, as well as instructions on 
how to fold your own angle templates using plain A4 paper;  
 
■
 some suggested implementations of low-frequency shuffl ing for coincident pairs;  
 
■
 further reading on XY, MS, AB, near-coincident, and baffl ed-stereo techniques, and 
on creating click tracks; 
 
■
 links to on-line stereo setup calculators and freeware MS processing plug-ins.  
 http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch8.htm 

This page intentionally left blank

 Multiple Sources, 
Multiple Mics 
 PART 4 
 PART 4 
 By now it should be clear that single instruments can be overdubbed in a mul-
titude of different ways, and that the working practices of different profes-
sionals can be understood as their response to the speciﬁ c music, performers, 
environment, and equipment they have to work with. You’ll also doubt-
less have developed your own preferences while working through the chap-
ter assignments—but you should also have an insight into the comparative 
strengths of many alternatives, so you’ll always have somewhere to turn in situ-
ations where your favorite tricks draw a blank. And nowhere does this adapt-
ability have greater value than when you’re capturing several instruments/
voices at a time, whether that’s a large ensemble such as an orchestra, big band, 
or choir; a smaller chamber/folk/rock group; or simply any musician who per-
forms multiple instruments at once, such as a rock band’s drummer or a sing-
ing accordionist. 
 As I see it, there are two basic approaches toward capturing any group of 
instruments/voices in stereo:
 
■
 Dominant Array.  Use a primary mic array (whether that’s a single mic or 
a complex multimic setup) to achieve a faithful overall representation of 
all the sound sources. If that picture then requires adjustment for correc-
tive or creative reasons, this dominant array may be supplemented by addi-
tional “spot” or “accent” microphones, although the main array typically 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
270
still dominates the balance. This approach is good for natural-sounding 
ensemble recording, hence its popularity in the classical world, but it’s also 
extremely useful for more mainstream commercial styles (especially when 
recording drum kits), and is very well suited for small-studio engineers who 
need to get respectable results in a hurry and don’t have many mics to play 
with. 
 
■
 Peer Arrays. Use a separate microphone array for each instrument (or group 
of instruments) and create the desired ensemble balance by adjusting the 
mix level of each array. None of the arrays can be seen as dominant here, as 
each is usually responsible for capturing the bulk of the sound of its associ-
ated instrument(s). This approach can be used for any type of music, but is 
more commonly encountered in popular styles where the engineer wants 
greater control over the balance and timbre of individual ensemble com-
ponents. The downside is that peer-array recording generally requires more 
gear and more setup time. 
 Of these two methods, the ﬁ rst presents the gentler learning curve, so we’ll 
begin there. However, let me ﬁ rst just clarify my use of the term “mic array” 
here. Although this phrase usually implies a multi-mic setup of some kind, in 
the remainder of this book I’ll be assuming than an array can also be just a sin-
gle mic, just so that I can talk about the general functions of mic arrays without 
having to write “mic or mics” the whole time! 

271
 9.1  USING A SINGLE-MIC DOMINANT ARRAY 
 To home in on the bedrock techniques of ensemble recording, let’s start by 
considering the most “no frills” dominant array: a single mic capturing every-
thing in mono. 
 9.1.1  Ensemble and Venue Reconnaissance 
 Organizing musicians for an ensemble recording can be a massive logistical 
headache, so sessions frequently have a strict schedule and you’ll be under 
time pressure. Therefore good guesswork remains paramount if you’re to avoid 
squandering precious minutes on setup chores. At the very least, ﬁ nd out the 
ensemble lineup ahead of time and scrutinize any available information about 
the recording venue if it’s unfamiliar to you. However, there’s no substitute for 
ﬁ rst-hand experience, so get yourself to a rehearsal/concert to hear the players 
in action, and sneak into the recording venue in advance to check it out. Pay 
special attention to the following questions:
 
■
 How do the performers set themselves up for rehearsal and/or perfor-
mance?  Every player will be accustomed to hearing a certain balance of the 
ensemble, and may rely on close visual contact with the other performers 
too, so this should be reﬂ ected in your session planning. If in doubt, I sug-
gest following this advice from Leslie Ann Jones: 1 “Find out how people 
normally set up and try not to deviate from that, because that’s what they’re 
most comfortable with.” However, any differences you notice between the 
rehearsal and performance layouts may indicate which instruments can be 
repositioned in the studio without unduly discomﬁ ting the players, so keep 
your eyes peeled for those. 
 
■
 Does any instrument (or group of instruments) either overpower the 
others or get lost in the balance?  Professional musicians will intuitively 
ﬁ nd an appropriate balance amongst themselves without much help from 
the recording engineer, but if you don’t get to work with that caliber of 
performer very often, then be alert for any instruments/voices which may 
 Ensemble Recording with a 
Dominant Array 
 CHAPTER 9 
 CHAPTER 9 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
272
need assistance in maintaining a sensible level. For example, many ama-
teur choirs have one or two weaker sections (or perhaps a single hurricane-
force soprano!), while student orchestras are frequently underpowered in 
the strings/harp department or else overwhelmed by the brass. Outside 
the classical sphere, acoustic guitars and upright basses can ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult 
to cut through (even piano may struggle in larger ensembles such as big 
bands), while any low-register drum can easily eat a small acoustic ensem-
ble for breakfast. Where the “ensemble” is a drum kit, less accomplished 
players may hammer the hi-hat at the expense of the other drums. “With 
a really good drummer,” says Jack Endino, 2 “you just hang a mic over and 
it’s amazing, no matter what he’s playing. You don’t get drummers like 
that too often. You get drummers who are just wailing on the hi-hat and 
they’ve got a little wimpy snare drum.” Whatever imbalance you hear, try 
talking to the performers about it, because they may be able to solve such 
problems before the mics get involved. “If you talk to the drummer,” says 
John Hampton, 3 “you’ll ﬁ nd out that he may be able to live with the ride 
in a place where it is more easily heard. A lot of drummers are like that.” 
Gordon Raphael 4 illustrates this with a splendid anecdote about work-
ing with The Strokes’s drummer Fabrizio Moretti: “To get a proper ‘drum 
machine’ gated snare… we had to put the hi-hat on the other side of the 
drum kit, and that was Fab’s idea: ‘Maybe if I put the hi-hat four feet away 
from the snare mic, I can still play it with another hand and keep time, but 
there won’t be any bleed.’ That was a great move, because we had a coher-
ent, live sound, not an overdubbed hi-hat.” 
 
■
 Do any instruments sound horrid?  Thin-sounding violins, banjos, or 
acoustic/resonator guitars? Abrasive electric guitars or horns? Honky piano? 
Anemic bass? Any kind of melodica? Again, query things like these with the 
players at the earliest opportunity. But if your suggestion of ritually sacriﬁ c-
ing the melodica falls on deaf ears, then just make a note of the issue so 
you can plan to tackle it by other means. 
 
■
 Does the recording venue restrict the layout of instruments, musi-
cians, or microphones in any way?  The space requirements of ensemble 
recording often force small-studio engineers to record on location, but 
this can incur other physical restrictions. A narrow room may require a 
large ensemble to be arranged with an unnaturally large distance between 
front and back, for instance, while a low ceiling may militate against using 
mics overhead. Are there any risers, pews, steps, doors, or balconies which 
might hamper the placement of large mic stands or heavy instruments (e.g., 
pianos)? 
 
■
 What are the acoustics of the recording venue like?  If the room doesn’t 
sound terriﬁ c, then you’ll want to investigate ways of minimizing the 
recorded reverb. However, on those happy occasions where the record-
ing environment sounds like it might enhance the sound, you’ll be more 
concerned with achieving a good dry/wet ratio for all the instruments in 
the ensemble. Also, consider how you might use any areas of the room 
that have different reﬂ ective properties, and explore the acoustic effects of 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
273
moving large objects in the room (carpets, curtains, rows of seats/pews) or 
opening/closing doors, windows, and partitions. 
 
■
 Is anything in the venue usable as an acoustic absorber/reﬂ ector?  Soft 
furnishings such as rugs, bedding, sofas, and clothing racks can serve as 
rough-and-ready absorbers, while things like whiteboards, large sideboards/
wardrobes, and upended tables can make great reﬂ ectors. It’s always a wise 
idea to have a selection of absorbers and reﬂ ectors on hand for any ensem-
ble session, but there’s no sense in lugging bulky things like that to a venue 
unnecessarily. 
 
■
 Have the ensemble or venue been involved with any previous record-
ings?  If you’ve gone as far as making contact with the performers or venue 
owners, then you might as well ﬁ nd out if they’ve witnessed any relevant 
recording setups, whether successful or not. Given the number of vari-
ables involved in ensemble recording, don’t be shy about ﬁ shing for 
suggestions—if nothing else, the responses you get will give you a good 
idea how conﬁ dent the musicians are likely to be in the studio, and how 
suitable the venue is likely to be for recording purposes. 
 Laden with the fruits of this research, you’re ready to start making some edu-
cated guesses about suitable initial setups for your recording. 
 CRITICAL DISTANCE 
 If you move far enough away from an ensemble, there comes a point where the level of direct sound from the 
ensemble matches the level of refl ected sound from the environment—the so-called “critical distance.” In large 
recording spaces you can use the critical distance as a way of estimating initial miking distances, so some 
engineers like to measure this aspect of unfamiliar venues during their pre-session investigations. The normal 
way to do this is by measuring the level of a broadband noise source (placed where the front of the ensemble 
is likely to be) at different points in the room with a portable SPL meter, but you can also make a reasonable 
stab at it using a detuned radio, an omni mic, and any reasonably wide-range digital level meter. Within the 
critical distance the measured sound level will decrease 3–5 dB for every doubling of the miking distance, but 
beyond the critical distance you get very little change at all—i.e., the measurement stays pretty constant. (For 
more detailed measurement instructions, check out this chapter’s web resources.) Common consensus is that 
sensible initial miking distances tend to cluster around a third of the critical distance for omni mics, and a half 
of the critical distance for cardioids, although clearly you need to develop your own personal tastes here. 
 It’s fair to say, however, that most practicing engineers are content to judge initial miking distances solely by ear, 
so don’t feel obligated to work in terms of critical distance if you’re already fairly happy with your own intuition. 
Nevertheless, if you think the measurement-based approach might come in handy on some occasions, then it’s 
worth doing dry-run critical-distance measurements for a few recording sessions before you need to use such data 
in earnest, so you develop a personalized sense of how your own preferred miking distances relate to the data. 
 9.1.2  Which Mic? 
 When shortlisting promising contenders amongst your mic collection, all the 
guidelines in Part 3 continue to apply, but with the proviso that groups of 
contrasting instruments are unlikely to be well served by mics which strongly 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
274
color the recorded tone, since the chances that the coloration will ﬂ atter several 
instruments at once are pretty slim. Dynamic mics are rarely useful for mixed 
ensembles for this reason, and I would in general favor mics with the ﬂ attest 
possible frequency response, both on- and off-axis (which usually means lean-
ing toward pricier models). Don’t discount ribbons on those grounds, though, 
because although they’re typically duller sounding than condensers, and 
lose some low end when used at a distance, they may otherwise be very well 
behaved in the frequency domain and should respond well to broad corrective 
EQ boosts at the frequency extremes. 
 9.1.3    How Wet Overall? 
 As the next step, I suggest asking yourself how much room reverb you want 
to capture overall, because the issue of dry/wet balance probably imposes the 
greatest restrictions on your mic placement. This is where the venue reconnais-
sance can really help. Firstly, it tells you whether the room reverb’s tonality is 
likely to be useful at all—if not, then you’ll have to work hard to eliminate 
it. And, secondly, it indicates roughly what range of miking distances will 
give you a decent dry/wet ratio should you choose to make use of the natural 
reverberation. 
 Other than that, your main tools for controlling reverb pickup will be just 
the same as when working with single instruments: shifting the mic position, 
switching its polar pattern, and adjusting the room acoustics. However, the ﬁ rst 
two of these strategies offer less leeway when you’re working with ensembles. 
For example, you may struggle to get a single mic close enough to an ensem-
ble for the right overall dry/wet ratio without overemphasizing the levels of the 
closest individual instruments in the balance. In a similar vein, trying to dry up 
an ensemble’s sound by switching to a more directional polar pattern may mean 
that the mic’s off-axis response seriously misrepresents the level or tone of some 
players. In this respect, a ﬁ gure-eight mic with groups of performers arranged on 
either side may outperform a cardioid facing a single group of performers, by 
virtue of the cleaner off-axis timbre. (Using a ﬁ gure-eight mic in this way also 
provides the considerable ancillary advantages of improving eye contact between 
the performers and allowing you to place foldback speakers in the mic’s deep 
side nulls if you don’t have enough headphones for all the musicians.) 
 Because ensembles reduce the power of pure mic technique in this way, the 
importance of dealing more directly with reverb issues increases, so strive 
to get maximum value out of acoustics modiﬁ cations in the ﬁ rst instance. 
Reducing excessive (or just dodgy-sounding) reverb is the most common 
requirement on low-budget sessions, although the very act of putting lots 
of musicians in one place can actually help with this. “I always felt that the 
sound in any studio was always better when the room was ﬁ lled with people,” 
remarks Larry Levine, 5 “regardless of whether you could get isolation or not.” 
The DIY absorption measures we’ve touched on in previous chapters can get 
you a long way in smaller rooms too, but when you’re in a space capacious 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
275
enough to hold a large ensemble, a given stock of improvised acoustics materi-
als won’t be able to treat as large a proportion of the room’s reﬂ ective surfaces, 
so clustering your available bafﬂ ing close around the microphone instead will 
usually prove more efﬁ cient. (The danger there, though, is that high frequen-
cies will be absorbed much better than low frequencies, rendering the remain-
ing reverb pickup rather woolly sounding.) Your on-site reconnaissance plays 
a vital role here, of course, because moving furniture and carpets/curtains may 
make a huge difference. Be aware, however, that heavily damped acoustics may 
bring problems of their own, by making it hard for the performers to hear each 
other well enough while performing. 
 9.1.4  What Level for Each Instrument? 
 Once you’ve got several instruments coming through one mic, you can’t 
easily adjust their levels after recording. This makes it vital to capture a good 
ensemble balance during the session, so plan for this as soon as you’ve consid-
ered issues of overall reverb pickup. Again, mic technique only offers limited 
 FIGURE 9.1   
 The recording setup in the left-hand diagram will struggle to capture all the singers in the ensemble with 
a uniform dry/wet balance: Singer B will sound more reverberant than Singer A because he’s further away 
from the mic; and Singer C will also sound more reverberant than Singer A because the mic’s cardioid 
polar pattern attenuates her direct sound. By contrast, the right-hand diagram would be more likely to 
achieve the same dry/wet balance for all the singers by moving them out of the pews and switching the 
microphone to a ﬁ gure-eight polar pattern: The singers are in a single row all around the mic, and the 
laterally placed voices are moved closer to the microphone to compensate for the polar pattern’s side-
rejection. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
276
control here. For instance, changing any instrument’s apparent level by adjust-
ing the mic-to-instrument distance will also alter that instrument’s apparent 
dry/wet ratio, and possibly incur proximity-related timbral side-effects too. 
On the other hand, angling a directional mic to rebalance the dry sounds of 
instruments will also affect their dry/wet ratios, and may cause tonal damage 
to some of them as well. 
 As a result, I think a mic’s type/placement is incapable of substantially correct-
ing poorly balanced performances, although it does still offer solutions to a 
couple of common technical difﬁ culties when you’re trying to capture the bal-
ance “as played”:
 
■
 If a mic’s polar pattern introduces balance problems, then changes to miking 
distances can compensate. So where, say, a supercardioid mic makes an ensem-
ble’s off-axis instruments too quiet and wet, bringing those instruments closer 
to the mic can counteract this by boosting their direct level.  
 
■
 If balance problems are caused by unsatisfactory miking distance, angling 
the polar pattern of a directional mic can compensate. For instance, if con-
cerns about overall reverb pickup force you to mike from a position too 
close to some instruments (as is frequently the case when working with 
large groups), angling a directional mic’s polar pattern can compensate for 
this by making closer sources both quieter and wetter. This is a very com-
mon tactic with orchestral recording, because it allows a mic to be placed in 
front of the ensemble, but aimed toward the wind section to avoid overstat-
ing the level of the nearest string players or rendering them unconscionably 
dry sounding, as shown in  Figure 9.2 . (Mic positions above the ensemble 
can help with this too, but a low ceiling or the lack of a sufﬁ ciently tall mic 
stand may prevent this approach in practice.) 
 FIGURE 9.2   
 Miking an orchestra from 
a close frontal position 
can overemphasize the 
level of the strings in the 
balance. This diagram 
shows how you might 
compensate for this 
problem to a degree by 
using a cardioid polar 
pattern angled to favor 
the woodwind section. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
277
 Because a single mic offers so little independent control over individual 
instrument levels, any ensemble imbalances you hear in rehearsal (or antici-
pate from a glance at the instrument lineup) are invariably better addressed 
by other means. Since most practical remedies involve the cooperation of the 
players, however, the main question at the planning stage is whether the reﬂ ec-
tion/absorption characteristics of the room (or any additional DIY treatment) 
can be used to improve the balance. A reﬂ ective surface behind rear-ﬁ ring 
instruments (most notably French Horns) is often desirable, for example, but 
any instrument that’s having trouble projecting can be assisted in a similar way 
by hard-surfaced rear reﬂ ectors, and also by removing carpet from in front of 
and beneath them—even with apparently “forward-ﬁ ring” instruments, addi-
tional early reﬂ ections will still provide signiﬁ cant level reinforcement. By 
extension, putting overloud instruments on carpeting with absorptive panels 
behind them may provide some balance correction, and in more extreme cases 
(such as when a rock drum kit is playing alongside acoustic instruments) you 
might even build a roofed booth around the back and sides of the player to 
more severely curtail the total energy they send out into the room. Any acous-
tic manipulation like this won’t just alter an instrument’s balance, though, 
because it’ll also affect the timbre—the high-frequency content of the instru-
ment will be most affected in each case, with reﬂ ectors tending to brighten the 
tone and absorbers tending to dull it. 
 9.1.5  What Tone for Each Instrument? 
 If the ensemble already sounds gorgeous, your primary goal is to avoid taint-
ing that sound during the recording process, which is why classical engineers 
so often prefer the naturalness and clarity of high-class small-diaphragm omni 
microphones for ensemble capture. In the less rariﬁ ed atmosphere of lower-
budget sessions, though, both the ensembles and the microphones tend to be 
less than ideal, so it pays to think quite carefully about workarounds. 
 Where certain instruments sound unappealing during rehearsal, and the play-
ers themselves aren’t able to remedy things sufﬁ ciently at source, try using 
your knowledge of instrument dispersion characteristics to advantage, particu-
larly high-frequency beaming effects. So if the viola in a string quartet sounds 
a bit mufﬂ ed, turn the player slightly, thereby directing more of the instru-
ment’s forward-thrown high-frequency spectrum toward the microphone; or if 
the tenors and basses in a large choir are being obscured by the sopranos and 
altos standing in front of them, investigate ways of lifting them higher, per-
haps using temporary risers or a dais/step already in the venue. By contrast, 
with an overbright trumpet you might place a little acoustic absorption directly 
in front of the performer to soak up some of those searing high frequencies 
emanating from the instrument’s bell. Philip Hobbs 6 did something similar for 
the harpsichord when recording John Butt’s award-winning 2012 interpreta-
tion of Bach’s  Matthew Passion : “John directs from the harpsichord, so it has 
to be in the middle, right under the [dominant array]. So it’s a challenge to 
stop the whole project sounding like a harpsichord concerto. We take the lid 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
278
off the instrument, but put a bit of board over the middle of the soundboard 
just to get rid of some of the immediate ‘ping’ of the sound, so it sounds pres-
ent enough, but nicely diffuse.” 
 Where the ensemble sounds ﬁ ne in the ﬂ esh, you have to be a bit careful that 
the extra on-axis brightness inherent in most mic designs doesn’t misrepresent 
instruments directly in front of the mic. In fact, in situations where players are 
seated all around an omni mic, there is a good argument for orienting its ﬁ ring 
line vertically, such that all instruments address it similarly off-axis. (The main 
drawback of this approach is that it tends to brighten the recorded reverb, so 
some additional acoustic absorption may be necessary, particu-
larly in smaller rooms.) The same applies with cardioid-
family mics, where ﬁ ring the microphone a little over 
the top of the players may match captured instrument 
tonalities better across the width of the ensemble. 
Sometimes, however, a mic’s on-axis HF boost can 
be turned to your advantage, especially when using 
omni mics, which won’t change the overall level 
of off-axis instruments very much: If an instru-
ment needs brightening, place it on-axis; whereas an 
instrument which is too biting could be placed off-axis 
where the mic’s pickup is dullest (i.e., typically at the rear 
for small diaphragms, or 90° off-axis for large diaphragms).
 9.1.6    What Depth for Each Instrument? 
 The next major issue is how far away each instrument should appear relative to 
the others—in other words, what it’s subjective depth should be in the front–
back perspective. This is something that is primarily determined by each instru-
ment’s dry/wet ratio, although tonal brightness does provide a psychological cue 
to the listener as well. The big problem is that changing an instrument’s reverb 
level independently of its overall level is something that microphone technique 
is all but powerless to do when the whole ensemble is coming through one 
microphone—you may be able to adjust a player’s dry/wet balance by changing 
their distance and/or angle relative to the mic, but either way you’ll also change 
the instrument’s apparent volume compared to other ensemble members. Given 
that good balance and an appealing tonal quality are usually deemed more 
important than a completely natural depth perspective, most pragmatic engineers 
would tend to prioritize balance/tonality concerns over depth issues wherever 
only one mic is being used. 
 9.1.7    Sonic Adjustments on the Session 
 Pondering the above issues should bring one or more likely-looking mic tactics 
into your sights, around which you can plan the technicalities of the session 
itself. As always, try to get all the equipment set up and tested long before any 
performers arrive, so you can concentrate on making musicians comfortable 
 “In situations 
where players are 
seated all around an 
omni mic, there is a good 
argument for orienting its fi ring 
line vertically, such that all 
instruments address it 
similarly off-axis.” 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
279
and ensuring that instruments are all well prepared for the recording. With 
amateur ensembles, don’t be afraid to insist that small sections of the group 
(or even single individuals) tune separately, because few things make a record-
ing sound cheaper than sour intonation. Where electronic tuning devices are 
being used, it’s not a bad idea to use the same device for all the instruments, so 
you don’t fall foul of differences in tuning reference between units. 
 The moment you clap ears on the mic signal, reﬁ ne your initial setup guess-
work by racing through the questions in Sections 9.1.2–9.1.6 again:
 
■
 Which mic? 
 
■
 How wet overall? 
 
■
 What level for each instrument? 
 
■
 What tone for each instrument? 
 
■
 What depth for each instrument? 
 Because these questions proceed roughly in order of importance, you’re likely 
to work most efﬁ ciently if you concentrate on mic choice/directivity, miking dis-
tance, and global acoustic treatment issues before transferring too much attention 
toward per-instrument concerns. Having more than one mic primed can really 
speed up the selection process, as can the presence of a willing assistant to move 
microphones under talkback control. When assessing the overall reverb capture, 
you’ll ﬁ nd decisions a whole lot easier if you’ve set up your monitoring system to 
switch easily between your mic signal and the playback of some commercial refer-
ence tracks, so I’d recommend conﬁ guring some way of doing that in advance. If 
you’re in any doubt with reverb, though, I’d err on the side of “too dry,” because 
that’s easier to remedy at mixdown than “too wet.” Don’t forget to critique the 
tonality of your captured reverb too, because the timbre of reﬂ ected sound can be 
one of the major reasons to reconsider your choice of microphone and/or polar 
pattern. Once you get into per-instrument concerns, it’s very easy to ﬁ xate on one 
or two instruments while overlooking others, so where any ensemble has more 
than a half-dozen sound sources, it pays to keep a paper list of the lineup close to 
hand. Working through this list methodically (ﬁ rst for level, then for tone, then for 
depth), helps you feel more conﬁ dent that nothing important has slipped under 
the radar. (“Heavens—I can actually hear the banjo! How careless of me…”) 
 The most effective ﬁ x for balance problems is simply asking certain performers 
to play quieter/louder (or asking their musical director to do it for you), but 
you might also request that someone change their instrument or instrument 
settings; that more/fewer doublings are used in the arrangement; that a sound-
box lid be opened/closed; or that ampliﬁ er levels be adjusted. Although all 
these methods of implementing balance changes may have tonal side-effects, 
they shouldn’t impact too much on the ensemble’s depth perspective, whereas 
if you start shufﬂ ing an instrument’s position/angle, you’ll also affect its subjec-
tive distance from the listener in the recording. 
 Of course, in some cases the link between level and depth can work in your 
favor, because repositioning a solo instrument to emphasize it in the balance 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
280
will usually also pull that instrument forward 
of the main ensemble by reducing its dry/
wet ratio—a staple technique prior to the 
advent of multitracking, and one which 
was regularly used dynamically, with 
instrumentalists encouraged to step 
closer to the mic for solo passages. 
The rise of the large-scale multi-room 
studio during the 1970s caused this 
kind of “performer choreography” to 
fall out of fashion, which means that 
many small-studio recordists seem to 
have a blind spot toward it, but it remains 
tremendously handy when you’re working 
under space/budget restrictions. If you’re going 
to use it, though, try to mark each musician’s different 
position (perhaps with gaffer on the ﬂ oor) so that they’re precisely repeatable 
between takes—and keep your ears open for squeaking shoes!  
 For single-mic ensemble recordings, trying to enact per-instrument tonal tweaks 
using EQ is pretty much a non-starter—again, this is something best addressed 
by the performer. However, if you’ve already established a decent level balance, 
you have to be a bit careful that a player’s timbral adjustments don’t upset that. 
For example, many instruments are louder along their frontal axis, so rotating 
them won’t just achieve a different sound color. In this respect, the way the 
ensemble and microphone interact with the room’s acoustics becomes quite 
a useful variable. In other words, moving the whole ensemble (together with 
the microphone) around the recording space can signiﬁ cantly change how the 
room’s acoustic resonances ﬁ lter each instrument’s tone, but shouldn’t have an 
enormous effect on the level or depth of each source. For ﬁ ner timbral control, 
a single instrument might be moved into another sector of the mic’s polar pat-
tern, perhaps in conjunction with a change in miking distance to maintain the 
level balance. Changes to the miking height will also give tonal adjustment, 
because of the way inevitable room resonances affect the captured frequency-
response at different miking positions (see Section 4.4.2), as well as allowing 
creative use of boundary-effect bass boost as the mic approaches the ﬂ oor or 
ceiling. In this context, fairly moderate repositioning can have a surprisingly 
big tonal impact without usually incurring too many level/depth-related side-
effects—unless you’re miking really close to the ensemble, adjusting the height 
of the dominant array by a foot (30 cm) or so shouldn’t make a huge difference 
to the distance between each instrument and the mics. 
 Once you’ve found an appropriate dry/wet ratio for your recording as a whole, 
and also a satisfactory level and tone for each separate instrument, your ability 
to tackle any remaining depth concerns without sacriﬁ cing some other hard-
won aspect of the sonics may be very limited—unless you start adding addi-
tional mics, as we’ll see in Section 9.3. As such, the art of single-mic ensemble 
“Repositioning a solo 
instrument to emphasize it in 
the balance was a staple technique 
prior to the advent of multitracking, with 
instrumentalists encouraged to step closer to 
the mic for solo passages. Many small-studio 
recordists seem to have a blind spot toward 
this kind of ‘performer choreography,’ but 
it remains tremendously handy when 
working under space/budget 
restrictions.”

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
281
recording is all about deciding what (if anything) you can afford to trade in for 
better depth presentation within the context of your speciﬁ c production. 
 9.2   USING SIMPLE STEREO DOMINANT ARRAYS 
 Now let’s consider the additional complexities introduced when we substi-
tute a stereo setup in place of our single mic, thereby increasing the number of 
questions that need answering while planning and running the session. Here’s 
the expanded list—again, tackling these questions in order provides a pretty 
sensible workﬂ ow, although there is inevitably some interaction between them:
 
■
 Which mic? 
 
■
 Which stereo method? 
 
■
 How wet overall? 
 
■
 How wide overall? 
 
■
 What level for each instrument? 
 
■
 What tone for each instrument? 
 
■
 What depth for each instrument? 
 
■
 What image for each instrument? 
 In stereo our options for microphone positioning immediately become more 
restricted, because of the need to place different sources appropriately within 
the stereo image, and you may also be forced to bring the microphones into a 
more central room position, where tonal ﬂ uctuations on account of room res-
onance are typically more severe. Where microphone directionality is respon-
sible for creating stereo level-difference information, you can’t then use it as 
freely to rebalance or tonally reshape individual instruments either. 
 9.2.1  Balance, Tone, and Depth Across the Acceptance 
Region 
 The issue of center-versus-edge balance (which we ﬁ rst mentioned back in 
Section 8.1.3) will usually become a more critical issue in ensemble settings, 
so ideally you should stick closely to the setup suggestions in Tables 8.2 and 
8.3, and then try to arrange your musicians at equal distances from the mic 
rig. Bear in mind that mutual angles which misrepresent the balance of sig-
nals reaching the array will also misrepresent the ensemble’s apparent depth: 
Overwide mutual angles will not only attenuate central sources, but will also 
make them appear wetter (and therefore more distant) than they are; while 
mutual angles which are too narrow will cause similar problems for instru-
ments at the edges of the acceptance zone. You may be able to compensate 
for these issues by changing the ensemble layout in some cases, but there’s no 
sense in making a rod for your own back if you can help it. 
 Sometimes the chosen ensemble layout will itself cause level/balance chal-
lenges. For example, instruments at the center of the acceptance region may 
be considerably closer to the mic rig than those at the edge, either because of 
physical layout limitations within the recording venue or because of the sheer 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
282
size of the ensemble. The most extreme situation you’re likely to encounter in 
this regard will be where your performers are set up in a straight line across 
the acceptance zone, which will give you roughly 3 dB more level from central 
musicians than from those 60° off-axis to the array, in my experience. If you’re 
using an AB rig, there’s precious little you can do about this (short of supple-
menting the rig with additional mics, which we’ll get to in Section 9.3), but 
with directional mics the wider mutual angles in Table 8.3 may help you out 
by recessing central sources, provided that you can still ﬁ t everyone into the 
narrowed acceptance angle. You’ll be placing greater demands on the off-axis 
linearity of your mics by doing this, though, so it may prove a struggle to main-
tain consistent tonality across the ensemble and to avoid overbrightening the 
room reverb under those circumstances, especially with large-diaphragm con-
densers. As such, I’d treat this as a fairly high-risk strategy when working on a 
budget, and test the tonality of the proposed stereo rig in advance to see if it’s 
likely to be viable. (The easiest way to do this is by recording yourself walking 
across the ensemble setup while speaking, given how sensitive we humans are 
to the timbral nuances of speech.) 
 Where your ensemble setup and mic selection allow you some choice between 
different arrays while retaining a decent level/depth picture, you should try to 
take advantage of this to design a rig which faithfully reﬂ ects the timbres of 
instruments at different locations. This is where the smoother off-axis response 
of omni or ﬁ gure-eight mics can be of assistance, but the narrower stereo accep-
tance angles these mics yield in typical XY, MS, and AB setups may cramp your 
style in more reverberant spaces, unless you can ﬁ nd some way of rigging acous-
tic absorption behind the array. Whichever mics you’re using, though, don’t 
forget to account for their on-axis brightening effect. Obviously this is easiest 
with AB omni pairs, where the mic angle has least effect on acceptance angle, 
but near-coincident pairs can also be usefully reconﬁ gured by trading off mutual 
angle against mic spacing, as discussed in Section 8.4.1. Moreover, any of the 
stereo arrays we’ve encountered so far can be tilted upwards/downwards to 
adjust the recorded tone by putting the entire ensemble slightly off-axis, and this 
can be particularly useful for avoiding overbright central sources when using an 
MS rig. Although tilting any directional stereo array like this has the potential to 
narrow the effective frontal acceptance angle in extreme cases, this shouldn’t be 
a cause for serious worries if you keep within a ±45° angle. 
 9.2.2    Combining an Array’s Front and Rear 
Pickup 
 One thing that less experienced engineers often over-
look is the additional setup possibilities offered by 
stereo mic techniques that pick up equally from both 
front and rear. For example, in music which combines 
choir and orchestra, it’s common in live performances 
for the singers to be set up behind the orchestra on risers, 
but this causes problems if you want to mike the ensemble 
 “Less 
experienced engineers 
often overlook the additional 
setup possibilities offered by 
stereo mic techniques that 
pick up equally from both 
front and rear.” 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
283
from the front while recording: The choir will usually appear both too low 
in level and too far away. However, if you depart from the standard concert 
layout by moving the singers to the other side of the mic array (i.e., facing 
toward the orchestra from behind the conductor, as shown in  Figure 9.3 ), you 
can place them much closer in to achieve better deﬁ nition, assuming of course 
that you’re using a mic technique with adequate rear pickup—spaced omnis or 
ﬁ gure-eights, say. 
 The same dodge will also work with crossed ﬁ gure-eights (whether in XY or 
MS conﬁ guration), but you’ll need to account for the array’s reversed-image 
rear pickup when placing the musicians. Do take care to keep instruments well 
clear of the out-of-polarity regions on either side of the rig, though, otherwise 
imaging clarity will be poor in stereo and your ensemble balance will take a 
big hit in mono. 
 Another option here is to suspend any stereo array above the ensemble, point-
ing at the ﬂ oor—just so long as you take the necessary measures to stabilize tall 
mic stands so that they don’t topple onto the players! The players can then be 
positioned on either side of the array, effectively stacking the players vertically, 
as far as the mic array is concerned. There are a few caveats here, though. Firstly, 
a lot of instruments are designed to project their most balanced tone forward 
rather than upward, but lowering the array to capture the frontal dispersion 
will cause stronger coloration of the ensemble’s tonality by directional mics’ 
off-axis response. Secondly, the small physical spacing between coincident mics 
will cause some comb-ﬁ ltering effects for instruments above and below the 
array’s normal on-axis stereo plane—a subtle effect, admittedly, for slim-line 
 FIGURE 9.3   
 The ensemble setup shown in Diagram A is common in live performance, but in a recording situation the 
choir may end up sounding rather soft and distant if you’re trying to pick up the whole ensemble with a 
simple dominant array behind the conductor. One solution to this problem is to stand the singers on the 
other side of the dominant array, facing the orchestra, as shown in Diagram B—assuming, of course, that 
your choice of dominant array has suitable rear pickup characteristics. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
284
end-ﬁ re mics, but bulkier large-diaphragm or ribbon pairs may lose a signiﬁ -
cant amount of high end. And, ﬁ nally, you need enough height in the room to 
avoid tonal problems from ceiling reﬂ ections when miking overhead like this. 
 9.2.3    Wide AB and Close AB Arrays 
 Although in most cases I’d suggest following the spacing and acceptance-angle 
guidelines in Table 8.2 when using AB stereo arrays, balance or tone concerns 
arguably override those of imaging realism in some cases. For example, you’ll 
get a better balance between the instruments of a physically wide ensemble by 
separating the two mics so that each one sits midway between the ensemble’s 
center line and its edge—the “wide AB” setup shown in  Figure 9.4 . Although 
the downside of this is an unnaturally stretched stereo image which places 
most of the instruments at the panorama’s edges (a situation some describe as 
a “hole in the middle”), you might prefer that to a beautiful stereo image with 
a dodgy balance—and you may even be able to compensate for the overwide 
imaging by narrowing the panning, as long as you make sure comb-ﬁ ltering 
between the mics isn’t too objectionable and you don’t mind a loss of subjec-
tive width in the room reverb. 
 Trying to achieve a dry ensemble sound with traditional AB miking can result 
in similar image-stretch compromises, because of level differences introduced 
between the mic signals when working at very close range (as discussed in 
Section 8.5.2). Fortunately, using panning adjustments to weaken the hole-
in-the-middle sensation is usually less damaging here, because the narrowed 
reverb pickup will be less noticeable, especially if you’re planning to add 
 FIGURE 9.4    
 The traditional AB stereo setup in the left-hand diagram typically gives a more realistic stereo spread, 
but favors central instruments in the balance; whereas the “wide AB” setup in the right-hand diagram 
gives a more uniform balance across the width of the orchestra, albeit at the expense of an unnaturally 
overstretched stereo picture. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
285
artiﬁ cial reverb at mixdown anyway. However, it is very easy when using a 
close-up AB rig to end up with lots of instruments well off-axis to the array, 
where the inter-mic time differences are largest, so do check carefully for 
mono-compatibility. 
 While the unnaturally sides-heavy stereo image of both these types of non-
traditional AB setup may not suit more purist genres, it’s as well to point out 
that it can actually serve modern mainstream productions better in some con-
texts. For example, wrapping overdubs such as percussion, strings, and atmo-
spheric ambience noises around more important central sounds (e.g., vocals, 
solos, kick, snare, bass) by effectively overwidening them can help prevent all 
those different elements from obscuring each other in a busy mix. 
 9.3   MULTIMIC DOMINANT ARRAYS IN MONO AND 
STEREO 
 It’s frequently possible to catch a respectable ensemble sound with just a 
simple mono or stereo setup, especially with smaller groups of instruments, 
which is great news for cash-strapped recordists or those sessions where you’re 
racing against the clock. However, it should also be clear by now that this kind 
of recording can be fraught with compromise, and often involves trading off 
various desirable sonic attributes against each other to some extent. In more 
demanding recording situations, therefore, many engineers resort to building a 
dominant array using more complicated multimiking techniques, so let’s have 
a look at the thinking behind some of these. 
 9.3.1  Coincident Multimiking 
 Using a coincident multimic array for mono ensemble recording offers many 
of the same advantages that it does for single instruments, as described in 
Section 7.1. For example, the broader pickup of a crossed pair’s combined 
polar pattern (especially at high frequencies) catches the edges of wider ensem-
bles better in situations where you only have access to directional mics. You 
can also carefully aim the polar-pattern sensitivity lobes and rejection nulls of 
coincident multimics at different sections of the ensemble to give considerable 
balance control from your faders. Figure-eight mics really come up trumps in 
this respect, one popular application being to arrange a crossed pair of them 
vertically in front of a singing guitarist so that one mic points at the voice and 
the other at the instrument—if you carefully aim each mic’s plane of rejection 
you can frequently achieve quite astonishing separation between the two mic 
signals, in spite of the small distance between the two sound sources. 
 Another interesting scenario is where you capture one lead vocal and two back-
ing vocals on the same crossed ﬁ gure-eight pair—the lead singer 45º off-axis to 
both mics, and each of the backing vocals on-axis to one mic’s rear sensitivity 
lobe. In mono, you can rebalance the two mics to shift emphasis between the 
two backing vocals, but without affecting the lead-vocal level; you can use just 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
286
one mic to eliminate either of the backing vocal lines; or you can invert the 
polarity of one of the mics and mix them together at equal level to cancel out 
the lead line, leaving just the backing vocals. Alternatively, if you want to use 
the rig in stereo, adjusting the array’s Sides level with MS processing allows you 
to adjust the stereo width of the backing vocals relative to the lead. 
 Mixing an omni mic with a similarly aligned directional mic to create intermedi-
ate directivities (as in the Strauss Paket, for example) has interesting applications 
too. Not only does it give you control over your recording’s overall dry/wet bal-
ance when using two-mic mono or four-mic AB stereo arrays, but it also allows 
you to get a wider range of useful acceptance angles from XY or MS stereo rigs. 
For example, if you combine carefully phase-aligned forward-facing omni and 
ﬁ gure-eight mics to create your Middle-channel signal, you can mimic any ﬂ avor 
of two-mic MS rig simply by rebalancing the resultant array’s three mic signals. 
(In fact, if you want to get really freaky you could even use complementary EQ 
settings on the two Middle-mic signals to effectively create different stereo rigs 
for different frequency ranges—a concept at the heart of the Schoeps Polarﬂ ex 
system, for instance.) There’s also nothing stopping you from using coincident 
multimiking (in either mono or stereo) just to blend the timbral characteristics 
of different microphone types, as discussed in Section 7.1.4. 
 9.3.2    Dual Arrays for Dry/Wet Control 
 The ﬁ rst reason to expand the dominant array with extra non-coincident 
microphones is to give yourself more control over the dry/wet ratio of the 
recording at mixdown, perhaps to work around physical mic-placement restric-
tions within the recording venue. The basic idea is to use one mic rig to catch 
a comparatively dry sound from the ensemble, and then to supplement that 
by mixing in room reverb from an additional rig dedicated to the purpose. 
We already considered the fundamental ramiﬁ cations of room miking back 
in Section 7.2.3, and we also assessed the suitability of vari-
ous two-mic stereo arrays for this kind of application in 
Chapter 8. The main thing to add here is that using direc-
tional mics for the reverb pickup with their nulls pointed 
toward the ensemble offers two advantages for acoustic styles 
that trade on stereo realism. Firstly, it allows you to achieve 
a good degree of wet/dry contrast between your two mic 
pairs without putting the mics too far away (thereby avoid-
ing a distracting “slapback” effect); and, secondly, with 
wide-spaced AB room arrays it also reduces the likelihood 
that highly directional instruments (e.g., trumpets and trom-
bones) ﬁ ring across the ensemble from one side might cause 
conﬂ icting directional cues when the two mic pairs are com-
bined, as illustrated in  Figure 9.5 . 
 The question of image width also needs a little extra thought. 
The crux of the matter is that if your dry pair presents the 
 FIGURE 9.5    
 Wide-spaced room mics 
can introduce conﬂ icting 
stereo cues if there are 
any strongly directional 
instruments ﬁ ring across 
your ensemble—as you 
can see in this diagram, 
where an orchestra’s 
brass section is arrayed 
on the angled section of 
a rear riser. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
287
ensemble as stretching right across the panorama, this creates the impression 
that the listener is positioned quite close to the musicians—after all, in real 
life an ensemble sounds wider the closer you get to it. Therefore, if you take 
a full-width dry image and add reverb to it using room mics, the question of 
where the listener feels they’re located in relation to the orchestra can get a bit 
confused—the dry pair’s width implies that they’re closer up, but the overall 
reverb level implies they’re further away. Choosing a slightly wider acceptance 
angle for the close array would be the preferred solution to this, but narrow-
ing that mic pair’s panning may also do the job as long as your chosen stereo 
setup doesn’t punish you with excessive comb-ﬁ ltering. (And speaking of comb-
ﬁ ltering, do check the phase/polarity relationship between the different dry and 
wet arrays to make sure you’re getting the most pleasant combined tonality.) 
 9.3.3  Balance and Depth Corrections 
 One of the big problems with trying to record an ensemble with a single mic 
array (whether mono or stereo), is that placing microphones close enough 
to achieve an appropriate overall dry/wet ratio may unduly bias the capture 
toward instruments at the front and center of the group—leaving instruments 
at both the sides and the rear sounding too quiet and too distant by compari-
son. As such, it’s very common for professional recordists to plant additional 
arrays close to those underrepresented sections, thereby bringing them up in 
the balance and forward in the depth perspective. 
 A popular strategy for deﬁ ning the sides of an ensemble in this way is to place 
additional “outrigger” mics ﬂ anking a central array, effectively picking up the 
full width of the group by stitching together the pickup from three narrower 
sections. If you’re purely looking for level/depth compensation, then you’ll 
want to place the additional mics to achieve the same kind of overall dry/wet 
ratio you’re hearing on the central array. A line of three very similar mics across 
the front of a choir or orchestra is a common application of this idea (a setup 
that was apparently the bedrock of Jack Renner’s classic Telarc sound, according 
to Michael Bishop 7 ), and if the outriggers are hard-panned for stereo, then the 
central mic provides the useful service of counteracting the hole-in-the-middle 
effect that would otherwise arise if a widely spaced pair had been used alone. 
However, it’s important to realize that if the spacing between any of the three 
microphones exceeds three feet (90 cm) or so, the stereo imaging will still be 
signiﬁ cantly stretched toward the locations the mics are panned to. So although 
this three-mic setup avoids the hole-in-the-middle phenomenon when listen-
ing back on loudspeakers, you may still end up with “holes” at ±15° off-center 
(as in  Figure 9.6 B). Different engineers disagree about how much of this kind 
of image-stretch is acceptable, but if it offends your own ears, then try increas-
ing the number of mics to allow more conservative inter-mic spacings. 
 Of course, the moment you have more than two spaced microphones creat-
ing your stereo picture, some of them will have to be summed, so the tim-
bral impact of inter-mic phase and polarity relationships won’t just be felt in 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
288
mono any longer. (As such, the techniques we used to manage comb-ﬁ ltering 
in Section 7.2.1 will be equally useful here, although I’d be a little wary of try-
ing to delay the outriggers to match the central array when working in stereo, 
because this can generate rather confusing stereo impressions.) You may ﬁ nd 
 FIGURE 9.6   
 If the widely spaced microphones in Diagram A are panned to the stereo extremes, your stereo panorama 
will suffer from “hole in the middle”—i.e., most of the singers will seem bunched up at the edges of the 
panorama on playback, and the central singer’s image will be stretched and destabilized. Using three 
mics instead, as shown in Diagram B, can help avoid the worst hole-in-the-middle problems, although 
weaker image-stretching artefacts may still remain audible. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
289
that your multimic rig starts to exhibit phased-array characteristics too (see 
Section 7.2.1), boosting on-axis instruments and comb-ﬁ ltering off-axis room 
reverb, so don’t be surprised if you end up with a slightly drier sound than 
you’d expect when using this multimic “curtain” method. Irrespective of how 
many mics you use, in practice you may ﬁ nd that the outermost mics need 
a little more gain than the inner ones. This is because the ensemble section 
in front of any of the inner mics is also being picked up as spill by mics on 
both sides, whereas mics at the edges only have supportive bleed coming from 
mics on one side. Angling the outriggers slightly outwards can make sense too, 
because spreading their brighter on-axis response further across can improve 
the consistency of high-frequency coverage across the ensemble. 
 Outriggers are frequently used in conjunction with a stereo central array, but if 
the central mics are directional designs then you’ll probably get a better match 
for that pair’s overall dry/wet ratio by using subcardioid or cardioid outriggers 
than omnis, as mentioned in Section 8.1.2. The stereo imaging of the com-
bined setup needs a little thought too, because it’s very easy to end up with 
an overwide stereo image from your central array when miking a wide ensem-
ble up close, and this will only be exacerbated if you mix in hard-panned 
outriggers. This is something you actually hear quite frequently on commer-
cial releases, so it’s clear that some engineers and producers aren’t too worried 
about it, but if it bugs you as much as it does me, then my advice is to insure 
you’re using a wide enough acceptance angle for the central array, or if that’s 
not possible for some reason then consider narrowing the panning of the cen-
ter pair’s mics a little. In fact, if you’re planning on mixing in additional room 
mics, you might also want to pan the outriggers slightly inwards too, so that 
the ensemble as a whole doesn’t create a stereo width at odds with its apparent 
distance from the listener on playback (as mentioned in Section 9.3.2). 
 The most common means of correcting balance/depth problems for instru-
ments at the rear of the ensemble is to set up a second array in the midst of the 
ensemble, targeting those ranks of instruments that need additional deﬁ nition. 
As far as stereo recordings are concerned, a wide variety of XY, MS, AB, and 
near-coincident rigs have been used commercially in this role, and the multi-
mic curtain approach we’ve just touched on can also function perfectly well. 
I’d steer clear of crossed ﬁ gure-eights myself, because when they’re surrounded 
by instruments they’ll usually pick up lots of things way off-axis, leading to 
troublesome polarity mismatches between the stereo channels (see Section 
8.1.3). There is also a strong argument for each stereo rig using a similar blend 
of inter-mic level-difference and time-difference information to create its ste-
reo illusion, to avoid the incongruity of having one group of instruments with 
razor-sharp XY/MS-based positioning set against another with softer-focus 
AB-based positioning. Plus, it stands to reason that you should try to match 
the spread of the instruments between the pairs too if possible. The off-axis 
response behavior of mics used for the supplementary array will be critical, 
whatever rig you choose for it, so those on a budget would be well advised to 
stick to small diaphragms if cardioids are unavoidable, and otherwise to favor 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
290
omnis and ﬁ gure-eights—remember that the latter can be used in parallel for 
non-coincident stereo without the polarity problems of a crossed pair. 
 Because the main purpose of the supplementary array in this context is to 
correct for depth misrepresentation on the front array (rather than errors of 
musical balance), you shouldn’t need to put these additional microphones 
too close. Just try to get roughly the same dry/wet balance for the rear-section 
instruments on those mics as you’ve already obtained for the front-section 
instruments coming through the front array, which means you should be able 
to mike from far enough away to capture a reasonably natural timbre. Once 
you’ve found a suitable mic position for the rear rig:
 
■
 Check that its stereo image matches that of the front pair. The best way to 
compare the rigs is to visualize the stereo position of different instruments 
 FIGURE 9.7   
 A dominant array system for capturing a large-scale concert work with orchestra, choir, and organ might 
incorporate a frontal mic array for the primary ensemble pickup working in conjunction with a series of 
supplementary mic arrays designed to compensate for the frontal array’s depth misrepresentation. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
291
while toggling between the two pairs using your monitor-channel mute 
buttons. If possible tweak the mics to address any problems here, but if 
this isn’t possible, then adjust your channel pan controls or make use of 
MS-based stereo width adjustment. 
 
■
 Find a good phase/polarity relationship between the front and rear arrays. 
Personally, I prefer to start off by delaying the rear array to roughly com-
pensate for the distance between the front and rear mics, based on my 
little “foot per millisecond” rule of thumb (or the slightly more accurate 
“meter per 3 ms” version)—this usually helps give a more natural timbre 
and avoids rear instruments being pulled right up to the front of the group. 
Then I’ll grab the rear array’s fader and try mixing it in slowly, listening to 
the entire ensemble (not just the rear instruments!) for unwanted tonal 
changes. Ideally, you’d hope to arrive at phase/polarity settings for the rear 
array that would allow you to mix it in without changing the tone of the 
front array at all, but frankly that’s a pipedream, because phase-cancellation 
will always occur to some extent. Hence, a more realistic goal is a tonal 
change that’s as benign as possible. 
 
■
 Balance the rear array sensibly—which usually translates as “lower than you 
think!” A mistake a lot of small-studio recordists make is try-
ing to position every instrument in an ensemble at the 
front of the mix’s depth perspective. The purpose of 
mixing in a rear array is to avoid the back ranks 
of your ensemble sounding unnaturally far 
away, not to create the illusion that the musi-
cians are all piled on top of each other in 
some sort of group hug! 
 In the normal run of things a single rear pair 
should be ample for most of the ensembles that 
small-studio engineers are likely to meet, even when 
working on location, but that’s not to say that more 
might not be called for in exceptional cases. A massive 
concert work like  The Dream Of Gerontius  might warrant three 
or four additional pairs in certain venues, for instance: one for the inner strings 
and woodwind; another for the brass and percussion; and separate arrays for 
choir and organ. 
 9.3.4  Hybrid Stereo Arrays 
 Adding extra microphones to a two-mic stereo setup can also let you blend 
selected characteristics of the basic XY, MS, near-coincident, and AB arrays into 
a hybrid listening experience. This is one reason why supplementing a coin-
cident central array with wide-spaced outriggers can work nicely, because it 
adds spaciousness that would otherwise be lacking. Choosing omni models for 
these outriggers is also popular, because that provides the improved low-end 
extension of a traditional AB array, but it does mean the outriggers will pick 
up more reverb than the directional central rig, so you have to decide how you 
 “The purpose of 
mixing in a rear array is 
to avoid the back ranks of your 
ensemble sounding unnaturally far 
away, not to create the illusion that 
the musicians are all piled on top 
of each other in some sort of 
group hug!” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
292
react to that. If you’re concerned about correcting balance/depth misrepresen-
tation across the width of the ensemble (as in Section 9.3.3), then it’s tempting 
to move the outriggers closer to the ensemble to dry up some of the reverb, but 
this risks imbalancing and distancing the rear sections of the group instead, 
and also has the potential to muddle the stereo imaging. A more common atti-
tude, therefore, is to embrace the omni outrigger’s extra reverb as a central part 
of its appeal (and even emphasize it using slightly more distant placement), 
such that the purpose of the outriggers becomes less about correcting balance/
depth problems, and more about gaining some independent control over the 
overall degree of low-end warmth, spaciousness, and reverberance. 
 Probably the best-known hybrid stereo technique is the Decca Tree, a setup 
developed over the course of more than a decade by a group of pioneering 
engineers at the Decca record company. The exact setup they used varied a 
great deal during the label’s early years, but had settled into a fairly standard-
ized rig by the beginning of the 1970s: three Neumann M50 microphones 
suspended above the front row of the ensemble in a triangular conﬁ guration, 
the leading mic 2–6 feet in front and panned centrally, and the remaining two 
mics 3–9 feet apart and panned to opposite sides of the panorama (see  Figure 
9.8 ). Most professional users of this system scale the physical dimensions to 
match the size of the ensemble, while maintaining roughly a 2:3 ratio between 
them—values of around 4 feet (1.2 m) deep by 6 feet (1.8 m) wide are fairly 
typical for a regular classical orchestra, for example. Where a Decca Tree is 
being used on its own, the side mics would usually be panned hard left/right 
to create a full stereo picture, but where outriggers are also in use, many people 
like to narrow the Tree’s panning a little. The mics are almost always angled 
slightly downward toward the ensemble and set up at the same height initially, 
usually via a special “T”-shaped bar on a single tall mic stand—preferably one 
built like a tank! You’ll sometimes see one or two of the mics being lowered 
a little on any given session to adjust the balance between the three sectors of 
the ensemble being covered. As with the simpler three-mic “curtain” arrange-
ment in Section 9.3.3, a lot of users fade the ﬂ anking mics up a little more 
than the center mic, but this is very much a question of personal taste—some 
engineers use a very low level purely as a subtle “center ﬁ ll,” while others (such 
as Eberhard Sengpiel 8 ) advocate keeping all three mics at identical levels. 
 Part of the unique character of the classic Decca Tree is related to the unusual 
design of the speciﬁ c microphones used. The Neumann M50’s head basket 
contains a small-diaphragm omnidirectional transducer mounted into the sur-
face of a golf-ball-sized sphere, an arrangement that generates an overall high-
frequency lift above about 3 kHz, as well as making the mic signiﬁ cantly more 
directional at higher frequencies. What this means is that when three M50s 
are set up in a Decca Tree formation, with the side mics angled about ±45° 
outwards (as is typical), the high-frequency directionality produces level-dif-
ference stereo information, sharpening the stereo imaging; the high-frequency 
coverage remains fairly even over a wide acceptance angle; and the omni 
design’s extended low end and clean off-axis response in the lower half of the 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
293
spectrum outperforms fully directional mics. In addition, the wide spacing of 
the side mics provides good ambient spaciousness; the central microphone 
guarantees a certain baseline mono compatibility; and the slight acoustic delay 
between the center mic and the trailing pair gives the whole array a subtle 
“building out from the center” character which a lot of listeners like. 
 The bad news about the classic Decca Tree for most small-studio folk is that 
Neumann discontinued the M50 long ago, so it’s now a collector’s item, and 
most modern mics designed speciﬁ cally for the same application tend to be 
eye-wateringly pricey—especially when you want three of them! That said, it is 
still possible to adapt the same concept to get good results with more general-
purpose microphones. One workaround suggested by Ron Streicher 9 is to 
substitute large-diaphragm omnis for the M50s, which makes a lot of sense 
given the unavoidable HF directionality of such designs. Another option is 
to choose directional mics instead, and then supplement their comparatively 
dry and bass-light sound with other mics, such as omni outriggers perhaps. 
Alan Meyerson 10 used this idea while recording one of the  Pirates Of The 
Caribbean  ﬁ lm scores, in fact, suspending a trio of ﬁ gure-eight ribbon mics 
right over the conductor. Using ribbons like this has a lot to recommend it 
with amateur orchestras too, given that overhead miking positions can easily 
make lesser-quality string sections sound scratchy. One word of caution here, 
 FIGURE 9.8    
 A traditional-style Decca 
Tree setup in action. 
The microphones are 
TLM150s, Neumann’s 
modern transformerless 
update of the classic, but 
now discontinued, M50. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
294
though: Directional polar patterns will more read-
ily cause unnatural image-stretch in this kind of 
conﬁ guration, so you may need to narrow the 
mic spacings to compensate for this—listen 
especially for what’s happening (or not!) in 
those critical mid-left and mid-right pan-
orama locations.
 Another of Ron Streicher’s 11 adaptations 
of the Decca Tree concept is to replace the 
leading mic of an omni-based setup with 
an MS stereo rig, effectively blending the pure 
level-difference stereo information from the coin-
cident rig with the spaciousness, low-end extension, 
and high-frequency coverage of a three-point non-coincident 
arrangement. If you’d like to try this for yourself, then I’d suggest using a cardi-
oid Middle mic, because that should give you a sensible acceptance angle with-
out skewing the center-versus-edge level balance too much. The difﬁ culty with 
using a cardioid center mic, though, is that the MS pair will almost certainly 
pick up signiﬁ cantly less reverb and low end than the omnis. If you ﬁ nd that 
this pulls the center of the ensemble too close to you over loudspeakers, then 
one response might be to switch the omnis for cardioids, thereby matching the 
sonics more closely across the rig, and then to move the whole array a little 
higher and apply some EQ to address the loss of reverb and low end. 
 The delicious whiff of mystique surrounding the Decca Tree “trade secret” 
means you’ll ﬁ nd no shortage of Internet debate about its original usage and 
potential adaptations, but rarely do such discussions suggest any downsides of 
the concept. In practice, creating a respectable balance and depth impression 
from an overhead miking scheme frequently requires the array to be raised 9 
feet (3 m) or more above the ﬂ oor, and that’s not easy to do securely on the 
cheap—plus the recording venue must be large enough to accommodate such 
mic placements without comb-ﬁ ltering from ceiling reﬂ ections noticeably col-
oring the overall timbre. As with simpler omni AB rigs, the classic Decca Tree 
arrangement will suffer from phase-cancellation when summed to mono, but 
I ﬁ nd it’s also more prone to sounding over-reverberant under those condi-
tions. The Decca Tree is also highly dependent on room acoustics, and John 
Kurlander 12 and Tony Faulkner 13 advise caution with overly dry and overly wet 
rooms respectively. Faulkner also has concerns with placing performers directly 
underneath the array, where the leading microphone’s center-ﬁ ll function 
is weakened: “There can be problems when doing concertos because soloists 
close to the main array can generate unstable or overwide stereo images.” 
 And while we’re speaking of Tony Faulkner, he has suggested another inter-
esting hybrid-stereo alternative: a pair of omnis at a mutual angle of approx-
imately 90°, spaced roughly 26 inches (66 cm) apart, and between them a 
near-coincident pair, usually subcardioids at a similar mutual angle, spaced 
 “It’s possible to 
adapt the Decca Tree 
concept to get good results with 
more general-purpose microphones. 
Using ribbon mics has a lot to 
recommend it with amateur orchestras, 
given that overhead miking positions 
can easily make lesser-quality 
string sections sound 
scratchy.” 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
295
roughly 16 inches (41 cm) apart. On the face of it, this might appear to be 
just another attempt at blending the sonic characteristics of two different 
stereo rigs, but there’s more to it than that. The microphone diaphragms are 
also carefully set up in a line so that sound from the center of the acceptance 
zone arrives at all of them simultaneously, which means that they operate as 
a phased array (see Section 7.2.1). As such, the whole shebang becomes more 
directional, and can therefore be placed further from the ensemble (for a given 
overall dry/wet ratio), with the result that the group’s balance and depth can 
often be captured more naturally. The main trade-off is mono compatibility, 
particularly at the high end for instruments on either side of the ensemble, so 
take time ﬁ nessing the array placement and mic spacing, and I’d recommend 
mixing one of the pairs at least a few decibels lower than the other, to soften 
the tonal impact of any comb-ﬁ ltering. You may also wish to experiment with 
smaller mic spacings if you’re presented with an especially wide ensemble, 
because the aforementioned setup only gives an acceptance angle of around 
60° in my experience—although narrowing the spacing will also weaken the 
phased-array effects by shifting them further up the frequency spectrum. 
 9.4   ADDING SPOT ARRAYS 
 The primary aim of a dominant array is to capture an ensemble performance 
holistically, warts and all. Clearly, some ﬂ attery is possible via sensitive mic 
selection/positioning, but none of the techniques we’ve talked about above 
will bail you out if a barbershop group’s bass singer is struggling to project 
his lowest notes; if you’re trying to give a big-band’s rhythm section more def-
inition on record than they have in the live room; if an orchestra’s clarinets 
sound dull; or if a jazz pianist isn’t differentiating between their rhythm and 
solo parts sufﬁ ciently. For all those jobs you need spot mics/arrays which pick 
 FIGURE 9.9    
 An example of a four-mic phased-array stereo setup. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
296
up a speciﬁ c instrument/section with more isolation, allowing you to control 
its level, tone, and depth independently of the rest of the ensemble—not only 
in the static balance, but also dynamically throughout the musical timeline if 
necessary. 
 ENGINEER’S QUICKSTART GUIDE: DRUM KITS 
 Back in Chapter 6, I already discussed some of the variables involved in preparing individual drums for 
recording, but there are a few extra things to mention about pop/rock drum-kit setups. When you’re recording 
them with the dominant-array method, you’ll get the best results if all the component instruments are already 
naturally balanced, because that means you don’t have to rely too heavily on your (inevitably less natural-
sounding) close-placed spot mics. 
 The fi rst thing to be wary of in this respect is damping individual drums too much, because it’s easy to 
imbalance the kit that way. This is especially risky with snare drums when you’re dealing with less experienced 
drummers, as they always seem to hit the hi-hat and cymbals too hard as it is. If you need to adjust hi-hat or 
cymbal levels, the best way is to swap them out for alternatives—thinner ones will usually be quieter, as well as 
brighter-sounding. However, the high-frequency dispersion patterns described in Section 6.2.4 give you some 
additional control here, depending on how you place your mics in relation to each instrument’s high-frequency 
beams. With toms, get the drummer to play round each tom in turn to listen for their relative levels and 
sustains. The trickiest balance problems to solve at mixdown are where the level and timbre of the drummer’s 
hits aren’t consistent enough, so if you notice this I’d recommend chatting it over with the performer—
sometimes small adjustments to the kit’s layout can make certain instruments easier to control. 
 Whenever any drum in the kit is hit, all the other drums resonate in sympathy to a degree, and the snare wires 
will rattle along a bit too. Some engineers seem inordinately harassed by this, while others (myself included) are 
more of the opinion that such peripheral noises are an important part of the whole sonic package. “Trying to 
get rid of those rings and resonances is sort of standard practice, but I’ve never followed that advice,” remarks 
Steve Albini, 14 for instance. If you do decide you want to reduce some of the resonance, the fi rst thing you can 
do is remove any drums that aren’t actually being played for the part you’re recording. Beyond that, sympathetic 
resonances and snare-rattle can be reduced a great deal with careful tuning, and you’ll almost always get a 
better overall sound if you try this approach before getting all heavy-handed with the damping. 
 9.4.1    Managing Spill 
 The biggest complication when using spot arrays is managing spill. Let’s sup-
pose you’re recording a choir with an underpowered alto section, and point 
a spot mic at those singers to correct the level imbalance. If that mic picks up 
loads of spill from the tenors standing in the row behind, you’ll undesirably 
overemphasize those voices in the process of boosting the altos—and if the 
mic’s off-axis response is highly colored, or you’re unlucky with the phase/
polarity relationship between the spot and the dominant array, you may 
also seriously harm the overall tenor timbre. Avoiding this kind of problem 
involves controlling the amount and quality of spill on each spot array, some-
thing that places heavy restrictions on your mic technique. 
 The most basic spill-management tactic is to maximize pickup from those 
instruments your spot array is ostensibly pointing at (which I’ll call the 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
297
“Focus’), while minimizing pickup of everything else in the recording room 
(which I’ll call the “Backdrop”). To this end, you’re usually forced to place 
spot mics much closer to their Focus instruments than you’d ideally like, and 
to use directional polar patterns to reject Backdrop sounds—both of which 
requirements make it tougher to capture appealing timbres. For example, the 
Focus may suffer from proximity-related problems such as bass boost, spot-
lighting, and overemphasized mechanical noises, while the Backdrop tone 
may be adversely affected by the vagaries of cardioid-family off-axis pickup. 
Furthermore, multimic workarounds, which are great for overdubbing single 
instruments, can come seriously unstuck in ensemble situations—the comb-
ﬁ ltering inherent in non-coincident methods can wreak havoc with the 
Backdrop tone, while the broadened directionality of some coincident tech-
niques may struggle to reduce Backdrop levels sufﬁ ciently. 
 So the best advice I can give here is to tackle spill problems as much as pos-
sible by acoustic means, because this’ll give you more leeway to select and posi-
tion your mics for a better recorded tone. Try adjusting the ensemble layout, 
perhaps, increasing the physical separation between quieter spot-miked instru-
ments and troublesome sources of spill, as well as directing the ﬁ ring lines of 
louder instruments away from nearby mics. Here’s Shawn Murphy 15 talking 
about this concept within a ﬁ lm-scoring context: “If you seat the orchestra 
properly and work on the balance in the room, by and large you will have lots 
of isolation—no matter what dynamic people are playing at…You don’t have to 
worry about excessive leakage because [each] instrument is acoustically sitting 
in a place that is complementary to the part it is playing … [It’s a question of] 
how tightly you pack them in, how far back you push the percussion or brass 
from the main mics, and recognizing the radiation pattern of the instruments.” 
 FIGURE 9.10   
 In Diagram A you can see a cello being spot-miked. If the cello tone sounds ﬁ ne through this mic, 
but the violin in the Backdrop sounds horrid, you might improve the situation by rotating the whole 
cellist+microphone setup as shown in Diagram B—the violin moves more on-axis to the mic, where 
the tone should hopefully be a bit clearer, while the mic’s position relative to the cello remains all but 
unchanged. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
298
Using a two-sided dominant array (see Section 9.2.2) can really help out here, 
because it allows you to increase the distances between imbalanced instru-
ments within the recording space, but still have them apparently sitting next to 
each other in the stereo panorama because of the array’s superimposed front 
and rear pickup. Risers can increase the physical separation between neighbor-
ing instruments too, without making a huge change to the sound 
in the dominant array. Where your spot array is catching 
a great Focus tone, but the Backdrop sounds awful, a 
trick Mike Stavrou 16 suggests is subtly adjusting the 
location/angle of the instrument  together with its 
spot mic  to improve just the spill sound without 
unduly affecting the Focus (see  Figure 9.10 ).
 Acoustic treatment can be your friend too. You 
might carefully arrange reﬂ ectors to bounce 
more sound into the mic from just the Focus 
instrument(s), for example, or use absorbers 
to obstruct paths of direct/reﬂ ected sound from 
the most prominent Backdrop sources. Shielding 
“unused” sectors of the spot array’s pickup pattern 
isn’t a bad idea either, the most common application of this 
idea being the “tunnel” of blankets or drum cases/shells that rock engineers 
regularly construct in front of a drum kit to protect an outside kick-drum mic 
from cymbal spill (as Butch Vig 17 did when recording Dave Grohl’s drums for 
Nirvana’s  Nevermind ). On a smaller scale, little handmade acoustic bafﬂ es can 
fulﬁ ll a similar function with solo instruments where spill-reduction require-
ments aren’t quite as extreme. The most frequent application here is prob-
ably keeping hi-hat spill out of a snare-drum close mic: Bruce Swedien 18 has 
a homemade wood-and-mu-metal panel, for example, while Darryl Swann 19 
uses a pop shield with a ski cap over it. 
 With the best will in the world, though, spill considerations usually pre-
vent you setting up spot arrays with complete freedom, so let me share a few 
tips for ﬁ nding an acceptable compromise between spill rejection and tone 
when you’re on a budget. Figure-eight mics are unsung heroes in this con-
text, because of their powerful plane of rejection (for loud sources of spill 
nearby), but otherwise clean off-axis sound. Again, this can be great for sing-
ing instrumentalists, but do be careful to ﬁ nd the best phase/polarity relation-
ships between the spot mics if they aren’t set up in a coincident conﬁ guration. 
Ribbon models have the additional beneﬁ t that their rounded HF tone helps 
compensate for overemphasized highs and mechanical noises when close-
miking, especially with brass and strings. Small-diaphragm designs are usually 
preferable over large diaphragms as well, because of their smoother off-axis fre-
quency response—so much so, in fact, that they become a much less contro-
versial choice for lead vocals within an ensemble context than they would be 
for vocal overdubs (as discussed in Section 5.1.3). Dynamic spot mics designed 
for on-stage applications can be excellent at rejecting spill, and can even work 
with more acoustic sources, because the natural sound in the dominant array 
 “You’re usually 
forced to place spot 
mics much closer to their Focus 
instruments than you’d ideally like, 
and to use directional polar patterns 
to reject Backdrop sounds—both 
of which requirements make it 
tougher to capture appealing 
timbres.” 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
299
helps disguise their tonal colorations. Boundary mics are very versatile in 
ensemble contexts too, given that they can be mounted on walls, ﬂ oors, and 
gobos right next to an instrument without reﬂ ections from the nearby surface 
incurring undesirable comb-ﬁ ltering. 
 In pursuit of maximum spill reduction, some people suggest placing mics 
inside instruments, a strategy borrowed from live sound-reinforcement. I’m not 
too keen on this in recording situations, though, simply because the mic sig-
nal then requires heaps of EQ to render the Focus listenable. True, kick drums 
sometimes rely on this approach in rock styles, but inside-miking usually 
makes pitched instruments sound so awful that the cure ends up worse than 
the disease. If everyone can hear the Focus instrument(s) in the room, then you 
shouldn’t need ridiculously low spill levels on that spot array—normal close-
miking, instrument placement, and acoustics dodges should provide ample 
control. Where you’re really ﬁ ghting spill on something like upright bass, harp, 
or acoustic guitar/piano, consider it a message from some higher power that 
you probably need to rethink your working methods! For example, any instru-
ment that’s barely audible on the dominant array should perhaps be moved 
closer in, or else replaced later with an overdub. Alternatively, it may be time 
to question the suitability of that instrumental line-up, or to consider moving 
some instruments into separate isolation rooms (of which more in Chapter 11). 
 By the same token, taking a DI feed from an instrument can also provide a spill-
free Focus, but it won’t give you a huge amount of control over that instrument’s 
balance within the ensemble mix unless the DI signal can stand on its own son-
ically. This is certainly feasible with electric guitars and basses where reamping 
and/or digital amp emulation are available, but the piezo-electric DIs on acous-
tic instruments rarely offer anything like the tone-quality you’d hope for, so I’d 
consider them a last resort for anything but fairly subtle balance adjustments.  
 FIGURE 9.11   
 One way to achieve excellent separation between the vocal and instrument spot mics on a singing 
acoustic guitarist is to use ﬁ gure-eight polar patterns, angling each mic’s deep rejection null to reduce 
the unwanted Backdrop signal. Just take care with the phase/polarity relationship between the spot 
mics—not just the relationship between each spot and the ensemble’s dominant array. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
300
 A SPOT OF SMOKE AND MIRRORS 
 Besides their audio contribution, don’t overlook the psychological effects of spot mics. For some musicians, 
their presence can be intimidating, whereas other performers may suffer bruised egos if they’re denied that 
special attention—indeed, putting up an impressive-looking spot mic in front of a temperamental soloist may 
signifi cantly improve the quality of their performance even if you don’t switch the thing on! And, of course, 
where any musician’s movements are causing distracting sonic inconsistencies on the recording, a dummy 
spot mic may help to anchor them more fi rmly into position. 
 9.4.2    Stereo Imaging Considerations 
 If your dominant array delivers a convincing stereo image, then you don’t 
want any spot arrays messing with that. The best way to guard against this is 
to repeatedly toggle the Mute buttons of each spot array while listening for 
image-shifts in the monitor mix. With single-mic spots, stereo alignment can 
be carried out with simple pan adjustments, but with stereo spot arrays, pan-
ning is only part of the process, because they capture some stereo information 
directly. My recommendation here is to set the spot array’s acceptance angle 
according to the width of the Focus, not the width of the entire ensemble. 
Although this means you’ll likely have to reduce the array’s image width using 
your pan controls to match that of the dominant array, it usually makes it 
easier to ﬁ nd a good match in practice. Just be wary of overemphasizing out-
of-acceptance Backdrop pickup in this case if you’re using wide mutual angles 
with a coincident or near-coincident stereo spot rig. 
 However, matching the position of each spot system’s Focus with the imag-
ing in the dominant array isn’t the end of the story either, because Backdrop 
pickup on each array can cause imaging side-effects too. For example, if you 
place a spot mic on the cello of a string-quartet recording, heavy viola spill 
on that mic would have the effect of pulling the viola toward the cello’s stereo 
position. Faced with such a situation, you have to decide whether there are any 
further steps you can take to reduce the viola spill in the Backdrop—perhaps 
by bafﬂ ing one side of the spot mic, moving the spot mic closer to the cello, 
or switching to a more directional polar pattern. In some cases, though, there 
may be little you can do to combat the image-shift without excessive damage 
to the ensemble timbre, in which case the stereo anomaly simply becomes the 
price you pay for extra control over the cello. 
 However, you can sometimes reduce Backdrop-driven image-shift by using 
stereo spot arrays in place of single mics. Imagine if you spot-miked our cello 
in stereo instead, such that it appeared in the center of the spot array’s full-
width stereo image and the viola spill appeared to be emanating from well off 
to one side. If you gave both these mics the same pan setting (in other words, 
treating them like a mono multimic setup) to match them with the apparent 
positioning of the cello in the dominant array, you’d get the same kind of viola 
image-shift as with a single mic; but if you offset the panning of the two mics 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
301
equally either side of that position-matched setting, the 
viola would shift back toward its natural position. 
This kind of trick is particularly handy where solo-
ists are placed at the front of an ensemble (for 
example with a lounge jazz singer or a clas-
sical concerto soloist), because it gives you 
much more freedom to ride the spot array’s 
level dynamically during the mixdown without 
modulating the recording’s overall stereo width. 
However, you do need to exercise some care with 
this technique if the soloist moves a lot, otherwise 
their proximity to the stereo spot array may exagger-
ate those movements to the point of absurdity in the loud-
speaker panorama.
 As far as choosing speciﬁ c stereo methods for spot arrays is concerned, the 
recommendations I made when discussing depth-perspective compensation 
within a dominant array (see Section 9.3.3) still hold true, but I’d also advise 
against using any crossed ﬁ gure-eight rig when you’re miking close in amongst 
the players, because of its reversed-image rear pickup. When you’re mik-
ing a broad source, such as a choir, a multimic curtain of spaced directional 
microphones will usually give you a better combination of Focus balance and 
Backdrop rejection than any traditional two-mic rig. 
 9.4.3  Spotting for Tone 
 Most of the time spot mics are used simply to adjust an ensemble’s natural 
balance, which puts the onus on the engineer to avoid unwanted timbral 
changes occurring when spot-array faders are moved at mixdown. Typically, 
this means:
 
■
 matching the tone of the spot array’s Focus instrument/section with the 
sound heard in the dominant array, preferably with minimal EQ so that 
you avoid mangling the tone of Backdrop instruments; 
 
■
 ﬁ nding a polarity/phase relationship between the dominant and spot arrays 
which renders inevitable comb-ﬁ ltering effects between them as pleasant as 
possible—both for the spot rig’s Focus instruments and for any instruments 
prominent in its Backdrop signal. 
 Spot rigs can also perform a more tonal role, though, if you deliberately 
design/process the spot array to correct or enhance the timbre of speciﬁ c 
ensemble instruments (although this necessarily reduces the usefulness of such 
a spot system for pure level adjustment). For example, many engineers like to 
retain the transient snap of percussion instruments at the rear of an ensem-
ble (a swing band’s drum kit, say, or an  avant garde  orchestral percussion sec-
tion) and low frequencies often need tailoring in small-studio recordings to 
compensate for unhelpful room resonances and lesser-quality instruments/
ampliﬁ ers. Shawn Murphy 20 is circumspect about the beneﬁ ts of heavy-handed 
 “When you’re 
miking a broad source, 
such as a choir, a multimic 
curtain of spaced directional 
microphones will usually give you 
a better combination of Focus 
balance and Backdrop rejection 
than any traditional two-
mic rig.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
302
processing, though: “If you crank a lot of EQ on the individual instruments,” 
he says, “it alters the characteristic of the leakage, so you’re ﬁ ghting the fact that 
in order to make the direct sound right on a certain mic, you’ve got badly EQ’d 
leakage to deal with.” Because of this, drastic EQ also makes spill reduction 
more critical (with all the sonic compromises that may entail), so I’d suggest 
chasing your target sound as hard as you can with careful mic technique before 
dialing in any processing. “Usually the cure for something not sounding right,” 
adds Murphy, “is to take the EQ off.” 
 Tweaking polarity/phase relationships between the spots and the dominant 
array is another valid tonal tool, albeit one that’s heavily reliant on the instru-
ments remaining stationary—ﬁ ne perhaps when you’re recording a rock drum 
kit and three electric guitar/bass cabs, but much less advisable on acoustic ses-
sions. Whatever means you use to sculpt per-instrument tone in a dominant 
array setup, however, the naturalistic dominant-array capture will inevitably 
restrict your creative scope. Where you crave greater artistic license, the peer-
array method explained in Chapter 10 becomes more appropriate. 
 9.4.4    Dealing with Depth Perspective 
 Because spot arrays are usually drier-sounding than the dominant array, chang-
ing the level of any spot mic may also change the dry/wet ratio (and thereby 
the apparent distance from the listener) of its Focus instrument/section. 
In some cases this may be exactly what you want—it’s certainly part of the 
appeal of drum-kit spot mics for mainstream mix engineers who want to cram 
 LOW-FREQUENCY CORRECTIONS FOR SPOT ARRAYS 
 Although I suggest trying to avoid equalization when recording ensembles with the dominant-array approach, 
the very nature of spot-miking can introduce low-end aberrations which even purists will use EQ to correct. For 
example, close-miking with directional mics will often incur considerable proximity-effect bass boost, especially 
with fi gure-eight polar patterns, and directional mics are also more sensitive to unwanted physical vibrations 
transmitted through their mic stands. A variable high-pass fi lter can deal with both these issues pretty swiftly. 
 The other problem, though, is that any spot mic’s Backdrop signal will tend to have an overabundance of 
sub-500 Hz frequencies, because anything higher up the spectrum is dispersed fairly directionally by most 
instruments (as we saw in Chapter 6), and is more easily absorbed by physical obstructions in transit. The off-
axis dulling effect of most mics (especially cardioid-family ones) only compounds the issue. As a result, it’s very 
common for engineers to shave a little low end off their spot mics. A high-pass fi lter isn’t that useful in this role, 
because its attenuation increases as you move down the spectrum, so a type of EQ called a “low-frequency 
shelving fi lter” (or “low shelf” to its chums) is a better choice, because it cuts everything below its nominal 
frequency by a similar amount (determined by a gain control). I normally set a shelving fi lter to around 100–
300 Hz for this application (because almost all EQ designs have a residual effect on frequencies a little above 
their nominal frequency) and wouldn’t suggest using any more than about 3–4 dB of cut for this reason unless 
you’re looking to thin out the spot array’s Focus timbre into the bargain. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
303
the kick and snare right up the listener’s nose! 
However, assuming that your dominant array 
already gives the entire ensemble a fairly 
representative front–back depth, you 
probably don’t want your spot array’s 
Focus instrument(s) to shimmy closer 
to the listener whenever you fade up 
those mics—especially if you’re plan-
ning to correct ensemble imbalances 
dynamically as the music progresses.
 One solution to this is to add artiﬁ cial 
reverb to each spot array, keeping the dry/
wet ratio more consistent as faders are moved. 
Ideally I like to do this in the monitor mix while 
recording, but you can also perfectly well leave it until mix-
down, so I won’t delve into the thorny subject of reverb processing in any great 
depth here. If you want to dip a toe in the water, though, here are the most 
salient points:
 
■
 Feed the reverb from post-fader sends on your spot-array monitor channels, 
and make sure the effects processor is set so that it doesn’t pass any unpro-
cessed signals (i.e., make sure it’s set to “100% wet”). 
 
■
 Take care choosing an initial preset, avoiding unnatural-sounding emula-
tions of vintage devices such as mechanical plate/spring reverb units. Try to 
choose stereo reverb presets which seem to match the acoustic characteris-
tics of the recording room (as captured via the dominant array)—this can 
take quite a bit of patch-surﬁ ng, so stick at it! 
 
■
 Find out how to adjust the length of the reverb’s decay, because this is the 
most common parameter you’re likely to want to change. 
 
■
 In practice it’s usually easier to work with two reverbs than one: Use an “early 
reﬂ ections” or “ambience” patch without any discernable effect “tail” as the 
primary means of pushing the spot array’s Focus instrument(s) backwards in 
the depth perspective; and use a longer “room” or “hall” patch to increase 
the sense of size and sustain for Focus instruments if necessary.  
 But artiﬁ cial reverb may not adequately distance the Focus instrument(s) if 
your spot-mic signals precede the dominant-array signals in time (as discussed 
in Section 7.2.3). With smaller ensembles that are set up within about 10 feet 
(3 m) of the front of your dominant array, this effect will often prove weak 
enough to ignore, but with larger ensembles it usually pays to delay the spot 
arrays to roughly compensate. I say “roughly” here for several reasons: Firstly, 
it’s impossible to compensate accurately for both Focus and Backdrop sources 
at the same time; secondly, with ensemble recordings it’s rarely straightforward 
to judge exact timing offsets using the polarity-inversion trick in 7.2.3 or by 
comparing waveform displays, because dominant-array and spot-array signals 
will be quite different in character; and, thirdly, you won’t be able to exactly 
 “Because spot 
arrays are usually drier-
sounding than the dominant array, 
changing the level of any spot mic may 
also change the dry/wet ratio of its Focus 
instrument. In some cases this may be 
exactly what you want—it’s certainly part of 
the appeal of drum-kit spot mics where 
you want to cram the kick and 
snare right up the listener’s 
nose!” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
304
time-align off-center spot arrays to any dominant array that incorporates wide-
spaced mics such as outriggers. Hence, my preferred method is to drag a tape-
measure from each spot rig over to the dominant array’s center-front point and 
use that to approximate the delay amount. 
 If the array’s Focus happens to be something that doesn’t move around (a 
drum kit, guitar amp, or piano, say), then I’ll stick with the same “meter per 
3 ms” estimation I used in Section 9.3.3, because that’s where the tightest 
phase-match is likely to be found. However, where a spot array’s Focus is some-
thing that moves around during the performance, then there’s a good argu-
ment for using slightly longer delay times instead. To understand why this is, 
 THE 3:1 RULE 
 An oft-quoted principle of ensemble miking is the “3:1 Rule,” which states that a spot array should be placed 
three times closer to its Focus instrument(s) than to any Backdrop instrument. The assertion is that this keeps 
spill from Backdrop instruments roughly 10 dB below the level of the Focus, so that it doesn’t cause too much 
mischief at the mix. What a lot of people don’t realize about the 3:1 Rule, though, is that it’s based around the 
following assumptions:
 
■
 That the instruments in question project all their frequencies equally in all directions. No instrument does 
this, as we saw in Part 2. 
 
■
 That the Focus and Backdrop instruments are equally loud. This is rarely the case—indeed, the whole point 
of using spot arrays in many cases is to support Focus instruments that are quieter than those around 
them. 
 
■
 That the mics pick up all frequencies equally in all directions. Even the best omni microphones don’t do 
this, and defi nitely not cheap directional types. 
 
■
 That the mic signals are balanced at identical levels. This is only likely when the two instruments 
already balance correctly—but if you’re using spot mics at all, then it’s often because there are balance 
problems. 
 
■
 That you’re recording in mid-air, without a fl oor, ceiling, and walls refl ecting sound back into the mics. 
Admittedly, this one might apply to you if your studio is in an anechoic chamber. Or a hot-air balloon. 
Anyone? 
 But it’s not just these issues that call the 3:1 Rule into question for me, its also that I don’t think there can 
be a “correct” spill level for any spot mic, because the amount of spill is just one variable amongst many that 
infl uence your mic-positioning decisions, and each engineer will have their own opinion regarding how much 
comb-fi ltering between mics is acceptable. Leaving the theory aside, though, I just don’t fi nd the 3:1 Rule much 
practical use in real recording situations. Granted, it maybe offers beginners the fl imsiest of guidelines for initial 
mic setup, but I wouldn’t suggest giving the 3:1 Rule much credence once you’re on the session, because it’s 
only your ears that can tell you whether you’ve got too much spill or not. 
 Incidentally, some engineers defi ne the 3:1 rule differently: that the distance between any two spot arrays 
should be at least three times the distance between either spot array and its respective Focus instrument(s). 
To my mind this variant is even less useful, because the amount of spill picked up then depends much more 
heavily on the specifi c layout of the performers—for example, if you were independently spot-miking two 
musicians, following this version of the 3:1 rule would give you much less spill for mic positions between the 
musicians than it would in setups where either musician was between the spot mics. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
305
imagine you’ve miked up a big-band with a simple XY 
dominant pair and have then set up a spot mic for 
the saxophone, delaying the spot mic so that its 
sax signal is phase-matched very closely with 
the sax signal in the dominant pair. This will 
give you a clear saxophone sound with mini-
mal comb-ﬁ ltering. However, if the saxophon-
ist destroys the phase-alignment by moving, 
you suddenly get a big tonal change as the 
mics start properly comb-ﬁ ltering against each 
other. By contrast, if you delay the saxophone’s 
spot mic  past  the point where its sax signal phase-
matches with the dominant XY pair, you’ll get a certain 
amount of comb-ﬁ ltering the whole time. In other words, when 
the saxophonist moves, we hear a selection of different comb-ﬁ ltering varia-
tions, which won’t be as strong a subjective effect as the transition between 
unﬁ ltered and ﬁ ltered tones (as we had when the spot mic was set for a tight 
phase-match). How much additional delay you use in this scenario is open to 
debate, and will depend on tonal considerations of course, but I’d say 10–25% 
is a pretty sensible range.
 One side-effect of close-miking that can’t be corrected by artiﬁ cial reverb or 
delay-compensation is the unnatural emphasis that’s often given to a Focus 
instrument/section’s high frequencies, especially where musically unrelated 
mechanical noises are concerned—a particularly troublesome problem with 
bass-register instruments such as bassoons and upright basses. Equalization 
can be a godsend here, so don’t be afraid to apply several decibels of high-
frequency shelving cut to any spot array for this reason. “High frequencies 
make something sound closer,” explains Reinhold Mack, 21 “and less high 
frequency tends to [move things] further back.” 
 Before we leave the issue of front–back perspective, it’s worth pointing out 
that depth realism is the aspect of commercial recordings that is most com-
monly jettisoned when compromises have to be made. For example, instru-
ments will often hurtle merrily backwards and forwards in recorded ﬁ lm 
scores as a byproduct of extreme rebalancing of thematic material or dramatic 
sound effects, or because of changing perspectives in the visual imagery. Pre-
digital classical recordings are replete with unusual depth perspectives too, 
partly because unusual ensemble layouts (harps by the conductor, say) were 
commonly used to improve balance, and partly because tools for compensat-
ing for spot-array depth distortion (e.g., delay/reverb processing and multi-
track recording/mixdown) didn’t become widespread until the 1970s. Even on 
modern recordings, the logistics and timescale demands of location record-
ing, especially for broadcast, will frequently militate against the use of detailed 
depth-adjustment techniques on spot mics. So if you need to get results in 
a hurry with limited gear, depth presentation is probably the aspect of your 
recording which will best tolerate any unavoidable corner-cutting.
 “One side-effect of 
close-miking that can’t be 
corrected by artifi cial reverb or 
delay-compensation is the unnatural 
emphasis that’s often given to a 
Focus instrument’s high frequencies, 
especially where musically 
unrelated mechanical noises 
are concerned.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
306
 9.4.5    How Should my Spot Mics Sound? 
 Because there are so many factors involved in choosing and using spot mics, 
there’s a lot of confusion amongst the small-studio community about how they 
should actually sound. The ﬁ rst thing to set straight is that any assumption that 
a certain spot mic (say a drum kit’s snare-drum mic) should always have a cer-
tain sound is unhelpful, to say the least. What’s important is how each spot 
array reacts  when combined with the dominant array —and indeed with any other 
spots. In this respect, the biggest trap you can fall into is passing judgment on 
spot arrays when they’re soloed. Soloing a spot array can be useful for homing 
in on a broadly appropriate sound, because you can hear the effects of setup 
and processing tweaks in isolation, but it’s vital that you treat what you hear in 
solo mode as provisional, postponing ﬁ nal decisions until you can scrutinize 
how the spot array interacts with the rest of the ensemble setup. 
 As when setting up a dominant array, there are a lot of different things to 
listen for when judging the effectiveness of any given spot array, so it helps 
 WHAT’S IN A NAME? 
 One thing that confuses a lot of people when learning about ensemble recording is that a number of the terms 
used to describe miking techniques apply more to a mic’s positioning than to its actual purpose in the mix. 
Foremost amongst the culprits is the term “outriggers.” For example, in an orchestral recording:
 
■
 the microphones designed to supplement a central stereo setup by picking up the edges of the ensemble 
better (as discussed in Section 9.3.3) are usually called outriggers. These form an integral part of the 
dominant array, and are often selected to match the central rig’s dry/wet ratio and overall tonality. They are 
unlikely to be processed or delayed independently. 
 
■
 omni outriggers might be used to bolster the low end and spaciousness of a central stereo setup that’s 
reliant on directional mics, again as an integral part of the dominant array (see Section 9.3.4). These mics 
will already sound wetter than the central array because they’re less directional, but some engineers will 
increase this wetness, giving the outriggers more the character of room mics. Again, this kind of outrigger 
would rarely be processed or delayed independently, but is more likely to have its level tweaked (subtly!) 
during playback to adapt the apparent width and reverberance of the space to different orchestral textures. 
 
■
 sometimes the outriggers might be operating as string-section spot mics, rather than forming part of 
the dominant array. In this case directional polar patterns and closer mic placement would make sense, 
and you’d be much more likely to use unmatched mics or apply processing such as EQ, delay, and reverb 
to tackle timbre and depth concerns. If the purpose of these spot mics was for balance control, then it 
wouldn’t be unusual for their faders to be ridden over a range of 6 dB or so during the music. 
 This isn’t the only ambiguous term, though, by any means. Some of what might be called “spot mics” within an 
ensemble may actually be integral to the dominant array, as a means of redressing the overall depth-distortion 
of a main stereo rig placed at the front of the ensemble (a technique we talked about in the latter half of 
Section 9.3.3). In a similar vein, the “overheads” in a drum-miking setup might be the dominant array for miking 
this one-player ensemble, but they are just as often treated as cymbal spot mics. 
 The upshot of this terminological tangle, as far as students of microphone technique are concerned, is that you have 
to be very careful how you interpret advice from other engineers. So if someone recommends a certain brand of 
overhead mic, say, on the basis that they like it for cymbal close-miking, you might not want to give that suggestion 
too much weight if you prefer using your overheads as a dominant array to capture the sound of the whole kit. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
307
to structure the task by asking yourself questions very similar to those listed at 
the start of Section 9.2:
 
■
 How does it affect the level?  Where you want to rebalance the Focus 
instrument/section, check you can do this sufﬁ ciently without also imbal-
ancing Backdrop instruments. If you can’t, you may need to reduce the spot 
array’s spill levels or adjust your polarity/phase settings.  
 
■
 How does it affect the tone?  If your spot system is for rebalancing purposes, 
then toggle the array’s Mute buttons to check for unacceptable tonal dam-
age of either Focus or Backdrop instruments. (Remember that the degree of 
comb-ﬁ ltering will depend on the spot array’s mix level, so this judgment 
should be made within the context of an appropriate range of fader set-
tings.) Where your spot array is designed to adjust the Focus timbre, you’ll 
want to insure this isn’t at the expense of unintended consequences for 
Backdrop instruments. Dealing with this question satisfactorily may involve 
a combination of miking tweaks, polarity/phase adjustment, and EQ.  
 
■
 How does it affect the depth?  Should toggling the array’s Mute button 
bring the Focus closer, and if so by how much? Does the Focus’s front–back 
position vary too much if the spot array’s fader is ridden in real time? When 
you’re not happy with what you hear in these cases, you might turn to com-
pensating delays, artiﬁ cial reverb, and/or EQ for a solution. 
 
■
 How does it affect the imaging?  Toggle the array’s Mute buttons to check 
for stereo image-shifts, adjusting your stereo setup and pan controls accord-
ingly. Don’t just listen to the Focus, though, because Backdrop instruments 
may also move noticeably, depending on spill levels.  
 9.4.6  Small is Beautiful 
 The beauty of the dominant-array recording approach for budget-conscious 
engineers is that it allows you to capture even quite large-scale ensembles with 
comparatively minimal gear, but simple setups may retain their attraction even 
where money is no object. Here’s Michael Bishop, 22 for instance: “I always 
look for the imaging across the orchestra that lets me feel where each musician 
is on stage. Use of spot mics pretty much destroys that.” Whether or not you 
subscribe to this view, or indeed any audiophile notion that simpler recording 
setups inherently sound better, the speed with which you can achieve results by 
streamlining your approach is another important beneﬁ t of smaller-scale sys-
tems, leaving you more time to deal with the musicians on your sessions. 
 Keeping the technological paraphernalia to a minimum is frequently a ques-
tion of psychology too, as Tony Faulkner 23 explains: “Keep it simple and you’ll 
make friends with a lot of orchestral players who do not enjoy a [spot mic], 
stand, and cable in each of their faces while they are trying to play… You’ll also 
probably make friends with the conductor if you use fewer mics, for at least 
two good reasons. First, if he/she sees a lot of microphones he/she will suspect 
(correctly) that you’ll be messing after the event with his/her careful balance. 
Second, if the stage is full of stands and cables it is a pain in the neck for the 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
308
players and especially the conductor to get to/from 
their place if they are walking through the string 
section.”
 So overall, I’d urge you to resist the temp-
tation to put up more mics just because 
you have the hardware. Even though 
the amateur ensembles and quirky 
recording spaces typically used for low-
budget projects frequently justify multi-
mic approaches, my ﬁ rm opinion is that 
most small-studio engineers get better results 
by erring on the side of simpler setups, because 
this allows them to concentrate more on the mic 
placement, the acoustics, the musicians, the perfor-
mances, and the music. 
 9.5    SOME CASE STUDIES 
 Ensemble recording can be a bit daunting for newcomers, because there are 
so many things to weigh up when planning and executing a session. So what 
I’d like to do now is bring the whole discussion back to earth by walking you 
through the thought processes I might follow when tackling a couple of differ-
ent dominant-array recordings using typical small-studio resources. 
 Let’s set the parameters ﬁ rst. We’ll say I have the following motley selection of 
mics to work with:
 
■
 One Shure SM58 and two Shure SM57s. These cardioid dynamic mics typi-
cally cost less than $120/£100 each. 
 
■
 A pair of SE Electronics SE1A small-diaphragm cardioid condensers (under 
$400/£300). 
 
■
 The Cascade Victor, one of the new breed of budget-friendly ribbon mics, 
priced around $200/£160. 
 
■
 AKG’s D112 cardioid dynamic mic (under $200/£150) and a C414B XLS 
large-diaphragm multi-pattern condenser mic (around $1000/£1600). 
 
■
 A $150/£100 large-diaphragm cardioid mic of questionable quality and 
with no published speciﬁ cations. We’ll not name names, but I’m sure you 
know the kind of mic I’m talking about…  
 In addition I have six mic stands, a small stereo bar, a handful of screw-on mic-
mounting clamps, a couple of thick old quilts, and a few random scraps of 
acoustic foam. Sound familiar? Right, let’s get to work! 
 9.5.1    A Drumkit 
 I’ve been asked to capture a fairly natural-sounding drum sound for a laid-
back indie-rock production, and I decide to use the dominant-array approach, 
although I’m aware from listening to releases by some of the band’s inﬂ uences 
 “Even though 
amateur ensembles and 
quirky recording spaces frequently 
justify multimic approaches, most 
small-studio engineers get better results 
by erring on the side of simpler setups 
which allow them to concentrate more on 
the mic placement, the acoustics, the 
musicians, the performances, 
and the music.” 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
309
 FIGURE 9.12   
 Some technical information about the speciﬁ c microphones featured in Sections 9.5 and 10.3. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
310
that I’ll probably need to use spot mics on all the drums to produce the required 
presence in the mix. Turning up to a band rehearsal, I see that the kit setup is 
fairly conventional, with the odd extra cymbal, but that the hi-hat’s set quite low, 
so I ask the drummer whether he’d be happy raising it at all if we want to reduce 
hi-hat spill on the snare close-mic. We also chat about whether a slightly deeper 
snare tone might work better, and agree that tuning it down a little seems to make 
it fuller-sounding. Because of the rehearsal room’s low ceiling and carpeted walls, 
we plan to record one weekend at a local warehouse that has a more spacious and 
reﬂ ective environment. The drummer’s not keen on recording to a click, but I ask 
the band to agree tempos in advance so that we can at least start each take consis-
tently, increasing the likelihood of us being able to edit between takes. 
 I want time-difference spaciousness from my dominant array, so I plan to put 
my only stereo pair (the SE1As) in a non-coincident setup, treating the snare 
as the center of the stereo picture (i.e., putting it equidistant from both mics). 
I’ll set up a single stand just behind the drummer with its boom roughly hori-
zontal, and then I can use screw-on clamps to ﬁ x the two mics in position. 
To balance the snare’s high frequencies and overall level with the cymbals 
(which will be closer to the mics) I decide to point the cardioid polar pat-
terns directly at the drum as an AB pair, rather than going for any kind of near-
coincident setup. To supplement this stereo rig, I’ll try putting the ribbon 
mic on the other side of the kit facing the kick drum, to try to compensate 
for inherent kick-drum weakness/distance in the overhead pair (see Section 
9.3.3); to catch more of the shell-tone from the other drums (in other words, 
multi-miking those instruments from different angles to catch more of their 
frequency dispersion, as discussed in Section 7.2.1); to ﬁ ll out the harder tim-
bre of the small-diaphragm condensers with the smoother ribbon ﬂ avor; and 
to provide a more solid center to the spaced-pair stereo image. For spot-miking 
individual drums, I decide to go for dynamic models across the board for their 
chunkier sound, knowing that I should be able to rely on the overheads for 
general realism: The D112 goes on the kick; an SM57 on snare; another SM57 
covering both rack toms; and an SM58 on the ﬂ oor tom. The C414B I’ll use as 
a room mic (clipped to a chair, given that all six stands are already accounted 
for), because it’s quiet and has polar-pattern control, and I’ll keep the cheapo 
condenser in reserve in case I need another mic for anything else. 
 On the session, the ﬁ rst job once the drummer arrives is to walk around with 
his kick and snare to ﬁ nd a promising-sounding location, whereupon we set 
up the kit. The lower rack tom seems to ring longer than the others, so a little 
retuning is required there, and a strip of gaffer helps zap one rather odd metal-
lic resonance from the snare without sucking the life out of it. Balancing the 
SE1As and ribbon against each other proves the most critical part of the mic 
setup. First I try to get a suitable balance and depth across the kit. Here the 
AB pair seem to work pretty well, but I need to reposition the ribbon mic sev-
eral times to get the kick, toms, and cymbals reasonably evenly balanced. At 
that point I reﬁ ne the stereo width a little (with reference to some commercial 
releases, because we’re working on headphones) while checking the AB pair’s 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
311
mono-compatibility, and then see whether ﬁ ner mic positions and further 
phase/polarity tweaks can improve the tonal combination of the three mics. 
During this whole process, it becomes clear that the hi-hat is coming across a 
little too strongly on the dominant array, so I do a test recording and ask the 
drummer to have a listen. He doesn’t have any other hi-hats with him, but says 
he may be able to adjust his playing to deal with this, and I decide to hang 
my quilts on the nearby wall on that side of the kit as an additional measure. 
I allow the dominant array to be a little on the dry side, so that the room mic 
will give a bit of control over the kit’s apparent dry/wet level at the mix. The 
C414B is set to its ﬁ gure-eight pattern so that I can use the null to reject the 
direct kit sound, and then I look for a spot in the room where I get a good 
low–midrange body to the drums, while avoiding excessive hi-hat pickup. 
 All this takes some time, but pays off with a pretty creditable dominant-array 
capture that needs comparatively little level from the spot mics. In order to 
get passable snare and tom sounds, I keep their close mics at least 4–6 inches 
(10–15 cm) away, with the rack-tom mic placed between the two toms to catch 
them equally. By moving the hi-hat a little higher, I’m able to gaffer some 
acoustic foam on one side of the snare close mic to take some edge off the hi-
hat spill, just in case hi-hat balance concerns re-emerge later. Although the kick 
drum’s resonant head has a hole cut in it, I nonetheless mike from just outside 
the drum to get a less “caricatured” sound, reﬁ ning the amount of beater click 
captured through the hole by angling the mic. I don’t bother delay-compensat-
ing any of the spot mics, given that a comparatively upfront drum sound is in 
keeping with the genre, but I do make sure to experiment with polarity inver-
sion in each case for the most appealing tone. While doing this I ﬁ rst check 
each spot microphone in solo to listen for any Backdrop instrument that’s 
obviously awful-sounding—an activity that demands some adjustment of the 
ﬂ oor-tom spot mic because of its cymbals Backdrop. 
 If I’d found myself pressed for time, I’d probably just have guessed the room-
mic and spot-mic positions, knowing that the ﬁ nal production sonics would 
depend mostly on the dominant array, and that the side-effects of any heavy 
remedial mixdown processing would be conﬁ ned to the low-level spot signals. 
In fact,  in extremis  I’d probably even have got away with postponing stereo-
width and polarity/phase adjustments of the dominant-array mics until mix-
down if I’d had to hit the Record button very early on in the session, as long 
as I’d been able to record all those mic signals on separate recorder tracks. Not 
that I’d suggest taking either of those shortcuts out of choice, of course, because 
the session time saved wouldn’t be worth the disproportionate increase in mix-
ing workload unless it resulted in an utterly blistering drum take. 
 9.5.2  A Chamber Orchestra 
 As a second case study, let’s imagine I wanted to record a college orches-
tra playing something like a Mozart symphony—nothing very large-scale, 
mostly just strings and woodwind, plus a couple of French horns, a couple 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
312
of trumpets, and some timpani. I’ve heard them play the piece in an end-of-
term concert, and will be recording them in the same room: the college’s main 
assembly hall. Without the audience in the room, its gymnasium-grade reverb 
gets rather overwhelming, so I suggest moving the orchestra off the dais/stage 
(where they performed the concert) and setting them up in the hall, so I can 
then close the heavy stage curtains to dry things up a bit. I also plan to sit 
the orchestra with their backs to the curtain so that directional mics pointing 
toward the back of the orchestra reject reverb from the live end of the hall. 
 FIGURE 9.13   
 A diagram illustrating this chapter’s ﬁ rst case-study setup, as described in Section 9.5.1. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
313
 Although the SE1As are my only mic pair, I’m concerned the small-diaphragms 
will give the strings in particular a rather scratchy sound, so I do a pre-session 
test comparing them against an MS rig comprising the C414B-XLS in subcardioid 
mode and the ﬁ gure-eight ribbon mic—the latter array isn’t as hot on imaging 
(even after some high-end lift for the ribbon mic), but feels much smoother in 
tone, so I go for that. However, the coincident setup lacks spaciousness, so I add 
the SE1As into the dominant array as wide-spaced outriggers to combat that, with 
the intention of setting them a few feet further back from the MS pair to give a 
super-wide and more ambient signal that I can blend in as a subtle supplement. 
 By jury-rigging two boom arms onto the same mic-stand base, I’m able 
to raise a stereo bar with the MS rig above 7 feet (2.1 m) into the air while 
retaining reasonable stability (with the help of a few sandbags!) and have also 
asked the caretakers about borrowing some of the lightweight stacking tables 
that are sitting at the back of the room in case I need more height. Each of 
the outriggers has its own stand, which leaves three stands left over for spot-
miking—although none of the remaining mic choices ﬁ lls me with tremen-
dous enthusiasm in that respect. In the end, I decide to set up the cheapy 
large-diaphragm condenser on the ﬂ ute and oboe, as they had a little trouble 
projecting at times during the concert, but otherwise I resolve just to do as well 
as I can by rejigging the ensemble itself. 
 On the session, I ﬁ nd a reasonable dry/wet balance on the MS rig at around 5 
feet (1.5 m) behind the conductor, and decide against raising the stand on a 
table so that the strings stay strong in the balance. However, adjusting the level 
of the MS rig’s ribbon mic for a suitable width seems to distance the woodwind 
at the center of the picture rather too much, so I switch the C414B to its cardioid 
polar pattern instead, which makes for better center-versus-edge balance for the 
given acceptance angle. While moving the mics slightly backward to restore my 
previous overall reverb level, I also experiment with a couple of alternate mik-
ing heights to see what the tonal ramiﬁ cations are. Listening to the outriggers, 
I decide to raise them up on the tables and angle them roughly parallel to the 
ﬂ oor in order to warm the strings a little (by virtue of the mics’ off-axis response). 
Mixing the two pairs together isn’t initially a roaring success (overblown width 
and some nasty comb-ﬁ ltering between the mics), but I persevere, narrowing the 
spacing a couple of times until I manage to get something that combines pretty 
well with the MS rig at moderate mix levels and doesn’t sound horrid in mono. 
 While reﬁ ning the dominant array in the hall, a couple of ensemble problems 
become increasingly apparent. Firstly, the timpani sound rather strident and 
overbearing, so I have a quick word with the conductor, play her a snippet of 
test recording to demonstrate what I mean, and she then decides to investigate 
some alternate mallets. While this is going on, I attend to the second issue, 
upending a couple of tables behind the French horn player (one of the two 
players has called in sick!) to reﬂ ect more of its high-end into the main mics—
the drapes behind it were making it sound rather mufﬂ ed in the dominant 
array, and the single instrument now needs some help in the balance anyway. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
314
While I’m over there, I move the spot mic a little closer to the oboes, but 
angled more toward the ﬂ utes, to try to get a better level/tone balance between 
the instruments. Another quick test recording conﬁ rms that these dodges have 
made a useful improvement, and we also decide to change the angle of the 
trumpets slightly, so as to mellow their tone on the MS rig. 
 At which point we need to start recording, so I have to do a couple of remain-
ing tweaks to that spot mic in the gaps between the ﬁ rst few takes, and I also 
throw up the D112 spot on the bassoon as well—not a tremendously reﬁ ned 
choice, but good enough for a bit more low end once I’ve cut away some of the 
highs with EQ. 
 FIGURE 9.14    
 A diagram illustrating 
this chapter’s second 
case-study setup, 
as described in 
Section 9.5.2. 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
315
 9.5.3  The New Orthodoxy 
 So what can you take away from these case studies? Well, the ﬁ rst thing to 
highlight is that you’re unlikely to ﬁ nd either of the above 
recording conﬁ gurations described as a “standard 
studio setup,” by any stretch of the imagina-
tion. That really shouldn’t be surprising, 
though, given that neither of them has 
much in common with any stan-
dard professional recording situa-
tion—the way Abbey Road deploy 
a ﬂ eet of vintage Neumanns to 
record the London Symphony 
Orchestra has precious little bear-
ing on how I best use a handful 
of budget mics to serve an amateur 
ensemble playing mediocre instru-
ments in a school hall! Getting decent 
results in project studios is all about 
unorthodox measures, because most orthodox 
techniques were developed with expensive profes-
sional setups in mind.
 I’d also like to make it absolutely clear that these case studies are entirely hypo-
thetical, and not designed to be some kind of template for your own small-
studio recording. What I’m trying to illustrate is how planning and executing 
an ensemble recording session is about suiting your working methods to the 
facilities you have and the immediate needs of the session. For example, I’d 
expect to completely rethink Section 9.5.1’s drum-miking setup if I traded in 
the Victor ribbon mic, D112, and SM58 for an extra C414B-XLS. Or if I had 
to set up in a living room. Or if one of the small-diaphragm mics died on me 
during setup. Or if the combination of the small-diaphragm condensers and 
the ribbon just happened to sound terrible, however many good experiences 
I’d had with it in the past. Or if the drummer hit his cymbals too hard. Or if 
I only had four mic inputs on my audio interface. Or if…There’s no end to 
the variations, and ultimately it’s the way you adapt your recording technique 
to each of them that primarily determines the quality of the recording. If you 
only ever stick to someone else’s tried-and-trusted setup, you’ll never actually 
work out how to get the best results from your own limited collection of small-
studio gear. 
 Finally, when resources are scarce, do at least use all the tools at your disposal, 
not just the studio gear. It doesn’t cost any money to change the ensemble 
layout, to ask musicians to adjust their playing, or to use spare bits of furni-
ture as impromptu acoustics devices, so there’s no excuse for overlooking these 
things when you’re short on cash—especially as they’re often the quickest 
route to big improvements anyway. 
 “The way Abbey Road 
deploy a fl eet of vintage 
Neumanns to record the London 
Symphony Orchestra has precious little 
bearing on how I best use a handful of budget 
mics to serve an amateur ensemble playing 
mediocre instruments in a school hall! Getting 
decent results in project studios is all about 
unorthodox measures, because most 
orthodox techniques were developed 
with expensive professional 
setups in mind.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
316
 9.6    MONITORING AND SIGHTLINES 
 I’ve already underlined how important it is that individual performers can 
hear what they need while overdubbing, and that’s no different in an ensem-
ble situation: The better any group of musicians can hear each other (and any 
backing cue mix you’re using), the better they’ll play together. If you have the 
hardware for it, there’s nothing stopping you giving every musician their own 
headphones with an independent headphone mix, in which case the previous 
chapters have already covered everything you need to know—just scale every-
thing up! Honestly, though, that kind of monitoring setup is the last thing I’d 
recommend for the majority of small-studio setups, for several reasons:
 
■
 It’s tremendously gear-hungry: Four musicians will need four separate 
auxiliary sends, four separate outputs from your recording system, four 
independent channels of headphone ampliﬁ cation, four suitable pairs of 
headphones—and probably various mains/headphone extension leads as 
well. I’d rather spend more money on mics…  
 
■
 It’s a big logistical headache, leaving you less session time for sorting out 
the microphones. If you’re ﬂ ying solo on the engineering side (which most 
small-studio engineers are), you need additional complications like you 
need a hole in the head! 
 
■
 Headphones can easily hinder communication between members of an 
ensemble both during and between takes. “When you have the musicians 
in the same room together without headphones,” remarks Bones Howe, 24 
“they tend to balance themselves better than any engineer can.” 
 So my advice is to try to keep monitoring arrangements as no-frills as possible 
when working with ensembles. One of the best ways of doing this, in my opin-
ion, is to use a recording setup that allows each performer to hear themselves 
and the rest of the ensemble naturally within the recording room (i.e., acous-
tically), because this means you can usually get away with using only a single 
backing-track cue mix for No Input monitoring. If the musicians are using head-
phones, they can set their own backing-track level relative to what they’re hear-
ing in the room, so all you need to do is keep a careful ear out for unwanted 
headphone spill (especially from any click track). Where there aren’t enough 
headphones for a larger ensemble, you can often use speakers instead without 
too many problems (as discussed in Section 5.3). Failing that, distribute the 
available headsets to the conductor, rhythm players, and/or section principals, 
and ask them to lead the rest of the group—as Reinhold Mack 25 did when he 
ran out of headphones recording orchestral overdubs for ELO: “I gave head-
phones to the lead guys; all the good ones who I knew could actually play.” 
 On a practical level, though, getting such a stripped-back monitoring scheme 
to work may require additional effort in the live room. Repositioning and 
angling musicians, instruments, or ampliﬁ ers can make a huge impact here, 
and setups where musicians are facing each other often work very well in 
this respect by taking advantage of the forward directionality of most instru-
ments—and indeed of the human ear. Reﬂ ectors can make themselves use-
ful by bouncing additional sound from quieter instruments back to the 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
317
performer or other musicians. Jack Miller 26 recalls using this technique when 
working with Duane Eddy: “We had these bafﬂ es that hung on the wall that 
we could turn. One side was live, one side was dead. We could bounce stuff 
around. If the rhythm guitar was [saying], ‘I can’t hear the drums,’ like a mir-
ror we bounced the drums toward him.” This trick can also encourage over-
forceful players to rein in their levels by making them more aware of their own 
volume—especially in the case of loud forward-ﬁ ring instruments like trum-
pets and trombones. Where a singer is struggling to hear themselves, cupping 
a hand behind one ear can really help, as can blocking an ear with a ﬁ nger to 
amplify bone-conducted sound via the Occlusion Effect (see Section 6.1.1). 
 Equally important to most ensemble playing is the issue of sight-lines, so this 
should always be at the back of your mind. One thing a lot of people forget 
is that you can use mirrors to maintain sight-lines in tricky situations—for 
example in an organ loft, or where two conductors are standing back to back 
so that groups of performers can face each other. Cheap lorry wing-mirrors are 
available for under $30 (£20), and can easily be gaffered to spare mic stands 
for accurate positioning. A webcam or closed-circuit TV system can also expand 
your options, so long as the display doesn’t have too much of a time-lag. 
 Naturally there will be times when ideal “acoustic monitoring” remains elu-
sive despite your best efforts, but that still doesn’t mean you have to have 
everyone monitoring everything on headphones, because it’s usually much 
easier to provide targeted foldback just for those who need it. One common 
scenario is where one or two members of the group aren’t hearing a certain 
part well enough. There’s no need to give them a full separate headphone 
mix in this case, because you can just feed a little of the relevant spot mic to 
their cans, assuming they can still hear everyone else acoustically. Similarly, if 
you’re recording a full rock band, the vocalist will usually be inaudible in the 
room against the drums and ampliﬁ ed instruments, so vocal-only headphone 
 FIGURE 9.15    
 Here a lorry’s wing-mirror mounted on a mic stand maintains the sight-line between a singer and an 
organist in a situation where a back-to-back performance layout made sense for recording purposes. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
318
foldback may be all that’s required to supplement what’s going on acoustically. 
Again, where headphones are in short supply you could substitute speakers 
in both these situations, and ﬂ oor wedges designed for onstage applications 
are quite nifty for this sort of thing. “About ﬁ fty percent of my projects use 
monitor wedges as opposed to phones,” comments Clif Norrell, 27 for instance, 
“primarily due to the fact that many of my projects … need to have a gig atmo-
sphere approximated, in order to capture the most natural performance.” 
 Clearly, any of the above suggestions may throw your carefully prepared 
recording setup into disarray, especially where foldback spill on the recording 
mics risks unwanted tonal coloration or feedback howlround. But don’t expect 
too much sympathy from me! Great performances will always be in the best 
interests of the production, and the very reason for learning a wide range of 
different miking techniques is because they allow you to adapt to the unique 
monitoring needs of each new group of performers. 
 Finally, if headphone foldback is unavoidable, make sure you dedicate enough 
time to getting each of the different cue mixes right. “Amazingly bad things can 
happen to even the best players when the headphone mix is all screwed up,” 
warns Wyn Davis. 28 “I don’t think you can pay enough attention to that part of 
it,” agrees Brian Ahern 29 wholeheartedly, and he also shares a great time-saving 
tip: “What I usually do is set up the phones prior to the session with a pre-
existing basic track tape that has similar instrumentation. That puts me that 
much further ahead in the game when the musicians walk in.” Don’t assume 
that the musicians will alert you to problems here either. “Sometimes I go out 
[into the live room],” says Jeff Powell, 30 “and the phones are completely dis-
torted. So I will sneak out there and tweak it up a little bit and all of a sudden 
they can hear. It amazes me how little importance some musicians place on 
headphone ﬁ delity and mixes.” 
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 The dominant-array approach is good for natural-sounding ensemble recording, and 
makes excellent use of limited time and equipment. The dominant array captures a pic-
ture of the whole ensemble at once, and its setup and balance typically remain static 
once recording has begun. Although a dominant array can be just one mic or stereo pair, 
it will often include other mics to enhance the overall recorded tonality; to allow the 
array’s directivity to be changed more ﬂ exibly from the control room; to give control over 
recorded reverb levels at mixdown; to correct misrepresentations of the ensemble’s bal-
ance/depth by close-placed mic rigs; and to blend appealing features of different stereo 
miking methods together. 
 
■
 Spot mics can be mixed with a dominant array to enhance or correct selected instru-
ments/sections of the ensemble. These mics must avoid catching excessive/ugly spill; 
must support the dominant array’s stereo imaging; and may need processing to avoid 
upsetting the ensemble’s natural depth perspective.  
 
■
 Do some research about the ensemble and venue before the recording session, and pref-
erably check both out in person. Make a note of any preferred ensemble setups; any 

Ensemble Recording with a Dominant Array CHAPTER 9
319
 Record two or three different ensembles using a mono or stereo dominant-array 
approach, but without recourse to spot mics. You’re free to choose any size of ensem-
ble, so there’s no need to wait around for big groups—even a singing instrumentalist 
will provide useful experience. You may use whatever recording equipment you wish, 
but make the effort to research and plan your approach well in advance and do your 
best to get maximum mileage from adjustments to the performance, instruments, 
ensemble layout, and acoustics—by hook or by crook! 
balance/tone problems between players; and any concerns with the acoustics or physi-
cal layout of the room. If possible, try to ﬁ nd out about setups that may have worked in 
the past, and keep your eyes open for anything on site that might operate as impromptu 
acoustic treatment. 
 
■
 You can structure the process of planning and setting up a dominant array by using the 
following series of questions, roughly in order. For the whole ensemble: Which mics; 
which stereo method; how wet overall; and how wide overall? For each instrument: What 
level; what tone; what depth; and what image? Because of the limitations of pure mic 
technique, answering these questions is usually best done by manipulating the acoustic 
environment and by working with the musicians to adjust the instruments, ensemble lay-
out, or performance. 
 
■
 When reﬁ ning the sound of each spot array, ask yourself in turn how it affects level, tone, 
depth, and imaging within the ensemble. Only make ﬁ nal judgments about spot arrays 
when you’re hearing them mixed with the dominant array. 
 
■
 The real-world directional characteristics of microphones are critical when mik-
ing ensembles. As such, think very carefully about how any mic’s on-axis and off-axis 
response will color incoming sounds, not just about the positioning of rejection nulls. 
Budget cardioid-family microphones should be treated with particular caution in this 
respect. 
 
■
 Although most small-studio engineers won’t have the resources to try a classic Decca Tree 
arrangement, its underlying operational principles can be adapted quite successfully for 
those working on a budget. Phased-array rigs are a good choice for cost-effective large-
ensemble dates, because their natural balance and depth capture tend to require less cor-
rection from supporting mics. 
 
■
 Be careful how you interpret the terms “outriggers,” “spot mics,” and “overheads,” 
because in each case they can refer to mics which serve very different purposes for differ-
ent engineers. 
 
■
 One of your top priorities when recording ensembles is to make sure that the musicians 
can hear and see each other properly, even if that makes your recording job more dif-
ﬁ cult. Rehearsal-format or face-to-face ensemble layouts are often preferable in this 
respect, and acoustic absorbers and reﬂ ectors (whether purpose-designed or improvised) 
can help with this. Mirrors provide a cheap way of working around sight-line problems. 
 
■
 Try to keep both recording and foldback schemes as simple as possible. An ensemble ses-
sion is usually a race against time, so minimizing the technical workload means you can 
concentrate more on what gets results quickest: dealing with the musicians, the instru-
ments, the ensemble layout, and the acoustics. 
 Assignment 1: Ensemble Recording with Just a Dominant Array 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
320
 Record a few different ensembles in stereo using a fully fl edged dominant-array 
approach, complete with spot mics as required. You should record a drum kit in this 
way at least once, and also do your best to fi nd a large ensemble (big-band, orchestra, 
or vocal chorus for instance) you can try your hand with too. When you’ve planned 
each job, make a point of asking yourself whether simplifying the setup might actually 
serve the fi nal production better, bearing in mind your anticipated technical workload 
during the session. 
 Assignment 2: Dominant-Array Ensemble Recording with Spot Mics 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 audio demonstrations of a variety of dominant-array setup issues;  
 
■
 further reading on multimic ensemble recording techniques, critical distance, and 
the fundamentals of reverb use; 
 
■
 links to information on the Schoeps Polarfl ex system and all the mics used in 
Section 9.5’s case studies. 
 http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch9.htm 

321
 CHAPTER 10 
 CHAPTER 10 
 Ensemble Recording 
with Peer Arrays 
 Although the dominant-array recording method can be extremely quick and 
efﬁ cient at capturing all sorts of different ensembles, it works best when pre-
serving a natural acoustic event for posterity. What it doesn’t allow is a tremen-
dous amount of control over the balance or timbre of any instrument from the 
control room, whether during tracking or at mixdown: You can’t process the 
dominant array without affecting most of the ensemble at once; you can’t fade 
down an instrument that’s too loud in the dominant array; and you can’t use 
a spot mic to drastically change any instrument’s tone without upsetting the 
ensemble balance. Fundamentally, a dominant-array recording is what it is, 
and trying to ﬁ ght against its inherent nature will usually end in tears. 
 Which is why some engineers prefer to use a peer-array approach instead, 
removing the dominant array from the equation and relying on separate 
microphones for all of the ensemble’s musicians/sections. Ditching the over-
all pickup means you can sculpt the tone of each instrument and rebalance 
everything much more ﬂ exibly, and it also allows more creative positioning of 
players and acoustic treatment to improve performances and manage spill. The 
downside, though, is that it’s arguably the most complicated type of recording 
to pull off successfully. Part of the reason for this is that any single array within 
your peer-array setup may range in complexity from a single mic (discussed 
in Part 2) to a complex multimic dominant-array rig with accompanying spot 
mics (discussed in Chapter 9), as in the following hypothetical band setup:
 
■
 Peer Array 1: A lead vocalist singing into a handheld dynamic mic.  
 
■
 Peer Array 2:  An acoustic guitar multimiked with a crossed coincident pair 
of condensers. 
 
■
 Peer Array 3:  An electric bass guitar recorded simultaneously through an 
amp (via a single mic on the cabinet) and a DI box.  
 
■
 Peer Array 4:  An electric guitar tone created by blending together three dif-
ferent close mics and adjusting their phase relationships. 
 
■
 Peer Array 5:  A drum kit captured with a stereo-pair dominant array, spot 
mics on every drum and cymbal, and additional multimics for snare and 
kick. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
322
 Driving a setup like this is no mean feat. Not only must you handle every one 
of the individual peer arrays conﬁ dently in its own right, but you also have to 
manipulate all the spill that arises between them. A lot of small-studio engi-
neers try to make life simpler for themselves here by 
just declaring all-out war on spill in general, 
heaping up masses of acoustic treatment 
and using super-tight mic placements 
to maximize isolation between instru-
ments. However, this kind of record-
ing is absolute hell to mix, because 
it just provides you with a bunch 
of spot mics—or, to put it another 
way, a dominant-array-plus-spots 
rig without the best-sounding bit 
(i.e., the dominant array itself)! The 
real trick with peer arrays is not trying 
to eliminate spill completely, but turning 
the spill to your advantage. In our imaginary 
full-band setup above, for example, you wouldn’t 
necessarily break your back trying to totally shield the 
acoustic-guitar and vocal mics from spill. Instead you’d work out how to set up 
those mics so that their Backdrop signals would actually enhance the sound of 
the rest of the band within the mix. 
 Once you adopt this kind of mindset, the interdependence of your peer arrays 
can become an enormous asset, because each one is effectively using all the 
others as supplementary multimics, thereby capturing a much more holistic 
view of each instrument. So the electric-guitar cabinet in our example wouldn’t 
appear in the mix solely via its own fairly close-placed three-mic peer array, 
but could be signiﬁ cantly enhanced by more than a dozen other mics nearby, 
albeit ostensibly pointing at other instruments (see  Figure 10.1 )—they might 
pick up useful alternative views of its frequency dispersion, say, and/or act as 
room mics to adjust its apparent depth in the mix. Here’s S. Husky Hoskulds 1 
talking about this concept: “For example, if I’m recording drums, piano, and 
acoustic guitar, I’ll often run out while people are getting sounds and move 
the piano mic further away to match the [drum] ambience in the guitar mic, 
 THE FOCUS AND BACKDROP OF A PEER ARRAY 
 I’m going to continue using my terminology from Chapter 9 here: i.e., the Focus of a given peer array is what 
the array’s mics are ostensibly directed at, whereas the Backdrop is everything else these mics are picking 
up besides the Focus instrument(s). However, a little clarifi cation is required, given that we can now nest 
dominant arrays within a peer-array setup. The overall Focus of a dominant array is the entire mini-ensemble 
it’s capturing, which means the full drum kit in the above example setup, even though that dominant-array rig 
may comprise spot mics which each have their own single-instrument Focus. 
 “A lot of small-studio 
engineers try to make life 
simpler by heaping up masses of 
acoustic treatment and using super-
tight mic placements to maximize isolation 
between instruments. However, this kind of 
recording is absolute hell to mix, because it 
just provides you with a bunch of spot mics—
or, to put it another way, a dominant-
array-plus-spots rig without the 
best-sounding bit!” 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
323
and then pan them left and right. That way the piano and guitar mics actually 
include half of the drum sound. A lot of the organ stuff you hear on [Solomon 
Burke’s]  Don’t Give Up On Me  is well set back in the mix, and I got that sound 
by using the spill from the guitar mic in the next room.” 
 While this kind of juggling act can be terriﬁ cally intense work from an engi-
neering perspective, it also offers exceptional rewards if you can judge it just 
right—a recording where every peer array sounds much richer in the mix than 
it does in solo, where individual instruments achieve an almost holographic 
three-dimensional quality, and where mixdown begins to become a mere for-
mality. “Leakage is your friend,” afﬁ rms Frank Filipetti, 2 “and what makes the 
sound real and live and wonderful.” 
 FIGURE 10.1   
 In this hypothetical peer-array ensemble recording of a ﬁ ve-piece band, the ﬁ nal mixed sound of the 
electric-guitar will comprise the Focus sound from its own peer array combined with the Backdrop 
electric-guitar sound coming through all the other open mics—in this case four separate peer arrays for 
drums, acoustic guitar, vocals, and bass amp. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
324
 10.1    PLANNING THE SESSION 
 Planning any ensemble recording involves reconnaissance work, whatever 
capture method you’re using, so everything we discussed in Section 9.1.1 still 
applies. There are additional considerations to take on board when using peer 
arrays, though, mainly because there may be a considerable difference between 
what’s happening acoustically in the recording room and what you actually 
want coming through the control-room monitors. Therefore:
 
■
 You have to make an executive decision about what kind of recorded sound 
you’re after. If you’ve been following the assignments throughout this book, 
you should already have some practice at developing a sonic “vision” in 
your head and then chasing it with your mic technique, and doing this for 
a complete ensemble is a natural extension of this. If you’re struggling to 
deﬁ ne the parameters of what the artist wants to hear, then grill them about 
what music they like listening to and how that relates to what they want to 
record, as I suggested in Section 7.2.3. 
 
■
 You have to compare your vision for the recorded outcome with what the 
ensemble is actually likely to sound like acoustically. This is where conﬁ rming 
an instrument line-up and attending a rehearsal are both so useful, because 
they tip you off if any instruments will be signiﬁ cantly out of balance with the 
others, and whether any of them will need serious engineering work from a 
timbral perspective. Without this kind of information you could totally mis-
judge your initial setup, thereby wasting a whole bunch of session time.  
 
■
 You have to work out how to transform the ensemble’s acoustic perfor-
mance into the envisioned control-room mix. As usual, the more you can 
match the reality to your vision before any microphones get involved, the 
fewer engineering difﬁ culties you’re likely to encounter, but whatever mis-
match remains must then inform your session planning. 
 RECORDING DRUMS: DOMINANT ARRAY OR PEER ARRAY? 
 The most common situation where small-studio users will have to choose between dominant-array and peer-
array approaches is when recording drum kits: Do you try to pick up the whole kit with a dominant array and 
then add defi nition with spot mics, or do you give all the different kit components their own peer arrays? 
Unfortunately, confusion over the basic method being used undermines many of the budget multitracks I hear. 
For example, I can’t tell you how often I see people trying to record a full drum kit with only four mics (for budget 
reasons) by putting a mic in the kick drum, a super-close mic on the snare, and wide-spaced overheads a foot 
or so above the left and right groups of cymbals—a rig which doesn’t make much sense however you view it:
 
■
 Looking at it as a dominant-array setup, where the overheads would normally serve as a stereo pair to 
capture the whole kit, the placement of those mics is going to give far too much cymbal level in the balance, 
dull and distant snare/toms, and a whacking great hole in the middle of the stereo image. 
 
■
 Looking at it as a peer-array setup, all the elements of the kit should be the Focus of at least one array, so 
where are the hi-hat and tom mics? It’s also important that the Focus instruments of individual peer-arrays 
sound pretty good, but here the kick and snare mics are both placed in very unnatural-sounding positions—
you might get away with that for kick in some styles, but not for snare. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
325
 What you’ve read so far in this book will guide you toward getting a decent 
sound from each peer array in isolation, and Chapter 9 has already suggested 
which mic choices and miking techniques tend to work best within an ensem-
ble-recording environment. So all that remains to explore from a sonics stand-
point is how to position the peer arrays (in conjunction with their associated 
Focus instruments) and any acoustics measures to make the best of the spill 
situation in your recording space. 
 In general, a dominant-array approach tends to work best in small studios, because it’s easier to get a 
respectable kit sound that way. “When you move the mics in closer and separate the kit into nine tracks,” 
says Phill Brown, 3 “that’s usually when all the problems start. Then it doesn’t sound anything like a real drum 
kit.” Dominant-array recording doesn’t typically require as many mics either, and only two of them have to 
be particularly hi-fi . To get best results out of a peer-array setup, on the other hand, you really need to have 
individual mics for each instrument (although miking groups of cymbals and toms can work), so you’ll usually 
be forced to use considerably more gear. And if you’re placing peer arrays close enough to allow serious 
independent tone/balance control, it begins to become advisable to multimike some of the drums as well 
(particularly the snare, given the snare wires underneath), in order to combat timbral spotlighting—which only 
expands the complexity of things further. 
 FIGURE 10.2    
 This small-studio drum setup can’t decide whether it’s a dominant-array or a peer-array approach: If you take it as a dominant 
array with a snare spot mic, then the overheads are probably too high to get a representative overall kit sound; whereas if you 
take it to be a peer-array rig, then where are the close mics on the toms? 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
326
 10.1.1    Acoustic Balance and Depth Perspective 
 The ﬁ rst thing to ask yourself is whether the ensemble’s acoustic balance is 
going to be problematic. You see, although the peer-array system gives you the 
power to adjust level balances after recording, acoustic imbalances can also 
cause problems with the ensemble’s apparent depth perspective. For example, 
if the electric guitar is too loud in the room, you might reduce the level of its 
peer array in the mix to compensate, but that won’t affect the level of electric-
guitar room reverb coming through all the other peer arrays (see  Figure 10.3 ). 
The result is that the electric guitar will sound wetter, and therefore more 
distant, than it would have if you’d not had to rebalance it with your faders. 
Likewise, a quieter instrument that hardly features at all in the Backdrop signal 
of other peer arrays will come across more dry and upfront if faded up. “The 
hardest thing to manage in terms of bleed,” afﬁ rms Steve Albini, 4 “is if you have 
really quiet instruments and really loud ones playing in the ensemble—like if 
you have a violinist playing with a rock band.” 
 FIGURE 10.3   
 Although rebalancing your peer-array mic signals can give you signiﬁ cant control over the ensemble 
balance, such fader adjustments may also mess with your mix’s depth perspective. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
327
 This effect can work in your favor sometimes, if you happen to want the quieter 
instruments at the front of your mix and the louder instruments in the back-
ground, but otherwise it’s probably the biggest reason you’d want to try reducing 
spill between peer arrays. We talked about various ways of doing this using mic 
polar patterns and acoustic devices in Section 9.4.1, but I’d like to add that you 
should try to be as targeted as you can with absorption, rather than just bafﬂ ing 
everything off. If the vocals and acoustic guitar are too quiet in our setup, then 
target your resources toward getting sufﬁ cient spill-level reduction on their peer 
arrays, rather than worrying too much about cordoning off the electric-guitar 
and bass cabs as well. Alternatively, if our ﬁ ve-piece band 
were playing entirely unplugged instead, the drums 
might be the only thing that was out of balance, 
in which case it’d probably be more efﬁ cient 
to cut down spill by putting gobos around 
the drums, rather than trying to shield 
the four other peer arrays individually. 
 Old-school engineers such as Bones 
Howe, 5 Wayne Moss, 6 Al Schmitt, 7 and 
Armin Steiner 8 offer very similar advice 
regarding spill: Be careful of combating 
it by increasing the distances between the 
ensemble instruments. “The closer [the musi-
cians] are, the tighter they are, the better things 
sound, and the better they play,” says Schmitt, 9 for 
instance. “[Some engineers] would try…moving them far-
ther and farther away from each other. Well, the drummer would then play 
louder and louder! So I learned that moving guys closer together made them 
play at a more comfortable level. It worked better for me and for them.”  
 When instruments are set up close together, the Backdrop of all the peer arrays 
sounds drier too, which means it ﬁ lls out the timbre of each instrument with-
out distancing it as much; whereas, when you place the instruments further 
apart, the peer-array Backdrop signals begin to operate more like room mics, 
making the instruments washier without enhancing the dry timbre as much. 
Alan Parsons 10 illustrates this rather counterintuitive concept in relation to the 
challenging task of capturing live drums and piano at once. “That’s always a 
nightmare,” he says, “but the way around it is to move the piano as close as 
possible to the drums, which is contrary to what you’d think.…It’s the time 
delay that’s the problem, not the actual separation.”  
 “Be careful of 
combating spill by increasing 
the distances between the 
ensemble instruments. When instruments 
are set up close together, the Backdrop of all 
the peer arrays sounds drier, whereas when 
you place the instruments further apart 
the Backdrop signals begin to operate 
more like room mics, making the 
instruments washier.” 
 SMALL ROOMS FOR BIG DRUMS 
 Nick Launay 11 has a tip for people wanting powerful drum sounds. “The misunderstanding about recording 
rooms is that to get a big sound you need a big room. I fi nd it absolutely the opposite. Some of the biggest 
drum sounds on earth have been recorded in very, very small rooms.” John Leckie 12 echoes this sentiment, 
adding that “it doesn’t have to be cramped, just a normal-sized room with an 8- to 10-foot ceiling.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
328
 10.1.2    Anticipating Processing Requirements 
 Even where an ensemble is well balanced overall, spill can still cause you prob-
lems if you’re planning to heavily process individual peer arrays for any reason. 
If we wanted to use high-frequency EQ boost to brighten the acoustic guitar in 
our ﬁ ve-piece band setup, for instance, that might overemphasize spill from 
the hi-hat or add an unpleasant edginess to the electric-guitar timbre. Or if we 
wanted to compress the lead vocal in that line-up, we might ﬁ nd that the com-
pressor’s automatic gain changes caused distracting variations in the balance 
and/or depth of other instruments by modulating the vocal mic’s Backdrop 
level. And the same would apply if we wanted to do any drastic vocal fader rid-
ing at mixdown. 
 In either of these cases there might be a good argument for additional bafﬂ ing 
of certain instruments, effectively sacriﬁ cing some of the timbral support and 
ensemble cohesion that spill can provide in favor of increased mixdown con-
trol. However, it’s as well to mention that side-effects of heavily processing one 
peer array might also be compensated for by adjustments to the others—turning 
down the hi-hat spot mic in response to the aforementioned acoustic-guitar EQ, 
say, or equalizing the electric guitar’s peer array. Unnatural compression “gain-
pumping” of Backdrop signals is also par for the course in many commercial 
rock styles. This is why you need to have a clear idea of the kind of product 
you’re hoping to end up with, because processing side-effects that are acceptable 
in one style won’t necessarily be tolerated in another. 
 10.1.3    Stereo Considerations 
 Part of what makes good peer-array recordings seem so three-dimensional in 
stereo is that spill between the mics prevents any individual array ever appear-
ing as a narrow point source at mixdown, even when it’s recorded in mono. 
So, for example, if I panned all the electric-guitar multimics in our band-
recording setup dead center, you’d still get some stereo width on account of 
electric-guitar spill in the drum kit’s stereo overhead mics. Most of the time 
this is a beneﬁ t, because the listening public isn’t that fond of super-narrow 
stereo images on the whole, but you do have to be a bit careful sometimes 
to avoid one peer array contradicting the natural picture presented by another 
peer array’s stereo mic technique. 
 Let’s say, for instance, that I positioned the acoustic guitar in our band setup 
to the left-hand side of the drummer, such that its mics picked up lots of 
snare and hi-hat spill (see  Figure 10.4 ). If I then panned those guitar mics 
to the opposite side of the panorama, the spill might risk dragging the snare 
and hi-hat onto the wrong side of the stereo image. Alternatively, imagine 
that the acoustic guitarist were in front of the drum kit facing the drummer 
(see  Figure 10.5 ). If I panned the acoustic guitar’s crossed-pair peer array to cre-
ate a stereo picture of that instrument, the stereo positioning of the drums in 
the array’s Backdrop might then contradict the stereo picture presented by the 
drum kit’s own peer array. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
329
 Although you can solve some stereo imaging problems by simply tweaking pan 
controls and swapping the left and right channels of stereo mic rigs, I prefer to 
try to deal with things like this at source if possible, planning an ensemble lay-
out from the outset to roughly match the desired stereo panorama of the ﬁ nal 
mixdown. So if I wanted to pan the two guitars in our ﬁ ve-piece band left and 
 FIGURE 10.4   
 If your acoustic guitarist is playing alongside the drummer (as shown here), then spill from the hi-hat 
and snare may cause stereo contradictions in the mix if the acoustic guitar’s peer-array mics are panned 
unwisely. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
330
right respectively, while keeping the bass and vocal in the center, I might place 
the guitars on opposite sides of the drummer in the recording room, with the 
singer and bass cabinet in front of the kit. 
 10.1.4    Session Layout for the Performers 
 Whatever your concerns about the effects of spill on the sonics, however, your 
needs as an engineer should (as always) remain secondary to those of the musi-
cians. “Don’t ever forget,” reminds Mike Stavrou, 13 “[that the musician’s] job is 
more difﬁ cult than ours. We just have to capture his performance. If our record-
ing setup ruins his ability to perform, we’re not helping.” So whenever you take 
any steps to adjust spill, you always have to question them from a performance 
perspective. Yes, you might prefer to put gobos up all around a jazz quartet’s 
upright bass to protect that peer array from drum spill, but if that means the 
player can’t see/hear the other players well enough to stay in time, then you’ve 
clearly put the cart before the horse. In addition, I think it’s also the engineer’s 
responsibility to think creatively about whether deviating from an ensemble’s 
instinctive rehearsal/concert layout might help the players see and hear each 
other more easily. For instance, although facing groups of musicians toward 
each other doesn’t tend to work that well within a concert situation, it can dra-
matically improve visual communication within a group for recording purposes. 
 As in Section 9.6, I’d suggest using the simplest foldback system possible—
and preferably none at all if you’re laying down an ensemble performance 
from scratch without a guide/backing track. That said, headphone monitoring 
is more often required in peer-array setups, because putting acoustic bafﬂ es 
around some players to counteract spill is more common, and that can make 
it very difﬁ cult for those musicians to hear what’s going on outside their little 
cocoon. If you do end up running multiple independent foldback mixes, how-
ever, my main advice would be to consider setting these up via a physical mixer 
or control surface, rather than with mouse-driven software controls, so that 
you can work more quickly. 
 10.2    BUILDING THE ENSEMBLE SOUND 
 Because all the microphones in a peer-array system interact, the only reliable way 
to assess the suitability of what you’re recording is to mix the arrays on the ﬂ y 
while setting up for tracking. As you might imagine, handling all those interde-
pendent Focus and Backdrop signals simultaneously can be a complete brain-fry, 
not least because it’s so easy to damage one facet of the ensemble sound inad-
vertently while working to improve some other aspect. So let me share my own 
plan of attack for this combined setup/mixing process, which helps make the 
task a little less daunting and the decision-making more logical—as well as orga-
nizing the workﬂ ow to keep backtracking and second-guessing to a minimum. 
 You need to start off with all your monitor channels muted, the goal being to 
build up the full-ensemble mix one peer array at a time. There’s a bit more to it 
than that, though, so let’s walk through the whole scheme step by step. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
331
 10.2.1   Choose a Peer Array 
 Firstly, choose which peer array you’re going to unmute ﬁ rst. Ideally, you 
should start work with those peer arrays which pick up the most spill, because 
your sonic decisions regarding the Focus instrument(s) on all subsequently 
 FIGURE 10.5   
 If your acoustic guitarist is playing facing the drummer (as shown here), then the stereo positioning of the 
drumkit Backdrop in the acoustic-guitar peer array may contradict the stereo positioning of the drumkit 
peer array’s Focus. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
332
added peer arrays will be better made within the context of that spill. Or, to 
look at it another way, if I only unmute my most spill-soaked peer array right 
at the end, it may completely upset the carefully wrought sonics of most of the 
instruments I’ve already mixed, forcing me to backtrack on a load of my prior 
setup/processing decisions. Fortunately, peer arrays with lots of spill are often 
well suited to being mixed early on, because they’re usually the ones pointed at 
quieter Focus instruments, and the sound of quieter instruments won’t change 
as much as the mix progresses because there’ll be less spill from them on other 
peer arrays. 
 In some situations, however, the difﬁ culty of moving a peer array or its Focus 
instrument(s) may cramp your style. This is most likely when you’re working 
with pre-installed microphones or an immovable instrument such as a chapel 
organ, but session logistics may also militate against moving a grand piano or 
drum kit in many cases, and there may be musical factors to weigh up too—for 
example, the need to keep rhythm-section players in close contact with each 
other for the sake of a tight groove. Where layout restrictions reduce your abil-
ity to adjust the sound of a particular peer array, getting it into the mix early on 
makes sense, because it provides you the maximum opportunity to compen-
sate for its sonic shortcomings by adjusting the remaining peer arrays. 
 10.2.2    Reﬁ ne the Peer Array: Focus and Backdrop 
 Having chosen your ﬁ rst peer array, concentrate on getting its Focus to sound 
as good as you can. You should be on familiar territory here, whether the peer 
array is a single mic or a complicated dominant-array-plus-spots system. To 
recap brieﬂ y: Your job will be to decide on the Focus’s overall dry/wet ratio 
and stereo width (remembering to check mono-compatibility) as well as the 
relative level, tone, depth, and imaging of each individual Focus instrument. 
At this point in the mixing process you’ve got a pretty free rein in terms of how 
you decide to sculpt the sound—reposition the instruments, adjust the acous-
tic environment, change mics and miking positions, tweak polarity/phase rela-
tionships between channels, add processing in the control room… So make 
the most of it! 
 Once you’ve got a good Focus sound, shift your attention away from that and 
concentrate on any Backdrop instruments you can hear, running through the 
same list of sonic decisions regarding those too (overall dry/wet balance and 
width; per-instrument level, tone, depth, and imaging), but within the context 
of their status as spill signals. So let’s say the acoustic-guitar microphones in 
our hypothetical ﬁ ve-piece band had the most spill on them, so I’d started my 
rough mix with those. Having achieved a nice acoustic-guitar tone, I’d then lis-
ten to the guitar’s XY peer array and consider how it was picking up the other 
instruments. Looking at the big picture ﬁ rst, overly wet spill may make the 
ﬁ nal mix too washy, whereas overly dry spill may not give much ensemble 
cohesion; overly wide spill may cause mono-compatibility problems, whereas 
overly narrow spill may cause the amount of room reverb to be rather uneven 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
333
across the stereo image. On a per-instrument level, and taking the drum kit as 
an example:
 
■
 Is the level of drum-kit spill appropriate? Does the level balance between 
the different drums and cymbals support my vision for the ﬁ nal mix? 
Tackling these questions now makes it less likely that drum spill from the 
acoustic-guitar peer array will cause balance/depth difﬁ culties when I’m try-
ing to add the drum kit’s own peer array to the mix later on.  
 
■
 Is the tone of the drum-kit spill appropriate? If the snare drum’s unpleas-
antly honky, the kick drum bloated, or the cymbals harsh, this’ll make it 
harder to get great drum sounds overall. 
 
■
 Is the imaging of the drum-kit spill appropriate? We considered some pos-
sible problems you might meet with this in Section 10.1.3. 
 
■
 Is the depth of the drum-kit spill appropriate? For instance, if the spill 
sounds like it’s coming down a tunnel from Colditz, you’ll struggle to get 
an upfront sound for the drums—assuming that’s what you happen to be 
aiming for. 
 Seeing as we’re in a questioning mood, you’d also be 
perfectly justiﬁ ed in asking the following: How the 
hell am I supposed to know what “appropriate” 
means in each of these cases? Unfortunately, 
there is simply no way of knowing for sure 
about this until the whole mix is up and 
running, so you just have to make the best 
guesses you can and resign yourself to spend-
ing extra time revisiting Backdrop issues on 
some of the peer arrays later on if it turns out 
you’ve misjudged things. This is one area where 
experience counts for a lot, because the better 
developed your instinct for how each peer array’s 
Backdrop should sound, the less you end up having to 
retrace your steps in your quest for a complete ensemble mix. 
 It’s also worth pointing out here that your options for altering the Backdrop 
will now be constrained by the desire to maintain the sound of the array’s 
Focus, so you should prioritize methods which don’t disturb the relationship 
between the peer array’s mics and their Focus instrument(s). In other words, 
your ﬁ rst ports of call should be adjusting and/or moving the Backdrop instru-
ments, or changing acoustic treatment. Here’s Joe Chiccarelli, 14 for instance, 
talking about doing this on a jazz session where they couldn’t prevent drum 
spill on the piano mics: “We moved the piano around the room and found 
a place where the drum leakage was mostly short, early reﬂ ections. This actu-
ally thickened up the drum sound a bit and was a pleasing effect that didn’t 
compromise the piano track. On cuts where the pianist didn’t play, I still left 
his mics open because it actually helped the drum sound.” If you feel com-
pelled to move your peer array on account of the Backdrop, then try to do this 
 “Your options for 
altering the Backdrop 
will be constrained by the 
desire to maintain the sound of the 
array’s Focus, so you should prioritize 
methods which don’t disturb the 
relationship between the peer 
array’s mics and their Focus 
instrument(s).” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
334
without changing the spatial relationships between that array’s mics and its 
Focus instrument(s). If none of those options work, and you realize that you 
need to change your miking strategy for that peer array, then be sure to back-
track properly and check all aspects of the Focus with the new mic setup. It 
may be that you choose to trade off a little Focus quality because of Backdrop 
concerns, but bear in mind that it’s the Focus signals that will often have great-
est impact on the ﬁ nal mix, so I’d usually give those precedence if I were you. 
 Before moving on to the next step, mute the ﬁ rst peer array, unmute the next 
one in line (referring again to the recommendations in Section 10.2.1), and 
repeat the steps above to achieve a sensible Focus and Backdrop for that as 
well. However, take care that the techniques you use to modify the sound of 
the second peer array don’t interfere with the good work you already did on 
the ﬁ rst. Again, if this proves impossible, you must reassess the ﬁ rst peer array’s 
Focus/Backdrop thoroughly before continuing. 
 SPEAKER FOLDBACK SPILL 
 If you’re using speakers for foldback purposes, don’t forget to consider their impact on each peer array’s 
Backdrop signal. In most cases speaker placement and/or baffl ing will combat foldback spill, but where it’s 
unavoidable, consider equalizing the foldback speaker’s feed signal to reduce any strong tonal colorations 
captured on the recording. If you’re in really desperate straits and the foldback speaker is being driven from your 
mixer’s monitor channels, you could try recording a cancellation pass, as discussed in Section 5.3.2—in other 
words, feed the foldback speaker with playback, while recording its spill through all the mics on a new set of 
tracks. Polarity inverting those tracks should reduce the spill. 
 10.2.3    Reﬁ ne the Meld: Focus and Backdrop 
 Hopefully it shouldn’t be too tricky to get reasonable Focus and Backdrop son-
ics for your ﬁ rst two peer arrays, at which point you’ll be ready to try combin-
ing them. Although most people would instinctively call this process “mixing,” 
I prefer to use the word “Melding” instead, because getting a good combined 
sound out of peer arrays often means making adjustments to the recording 
setup too. Your goal is to evaluate and reﬁ ne the Meld (i.e., the combined 
setup and mix of both peer arrays) in exactly the same way you evaluated and 
reﬁ ned each individual peer array. In other words, ﬁ rst concentrate on the 
Meld’s collected Focus instruments, and then on its combined Backdrop signal, 
scrutinizing overall dry/wet balance, overall stereo width, and per-instrument 
level, tone, depth, and imaging. 
 If you’ve been conscientious in Section 10.2.2, the Meld will rarely hold any 
surprises in terms of overall wetness/width, and per-instrument balance will 
usually fall into place once you’ve decided on the overall level of each peer 
array in the mix. What can be really tricky, though, is trying to get a good tone 
for the entirety of the Meld, because of the way comb-ﬁ ltering effects inevita-
bly impact upon the sound when the different peer-array signals mix together. 
Some small-studio engineers fall into the trap of immediately EQ’ing lots of 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
335
individual mics to ﬁ ght the comb-ﬁ ltering, but this is a recipe for frustration. 
For a start, the EQ won’t work as effectively as you might hope, because it’ll 
change the phase response (and hence the character of the comb-ﬁ ltering) as 
well as the frequency response—in other words, you’ll ﬁ nd yourself hunting a 
moving target. This typically encourages overprocessing, leading to level/tone 
side-effects which demand yet more corrective processing, whereupon you start 
chasing your tail. So don’t take the bait! If you’re happy about the sound of 
each peer array in isolation, but don’t like the way they combine in the Meld, 
equalization really isn’t the best answer. 
 The trick is to accept that comb-ﬁ ltering between the peer arrays will be unavoid-
able, and then to direct your energies into grappling with that directly, manipu-
lating its tonal ﬂ avor until it suits your needs. As you’ll know from previous 
assignments, this is not a very predictable process, so the key to success is lots 
of experimentation. Given the time pressure on most ensemble sessions, try to 
get the best out of quick control-room ﬁ xes (such as polarity-inverting or phase-
adjusting one entire peer array relative to the other) in the ﬁ rst instance, reserving 
recording-room phase-adjustments (such as adjusting the relative positions of the 
two peer arrays) for situations where the simpler tactics don’t bear sufﬁ cient fruit.  
 USING DELAYS FOR PHASE-MANIPULATION OF PEER ARRAYS 
 I explored the subject of using delays for phase-aligning multimic rigs back in Sections 7.2.3 and 9.4.4, but this 
concept also has a bearing on peer-array recording setups. As far as your individual peer arrays are concerned, 
I don’t think there’s any new information to add to what you already know—in other words, feel free to phase-
align any of the multimics within a given peer array if that gets you the Focus sound you’re looking for, but be 
wary of phase-related damage to the Backdrop. However, I don’t think there’s very much to be gained by trying 
to time-align whole peer arrays against each other. 
 To understand why this is, imagine the following very simple two-peer-array scenario: a trumpeter and a 
saxophonist sitting next to each other, each with a single mic pointed at them. In this situation, the trumpet 
mic will pick up delayed saxophone spill, and the saxophone mic will pick up delayed trumpet spill. If you 
electronically delay the saxophone mic to time-align its Focus with the trumpet mic’s Backdrop, the saxophone 
mic’s Backdrop will slip further out of time-alignment with the trumpet mic’s Focus. In other words, phase-
aligning the spill of both instruments is impossible. 
 Leaving the idea of phase-alignment to one side, though, what about using delays simply as a phase-
manipulation tool to massage the tonal quality of the comb-fi ltering between peer arrays? In principle I have 
nothing against this, as long as you keep the delays below about 5 ms—longer delay times may start to have 
unwelcome knock-on effects on the ensemble’s depth perspective, as mentioned in Section 9.4.4. 
 While comb-ﬁ ltering will probably be the main tonal issue to address at the 
Meld, the tonal aspects of your Backdrop guesswork will also be put to the test. 
The main tip-off of a problem in this department is if some tonal problems 
persist despite your efforts with polarity/phase work. Returning to our imagi-
nary ﬁ ve-piece band setup, let’s say that I’m trying to Meld the vocal mic with 
the acoustic-guitar mics, but ﬁ nd that the guitar tone is plagued by a persis-
tent boxiness which isn’t apparent on its own peer array. This is the moment to 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
336
quickly Solo the vocal mic again and check whether that boxiness might actu-
ally be coming from its Backdrop. If it is, then I’d be inclined to ﬁ nesse the 
sound of the guitar spill on that mic in some way, before recommencing the 
Meld. Some kind of acoustic treatment would probably make most sense, since 
that would disturb the phase-relationships in the Meld the least, but it’s vital 
to realize that pretty much anything I do to change the sound of an individ-
ual peer array has the potential to affect every aspect of the Meld. In this case, 
for example, it would be very easy to miss some unwanted tonal side-effect of 
my acoustics ﬁ x on the vocal sound while I’m concentrating my mind on the 
guitar. The only fail-safe attitude is steely self-discipline: Whenever you change 
anything about a peer array, don’t skimp on fully rechecking the Meld! 
 If you’ve properly considered the stereo imaging of each of your peer arrays in 
Solo mode, there should be little else to do at the Meld than just toggling the 
second peer array’s Mute button(s) to check for image shifts. Problems with the 
depth perspective, on the other hand, can take more work to sort out. Again, this 
is where your Backdrop guesses for each individual peer array will be put on trial: 
Do all your Focus instruments seem to be in the correct front–back positions in 
the mix? If they aren’t, then the best tools at your disposal will be those which 
have the least effect on other aspects of the Meld, for example changing the acous-
tic balance between the instruments (if possible), getting busy with any acoustics 
devices you have available, or adding artiﬁ cial reverb. As before, if you have to 
reposition the instruments or change anything about the peer arrays themselves, 
don’t overlook the possibility of unforeseen consequences in the Meld. 
 You may already have had difﬁ culties getting the right Backdrop sound for the 
two peer arrays individually, because of overriding concerns about the Focus 
instruments in each case, but it gets even more challenging when you start 
Melding peer arrays together. So although you should certainly do the best 
you can with it, don’t beat yourself up too much if you have to make some 
Backdrop compromises, because it’s pretty much an inevitability given the 
complexity of the endeavor. The main thing is to try to minimize those com-
promises and restrict them to less important aspects of the production—which 
for many engineers means favoring issues of overall dry/wet ratio and per-
instrument level/tone over questions of per-instrument imaging/depth.  
 RECORDING SAFETY SAMPLES 
 Whenever you record an ensemble containing percussion instruments, it’s wise to spend a few minutes at the 
end of the session recording a few good clean hits of each one, through all the mics in the ensemble rig. This 
effectively gives you a kind of “get out of jail free” card if you discover at mixdown that the percussion mics 
have caught undesirable spill. Spill-free cymbal samples can be a godsend for uptempo pop/rock productions, 
for example, if headphone click-track spill becomes embarrassingly audible through the drum overheads as 
a song’s fi nal note decays. (Er, or so I’ve been told…) There are now plenty of ways to repeatedly retrigger a 
sample in sync with a live-played track (see this chapter’s web resources for some suggestions), and this is 
another thing that can come in very handy—for example, if your snare close-mic signal has picked up too much 
hi-hat spill, replacing the signal with a retriggered close-mic sample can bail you out big-time. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
337
 10.2.4   The Ghost of the Next Array 
 When you’re convinced that the Meld has reached the point of diminishing 
returns, you can choose a third peer array to work on. Don’t unmute it just yet, 
though! Instead, just concentrate on the combined spill from its Focus instru-
ment/section across all the mics in the Meld so far—what I call the “Ghost” of 
the third peer array. If you don’t like what you hear, and weren’t able to remedy 
this during the Meld without unacceptable damage to the ﬁ rst two peer arrays’ 
Focus instruments, then ﬁ rst try adjusting/moving the new Focus instrument(s) 
and/or altering the acoustic environment (as discussed in Section 10.2.2), as 
this is least likely to undo the work you’ve already done on the previous peer 
arrays. If this doesn’t reap the rewards you’re hoping for, however, then you 
have to think about potentially compensating for the Ghost’s remaining deﬁ -
ciencies by adapting the third peer array’s Focus sonics. 
 FIGURE 10.6   
 An example illustrating the concept of the Ghost. Here I’ve already melded two peer arrays (drumkit and bass amp) and have chosen 
a third (guitar amp) to work on. First I’d address the sound of that peer array’s Ghost (i.e., the guitar amp’s combined spill on all the 
drumkit and bass-amp mics), and then take any unavoidable deﬁ ciencies into account when tweaking its own Focus sound. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
338
 So, for example, if you can’t avoid some rather hissy cymbal spill when 
Melding the vocal and acoustic-guitar microphones in our ﬁ ve-piece band 
setup, you might subsequently consider cutting some of those same cymbal 
frequencies from the drum-kit peer array, perhaps by selecting different cym-
bals, altering your mic choice/technique, or dialing in some EQ on the over-
head-mic mixer channels. Or let’s say you wanted to bring in the electric guitar 
as the third array instead, but there was more electric-guitar spill in the Meld 
than you’d have liked. You might respond to that by moving the electric gui-
tar’s peer array closer to its ampliﬁ er cabinet, giving it a drier sound. Doing this 
 FIGURE 10.7    
 This block diagram 
shows the basic steps 
involved in constructing 
a full ensemble recording 
from multiple peer 
arrays. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
339
kind of thing helps reduce the likelihood of big surprises at the  next  Melding 
stage, and therefore speeds up your workﬂ ow. The main drawback with such 
compensatory maneuvers, however, is that if you change the ensemble balance 
dynamically at mixdown, you get greater tone/depth side-effects, so I’d recom-
mend using this dodge as sparingly as you can get away with. 
 10.2.5   Turn the Handle… 
 You’re now ready to work on the third peer array’s Focus and Backdrop (as 
in Section 10.2.2), and then Meld it with the previous two peer arrays (as in 
Section 10.2.3). Subsequent peer arrays can be dealt with in a similar manner, 
as summarized below and illustrated in  Figure 10.7 :
 
■
 Choose the peer array, but leave it muted to assess its Ghost, making a men-
tal note of any shortcomings. 
 
■
 Solo the new peer array to reﬁ ne its sound, checking both Focus and 
Backdrop instruments. 
 
■
 Meld the new peer array with all previously Melded peer arrays, checking 
both Focus and Backdrop instruments. 
 The more peer arrays you use, the more complicated the Melding process 
becomes, so it pays to be as methodical as you can in terms of giving each and 
every Focus instrument enough attention. As suggested in Section 9.1.7, keep-
ing a checklist of all the ensemble instruments next to the mixer makes it less 
likely you’ll forget to run your ears over one. 
 10.3   SOME MORE CASE STUDIES 
 As in Chapter 9, I’d like to use a couple of thought-experiment case studies to 
help illustrate the nature of the workﬂ ow when using a peer-array system. As 
before, I’ll restrict myself to the equipment listed in Section 9.5, and I’ll choose 
a fairly simple situation to start with: A student singer-songwriter has asked me 
to record an intimate ballad she’s written, and which she’d like to sing while 
accompanying herself on the piano. 
 10.3.1   A Singing Pianist 
 The most suitable instrument available turns out to be a mid-size grand lurk-
ing in her college’s performing arts department, so we both toddle over to have 
a pre-session gander. The room it’s in is a multi-use rehearsal space covering 
an area of roughly 20 feet × 30 feet (6 m × 9 m), but with a typical domes-
tic ceiling height of around 8 feet (2.4 m)—in other words, large enough to 
escape the worst room-mode colorations, but not high enough to avoid a fairly 
constricted reverb sound. The room’s pretty bare, with slatted blinds hanging 
over the windows along one side, so options for adjusting the acoustics are 
pretty thin on the ground, and there’s also no separate space to use as a control 
room—looks like I’ll be working on headphones, then! The piano is in fairly 
good nick despite heavy use, and reasonably well in tune, but doesn’t have 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
340
casters, which inclines me against trying to move it around. At least it’s not 
right up against a wall. It’s rather bright sounding, such that it overwhelms the 
singer’s breathy delivery when I ask her to do a quick run-through of the song 
for my beneﬁ t. I also notice that she’s using the piano’s music stand, which 
means I’ll need to mic her slightly from one side to keep her sight-line clear. In 
light of that, I make a mental note of the fact that she naturally appears to sing 
a little to the left. 
 Anticipating that I’ll want to use dynamics processing and/or level automation 
on the vocal line, I decide to mic the singer fairly close, with one of my quilts 
intercepting the room sound from the sides and rear of her sitting position. I 
ﬁ gure that my large-diaphragm condensers will probably be best suited to the 
breathy vocal delivery, and decide to do a little shootout between the AKG 
C414B XLS and the other bargain-basement mic at the start of the session. For 
the piano sound, I’m in something of a quandary. On the one hand, I’d like a 
stereo piano sound with some time-difference spaciousness, but on the other 
hand the only matched pair of mics I have are quite hard sounding, and I’m 
concerned that they’ll exaggerate the instrument’s brightness, especially at the 
moderately close miking distances I’d like to use to keep the unﬂ attering room 
reverb manageably low. My tactic will therefore be to set up the SE1As as a wide 
AB pair just outside the piano casing (rather than right up by the hammers), 
and then to use the Cascade Victor ribbon mic perhaps a little closer up to pro-
vide some tonal warmth and avoid too much of a hole in the middle of the ste-
reo picture. (The second quilt I’ll arrange around the backs of those mics to give 
me a bit more reverb reduction.) I brieﬂ y entertain the idea of closing the piano 
lid to round off the high-end timbre, but quickly abandon that train of thought, 
anticipating the difﬁ culty in getting a natural-sounding piano tone that way.  
 USING ROOM MICS IN A PEER-ARRAY SYSTEM 
 In Chapters 7 and 9, we investigated using room mics to control a recording’s overall dry/wet ratio from the 
faders. It can also be useful in peer-array ensemble recording, if you deliberately capture a slightly under-
reverberant sound from the peer arrays and then supplement that with some kind of room-mic array which 
delivers a fairly balanced ensemble reverb. However, if the ensemble you’re recording doesn’t balance well 
acoustically, room mics will only tend to exaggerate the kinds of depth-presentation problems I described in 
Section 10.1.1—in other words, the depth disparity between quiet and loud instruments will just increase, 
because the quiet instruments create less reverb. Artifi cial reverb is therefore usually the best solution under 
these circumstances, because you can apply it more liberally to the instruments that sound driest. (One 
alternative, though, which is quite popular when recording rock drum kits, is to set up a PA system in the 
room to supplement the room sound: For example, Bill Price 15 used this technique when recording The Rolling 
Stones’s  Tattoo You , Steve Churchyard 16 used it for The Pretenders’  Learning To Crawl , Dave Jerden 17 used it for 
Alice In Chains’  Dirt , and Dave Bottrill 18 used it for Tool’s  AEnima .) 
 I wouldn’t really advise using room mics as part of individual peer arrays either, unless you’re willing to make a 
fairly fi rm commitment to the reverb level the moment you Meld that specifi c array—the room mics will pick up 
so much spill from the whole ensemble that you may seriously disrupt the ensemble sound by trying to change 
their level later on. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
341
 On the day of the session, I’m able to get into the room an hour or so early 
to set up and test the gear. By ﬁ xing both SE1As to a single stand using screw-
on mounts, I only need four stands in total for the mics, so the other two I 
use to rig one of the quilts into a V-shaped booth behind the piano stool. The 
other quilt I manage to suspend from the ceiling-tile lattice with bungee cords. 
With 20 minutes still in hand, I decide to make use of the time and do a few 
test recordings (showcasing my spectacularly meager keyboard skills) to see 
what the guesswork-based piano peer array sounds like in practice. It’s a good 
job I do, as well, because the ribbon mic doesn’t deliver a particularly thrill-
ing sound, even after three or four position changes. Deciding to rely mostly 
on the small-diaphragm condensers instead, I pull them closer together into 
a more traditional AB spacing and then experiment with their height, angle, 
and spacing in search of a relatively smooth sound with reasonable mono-
compatibility. While I’m in the middle of doing that, the singer shows up, so I 
immediately change tack and suggest she warms up a little so we can check out 
how she sounds on the two vocal mics. 
 I’ve set up both mics a little to the singer’s left side and slightly below her 
nose level, my reasoning being: that I’ll probably get a brighter vocal tone 
there; that I shouldn’t get comb-ﬁ ltering from reﬂ ections off the music stand; 
and that she’s less likely to move off the mic if she needs to look where her 
hands are going. A pop shield is ﬁ xed to one of the stands around 8 inches 
from the mics, and I talk to the performer about trying to keep close to the 
pop shield, but without singing downwards into the mics. While she gets used 
to this, I quickly check the vocal-mic signals. Both of them give slightly over-
blown proximity-effect bass boost, but are already catching enough spill that 
I decide against moving them any further away. Reaching for my high-pass 
ﬁ lters instead, I roughly match the low end on both mic signals by ear and 
then hit Record so that we can both have a listen. Another surprise awaits: The 
cheapy mic wins hands-down! There’s just something about its high-frequency 
spectral contour that seems to bring out the airiness and clarity in the singer’s 
voice, whereas the C414B leaves her sounding rather spongy. I suggest giving 
the C414B’s hypercardioid pattern a go too, but that only makes her too sibi-
lant into the bargain. 
 What concerns me about the cheapy mic, though, is that its Backdrop piano 
sound is pretty nasty—gutless in the midrange, and with a harsh upper-
midrange edge that clearly won’t do the production sonics any favors. I try 
dealing with the upper-spectrum harshness ﬁ rst by gaffering a piece of acous-
tic foam to the C414B’s stand and positioning it behind the vocal mic, which 
does seem to help somewhat. Then I try rotating the microphone a little fur-
ther to the side of the singer, and after a couple of repositionings manage to 
tame the Backdrop tone somewhat without unduly affecting the vocal sound 
or making the singer’s performance position too awkward. I end up with a lit-
tle more piano spill overall on the vocal mic, but its timbre feels a whole lot 
less objectionable. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
342
 Now I explain to the artist that I’d like to take ten minutes or so to get the 
piano sonics together, and ask her just to play the piano part while I do this, so 
we don’t tire her voice unnecessarily. Although I’m working on headphones in 
the same room, my recording system is set up a fair distance away, so I’m able 
to make some judgments about the sound while she’s playing. Returning to the 
task of reﬁ ning the SE1A positions, I end up moving them further away from 
the instrument than I’d originally anticipated in order to minimize tonal edgi-
ness. This means they start picking up a touch more room reverb than I’d like, 
so I rehang the quilt closer around the mics to make them a bit drier again. In 
addition, the mics seem rather light on low end at this distance, so I try adding 
in a little of the closer ribbon mic (checking for the warmest-sounding polarity 
setting). This is of some use, but I can’t fade too much of it in without cloud-
ing the midrange tonality, so I end up routing the monitor channels of all three 
mics to a group channel in my recording system and then boosting that by 3 dB 
at around 100 Hz using a low shelf EQ, as well as further mellowing the bright-
ness above 3 kHz with a couple of decibels of high-frequency shelving cut. 
 Now I ask the performer to sing and play at the same time, so I can listen to the 
vocal Backdrop on my piano peer array. As suspected, the voice doesn’t feature par-
ticularly strongly in the Backdrop signal, but what spill there is appears to be fairly 
neutral sounding, albeit as muted in tone as you generally expect with off-axis 
 FIGURE 10.8    
 A diagram illustrating this chapter’s ﬁ rst case-study setup, as described in Section 10.3.1. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
343
pickup. The Ghost’s image is a little off-center in the stereo panorama, but I don’t 
really want to jeopardize the piano tone by moving its mics around any more, so 
resolve to pan the vocal mic a touch if any compensation is required later on. 
 Combining the two peer arrays for the ﬁ rst time is a disaster, but ﬂ ipping the 
polarity of the vocal mic immediately restores a more sensible tone, so I record 
a short section and suggest the singer take a short break while I listen criti-
cally to the Meld. A touch of muddiness has crept into the piano sound, and 
that’s only marginally improved by reducing the ribbon mic’s level, so instead 
I insert a variable phase-adjuster into the vocal-mic channel, which makes a 
bigger difference—and which affects the vocal tone very little, given the lack 
of vocal spill on the piano peer array. The stereo offset of the vocal Backdrop 
on the piano peer array doesn’t turn out to be particularly problematic in prac-
tice, so I keep the vocal mic itself panned centrally. Moving the quilt closer in 
behind the piano mics appears to have avoided distancing the piano too far, 
but I do blend the vocal a little better with it by adding a dab of short artiﬁ cial 
reverb to that mic signal in my monitor mix. At this point I take the opportu-
nity to quickly reference a couple of commercial voice-and-piano recordings 
I’ve already imported into my recording system (checking with a vectorscope to 
conﬁ rm that the stereo width’s appropriate), and realize that I can ease up my 
initial SE1A high-frequency shelving cut a fraction and bring the ribbon mic 
even further down in the mix balance. 
 At this point I ﬁ gure it’s time to start doing takes. The sound’s not perfect, but 
good enough now that I’m pretty sure we won’t get substantial improvements 
even if we spend the rest of the session fafﬁ ng around with the setup—in other 
words, we’ve reached the point of diminishing returns. Knowing the spill situ-
ation on the vocal mic, though, I do my best to alert the singer of any swal-
lowed syllables in her vocal performance, because I know that my ability to 
fade those up without affecting the piano sound may be a little restricted.  
 TALKBACK SPEAKERS AND SLATING 
 Even if you’re recording an ensemble without recourse to a foldback mix, it can still be useful to have little 
loudspeakers out in the recording space for talkback purposes. These don’t need to be anything fancy—in fact, little 
multimedia speakers have a number of advantages in this role: They’re cheap; they’re usually designed to be plugged 
directly into a headphone socket, so you can use your existing headphone foldback hardware to drive them; and 
they’re usually designed to require no earth connection, which prevents earth-loop problems. Do be careful, though, 
that such speakers don’t add appreciable background noise in the room when they’re not being used for talkback. 
 An ancillary advantage of having talkback speakers in the recording room is that you can use them to start 
each take with an announcement about what’s about to be recorded—a technique known as “slating.” Although 
in theory your note-taking during a session should make slating redundant, I think it’s a very good idea to do 
it anyway. Written notes can easily be lost or seem confusing in retrospect, whereupon slated take numbers 
are invaluable. I also sometimes like to slate all the recorder tracks prior to the session, by recording myself 
speaking into each mic, identifying what it is and where it’s supposedly pointed. Not only does this help out if 
audio fi les get mislabeled later on in the production process, but the process of checking over each mic also 
frequently exposes ridiculous setup gaffes you’d rather weren’t witnessed by a room full of musicians! 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
344
 10.3.2    A Jazz Trio 
 Now let’s say the same singer comes back to me and wants to record some jazz 
standards, adding a drummer (playing with brushes) and a bass guitarist to 
the line-up. How would I rejig the same venue/gear situation to deal with this? 
Well, ﬁ rst of all, I’d try to take advantage of the work I’d already done on the 
previous session, and set up the vocal mic and the piano’s small-diaphragm 
condensers roughly how they were before—slinging the vocal “booth” from 
the ceiling lattice as well, though, to free up those two mic stands. Given that 
the piano mics are a stereo rig, I’ll place the bass and drums in the room so 
that they appear roughly central within the Backdrop panorama, and I’ll face 
the drum kit toward the piano to maintain good eye contact between the 
singer and drummer. The big question is where to place the bass cab, and the 
following thoughts go through my mind:
 
■
 The bass player is likely to perform best when close to the drummer, but 
he needs to hear himself too, so I’ll avoid cab positions behind the piano 
which would make that difﬁ cult.  
 
■
 The singer may need to be able to hear the bass part for her pitching, so I 
don’t want to put the cab on the other side of the drum kit.  
 
■
 If I put the cab underneath the piano, the casing of the piano will help 
reduce bass spill on the piano’s peer array. 
 As a result, I decide to put the bass player a little to the left of the drummer 
(and to the right of the singer), with his cabinet under the edge of the piano in 
front of the kick drum, pointed toward the bassist. 
 Now to decide on mics. Given the less-than-stellar room sound and limited 
acoustic absorption available, I’m pretty sure I’ll want to bring the mics in 
fairly close and stick with directional models for the most part, but the main 
question is whether or not I should recycle the idea of a ribbon+C414B stereo 
MS pair I discussed in Section 9.5.2. The problem I have with this approach, 
though, is that it doesn’t leave me with any very suitable mic for the bass gui-
tar—the D112’s highly contoured LF response is unlikely to work well with 
more wide-ranging jazz lines, while the SM57 and SM58 are both likely to be 
light on low end. So I abandon the idea of miking the drums in stereo, and 
instead rely on the drum spill in the piano mics to give the drum kit some 
stereo width. I guess that some high-frequency deﬁ nition on the drummer’s 
brush work wouldn’t go amiss, so I ﬁ gure I’ll allocate the C414B XLS as a single 
overhead mic, and then use the ribbon down in front of the bass cab with its 
null plane rejecting the piano and kick drum—taking care to protect the micro-
phone from potential air blasts from the kick drum and bass cabinet. I imagine 
that a kick-drum spot mic will probably be required to ﬁ ll out the overhead 
sound, so decide to use the D112 there. The kick-drum has no hole in it, and 
I feel that removing the front head would kill the more natural and resonant 
tone required for this style, so I resolve to mike the instrument from the out-
side. With the piano and bass cabinet in such close proximity, I’m a bit cagey 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
345
about using this mic around the front of the drum, so decide to go for a posi-
tion around the beater side instead (where those other instruments will be 
shadowed more), and then angle the mic to regulate the degree of beater noise. 
The ﬁ nal mic stand, the Shure dynamic mics, and the second quilt I’ll keep on 
standby just in case I need them… 
 SOME BAND REHEARSAL TACTICS 
 Rehearsing and working out arrangements with bands is an art in itself, but there are some time-honoured 
preproduction tricks. Paul Worley, 19 for instance, likes to work out his arrangements in a rehearsal room, so that 
all the musicians know exactly what they’re doing before they get into the studio. “It means that you don’t have 
to waste your time in the studio having discussions about structure, what instruments to play, what amp to plug 
in, because you’ve already fi gured all that out…Each musician gets a chance to fi gure out what  not to play as 
well as what to play, and to work out when it’s their turn to step up.” 
 Gareth Jones 20 values this initial preproduction stage for other reasons: “We all get to know each other in a 
relatively low-stress environment, so when we get into the recording studio we all know where our strengths and 
weaknesses lie and there’s already a level of trust that’s been developed with the band. In the studio, that band 
is more willing to take what I’m saying seriously if we’ve done a lot of preproduction, because they’ve worked 
out that some of my ideas are worthwhile—and that’s really important.” 
 Another great little trick comes courtesy of Jack Douglas: 21 “I always tell them they’re holding back in rehearsal, 
even if they aren’t. Even if they’re at rehearsal playing their absolutely best, I will say, ‘Well, when we get into 
the studio, you can really let go.’” And if you’re actually rehearsing in the studio, Tony Brown 22 recalls a clever 
approach used by Don Was: He’d only rehearse the band section by section, concentrating particularly on any 
tricky transitions. Once all these smaller sections had been rehearsed, the band would then invariably nail their 
recorded performance within the fi rst couple of takes. Producers such as Neal Avron 23 and Gareth Jones 24 
regularly make little demo recordings during the preproduction to help focus arrangement discussions, and 
this also serves to remind everyone of decisions they’ve agreed on once proper recording commences. James 
Ford 25 cautions against making such recordings too elaborate, though: “It’s that demo-itis thing. I [don’t] want 
the rehearsal-room recordings to be too good, in a way, because you can kind of get attached to them.” 
 I arrange to get into the venue a couple of hours before the musicians do, and 
ask the singer/pianist to turn up twenty minutes before the rest of the band. I 
also warn everyone that we’re going to need at least an hour’s setup time once 
they’ve all arrived, in order to get a solid recorded sound. When the singer 
arrives, we set up the Focus, Backdrop, and Meld for the vocal and piano peer 
arrays as well as we can, within the constraints of a slightly closer piano-miking 
position—I don’t want the quilt in front of the piano this time, because I’m rely-
ing on the piano mics to ﬁ ll out the drum kit’s stereo picture. While the other 
players are warming up and tuning, I have a listen to what each sounds like as 
a Ghost in the existing Meld. The bass amp isn’t that powerful, so its Ghost is 
fairly understated, but the drums are (as expected) producing a fair bit of spill. 
Although the kick and snare don’t fare too badly in terms of sonics, the piano 
mics appear to be making the cymbals rather harsh and unnatural sounding. 
Moving the kit a little off-center seems to help, as do some small adjustments to 
the angling and spacing of the mics, but there’s only a certain amount that can 
be done without undermining the Focus sound of the piano’s peer array. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
346
 Once I’ve done as best I can with that, I recheck the piano array’s Meld with 
the vocal mic, and make a mental note that the drums Ghost is still sounding 
a touch harsh. In response I try positioning the C414B for a smoother sound, 
but its high-frequency presence makes this a little tricky, and drum spill picked 
up by the D112 spot mic also makes it hard work to ﬁ nd a clear tone for the 
whole kit—unless I put the spot mic so close that it picks up a very strange 
sound from the kick itself. Trying to Meld this drums peer array with the vocal 
and piano mics doesn’t go particularly well either, with cymbal harshness 
remaining a problem, and colored spill in the drum-array Backdrop clouding 
the piano sound. I ask for two minutes’ hiatus to have a listen to a test record-
ing, but become increasingly convinced that we’re on the wrong track using the 
C414B as the drums overhead. Replacing it with the ribbon mic gives a much 
less abrasive cymbal picture, and I get a lower level of piano spill (which is also 
better sounding) into the bargain. The new overhead seems to blend a little 
better with the kick-drum spot mic’s tone too, although I have to revisit their 
polarity/phase relationship to get the best out of it. 
 FIGURE 10.9    
 A diagram illustrating this chapter’s second case-study setup, as described in Section 10.3.2. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
347
 Now the Meld proceeds more promisingly, with the high frequencies in the piano 
peer array’s backdrop complementing the duller pickup from the drum peer 
array’s ribbon mic, although I still feel the need to add a little high-end shelving 
boost to the drum-mic submix to get enough brightness overall. Some muddi-
ness has crept into the drum sound because of its spill onto the piano mics too, 
and although some adjustments to the phase relationship between the piano and 
drum peer arrays improves this a bit, I shelve a couple of decibels off the ribbon 
mic below around 250 Hz as well. With the C414B switched to its ﬁ gure-eight 
pickup mode, I’m able to get a great deal of isolation on the bass mic even at a 
distance of 9 inches or so from the cab, so it’s not too difﬁ cult to pull off a rea-
sonable bass sound. It also Melds fairly easily with the other instruments because 
it’s not picking up too much spill and isn’t too loud in the recording room. 
 Once the full mix is in front of me I zap a quick test recording and then call 
a break so that I can have a closer listen with the singer. Although the sound 
seems to be fairly well received, both of us feel that the kick-drum is sounding 
rather too much like a rock kick drum on account of the close D112 spot mic, 
and doesn’t blend that well with the rest of the ensemble because it’s not cre-
ating very much spill on other mics. I’m loath to move the D112 signiﬁ cantly 
further away, however, because I’m concerned that the unusual tone of its spill 
may damage the rest of the drum sound, so instead I mute the D112 temporar-
ily and try picking up a slightly more holistic view of the kick drum using the 
rear sensitivity lobe of the bass mic’s ﬁ gure-eight polar pattern. This involves 
sliding the bass cabinet (with its mic) to angle it slightly toward the drums—
the bass-versus-kick balance subsequently being adjusted by the C414’s angle 
and by the distance between the kick drum and the bass mic. This immediately 
helps give the kick (and indeed the whole kit) a more well-balanced sound, 
 COULD YOU GO ROUND THOSE TOMS ONCE MORE FOR ME…? 
 The combined mic-setup/mixing scheme I outline in this chapter shouldn’t require anyone in the ensemble 
to play on their own just for your benefi t, so if the ensemble are happy just jamming or rehearsing for a while, 
it’s perfectly possible to set up and mix the entire rig very inconspicuously, without bothering the performers 
very much at all. In fact, scheduling a rehearsal in the recording venue prior to the session proper is often 
a great way to get the performers comfortable with the recording layout, while giving you valuable extra 
setup time. 
 Nevertheless, there are occasions where you may want to ask the musicians to play certain things specifi cally 
for you, so that you can deal with technical matters more effi ciently. If you sense that physical stamina may be a 
limiting factor when it comes to capturing enough takes (particularly when working with singers, percussionists, 
and wind/brass players), try not to have them performing for any longer than absolutely necessary—you don’t 
want to cross the line between “warmed up” and “burnt out” before something’s actually been recorded! Also, 
where certain instruments are played only sporadically (e.g., the toms in a drum kit), you’ll generally conserve 
everyone’s time and energy if you ask players to loop around a certain musical section where those instruments 
are featured. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
348
and allows me to use the D112 at a much lower level in the mix just for a 
sprinkling of extra attack deﬁ nition, although its phase relationship does natu-
rally require careful rechecking at the Meld. 
 An additional worry of mine is that I might want to rebalance the snare brush-
work a little at the mix, so I put up the SM57 as a spot mic to catch this—not 
ideal for high frequencies, but a dynamic’s all I’ve got left! Finally, seeing as we 
didn’t need to use the second quilt elsewhere, I sling it up above and behind 
the drummer to kill a bit more of the room reverb coming into his overhead 
mic. One quick burger pitstop later, and we’re ready for the proper takes!  
 10.3.3    An Exploratory Campaign 
 As in Section 9.5, these two case studies aren’t meant to provide you with 
some kind of “cut out and keep” ensemble-recording recipe. On the contrary: I 
hope I’ve shown how the nature of a miking setup is inextricably linked to the 
unique combination of musicians, equipment, and venue it’s contending with. 
You can’t just adopt some kind of cookie-cutter attitude—apart from anything, 
the restrictions of low-budget operation frequently demand considerable lat-
eral thinking from small-studio engineers, so leftﬁ eld recording rigs (such as 
the ones mentioned above) often become eminently justiﬁ able. 
 I also hope I’ve been able to communicate how exploratory this kind of ses-
sion typically is. The way instruments, acoustics, mics, and processing inter-
act on even fairly small peer-array sessions is so complicated that you really 
can’t know for sure what’s going to work until you try it, so 
you must always be willing (and able) to probe new 
options on the ﬂ y if you don’t hit paydirt straight 
away. That said, there’s no point spending ages 
seeking sonic perfection if that leaves insufﬁ -
cient time to get the necessary takes, so it’s 
important to prioritize those aspects of the 
recorded sound that are of greatest value 
to the music you’re serving. That way, if 
you feel forced to hit Record earlier than 
you’d wish (which is most of the time!), 
any remaining sonic compromises are rel-
egated to less critical aspects of the produc-
tion. In Section 10.3.2, for example, I was willing 
to compromise on the stereo width, HF clarity, and 
overall spill levels of the drum kit, because I wanted the 
piano to be wider, clearer, and more upfront than the drums in the mix.  
 I’m not wanting to promote defeatism, though, because I ﬁ rmly believe you 
should always be striving for the best possible sound you can get on every ses-
sion. It’s just that learning about peer-array recording is a long-term campaign, 
rather than a single battle. The ﬁ rst sessions you do, you’ll have to work out 
most of your mic placements from scratch, so you’ll be ﬁ ring on all cylinders 
 “The way 
instruments, acoustics, 
mics, and processing interact on 
even fairly small peer-array sessions 
is so complicated that you really can’t 
know for sure what’s going to work until 
you try it, so you must always be willing 
(and able) to probe new options on 
the fl y if you don’t hit paydirt 
straight away.” 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
349
just to get a usable sound before everyone dies of boredom. But as you rack up 
a bit of experience with different ensembles/venues, you’ll begin to ﬁ nd you 
have more of a head start. For example, the piano and vocal setup of Section 
10.3.1 saved me time when setting up for the ensemble in Section 10.3.2. 
Likewise, if I had to record the same jazz trio again, I might be more efﬁ cient 
by starting from the previous session’s mic setup; or, alternatively, my attempts 
at trying to mix the ﬁ rst trio recording might suggest that, say, arranging the 
quilt over the bass mic to reduce cymbal spill might be a better option in 
future. 
 THE KICKSNARE MIC 
 Here’s an interesting little trick for drum recording mentioned by Tom Syrowski: 26 “We also had what we call 
a kicksnare mic, which is an AKG C414 in fi gure-eight placed just underneath the snare, pointing at the kick-
drum beater and the bottom of the snare drum. We move it around until kick and snare have roughly the same 
volume level.” Gus Oberg 27 used a Telefunken 260 small-diaphragm omni in a very similar way while recording 
The Strokes: “I put the 260 on the beater side of the rim of the kick drum, it’s like two inches from the top of 
the kick drum and two inches from the side of the snare.” The advantages of this placement for me are that it 
keeps cymbal spill low and it provides an alternate tonal picture that supplements more traditional close-mic 
placements rather well, typically adding beater defi nition to the kick and tonal “beef” to the snare. 
 If you scratch the surface of any large studio’s “standard” band setup, you’ll 
ﬁ nd a whole history of similar session-by-session experiments which led to it, 
through which the engineers endeavored to get the best from the speciﬁ c play-
ers, rooms, and equipment they had. “We ﬁ gured out how to get good sounds 
in the room,” recalls Robert Musso 28 of his work at Greenpoint Studio, for 
example. “At ﬁ rst it was a matter of trial and error, until we ﬁ nally got to a 
point when it really came together. Then we stayed with what worked.” One of 
the things you’re paying for in a well-run professional studio is this accumula-
tion of uniquely location-speciﬁ c experience, which makes it possible for their 
staff to get beautifully reﬁ ned peer-array recordings in a ﬂ ash. Sadly, you can’t 
really hope to compete with any such recording by copying its session layout, 
because so many of the nuanced engineering decisions that originally spawned 
that layout will be invalidated the moment you substitute its speciﬁ c players/
instruments/gear/acoustics with yours. In other words, there’s no alternative 
but to build up your own recording experience, based on the musicians, kit, 
and rooms  you  have to work with, and develop your own “standard” proce-
dures which ﬁ t those resources. 
 Even then, though, there’s only a certain amount you can ever predict about 
how a setup will sound based on previous sessions, if only because of atmo-
spheric conditions affecting the way sound travels through the air. “It can be a 
big change,” observes Bruce Botnick. 29 “I’ve had it where the ﬁ rst two days [of a 
session] sounded amazing, and all of a sudden the third day is as dry as can be, 
and you have to either raise the mics or go in closer, or change them.”

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
350
 EDITING ENSEMBLE RECORDINGS 
 Although all-in-one-room ensemble recording is very popular in classical and acoustic music, many small-studio 
recordists shy away from it when working in more mainstream rock and pop styles, primarily on the basis that 
spill between the mics might make it diffi cult to correct mistakes or to tighten ensemble timing after the fact. 
This is a shame, because the simple ability to comp together slices from three or four different multitrack takes 
usually affords more than enough editing/fi xing power for those purposes, in my experience, especially if there’s 
any prominent percussion part (such as a drum kit) providing lots of easy edit points in every bar of the music. 
Furthermore, most commercial styles will usually have enough repetition in them that you can fi x up missed 
snare hits or fl ubbed guitar chords even when there’s only one take to work from, just by copying between 
repeated sections. 
 However, to get the best out of editing ensemble takes, there are a few things to keep in mind:
 
■
 The most effective edits will be those in which you cut across all the ensemble mics at once, so you 
shouldn’t expect to be able to patch up subsets of the ensemble session’s mic signals using tracks from 
a separate take. You might just get away with dropping in an individual part for a small snippet without too 
many odd-sounding side-effects, but I wouldn’t recommend ever relying on that—do another take to get the 
performance you need while you’re still tracking. 
 FIGURE 10.10    
 You can often get away with editing multitrack ensemble recordings in surprising detail without audible problems—just so long 
as you’re careful to maintain the phase-relationships between the tracks. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
351
 10.4   COPING WITH LARGE-SCALE SESSIONS 
 10.4.1   Delegating the Workload 
 Already in Chapter 9 the logistics involved with all those mics 
and signals may have begun to feel fairly taxing, but 
peer-array recording is usually even more so, such 
that most engineers will struggle to do a good 
job of it single-handed—especially if their brief 
extends beyond sonics into wider production 
matters. “Honestly, I don’t know how some 
engineer-producers can handle it on their 
own,” remarks Steve Bush. 32 “Why do you 
think that, on most pro sessions, there’s gener-
ally a producer, and engineer, and an assistant 
or two?” Given that employing staff will be out 
of the budget of small-studio engineers, one of the 
best ways you can improve your recorded results on 
 
■
 You should be careful not to change the time-alignment between the different tracks in the multitrack 
recording, otherwise you may mess with internal phase-relationships, potentially rubbishing your entire 
ensemble timbre. “I’ll tell you,” says Wyn Davis, 30 “as soon as you start moving things around and start 
taking things out of their phase-relationship to each other, it’s over!” Most editing systems will provide the 
option to time-lock a set of tracks together for editing purposes, so enable that feature if it’s available, to 
avoid slip-ups. 
 
■
 Should you record lead vocals and improvised solo parts as part of your full-ensemble take, or separately as 
a later overdub? If such lines vary much between performances, you may fi nd it almost impossible to make 
fi ner edits between takes, or indeed between repeated sections of the same take. With a lot of amateur 
ensembles, it’s often pragmatic to postpone such parts to the overdubbing stage to make best use of 
limited session time—something we’ll discuss further next chapter. 
 Make sure you keep good clear notes of which takes are which, and where to fi nd each one within your recording 
system, because it saves all manner of confusion come editing time. Within this context, most engineers who 
regularly work with ensembles develop their own shorthand for certain common session occurrences. For 
example, I normally use “T3” for “take three,” “FS” for “false start,” “M” for “master,” “X” for “discard,” and 
“TUN”/“TIM” to fl ag tuning/timing concerns. It’s also sensible to write down something about the purpose of 
each take, so that you know what to listen for when comparing takes post-session—particularly if that happens 
to be several weeks later! 
 Occasionally you’ll come into contact with bands who are determined to avoid all studio trickery and present 
the listening public with nothing but complete, unedited takes. As defensible as such indier-than-thou posturing 
might be philosophically, I don’t think it actually gives the best results in most small-studio situations. The fi rst 
problem is that it tends to expand the number of takes required to achieve a suitable quality level, especially 
where several band members have equal voting rights—to the point where the stamina of the players begins 
to become a serious limiting factor. But that’s not the only reason, as Steven Epstein 31 recalls from the age of 
direct-to-vinyl orchestral recording: “When you got to the last two minutes of a direct-to-disc recording, the artist 
would tend to give a very safe performance because they didn’t want to make any mistakes and have to start all 
over again…Having the option of editing allows the artist to be much more free with the performance.” 
 “Given that 
employing staff will be 
out of the budget of small-
studio engineers, one of the best 
ways you can improve your recorded 
results on peer-array sessions 
is to fi nd ways of delegating 
some of the work to willing 
volunteers.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
352
peer-array sessions is to ﬁ nd ways of delegating some of the work to willing 
volunteers—whether those are members of the ensemble (who should have 
a clear interest in helping you make them sound good), students in need of 
recording experience, or other guerrilla recordists helping you out on a favors-
for-favors basis. 
 The simplest thing other people can do is usually loading/unloading gear if 
you’re working on location, although I usually try to avoid getting musicians 
involved with packing/unpacking mic stands and cables unless I’ve been able 
to demonstrate how I’d prefer it done—misguided assistance in this respect 
can easily lose you more time than it saves! Nominating someone to keep 
track of the session schedule and organize any breaks/refreshments often 
works well, especially if you (like me) only remember to take a break when 
you’re beginning to hallucinate from malnutrition… 
 On the production side, there are lots of tasks that are eminently delegable. 
For example, it’s a godsend having someone who reminds everyone to tune 
up before takes and who listens speciﬁ cally for sour tuning during playbacks. 
Likewise, a “Timing Tsar” might issue pre-take tempo reminders and scout for 
timing concerns post-recording, and a conductor or musical director might 
take charge of spotting and remedying internal balance issues via adjustments 
 FIGURE 10.11    
 One of the most useful 
things an assistant or 
willing volunteer can do 
for you while setting up 
an ensemble recording 
is to put on headphones 
and move microphones 
on your behalf, while you 
listen and direct their 
actions from the control 
room using talkback. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
353
to the ensemble’s musical performance. A designated mic-checker/mover can 
be another fantastically useful person, because they’ll save you a lot of legwork 
running back and forth between the mics and the mixer. If you’ve managed to 
set up a separate control room for your ensemble session, then ideally it’s nice 
to provide this helper with a pair of headphones to direct their activities, but 
don’t underestimate what can be achieved just by agreeing a few bits of sign-
language in advance. I like to ﬁ nd someone with a little studio experience for 
this role if possible, but I don’t let it put me off if I can’t—even a technophobe 
will usually save me signiﬁ cant effort here. 
 Where you have someone much more studio-savvy available, then you’ll get 
the best assistance from them if you’ve got a decent setup list they can refer 
to. This should show at least what mics you’re planning to use for which 
instruments, and which stand, cable, and recorder input each mic should 
be connected to, but there’s lots of other useful information you might also 
provide on it: how any on-body mic switches should be set, for instance, or 
whether a pop shield will be required. An annotated venue ﬂ oorplan can 
also be invaluable—it doesn’t need to look like an architect’s blueprint to 
show all the instruments and mics, as well as the positioning of any furniture, 
gobos, headphone amps, and music stands. Labeling your recording system’s 
inputs and monitor faders with masking tape to show the mic signals they’re 
responsible for saves a lot of aggro as well, by preventing people working at 
cross-purposes. 
 Once everything’s plugged in, it makes for quite a good division of labor if you 
ask your fellow engineer to handle foldback and talkback arrangements for 
you, seeing as these can get quite complicated on larger sessions. This is one 
situation where DAW-based recording engineers can really beneﬁ t from having 
a multi-output audio interface and a separate analog mixer, because this makes 
it possible for two people to work in tandem: the recordist building the main 
control-room monitor mix within the DAW mixer, while sending per-instru-
ment submixes to the channel line inputs of the analog console; and the guest 
engineer sitting at the analog desk creating any necessary foldback mixes for 
the musicians via its auxiliary sends, as well as being responsible for talkback 
functions. 
 THE LONESOME LINE-CHECKER 
 If I’ve no choice but to line-check a large ensemble-recording setup on my own, here’s what I do. First I take 
a cheap phantom-powered test-signal generator and plug it into the end of each mic cable. This gives me a 
consistent sinewave signal that I can use to check routing and which will also highlight any audio clicks or 
distortion pretty clearly when auditioned. When I know that the post-mic input chains are all working properly, 
I connect up the mics, switch on a portable radio in the middle of the ensemble, and quickly Solo each of the 
mic signals to check that none of the mics is malfunctioning. Because I know how loud the radio is, and where 
it is in the room, I can normally use it to set up approximate preamp gain settings too. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
354
 10.4.2    Mic Stands and Cabling for Ensemble Work 
 So far I’ve been assuming that you’re using general-purpose mic stands, of 
the type that can lift your mics around 7 feet (2.2 m) into the air. As you start 
working seriously with ensembles, however, you may have to begin invest-
ing in more specialized products. Shorter mic stands speciﬁ cally designed for 
addressing things like kick drums and small ampliﬁ ers are a useful ﬁ rst step 
(and not too pricey), because they allow you to position mics more freely 
when multimiking within a restricted space. Where ﬂ oor area really is at a pre-
mium, you can also get little clips which will attach mics directly to drums 
and speaker cabinets, although I’m not too fond of those myself, because they 
often make it more difﬁ cult to reposition mics and generally promote rather 
extreme close-miking. 
 Elevating your mics well above head height is typically a more expensive prop-
osition, with dedicated double-height mic stands typically retailing at more 
than twice the price. One budget workaround here is to investigate cheaper 
lighting stands. If you ﬁ x a length of metal curtain-rod tubing to the cross-bar 
of one of these, you can hang mics from it using screw-on clips such as K&M’s 
238 Microphone Holders. In fact, because some lighting stands have multiple 
arm attachments, one stand base may even be able to accommodate large mul-
timic dominant arrays such as omni “curtain,” Decca Tree, or phased-array rigs. 
Whatever design of large-scale stand you’re using, though, take extra care to 
avoid it overbalancing, because the consequences hardly bear thinking about 
on a big ensemble date. “All the cables have to be nicely dressed,” says Armin 
Steiner, 33 “because anyone who is stepping around on a break or something 
can cause you irreparable damage if everything isn’t tied down properly.” Add 
weight to the stand bases where possible, and consider counterweighting the 
stand’s boom arm wherever a longer horizontal reach is required. 
 FIGURE 10.12   
 An affordable lighting 
stand repurposed as an 
extended-height multi-
mic stand—the mics 
are ﬁ xed to the main 
frame with curtain-rail 
tubing and screw-on 
microphone mounts. 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
355
 Speaking of counterweights, remember that the point of them is to reduce 
strain on the clutch mechanism which holds the boom arm in position, so try 
to make sure the arm actually balances on its own before tightening the clutch. 
Also, do endeavor to set up any counterweight well above head height, other-
wise you’re just begging for someone to come along and brain themselves on 
that big lump of metal! 
 When you’ve got lots of mic stands in a small space, there are a couple of other 
general pitfalls to watch out for. Firstly, try not to place the foot of one stand on 
top of the foot of another. Not only does that potentially destabilize the upper 
stand, but it also means its position will be disturbed if you need to move the 
one underneath. By the same token, try not to place any mic stand’s base over a 
cable, so you limit the damage if anyone does trip over your audio wiring. 
 Where you’re using just a handful of mics within about a 30-feet (10 m) range 
of your recording system, ordinary mic cables will usually do the job ﬁ ne, even 
though it may mean you have to chain mic cables from time to time. However, 
once you’re using more than about eight mics, or you need to set up your mul-
titrack recorder signiﬁ cantly further away from the ensemble, using lots of indi-
vidual cables becomes rather ungainly, and it’s usually wise to invest in some 
thick “multicore” cables, each of which can carry multiple audio signals. These 
are sometimes called “snakes,” and are usually terminated at one end with 
short “tails” or “ﬂ ying connectors” for plugging into the inputs of your record-
ing system. The other end of the snake feeds into a heavy-duty “stage box” cov-
ered with audio sockets, and there are labels on the tails and stage box to show 
how their connections correspond. The idea is that you use your regular mic 
cables to get from the microphones to the stage box, and then the snake carries 
those signals all the way back to the recording system without any extra fuss. 
Where the total cable length ends up being more than about 100 feet (30 m), 
the cables may begin to become responsible for unwelcome amounts of added 
noise, especially if you’re recording quieter acoustic sources. Some professional 
 FIGURE 10.13   
 A multicore cable such 
as this one (which has a 
stage box built into the 
cable reel) makes it a 
lot easier to set up for 
larger-scale sessions. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
356
engineers tackle this by preamplifying their mics in the live room, so that they 
can send them through the snake at line level, but I wouldn’t get involved with 
that unless you really hear that you have to, because it makes managing levels 
a bit of hassle if you’re engineering single-handed. 
 DROP ARMS 
 There are some situations where large-scale microphone 
stands are used for ordinary-height sources. Vocals are 
common recipients of this treatment, because it allows 
the stand’s base to be moved out of harm’s way, providing 
more room for the singer to move, as well as allowing freer 
positioning of their music stand and/or any instrument they’re 
accompanying themselves with. Drum overheads may also 
benefi t from larger stands too, leaving more fl oor space around 
the kit clear for spot-mic stands. However, in both these cases 
it can prove awkward to avoid putting the stand’s counterweight 
at head height, so high-end mic stands frequently feature an 
extra little attachment at the end of the boom arm, called 
a “drop arm,” which simply lowers the mic by roughly a foot 
(30 cm), allowing the boom and its counterweight to be 
elevated further out of harm’s way. You rarely see drop arms 
in use in small studios, because cheaper mic stands don’t 
include them as standard, but if the idea appeals to you, then 
check out K&M’s $30 (£20) Mini Boom Arm, because this will 
fi t to the end of any general-purpose mic stand’s boom to give 
a very similar result.  
 FIGURE 10.14   
 This high-spec Latch Lake MicKing 2200 stand 
has a built-in drop arm, but you can also retroﬁ t 
drop arms to more affordable stands. 
 10.4.3    Equipment Redundancy 
 The more musicians you’re recording at once, the more of a bummer it’s likely 
to be if some technical gremlin renders the recording system inoperable. For 
this reason, you should always try to plan some equipment redundancy into 
your recording rig on ensemble sessions. The easiest way to do this is to go 
through each piece of equipment in your rig and ask yourself what you’d 
do if it went up in smoke. “You absolutely have to assume that whatever can 
go wrong most likely will,” says Frank Filipetti. 34 Clearly there will be few 
small-studio recordists who can afford to bring along direct replacements for 
every bit of kit they’re using on a session, but there are some sensible precau-
tions you can take that shouldn’t break the bank:
 
■
 Have at least one more of each type of cable/adaptor than you need. Cable 
faults are the most frequent problem you’re likely to encounter on any loca-
tion session. With mic cables, I’d personally plan to bring 50% more of 
those, so you can also use them as extensions if necessary.  

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
357
 
■
 Take a couple more mics than strictly necessary, 
even if they’re not all that suitable. If one of your 
ﬁ rst-call mics gives up on you during the ses-
sion, it’s usually better to replace it with an 
inappropriate mic than to have none at all, 
especially within a peer-array recording sit-
uation. This also gives you some ﬂ exibility 
if the ensemble line-up changes on the day 
of the recording—a dispiritingly common 
occurrence on low-budget sessions. 
 
■
 Always have a spare pair of headphones, a spare 
headphone output, and a long headphone extension 
cable with you, whether you’re planning to use head-
phone foldback or not. It’s amazing how often this will come in 
useful: for bailing you out when your main monitoring system fails; for direct-
ing an assistant who’s moving mics; for protecting your ears while you rearrange 
drum overheads; or for providing an unforeseen additional foldback feed.  
 
■
 Have some kind of feasible backup plan in case your main recording system 
dies. This might simply be an agreement with a friendly co-conspirator that 
you’ll come to each other’s rescue if either of you ﬁ nds yourselves in such 
dire straights. Alternatively, you might continue to maintain an outdated 
recording system as a fallback after upgrading, or else invest in a secondhand 
multitracker or even one of those ubiquitous portable stereo recorders—
recording direct to stereo may be your idea of a complete nightmare, but 
would you prefer no recording at all?  
 
■
 Whatever data storage space you  think  you need for your session, make sure 
you’ve got twice as much available. You never want to have to stop record-
ing because you’ve run out of space. In a similar vein, work out how you’re 
planning to back up your work as you go, in case any of your storage media 
fail mid-session. 
 Planning for the unexpected may also involve working out what you’d do in the 
event of a power cut. Backup power systems that are capable of keeping a whole 
recording rig running seamlessly through a mains outage will be well out of 
budget for most small-studio denizens, but I wouldn’t worry about those much 
anyway—most ensembles will need power to perform anyway, if only for lights. 
However, if you’re recording digitally, it’s still worth considering whether a power 
cut might lose you unsaved data. This is where laptop computer systems are great 
for location recording, because they’ll switch over to battery power automatically 
if the mains supply vanishes, giving enough time to save whatever you’re work-
ing on. With other computers and digital recorders, however, I’d recommend 
investing in a small Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS). This is effectively a 
backup battery that switches in if the mains power fails, giving you a few min-
utes of extra running time to save in-progress project ﬁ les and shut everything 
down correctly. To protect just one or two recorders/computers, you should be 
able to get hold of a UPS with a suitable power rating for under $150 (£100). 
 “Take a couple 
more mics than strictly 
necessary, even if they’re 
not all that suitable. This gives 
you some fl exibility if the ensemble 
line-up changes on the day of the 
recording—a dispiritingly common 
occurrence on low-budget 
sessions.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
358
 FIGURE 10.15    
 The more difﬁ cult or expensive a session is to reschedule, the more it makes sense to protect your 
recordings against unforeseen power outages—for example with an affordable uninterruptible power 
supply such as this one. 
 SAGGING PHANTOM POWER 
 If you’re running lots of microphones simultaneously on an ensemble session, their combined phantom-power 
draw can overstress the hardware of a multi-input preamp, mixer, or audio interface within your recording 
system. This is something that’s much more likely to happen in cheaper equipment, especially in audio 
interfaces which draw their own power from a computer via a data cable (rather than directly from the mains). 
If the load on the phantom power supply causes its voltage level to drop by more than a few volts below the 
nominal 48 V standard, you’ll fi nd that your mics will lose headroom—i.e., they’ll distort more easily on loud 
sounds. 
 To check for sagging phantom-power levels on any multi-input device, plug in all the mics/DIs you’re going to 
use and engage phantom powering for those mics that need it. Then fi nd a spare mic input (unplug one of the 
mics if necessary) and measure the voltage between Pin 1 (earth) and either Pin 2 or Pin 3 using a regular 
voltmeter—it should read above 44 V to be within internationally agreed standards. If you had to unplug a mic 
to make the measurement, it’s worth repeating this test using a different mic’s socket, just in case the mic 
you unplugged fi rst of all was particularly power-hungry! (Also, be careful not to short-circuit the phantom-power 
supply by connecting unbalanced outputs to phantom-powered inputs, as that can also cause the phantom 
power supply’s voltage to droop in less well-designed equipment.) 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
359
 10.5   SESSION PACING AND PLAYBACKS 
 10.5.1   Workarounds for Limited Setup Time 
 In previous chapters, I’ve repeatedly stressed the importance of working at high 
speed so that you’re ready to capture moments of magic whenever they hap-
pen. It’s no different when working with ensembles. “I think [engineers are] 
very unaware of how important it is for the band to come into the studio and 
not have to wait around,” says Phil Ramone. 35 “If the band feels like playing 
in the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve minutes, there’s your record.” “You just want to get everything 
set up so everybody can play,” adds Nigel Godrich. 36 “My engineering may not 
be the most reﬁ ned of anybody’s, but I have learned that that’s not what it’s 
about. It’s not about getting the most hi-ﬁ  sounding thing; what makes a good 
record good is the vibe, and how everything just falls together.” 
 Where you’re recording single instruments (or ensembles via the dominant-
array approach), copious preparation can usually equip you to hit Record the 
moment the musicians arrive, if necessary, while still 
ending up with a usable recording—even when 
you’re working with a group of performers 
for the ﬁ rst time in an unfamiliar venue. 
Sure, there’ll always be risk involved in 
doing this, but it’ll be a comparatively 
calculated risk. With peer-array record-
ing, on the other hand, unfortunate 
spill pickup on just one of your peer 
arrays may cause ferocious problems 
at the mix, and it’s very difﬁ cult to pre-
dict such things in advance before you’ve 
heard what your speciﬁ c ensemble sounds 
like through your speciﬁ c mics in your spe-
ciﬁ c room. So although it’s still your duty to press 
Record within the ﬁ rst few moments of a peer-array ses-
sion should the occasion demand, I’d also highly recommend doing everything 
within your power to avoid getting into that situation in the ﬁ rst place!  
 A primary tactic here is to get some of the musicians into the studio in advance 
of the others, so that you get a head-start on sorting out their peer arrays before 
everyone needs to start playing together. An added bonus of bringing in the per-
formers piecemeal like this is that you get more opportunity to talk with each 
of them individually, so you can get constructive communication going before 
you need to make use of it in earnest. This isn’t nearly as easy to pull off when 
a coachload of people all rock up at the same time! Another good trick is to 
start the session with some kind of warm-up jam or rehearsal (or by deliberately 
recording some piece of music inessential to the production as a whole), on the 
understanding that it’s expressly for the purpose of letting the performers settle 
in and allowing you to get sounds. “[If] I’ve decided which song I’d like to record 
ﬁ rst,” says Richard Dodd, 37 “I’ll actually have them warm up and get my sounds 
on another song, so that when we start the song we’re going to record, I’m ready.”  
 “Try to get some 
of the musicians into the 
studio in advance of the others, 
so that you get a head-start on sorting 
out their peer arrays. An added bonus of 
bringing in the performers piecemeal is that 
you get more opportunity to talk with each 
of them individually and get constructive 
communication going before you 
need to make use of it in 
earnest.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
360
 MINIMAL DRUM MIKING 
 Some small-studio engineers labor under the misapprehension that you can only capture commercial-grade 
drum sounds via elaborate multimiking, and therefore avoid recording a drum kit in ensemble situations simply 
because they don’t feel they have enough hardware. In fact, lots of commercial drum recordings have been 
carried out with very few mics indeed. Many pre-multitrack-era big-band recordings have a single overhead mic 
on the drums, for instance, as did Cliff Richard’s rock-and-roll classic “Move It,” according to Malcolm Addey. 38 
Two-mic drum setups were fairly common in the ’60s and ’70s, when few people would bat an eyelid at a mono 
drum sound. For instance, Andy Johns 39 used just two Beyerdynamic M160 ribbon mics for Led Zeppelin’s 
oft-imitated “When The Levee Breaks”; both Steve Albini 40 and Eddie Kramer 41 have talked about creating full 
mono kit sounds with one overhead and a kick mic; and Bones Howe 42 used an overhead-plus-snare/hat setup 
for many artists, including Ornette Coleman and Tom Waits. 
 There are some classic three-mic setups too: For instance, Robbie Adams 43 used a single overhead mic with 
kick and snare spots for U2’s  Achtung Baby ; Bruce Botnick 44 used a very similar miking scheme for The Doors, 
except that his snare mic was underneath the drum; and Al Stone 45 used a three-mic technique for Jamiroquai’s 
break-through album  Traveling Without Moving  (“One mic a few feet in front of the bass drum, one over the 
drummer’s shoulder covering the hi-hat and snare, and another to the side to cover the cymbals,” he explains.”). 
Even if you insist on stereo, there are plenty of well-known engineers who’ve recorded kits by supplementing a 
main pair with only one or two spot mics—for example, both Tony Platt 46 and Mike Hedges 47 recall Glyn Johns 
working with just stereo overheads and a kick-drum mic, and Jacquire King 48 used a similar setup with Kings Of 
Leon. Steve Churchyard 49 and Peter Henderson 50 have also talked about Geoff Emerick using a four-mic setup 
with spots for just kick and snare. 
 It also stands to reason that peer-array methods will work best on longer ses-
sions where more than one piece of music is to be recorded, because this 
gives you the opportunity to continue ﬁ nessing the setup on a rolling basis. 
My favorite situation, in fact, is to get a sound for the ensemble’s ﬁ rst piece of 
music at a fairly leisurely pace on day one, ending up with a couple of prelimi-
nary takes before supper time. Then I reassess my initial rough mix later that 
evening and make any setup tweaks which seem necessary with hindsight. The 
following day the musicians can then return to the session fresh and rested, 
and work at whatever pace suits them, because the lion’s share of the technical 
legwork is already complete. 
 Unfortunately, such utopian scenarios are rarely feasible, and sometimes 
you’ve simply got to grit your teeth and cut corners to hit the session sched-
ule. “How can you get great sounds without hearing the band?” asks David 
Thoener. 51 “The answer: you wing it!” You might, for example, mic a little 
closer and use a bit more absorption overall to reduce interaction between the 
peer arrays, making the Meld stages a little less critical (and time consuming). 
Another shortcut would be to concentrate on getting the Focus of each array 
sorted out ﬁ rst, and then skipping directly to a full-ensemble Melding free-for-
all so you can highlight the most obvious spill-related issues. Both of these 
tricks will likely cause you headaches at mixdown, but at the same time they 
should hopefully minimize the chances of capturing signals that prove to be 
truly unmixable. “If I’m going into the session, and it’s essential that it runs 

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
361
fast,” says Frank Filipetti, 52 “I’ll go with what I consider the safest and not nec-
essarily what I consider the best.” 
 But what if something still sounds hopeless during the ﬁ rst take? “Don’t just 
stand there and wait until the take is over!” asserts Phil Ramone. 53 “I’ve got 
a take with me adjusting mics in the middle of the take…and me moving a 
whole guitar rig over, and it’s in the record! It was the best take!” And if the 
ﬁ rst take isn’t the keeper, then you won’t have wasted the opportunity to bet-
ter prepare for the next one. In fact, Ed Cherney 54 actually takes the view that 
leaving sonic reﬁ nements until after the ﬁ rst take can actually be beneﬁ cial, 
because at that point there’s actually something concrete to discuss: “It’s real at 
that point… I’ve been in places where you mess around a lot before you play 
any music, and the session doesn’t move forward.” 
 10.5.2   The Power of Playbacks 
 As I said in Section 10.2, you can only properly evaluate the quality of a peer-
array recording by creating a basic mix of it during the tracking session. But 
this isn’t the only reason for spending as much time on your control-room 
monitor mix as you can. When you’ve got a lot of sessions under your belt, 
it’s easy to forget just how exhilarating it is for musicians to hear themselves 
sounding like something out of their own record collections, so if you can hit 
them with that after their ﬁ rst take, they’ll almost always respond by delivering 
a second take that utterly smokes it, setting up a classic virtuous cycle. “The best 
thing you can do for a musician is to get them excited,” says 
Mark Howard: 55 “As soon as you win their conﬁ dence 
with a great sound, and they know they don’t have 
to worry about anything technical, you are going 
to get great performances out of them. They are 
just going to nail it.” But even with more sea-
soned players who are more likely to deliver 
maximum expression from the get-go, it’s still 
worth giving them a playback sound that’s 
within spitting distance of the ﬁ nal release, 
because they’ll respond to any audible imbal-
ances by moderating their playing—in other 
words, they’ll help mix the record for you!  
 And let’s not forget how much the ﬁ rst playback reﬂ ects 
upon you. “You must wow your band,” says Eric “Mixerman” 
Saraﬁ n. 56 “A poor job on tones right from the beginning of your session can 
be unrecoverable. Job number one on the ﬁ rst day is to solidify the band’s 
trust in you.” In this light, having speakers in the control room for playback 
is usually a massive advantage, because everyone can then listen and respond 
to the playback communally, and you can also push up the listening level if 
you think that’ll help the general vibe. However, take care that you don’t make 
a rod for your own back by shepherding listeners into the wrong areas of the 
 “Even with more 
seasoned players, it’s still 
worth giving them a playback 
sound that’s within spitting distance 
of the fi nal release, because they’ll 
respond to any audible imbalances by 
moderating their playing—in other 
words, they’ll help mix the 
record for you!” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
362
control room. For example, sitting a guitarist closer to the right speaker when 
he’s panned left in the balance is a bit daft. Likewise I’d think twice about sit-
ting that guitarist close to a wall where boundary effect will tend to overem-
phasize the level of the bass part, or to put the bass player somewhere where 
room resonances are murdering the low-end response. 
 One speciﬁ c thing I like to do is vacate the sweetspot during playbacks, and go 
stand somewhere at the back of the room. Not only does this put the musi-
cians into the best listening location, but also positions me where I can watch 
everyone’s immediate reactions to the music at once. Another tip I picked up 
from Chuck Ainlay 57 was to angle the speakers more toward the back wall of 
the control room for playbacks, so that you improve their high-frequency cov-
erage across the ﬂ oor area, a stunt which somehow seems to make people feel 
more comfortable moving around the room while listening too.  
 RIDING FADERS TO TAPE 
 When you’re working with ensembles, one way to improve 
your monitor mixes is to compensate for any unwanted 
balance changes by massaging recording levels on the 
fl y (or “riding the faders to tape”). This was a day-to-day 
requirement back in the days of direct-to-mono/stereo 
recording, but the idea rarely seems to occur to small-
studio engineers these days. “If the trumpets change to 
mutes, or something like that,” says Leslie Ann Jones, 58  
“I try to bring them up while recording. If I don’t, every 
time we play the tune back, I have to make a level 
ride for people to hear it the way the arrangement is 
supposed to be heard.” Joe Chiccarelli 59 says something 
similar: “I defi nitely record things so you can leave the 
faders at one level and there’s your record. If you know 
this part needs to be subtler in the verses, you record 
it a little lower…You don’t have to go, ‘Oh yeah, I forgot 
the bridge is coming up, I’ve got to crank that guitar way 
down.’ All the stuff that takes you out of the picture for 
a second.” This is one situation where hardware faders 
really come into their own, because you can ride several 
at once during a take. 
 Bruce Botnick, 60 Jeff Powell, 61 and Elliott Scheiner 62 
also mention riding their input levels as a matter of 
course, the latter explaining another benefi t he feels 
it brings to a production. “I watch guys come in, throw 
on a compressor, throw on an EQ, and then never 
touch the fader again. Everything is predetermined. For me, part of it is that I feel, as an engineer, you are as 
much a part of the performance, especially when you’re doing a live band, as any member of the band. And 
you’re interpreting what they’re doing, and your hand rides dictate that. It’s not a constant compression where 
everything is safe, everything is slammed, and everything is at a certain level. A lot of times, the dynamics are 
totally missing when people do that.” 
FIGURE 10.16   

Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays  CHAPTER 10
363
 But don’t just abandon your monitor mix after the ﬁ rst playback—keep work-
ing on it throughout the session whenever you have a moment spare. On 
the most basic level, solo each mic signal from time to time to scout for sub-
tle equipment faults before they have the chance to spoil dozens of takes. 
Experimenting with your mix settings will also frequently alert you to weak-
nesses in your recording setup that you overlooked during the initial setup 
melee. But on a more general level, improving the control-room monitor mix 
on a rolling basis helps build on any good ﬁ rst impression you’ve already cre-
ated with the musicians, as well as consolidating your own decisions about 
how you ultimately want the ﬁ nished production to sound. “If, upon com-
pleting your last overdub, you have no earthly idea how you want your tracks 
balanced,” says Eric “Mixerman” Saraﬁ n, 63 “then you have been completely 
ignoring how the track is supposed to make you move and feel…Therefore, you 
should be toying with your balances each and every time you touch the track.” 
 Finally, I always like to bounce down my monitor mixes at the end of every 
tracking session, because they can be a tremendously useful reference-point 
at the mixdown stage. “The ﬁ rst initial thought is always the best,” explains 
Rodney Jerkins. 64 “It’s the raw feeling, that ﬁ rst, ‘Whoa—why did I have that 
triangle so loud?’ But there was a reason for it.” Daniel Lanois 65 has made 
whole albums from such work-in-progress mixes: “On that day, there will be 
a certain unspoken knowledge of that piece of music. The people in the room 
are operating on instinct, and so your blend is not cerebral.”  
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 Compared with the dominant-array method, peer arrays allow greater scope for reshap-
ing the timbres and balances within an ensemble. However, the downside is peer-array 
sessions are usually more complicated and time consuming to set up. Although many 
small-studio users have misgivings about using peer-array recording where corrective 
edits may be required, in practice these concerns are often unfounded. 
 
■
 Planning a peer-array session involves bridging the gap between the sound that’s likely to 
be happening in the recording room and your vision for the production’s ﬁ nal mix son-
ics. The closer you can bring the two, the less demanding the job becomes.  
 
■
 Quieter instruments will be drier and more upfront than louder instruments in a peer-
array recording unless you take deliberate spill-reduction measures. Spill may also need 
careful handling if you’re planning on heavily processing any mic signals or if stereo-
positioning disagreements arise between different peer arrays. Attempting to cut spill by 
spacing instruments further apart is often counterproductive.  
 
■
 Each peer array can be anything from a single mic to a full “dominant array plus spot 
mics” setup. Part of your engineering task is to optimize each peer array’s Focus (what it’s 
ostensibly pointing at) and Backdrop (everything else it’s picking up), but with the needs 
of the Focus taking precedence if conﬂ icts arise.  
 
■
 The only reliable way to evaluate a peer-array setup is to build a mix of it while tracking. 
Start by mixing those arrays which pick up the most spill and which are subject to mic/
instrument-placement restrictions. For each array you add to the mix, consider its Ghost 
(the spill from its Focus instrument/section across the whole mix so far) and Meld (any 
interactions with other peer arrays already present in the mix). Whenever you make adjust-
ments to the Focus or Backdrop of any individual peer array, always recheck its Meld.  

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
364
 
■
 Although it’s possible to compensate for the sonic shortcomings of a peer array’s Ghost 
by tweaking its Focus, this may reduce your balancing ﬂ exibility.  
 
■
 When dealing with comb-ﬁ ltering problems at the Meld, polarity/phase adjustments 
and mic/instrument repositioning tend to be more effective remedies than equalization. 
Time-alignment methods are less useful for Melding purposes, even though they remain 
fair game within individual peer arrays. 
 
■
 Room mics are tricky to handle within peer-array systems unless your ensemble is well 
balanced acoustically, so artiﬁ cial reverb is frequently necessary to address depth-perspec-
tive concerns. 
 
■
 Minimize the impact of peer-array setup technicalities for the musicians by: dry-running 
the recording layout during rehearsals; involving volunteers to split the workload; stag-
gering the arrival of the performers on the ﬁ rst day of the session; starting the session 
with some kind of warm-up number; and recording multiple pieces of music over a lon-
ger continuous session. 
 
■
 Talkback speakers can be very useful for ensemble work, not least because they allow easy 
slating of takes. 
 
■
 Don’t underestimate the importance of a good playback mix, because it has the potential 
to improve an ensemble’s performance tremendously—and will also naturally reﬂ ect on 
your abilities as an engineer! 
 
■
 If you’re regularly recording ensembles, consider investing in some smaller/larger mic 
stands. Take extra care to make sure your stands are stable, staying mindful of where 
cables and counterweights are positioned. Backup power and a certain degree of equip-
ment redundancy are also advisable. 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 audio demonstrations of a variety of peer-array setup issues;  
 
■
 real-world peer-array recordings in multitrack format, with accompanying notes 
about their session setup and mixability; 
 
■
 further reading on phantom-power problems and backup powering;  
 
■
 links to useful mic-stand products and various related widgets.  
 http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch10.htm 
 Assignment: Ensemble Recording with Peer Arrays 
 Record several different ensembles using the peer-array approach. You’re free to 
choose any size of ensemble, but do try to fi nd at least one group with more than four 
players. You may use whatever recording equipment you wish, but be sure to research 
and plan the session well in advance, doing your best to make engineering technicali-
ties as unobtrusive for the musicians as possible. Be sure to capture more than one 
take of each piece of music you record, so that you can experiment with the possibili-
ties of full-multitrack editing after the session. 

365
 In order to introduce new studio techniques in a progressive manner through-
out this course, all the chapter assignments so far have imposed artiﬁ cial limi-
tations on what and how you recorded. The time has ﬁ nally come to remove 
those restrictions completely. You should now have enough experience to go 
totally freestyle with your recordings, building whole productions from scratch 
using your own unique blend of the techniques in this book. With this in 
mind, I’d like to delve into a few of the broader issues involved with piloting a 
full project under your own steam. 
 11.1  MULTIPLE SESSIONS AND MULTIPLE ROOMS 
 Freestyle recording of entire productions means making the following choices 
that we’ve side-stepped up until now:
 
■
 Should the recordings be carried out over more than one session?  
 
■
 How many musicians should play together on each session?  
 
■
 Should any ensemble instruments be acoustically isolated from others?  
 The practical challenges of working on a budget are so great that small-studio 
engineers all too often fall back on the “safe option” of building full arrange-
ments out of single-instrument overdubs, despite the fact that group perfor-
mances are normally so much vibier for the musicians. Tony Hoffer 1 also points 
out that ensemble recording is much more efﬁ cient in terms of session time, 
because making sonic decisions becomes more straightforward in context. “I 
think the best way to shape a drum sound is to have your guitar sound and you’re 
sort of shaping all the sounds together. You’re going for a guitar sound that’s 
probably going to be the ﬁ nal sound, you’re going for the bass sound that’s going 
to be the ﬁ nal sound. And that way I’m able to do [complete albums] in three or 
four weeks…I’d rather work fast, make quick decisions, and not waste time going 
back and forth, because you can get a lot more done in a shorter period of time.” 
 A good way of ﬁ ghting Excessive Overdubbing Syndrome is to start your plan-
ning by asking yourself how you’d go about capturing the entire arrangement 
 Going Freestyle 
 CHAPTER 11 
 CHAPTER 11 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
366
as a one-room full-ensemble recording. If it transpires that this “all in one go” 
approach would be impractical in your situation for any reason, then adapt 
your plans as little as possible to enable a workable setup. To illustrate this 
concept, let’s return to the imaginary ﬁ ve-piece band introduced at the start of 
Chapter 10: a singer, an acoustic guitar, an electric guitar, an electric bass, and 
a drum kit. In principle, such a line-up is eminently recordable within a single 
room, albeit probably using peer-array methods, given that the vocal and acous-
tic guitar are likely to be outgunned acoustically by the other instruments. So 
what factors might prompt me to deviate from this one-stop shop?
 
 11.1.1    Personnel and Equipment 
 The most obvious restriction in most popular styles is that there will fre-
quently be many more parts in a recorded arrangement than there are players 
available. If our ﬁ ve-piece band wanted to double-track both guitars and add 
tambourine and backing-vocal parts, you’d obviously have to plan for captur-
ing those overdubs after the initial full-band takes. Even for those extra parts, 
though, I’d still suggest retaining the “everything at once” mindset if you can, 
by recording group overdubs rather than laying down each as a separate pass 
by default. 
 For those on a budget, the kit list may also be a deciding factor. So if you had, 
say, only three condenser mics for the ﬁ ve-piece band recording, you might allo-
cate those as a vocal mic and a drum-kit stereo pair, overdubbing the acoustic 
guitar later to avoid having to record it on a dynamic. Or perhaps your studio 
setup has inadequate facilities for acoustic absorption/isolation and you have a 
quiet vocalist, in which case overdubbing that might prevent other instruments 
 THE RIGHT KEY AND THE RIGHT TEMPO 
 A couple of decisions that are frequently taken rather too lightly in small-studio productions are the key and 
tempo the music is going to be performed in. A poor choice of key can be particularly counterproductive where 
a lead vocalist is involved. “If they can’t get the bloody notes,” says Gus Dudgeon, 2 “you spend ages trying 
to drop in over and over again—it’s just hell.” But it’s not just a case of whether the line’s possible, says Phil 
Thornalley 3 —it’s also a question of the tone you’re after: “Some singers, especially pop singers, may have soul 
and a sound, but also a limited effective range, say an octave or less. It’s not that they can’t sing higher or 
lower; it’s more that they have an area where their voice becomes 3D, and outside of that range they have no 
character or expression. So avoid that at your peril.” 
 Tommy LiPuma 4 is equally emphatic about fi nding the right tempo for each piece of music. “Many years ago, 
I read something that [band leader] Harry James once said; that you can lose a record with the wrong tempo. 
That stuck with me, because he’s absolutely right. You can lose a hit by having the wrong tempo, so I’m very, 
very conscious of that.” It can, however, easily become a point of contention in the studio, so try to agree 
tempos with all the players well in advance if you can—if only so that they rehearse at the same speed they’ll 
be recording at. Where this isn’t possible, Jack Endino 5 has a nice little trick up his sleeve: making a note of 
the actual tempos used at a series of rehearsals/shows. “When they get in the studio it’s a good argument-
settling device. People freak out and they play everything at half speed in the studio, and you can say, ‘Wait a 
minute! Here’s how fast you played it the last fi ve times I saw you.’ That really saves a lot of hassle.” 

Going Freestyle CHAPTER 11
367
drowning under the room reverb from the vocal mic’s Backdrop. This kind of 
reasoning can be a bit of a slippery slope for small-studio engineers, though, 
because it’s extremely tempting to retreat to the argument that you couldn’t 
 possibly  do justice to the sound of such-and-such an instrument without using 
all of your microphones, preamps, and acoustic treatment for that alone. 
Unassailable as this standpoint can seem from an engineering perspective, it 
should still take second place to capturing a performance that really sets your 
pants on ﬁ re. 
 11.1.2   A Question of Timing 
 Recording ensembles can occasionally be counterpro-
ductive on a performance level, though, if certain 
members of the group require more takes than 
others to adequately nail their part. This may 
be because some players simply aren’t up 
to the standard of the others, but it could 
also be that some musical parts are much 
more challenging—as will frequently be 
the case with lead-vocal or hook/solo lines, 
especially in genres where detailed comping 
of these is par for the course. “If the acoustic 
guitar is going to be the lead solo instrument, I’ll 
put them in a booth to get the necessary isolation,” 
comments Al Schmitt. 6 “However, if he’s part of the 
rhythm section, I’ll keep him in the room with the other guys.” 
There are also issues of stamina to take into account, because no matter how easy 
a loud drum, trumpet, or vocal part may be technically, there’s a limit to how 
long any player can hammer the volume before their strength gives out.  
 So what you need to do is identify those ensemble players you reckon will be 
able to deliver the goods when their instruments are all in the same room. Any 
player you suspect might frustrate the others by slowing down the communal 
work rate, or who might just run out of steam too early, should then ideally 
have their instrument acoustically isolated from the core group, allowing you 
to edit that instrument’s part freely between takes and/or patch it up with addi-
tional single-instrument punch-ins once you’ve ﬁ nished the main ensemble 
takes. Postponing the recording of such troublesome instruments to the over-
dubbing stage can seem attractive where isolation and foldback facilities are 
scarce, but this option will, of course, reduce the degree of live human inter-
action within the ensemble, so I’d personally advise against it unless it’s truly 
unavoidable. 
 Although few small studios have dedicated isolation booths available, you can 
frequently bodge together a reasonably operational alternative with a little lat-
eral thinking. Electric instruments afford the greatest ﬂ exibility, because you can 
simply DI them during the ensemble session (perhaps in conjunction with a 
 “Any player you 
suspect might frustrate 
the others by slowing down the 
communal work rate, or who might just 
run out of steam too early, should ideally 
have their instrument acoustically isolated 
from the core group, allowing you to 
edit that instrument’s part freely 
between takes and/or patch it 
up with punch-ins.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
368
digital ampliﬁ er emulation to give an appropriate foldback sound) so that 
they’re not picked up by any live-room mics, and then reamp them at leisure 
afterwards. But even when using a real amp you can usually move a few bits of 
spare furniture to box off the speaker cabinet pretty effectively, or move it into 
a suitable cupboard or hallway. David Barbe 7 recalls another ingenious work-
around: “Andy Le Master had a studio in Toccoa called The Furry Vault…a small 
cinder-block shed behind his parents’ house. It was so small that the guitar 
tracks would be done in a car or van. They’d back the van up to the door of the 
place and put the amps out there and the mics in the van.” Keeping the player 
in the live room then requires only a long instrument cable and some head-
phone foldback. In a similar vein, using a digital keyboard to emulate acoustic 
piano, organ, or harp for the purposes of an ensemble recording (rather than 
recording the real thing) can buy you additional post-recording ﬂ exibility, albeit 
usually with some trade-off in terms of the naturalness of the recorded sound. 
 If you’re lucky enough to be working in a separate control room, then another 
scheme that can work well is bringing some quieter instrument in there with 
you. While this may cramp your style a little while setting up that instrument’s 
sonics, it shouldn’t make building the sound for the core ensemble instru-
ments any harder, and the opportunity to use the control-room loudspeakers 
for headphone-free foldback monitoring (see Section 5.3) in this conﬁ guration 
can pay dividends with many musicians, especially vocalists. 
 WHEN SHOULD I RECORD THE VOCALS? 
 One of the things that really defi nes someone’s production style in commercial genres is how soon they choose 
to record lead vocals. The most common approach is to deal with them after most of the other parts have been 
captured, so that the singer can respond to a backing track that’s pretty much in its fi nal form. But that’s not 
the only school of thought. “During the preproduction period we do a lot of experimentation with rhythms, with 
textures, and especially with the vocals,” says Pierre Marchand, 8 for instance. “Most of those early vocals are 
retained. We still try to get better vocals later on, but it seems that when there’s little on tape, the vocal is more 
focused. If you record a vocal to a fi nished backing track it often doesn’t work. Moreover, this way of working 
means that everybody in the band plays to the vocal, which helps to keep  them focused.” 
 “The singing has to set the level for the energy of the track,” adds Steve Bush. 9 “If it were practical, you’d 
almost rather do the vocals fi rst, because the thing which will be heard and focused on is the singing. If you 
start with the drums, bass, and one guitar, and you’re obsessed with those parts sounding as good as they can, 
it’s easy to forget the fact that it’s not going to be very prominent in the end. The tone of the vocal makes every 
track sound a particular way, so [I] try to put a guide vocal down as soon as [I] start work, because you have 
to tailor the music to fi t what the singer’s doing.” John Leckie 10 and Tony Brown 11 both also insist that singers 
perform guide vocals with maximum enthusiasm and emotional commitment. “If they give it their all, it’s like a 
kick in the ass for the band,” says Brown, “and the tracking session can turn into a lovefest.” (In addition to any 
psychological benefi ts, though, Clarke Schleicher 12 considers it an invaluable opportunity to audition potential 
vocal mics within the context of a real performance: “When the singer is out there consciously doing a shootout, 
that’s not a real test.”) 

Going Freestyle CHAPTER 11
369
 Although most commercial lead vocals are the result of multiple takes and comping, you certainly shouldn’t 
assume that guide vocals won’t end up on the fi nished record. John Leckie, 13 for instance, estimates that 
50% of all his fi nal mixed vocals have been guides; Darryl Swann 14 says a similar proportion of Macy Gray’s 
performances on the Grammy-winning  On How Life Is were from their original nocturnal song-writing sessions; 
and Taylor Swift’s original “demo” lead vocals for her album  Speak Now made it all the way to the fi nal mixes 
(according to Nathan Chapman 15 ), as did Adele’s vocals on her single “Rolling In The Deep” (according to Paul 
Epworth 16 ). Jimmy Jam 17 also favors the earliest takes, even when there is no full-band ensemble session 
involved: “Nine times out of ten, the scratch vocals are better than the real thing, because the artist doesn’t 
have the pressure that ‘this is it!’ rolling around in his or her mind.… You can catch gold while an artist is in the 
process of learning a song and playing around with addictive new melodies.”  
FIGURE 11.1    
 Don’t assume lead vocals have to be recorded last—all these hits, for instance, feature lead vocals recorded at the demo stage, 
while the song was still being written. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
370
 11.1.3    Postponing Decisions 
 In Section 7.4 I extolled the virtues of making creative and sonic commitments 
from the earliest stages of a production, but there’s only so much you can do on 
this front if you happen to be working with artists who start recording before 
they’ve actually ﬁ nished writing the music! Don’t get me wrong here—I’m not 
frowning on such practices (many fantastic albums have been made like that, 
after all), but they do make it difﬁ cult for an engineer to record one-room ensem-
ble takes where all the instruments get into all the mics to some extent. With 
spill all over the place, it becomes impossible to completely mute individual 
instruments, so any replacement you put in later may conﬂ ict with the Ghost 
of its predecessor—something which rarely ends happily for Danish princes in 
particular. 
 The fear of such complications seems to drive some small-studio engineers to 
extremes, such that they’ll only record multiple musicians simultaneously where 
separate recording rooms are available for each instrument. Honestly, though, I 
think such a hard-line stance is rarely necessary in practice, and it actively discrim-
inates against recordists who don’t have space or time on their side. A more prag-
matic stance is to target any available isolation methods where they’ll be most 
use, but not to lose sight of the advantages of having people playing together. 
“I don’t care whether it’s classical or rock or country,” declares Eddie Kramer, 18 
“you’ve got to capture that performance, and the hell with the bloody leakage!” 
 Returning to our ﬁ ve-piece band example, let’s say I wanted to hedge my bets 
against song-writing changes, but only had a two-room setup to work with—in 
other words, a live room and a control room, but no iso booths at all. Here’s 
what I might do:
 
■
 Bring the vocalist into the control room and mic them up there, using 
the control-room loudspeakers for the singer’s foldback. If I got a truly 
inspired lead-vocal take, I could record a cancellation pass of loudspeaker 
spill (see Section 5.3.2) to improve my ﬂ exibility at mixdown; if I didn’t, I 
could either punch in on the vocal track directly after I’d ﬁ nished recording 
the full-band takes, or replace it completely later on without affecting the 
sound of my ensemble recording. 
 
■
 Record a DI signal from the electric guitarist (using a digital amp modeler 
for foldback purposes), with the intention of reamping the part properly 
later if the performance was worth keeping. 
 
■
 Use ensemble-miking techniques to record the drums, bass, and acoustic 
guitar together in the live room. I’d intercept some of the acoustic-guitar 
spill before it reached the drum overheads, using a couple of quilts draped 
over high-backed chairs (which shouldn’t interfere with any sight-lines), 
and then I’d put a reﬂ ective board or three within this padded enclosure 
to provide the guitarist with improved acoustic monitoring. In addition to 
miking up the bass cab, I’d also take a DI signal from the instrument, and 
I’d record drum samples after each song’s takes. I’d now likely be able to 
replace the acoustic guitar part without worrying about conﬂ icts with its 
Ghost, and I could also solo the bass line if I wished.  

Going Freestyle CHAPTER 11
371
 
■
 Provide vocal and electric-guitar foldback to the live-room musicians via 
headphones. I could probably get away with using just a single cue mix, but 
the electric guitarist would probably appreciate an independent “more me” 
mix if that were available. Between takes, the live-room players could con-
verse directly, while hearing the singer in their headphones; and the singer 
could hear the rest of the players through the ensemble-rig mics.  
 FIGURE 11.2   
 Here’s an example of how you might go about tracking Chapter 10’s ﬁ ve-piece band within a simple 
two-room setup, while still retaining masses of ﬂ exibility in terms of changing the song structure and 
arrangement post-recording. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
372
 This conﬁ guration is hardly very complex, and only gives total isolation for 
two of the parts, but it nonetheless affords tremendous rewriting flexibility 
while sacriﬁ cing very little of the full-band performance experience as far as the 
musicians are concerned. If the vocalist and engineer worked on headphones 
instead, the options would expand even further: I’d be free to edit the live-
room rhythm tracks to tighten timing and rejig the bass line without making 
a nonsense of the vocal part; and I could comp the ﬁ nal vocal from pieces of 
all the full-band takes without affecting the sound of any other instrument. In 
fact, just about the only thing I’d really struggle to do in this scenario would 
be soloing the drums in the arrangement—although I might actually even get 
away with that for brief moments by substituting samples in place of a few of 
the live-performed hits! 
 In different circumstances, of course, this setup might not be effective at all, 
so it’s important to question your studio-layout and isolation scheme for 
each new piece of music, or wherever the instrumentation or recording venue 
changes. Andrija Tokic 19 illustrates this mentality beautifully when talking 
about recording Alabama Shakes in his home studio: “I mostly tracked them 
on my ground ﬂ oor…It was important to make sure that the core of the song 
was going down in one piece at the same time, [but] just like anything, you 
have to be ﬂ exible…On some songs, we put [lead singer] Brittany in a room 
right across from the room where everybody else was and then, if the drums 
weren’t too loud, we’d leave the doors open so she could at least see the bass 
player and the bass player could see the drummer. There’s a hallway between 
those two rooms, and we could either put the amps in the hallway or put them 
in the rooms on my basement ﬂ oor…It would totally depend on what had to 
be where for the sound. Sometimes you want the bass to rattle the snare real 
hard, so you’ve got to have it right there.” 
 11.2    IMPROVING YOUR EFFICIENCY 
 You’re more likely to engineer complete productions efﬁ ciently if you main-
tain a clear overview of how much has already been recorded, and how much 
remains to be completed. The “to record” list I mentioned back in Section 
2.3.1 can be easily expanded into tabular form for this purpose, with a row 
for each piece of music you’re recording and columns to tick when each part 
of the arrangement has been successfully written, programmed, recorded, and/
or edited. Rodaidh McDonald 20 used just such a tactic when working with The 
XX, for instance: “[We] had a chart on the wall with every track on it. We had 
boxes for ‘bass done’ and ‘guitar done’ and vocals…so we could visually see 
how far we were getting.” 
 Where session time is limited, creating some kind of written schedule will usu-
ally help too, and can provide a means of managing the mood and momen-
tum of the production process. “Falling behind on a project,” comments Eric 
“Mixerman” Saraﬁ n, 21 “can be a useful session tool, as it tends to ratchet up 
pressure. It can also bring down morale, particularly if you get too far behind. 

Going Freestyle CHAPTER 11
373
Getting ahead relieves pressure, and allows everyone to relax. Between the 
push of falling behind and the pull of getting ahead, you can manipulate the 
forward push of your session…While you don’t have total control over how 
things go on a session, you do have considerable inﬂ uence. You should cer-
tainly have some idea of which tracks will be a breeze and which a struggle…
If you’re ahead, work on something that you believe will require time. If you’re 
behind, knock out something easy.” Gareth Jones 22 feels that each session 
should have clear boundaries too: “I try to schedule things so the sessions are 
not open ended and so everyone knows that we start at twelve noon and work 
until eight or nine, and in that time we’re working and creating. That means 
that we don’t waste time in the studio.”
 
 Gareth Jones 27 also has a clever approach to scheduling ensemble band 
recordings, tracking everything in the ﬁ rst half of the studio time, and then re-
evaluating and retracking those takes as necessary in the second half. “[Once] 
everyone is settled into the studio, I ﬁ nd that a band can do their best work 
and can usually do a good take in ten minutes,” he says. “Bands love it, and I 
love it too, because we realize that what we’ve recorded is not so precious. That 
second half is when they can really start to deliver. We end up keeping some of 
the stuff from the ﬁ rst round of tracking, but a lot of it just gets done again.” 
 Another means of increasing productivity is to cut out unnecessary setup time, 
and one of the easiest ways to do this is by consolidating recording projects 
into a smaller number of longer sessions. With ensemble recordings in par-
ticular, the heavy-duty technical setup involved at the outset will usually only 
delay the start of the ﬁ rst few takes, and once the session hits its stride you 
should ﬁ nd yourself in the enviable position of being able to hit Record at 
the drop of a hat without compromising on sonics. It also gives you the abil-
ity to hop back and forth between different pieces of music to keep players 
from getting bored or frustrated, as Butch Vig 28 did when recording Nirvana’s 
 Nevermind : “If we didn’t get something right away, we’d just move on to some-
thing else and go back for it later. I think that’s why the band always sounds 
 THE BENEFITS OF TAG-TEAM PRODUCTION 
 If you regularly fi nd yourself having to both engineer and produce sessions, then there’s a lot to be said for 
setting up a regular partnership with someone else in a similar position. “It works brilliantly,” enthuses Steve 
Bush 23 about his fruitful collaboration with fellow producer Marshall Bird. “Marsh and I can both cover the 
engineering side and it’s great to have someone other than the artist to bounce ideas off. How many times have 
you been doing something, and you just want to ask someone what they think? That extra opinion makes all the 
difference.” L.A. Reid 24 concurs: “You don’t have to second-guess yourself when working with someone whom 
you trust. As my partner, Babyface, says: ‘By working as part of a team, one always has the benefi t of a second 
opinion.’” Working in partnership also makes it easier to avoid hold-ups to the creative fl ow of a session. “If one 
of us is experiencing a creative block for some reason,” says Jimmy Jam, 25 “the other one picks up the slack.” 
Steve Bush 26 agrees: “Any problems can be dealt with by one of us while the other one carries on working with 
the band.” 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
374
fresh—they kept their spontaneity while recording.” 
Even where you’re building an arrangement part by 
part via discrete overdubs, there are still signiﬁ cant 
time economies to be had by scheduling several over-
dubs for the same session. For example, if you leave a 
dozen mics active in the live room following a drum kit 
recording, you only need to move a few stands to carry 
out mic shootouts for other instruments or indulge in 
complicated multimiking rigs. Robert Carranza 29 also 
stresses the speed advantages of this approach, describ-
ing how he reused mics from his initial ensemble-
miking setup while overdubbing for Jack Johnson’s 
 Sleep Through The Static : “The mic we used [for each 
overdub] was usually based on what was nearest and 
easiest to use. When you work like that, it creates a nice 
ﬂ ow…Even if the sound wasn’t right, at least the idea 
was there.” 
 Leaving mics permanently set up during/between ses-
sions is something that many high-proﬁ le producers 
endorse, particularly Daniel Lanois 30 , who has often 
mentioned leaving instruments and their microphones 
set up as “stations” in the studio, their express purpose 
being so that musicians never have to wait around to 
start recording. Nathan Chapman 31 applied the same 
kind of principle in his own project studio while writing and recording with 
Taylor Swift: “It’s just she and I. I do the engineering myself. It’s not hard to 
do… I have all my different recording chains plugged in and ready to go. 
I don’t ever have to reach up and turn a knob… I have three or four micro-
phones that I just swing into place when I need them and swing back when I 
don’t.” 
 Another application of pre-conﬁ gured recording hardware is to allow a choice 
of different room-miking options while overdubbing, a tactic used by Jacquire 
King 32 and Joe Chiccarelli for their work with Kings Of Leon and The White 
Stripes respectively. “[The White Stripes] work extremely quickly,” recalls 
Chiccarelli, 33 “and expected me to be ready to record at any time, so I had [six 
to ten] room ambience microphones set up in the studio. When they began to 
play a song, I could quickly push up the faders and choose which microphones 
best suited the songs.” Even if you don’t require this kind of elaborate multi-
miking, though, it’s excellent practice to have at least a vocal mic primed at all 
times when recording any group featuring a lead singer, irrespective of what 
instrument you’re actually planning to record at any given moment. Many pro-
ducers stress this point, especially in pop and hip-hop genres. “I always have 
an open mic in the studio,” says Drake’s engineer Noah “40” Shebib, 34 for 
instance. “When he says he wants to sing or rap or do an overdub, I just hit 
record.” 
 FIGURE 11.3    
 If you schedule electric-
guitar overdubs to 
follow on directly from 
a drumkit-tracking 
session, you can try out 
all sorts of multimiking 
strategies in a ﬂ ash, 
simply by reusing the 
drum mics. It’s also very 
quick to try out new 
mics, because you can 
just plug them into the 
already line-checked 
drum-mic recording 
chains. 

Going Freestyle CHAPTER 11
375
 Something that can seriously send a project off the rails is failing to acknowl-
edge quickly enough that a mistake has been made. It’s often better to head 
straight back to the drawing board on a recording that doesn’t feel right, rather 
than endlessly dickering with details. “If you decide you have made a mistake 
with it and must rerecord it, that’s only a day out of the schedule”, says Kevin 
Killen. 35 “You haven’t spent three months trying to make it pop or groove a 
little better by adding one more thing.”
 
 11.3   THE ANALOG MINDSET 
 Although small studios have now almost universally adopted computer-based 
recording, there are many producers who feel that the move away from ana-
log recorders has had a negative impact on music-making—irrespective of any 
sonic concerns. Part of it is a question of session pacing. “One of the bless-
ings about analog was that it was a slower process,” explains Ken Caillat. 36 
“While I’m rewinding I have to ﬁ ll in the time, so it’s like… ‘Hey, Lindsey 
[Buckingham of Fleetwood Mac], on that second verse you started doing this 
syncopated thing…it was really cool.’ He’d say, ‘Really, could you play that for 
me?’ I’d stop and play him back the part, and he’d say, ‘Wow…I didn’t realize 
that.’ So I’d say, ‘Do that some more.’ You have all this talking. But in [a DAW] 
it’s just, ‘Boom, boom, boom. Start again.’ Stop. Just stop. Let me talk to them. 
I want to bring talking and creativity back into it.” Robert Carranza 37 felt the 
same when working on tape for Jack Johnson’s  Sleep Through The Static : “These 
are little moments of quiet in the recording process, and they made us pay 
more attention. The pauses forced me to refocus and get my thoughts together, 
and pay attention to what was happening next.” 
 Carranza also cites the lack of a screen as a beneﬁ t: “[With DAWs] you start 
listening with your eyes. Working with tape forced us to sit back and really lis-
ten to takes and to what was good or not in terms of feel, and be a little bit 
more forgiving of little mistakes that happen.” Jacquire King 38 concurs: “I have 
found that when I’m recording to tape, the musicians’ performances are more 
 BEYOND THE STUDIO 
 Within these pages I’ve concentrated on engineering techniques for studio recording—whether that studio 
happens to be your bedroom, a purpose-built live room, or a location-recording venue. However, once you get 
outside such comparatively controlled situations into environments like open-air concerts, live musicals/opera, 
or audio-plus-video events, the game-plan can change completely. The need to keep mics and stands out of the 
way of audience members and camera shots can restrict your options tremendously, and you may also have to 
plan for performers moving around the stage. The sonic contributions of applause and any sound-reinforcement 
system need to be carefully considered too, and the stakes are frequently higher overall in terms of making sure 
that equipment is robust and/or easily replaced if a punter spills beer on it or the weather quite literally rains on 
your parade. Although such scenarios fall outside the scope of this book, the understanding of mic technique 
you’ve gained here should provide a solid foundation from which to grapple with the additional demands of 
live-performance and multimedia recording dates, and I’ve included some further reading suggestions in this 
chapter’s web resources if you’re interested in fi nding out more about these kinds of applications. 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
376
focused and inspired.…They’re not looking at a screen, so it’s all about using 
your ears. Making records with your eyes, as is a danger with [a DAW], is really 
a poor approach.” 
 Philippe Zdar 39 also feels that the nondestructive nature of digital recording 
removes an important element of risk from the session dynamic: “The problem 
with [using a DAW] is that it’s easy to forget to take risks. But you have to take 
risks…I hate the comfort and the safety net that digital provides.” The whiff of 
danger in the air concentrates the minds of the musicians, feels Mike Vernon: 40 
“For me, analogue makes you focus more on what you’re doing. You have to 
actually give the performance of your life to be able to get the result. When 
you work digitally, you have so much more scope, and if you make a 
mistake, it can be corrected at the drop of a mouse.” 
 Nigel Godrich 41 expresses probably the most common com-
plaint of all about computer-based recording, however: 
“When we ﬁ rst got [into] it, I was trying to do this and 
that with it, and ended up sitting in front of the thing for 
two days. And everybody gets pissed off, and you lose the 
feeling that you’re excited about something. The trick is to 
do something fast enough and then keep going so you can’t 
get bored with the thing you’ve just done…The best times 
have all been really fast, with everyone I’ve worked with.”  
 So although analog recording is rarely practical for most small-studio engi-
neers, there’s a lot to be said for retaining an analog attitude. “[Don’t] allow 
yourself to be tied to the ways in which the software tries to get you to work,” 
advises Mike Poole. 42 “There will be always be younger people coming along 
that will…adapt DAWs to work for them, rather than allow the computerized, 
linear way of looking at and organizing music to become a stumbling block. 
They will just hit Record and Play and will be able to work beyond what the 
medium expects them to do.” This is another reason why I think stand-alone 
digital multitrackers can still be tremendously useful for small-studio track-
ing sessions, even when your main system is computer based, because they 
don’t offer as many distracting options during the earliest stages of the creative 
process. 
 But it’s not just the recording medium that affects the workﬂ ow, because the 
ergonomics of other analog studio hardware can also affect your workﬂ ow. “ 
When I’m standing at [an analog] desk,” continues Mike Poole, 43 “my hands 
will reach intuitively for the EQ, and without even thinking about it I may at 
the same time do a fader move with my other hand…instantly and purely on 
feel. By contrast, with the digital devices, even with big controllers, I ﬁ nd I need 
to think in a very linear fashion. It’s very difﬁ cult to ride and tweak things at the 
same time.” This is partly why, in my opinion, small computer-based studios 
frequently beneﬁ t from having a small analog console for tracking purposes, 
especially as it makes it easier to set up true zero-latency monitoring (as dis-
cussed in Part 1) and to ride input levels while recording (see Section 10.5.2).
 “Although 
analog recording is 
rarely practical for most 
small-studio engineers, 
there’s a lot to be said for 
retaining an analog 
attitude.” 

Going Freestyle CHAPTER 11
377
 11.4   USING COMMERCIAL STUDIOS 
 While it’s perfectly possible to create release-quality productions without ever 
setting foot inside a commercial studio, that’s no reason to disregard the idea 
of paying for time at a professional facility where budget allows. A studio with 
a great selection of instruments and microphones will make it easier to get 
decent raw sounds, for example, and the experience of the in-house staff can 
save you hours of experimentation with studio layout on ensemble-recording 
sessions (as mentioned in Section 10.3.3). In addition, the ability to record 
and monitor in purpose-designed acoustic environments is another massive 
advantage, and the availability of separate isolation booths and well-speciﬁ ed 
foldback facilities makes it much easier to maintain an ensemble vibe in situa-
tions where you require maximum mixdown ﬂ exibility. 
 PREPARING MULTITRACKS FOR MIXDOWN 
 Although most small-studio engineers tend to mix their own recordings these days, if you’re submitting your 
multitracks to a third party for mixdown, there are a few things you can do to help them make the best job 
of it. The biggest advice I can give is to fi nish making as many decisions as you can about the arrangement. 
“My goal,” says Glen Ballard, 44 for instance, “is always to give something to a mixer where he can push up 
the faders and it’s reasonably close to the architecture that I want in terms of the arrangement. If you give 
them that to start with, it frees them up to really focus on detailing the sounds and making everything sound 
great. I try not to add to their burden the idea that they’ve got to arrange the song as well.” Mix engineer Randy 
Staub 45 reinforces Ballard’s message: “I always tell people that you have to create the sound of the record 
that you want right from the beginning, so that when the mixer fi rst pushes up the fader, the record is there. 
Everything sounds the way it should, the arrangements are good, the emotion in there, the balance is there, 
and as a mixer your job is to take it to another level. You pump it up and you make it sound larger than life. 
This rather than trying to create something that wasn’t there to begin with.” 
 Staub 46 also highlights another vital point: “It’s important to send clear, clean sessions. We don’t need playlists, 
we don’t need stuff hidden. When I open a session, everything that the artist and producer want in there should 
come up immediately, so I can see it straight away.” It also makes sense to bounce down edited tracks to 
prevent things being moved inadvertently during the mixing process—as David R Ferguson 47 did when preparing 
his Johnny Cash multitracks for mixdown, for example, and which Fraser T. Smith 48 likes to do as a matter of 
course. You can also save a mix engineer time by printing the returns of any favorite effects as audio so that 
they don’t have to be recreated from scratch, and you might also submix multiple layered parts (such as backing 
vocals) to a single stereo fi le for similar reasons. “I am not going to mix two hundred tracks on the desk for you,” 
remarks Michael Brauer, 49 “so the best thing for you to do is to give me the stereo blends that you like…I’m 
happy to mix sixteen tracks. The simpler the better. I don’t want to have to fi ght my way through a mix.” 
 If you’re sending raw digital audio fi les, rather than a DAW project fi le, try to name the tracks sensibly and make 
sure they all start at exactly the same time so that they line up properly in the mixing system. I’d also suggest 
accompanying them with your most recent rough mix of the material and a document containing as much as 
possible of the following information:
 
■
 the tempo and key of the music; 
 
■
 the sample-rate and bit-depth you recorded at; 
 
■
 full details of any commercial releases that you’ll be referencing the fi nal mix against;  
 
■
 your own contact details so that the mix engineer can easily make further inquiries if necessary.  

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
378
 If you do decide to go down the pro-studio route, how-
ever, it’s vital that you ﬁ nd a facility that really suits 
your needs, so check over the contenders care-
fully and ask plenty of pointed questions before 
booking. Get a list of the instruments and mics, 
and conﬁ rm that they’ll actually be available for 
your session date—the last thing you want is to 
be greeted by “Oh, those U87s are out with the 
location rig today” when you’ve planned your ses-
sion around them! Can you leave mics and instru-
ments set up overnight without them being disturbed? 
Is there enough redundancy in the studio setup, and are 
there technicians on site capable of ﬁ xing common faults so 
that work can continue without major disruption? “I like to work fast and 
get good momentum and it can be a bit frustrating if you’re constantly com-
ing up against technical worries and mechanical issues,” comments Tony 
Hoffer. 50 “I learned early on that you’ve got to ﬁ nd the studios that have good 
maintenance.”
 If an engineer is included with the rate, ﬁ nd out how long they’ve been work-
ing for the studio, listen to some of their previous work, and preferably try 
to have a quick chat with them before booking. Ask them how they’d sug-
gest recording your project in their environment, and ask yourself whether 
their instincts chime with yours—particularly if you’re planning on capturing 
a full ensemble. Although any self-respecting engineer will endeavor to adapt 
their working methods to their client’s preferences, it tends to save time if this 
doesn’t demand a complete “U”-turn relative to their own natural recording 
style. If only an assistant is provided, then ask to send them a mic list and 
setup diagram in advance of the session, so that they can prepare the studio 
for you. That way you can hopefully start serious work the moment you walk 
through the door. 
 And it should probably go without saying by now that you and the musicians 
should be as well prepared as you can be before the session, in order to make 
the most of your expenditure once the meter’s running. People more familiar 
with project-studio workﬂ ow are frequently caught off-guard by how swiftly a 
well-managed commercial room can operate. Don’t say I didn’t warn you!  
 “Although any 
self-respecting engineer 
will endeavor to adapt their 
working methods to their client’s 
preferences, it tends to save time if 
this doesn’t demand a complete 
‘U’-turn relative to their own 
natural recording 
style.” 
 CUT TO THE CHASE 
 
■
 When planning the engineering for a complete production, it’s a good idea to start by 
considering how you’d record the whole arrangement at once in a single room. Although 
this is rarely feasible in practice for most small-studio productions, sticking close to that 
kind of setup will usually improve the humanity and musicality of your end product. 
Scarcity of personnel and equipment may prevent the “all in one go” recording approach, 
but an equally good reason to deviate from it is if you need to match the stamina and 
work rates of different performers, or if the musical material has yet to be ﬁ nalized at the 
time of recording. 

Going Freestyle CHAPTER 11
379
  WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
chapter, including:
 
■
 links to a range of articles describing real-world ensemble recordings in multi-room 
scenarios, complete with audio demonstration fi les;  
 
■
 suggested further reading about recording live concerts and multimedia events.  
 http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-ch11.htm 
 
■
 Clear written work/time plans will help you make more efﬁ cient progress, and you 
should do your best to manipulate the session scheduling to reduce total setup time over 
the lifetime of the project. Fewer, longer sessions are sensible in this respect, as is any 
workﬂ ow that allows you to leave equipment constantly primed for instant use.  
 
■
 Tracking lead vocals early on in the production process can help you build a more mix-
able arrangement. Just don’t settle for anything less than a compelling performance, 
whether or not you consider these early vocals “ﬁ nal,” because their attitude will power-
fully inﬂ uence the way the whole project develops. 
 
■
 Owners of small studios shouldn’t reject out of hand the idea of booking commercial 
studio time, especially when recording ensembles. However, you need to ask the right 
questions when deciding which studio to book, as well as making sure that everyone 
involved with the session is well prepared for the speedy workﬂ ow of well-run commer-
cial facilities. 
 What are you looking at me for? You’re the boss now—you call the shots! 
 Assignment 

This page intentionally left blank

381
 Most of the best-known recording engineers learnt their craft by progressing 
through the ranks of some professional studio or other, carefully observing the 
work of their elders and betters. These days, however, the network of high-level 
recording facilities that supported this informal but effective apprenticeship 
system is a shadow of its former self, and only a lucky few are able to acquire 
a broad base of recording skills in that way. “With the studio culture disap-
pearing, nobody is learning any more how to record properly,” says Randy 
Staub. 1 “People buy studio equipment, put it in their house, and immediately 
think they’re a recording engineer. But a lot of the stuff that I get in to mix 
has been recorded horrendously.” This book has been my own response to this 
trend, and I hope it will help provide self-starting engineers with something 
akin to a “virtual apprenticeship”—a solid foundation of all-purpose recording 
technique combined with real-world insights from a wide range of top-level 
professionals. 
 The good news for small-studio operators, though, is that if you can master 
the fundamentals I’ve laid out here, there’s really no reason why a slim bud-
get should prevent you from putting together high-quality productions. “I’ve 
mixed stuff that’s been done on really cheap equipment that sounds gor-
geous,” says Dave Jerden, 2 for instance, “and [other] stuff that’s been done 
on all the proper high-end gear, and it sounds like crap. It’s all in how you 
record it.” Low-budget scenarios can give you a creative edge, in fact, says 
John Cuniberti: 3 “The project studio is where you can outdo the guys who are 
strapped into $2000-a-day rooms ﬁ lled with expensive microphones they feel 
they  have  to use. It’s very difﬁ cult to go into a big room with big money and 
high expectations and be experimental.” 
 I’ve also touched on many broader issues of music production in these pages, 
in recognition of the fact that small-studio operators frequently need to ﬁ ll the 
role of producer on low-budget projects. Inevitably, though, I’ve only been able 
to graze the surface of that enormous subject in a book about audio engineer-
ing. The best teacher there is experience, though, so up-and-coming engineers 
 Conclusion 
 CHAPTER 12 
 CHAPTER 12 

PART 4 Multiple Sources, Multiple Mics
382
should seek out good experience wherever they can ﬁ nd it, whether it pays the 
bills or not. “Every great producer has had to go out on a limb and do proj-
ects where they weren’t getting paid,” says Justin Niebank. 4 “You should view 
every record you make as an investment in your future. That’s really the bot-
tom line.” Even dreadful session experiences can yield positive experience, says 
Andy Bradﬁ eld: 5 “The way to view those kinds of sessions is that they’re teach-
ing you what  not to do.” 
 The main thing is that you should never stop learning in this business. Here’s 
Al Schmitt, 6 who probably has more right than any of us to rest on his lau-
rels: “When I go home at night, I’ll think…‘What did I learn today that I didn’t 
know?’ I consciously do that…You have to keep learning.” “Never think you 
know everything,” adds Toby Wright. 7 “The minute you do, you don’t!” And 
it’s not just a question of studio skills either, because John Simon 8 advises con-
tinually widening your musical tastes beyond your stylistic comfort zone, while 
Joe Chiccarelli 9 extols the virtues of a broader knowledge of art, literature, and 
psychology as well. 
 And, of course, if you get the chance to learn directly from the top names, then 
grasp that opportunity with both hands! It always amazes me when walking 
around the big music-industry trade fairs how few people make the effort to 
track down and ask a question of their favorite engineers and producers. In 
my experience, these people all acknowledge the gift they received from their 
own mentors, and can be extremely gracious and helpful when approached 
courteously. 
 Finally, remember that the way you work will inﬂ uence the music itself—or, as 
John Hampton 10 puts it: “Fun sticks to the tape. If you’re not having fun, that 
sticks to the tape too.” 

383
 Music Studios and 
the Recording Process: 
An Overview 
 APPENDIX 1 
 APPENDIX 1 
 Throughout most of this book I make the assumption that you have a basic 
overview of what the music-production process entails. However, because 
I can’t  rely  on that, I wanted to lay out exactly what background knowledge 
I’m expecting of the reader, and in the most condensed form I can. (Health 
Warning: Anyone with a strong allergic reaction to sweeping generalizations 
should top up their medication now!) 
 I’ve put important pieces of technical jargon in bold-face to make them stand 
out. It’s a fact of life that every engineer applies studio terminology slightly dif-
ferently, so I hope that clarifying my own usage will help minimize confusion. 
 SOUND IN DIFFERENT FORMS 
 Sound is a series of pressure waves moving through the air at the speed of 
sound (roughly 343 meters/second). Any vibrating object can create these pres-
sure waves, and when they reach your eardrums, those vibrate in sympathy, 
triggering the hearing sensation. Transducers such as pickups and microphones 
can convert air-pressure waves, or the vibrations which triggered them, into 
an electrical signal, representing their movements over time as voltage ﬂ uctua-
tions—often displayed for inspection purposes as a waveform of voltage level 
(vertical axis) against time (horizontal axis). Other transducers can convert this 
electrical signal back into air-pressure waves for listening or  monitoring  pur-
poses (via loudspeakers or headphones) or into some other form for storage/
replay (e.g., the variable groove depths on a vinyl LP or the variable ﬂ ux levels 
on a magnetic tape). 
 Once sounds have been converted to electrical signals, it becomes possible to 
process and combine them using all manner of electronic circuitry. In addi-
tion, the voltage variations of an electrical signal can also be represented as a 
stream of numbers in digital form, whereupon digital signal-processing (DSP) 
techniques can be applied to them. Transferring any signal between the  analog 
domain  (of electrical signals, vinyl grooves, magnetic ﬂ ux, physical vibrations, 
and pressure waves) and the  digital domain  requires either an analog-to-digital 
converter ( ADC ) or a digital-to-analog converter ( DAC ). The ﬁ delity of analog-
to-digital conversion is primarily determined by two statistics: the frequency 
with which the analog signal’s voltage level is measured (the  sample rate  or 
 sampling frequency ) and the resolution (or  bit depth ) of each measurement 
(or  sample ), expressed in terms of the length of the binary number required to 
store it. 

APPENDIX 1 Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview
384
 SINEWAVES AND AUDIO FREQUENCIES 
 If an electrical signal’s waveform looks chaotic, what you hear will usually fea-
ture noisy sounds, whereas repeating waveform patterns are heard as pitched 
events such as musical notes or overtones. However, before I say any more 
about complex sounds, it’s useful ﬁ rst to understand the simplest repeat-
ing sound wave: a  sinewave tone . Its pitch is determined by the number of 
times it repeats per second, referred to as its  frequency  and measured in Hertz 
(Hz). Roughly speaking, the human ear can detect sinewave tones across 
a 20 Hz–20 kHz frequency range (the  audible frequency spectrum ). Low-
frequency tones are perceived as low pitched, while high-frequency tones are 
perceived as high pitched. Although a sinewave tone isn’t exactly thrilling to 
listen to on its own, it turns out that all the more interesting musical sounds 
can actually be broken down into a collection of different sinewave tones. The 
mixture of different sinewave components within any given complex sound 
determines its timbre. 
 One way to examine these sinewave components is to use a  spectrum ana-
lyzer , a real-time display of a sound’s energy distribution across the audible 
frequency spectrum. On a spectrum analyzer, a simple sinewave tone shows up 
as a narrow peak, while real-world signals create a complex undulating plot. 
Narrow peaks in a complex spectrum-analyzer display indicate pitched compo-
nents within the signal, while the distribution of energy across the frequency 
display determines the timbre of the sound—subjectively darker sounds are 
richer in low frequencies, whereas bright sounds tend to be strong on high fre-
quencies. Although a single sinewave tone will be perceived as a pitched note, 
almost all real-world musical notes are actually made up of a  harmonic series 
of related sinewaves. The most low-frequency of these, the  fundamental , deter-
mines the perceived pitch, while a series of  harmonics  at multiples of the fun-
damental’s frequency determine the note’s timbre according to their relative 
levels. 
 FIGURE A.1    
 On this spectrum-
analyzer display you 
can clearly see the 
fundamental and ﬁ rst 
four harmonics of a 
single pitched note 
projecting out of the full-
frequency background 
noise. 

Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview APPENDIX 1
385
 LOGARITHMIC SCALES FOR LEVEL & PITCH 
 Human hearing perceives both level and pitch in a roughly logarithmic way—
in other words, we compare levels and pitches in terms of ratios. For exam-
ple, the perceived pitch interval between a note with its fundamental at 100 Hz 
and a note with its fundamental at 200 Hz is the same as that between notes 
with fundamentals at 200 Hz and 400 Hz. Similarly, when dealing with sound 
in electrical form, the perceived volume difference on playback between sig-
nals peaking at 100 mV and 200 mV is roughly similar to that between signals 
peaking at 200 mV and 400 mV. In recognition of this, both pitch and signal 
level measurements are frequently made using a logarithmic scale. In the case 
of pitch, this is done in terms of traditional musical intervals: e.g., 200 Hz is an 
octave above 100 Hz, 200 Hz is an octave below 400 Hz, and so on. In the case 
of signal levels this is done using  decibels  (dB): e.g., 200 mV is 6 dB higher in 
level than 100 mV, 200 mV is 6 dB lower in level than 400 mV—or, to express 
it in another commonly used form, a +6 dB level change (“+6 dB gain”) takes 
100 mV to 200 mV, whereas a −6 dB level change (“−6 dB gain”) takes 400 mV 
to 200 mV. 
 On their own, decibel values can only be used to indicate  changes  in signal level, 
which is why they are often used to label audio “gain controls” (such as faders) 
that are expressly designed for this purpose. However, it’s important to remem-
ber that decibels (just like musical intervals) are always relative. In other words, 
it’s meaningless to say that a signal level is “4.75 dB,” much as it’s nonsensical 
to say that any isolated note is a major sixth, because the question is “4.75 dB 
larger than what?” or “a major sixth above what?” Therefore, if you want to state 
absolute level values in terms of decibels, you need to express them relative 
to an agreed  reference level , indicating this using a sufﬁ x. Common reference 
levels used for studio purposes include dBu and dBV (for electrical signals) and 
dBFS (for digital signals), but those are by no means the only ones out there.
 
 FREQUENCY RESPONSE 
 Any studio device will alter the nature of sound passing through it in some way, however small, and the nature 
of any such effect on a signal’s frequency balance is commonly expressed in terms of a  frequency response 
graph, which shows the gain applied by the device across the frequency range. A device that left the frequency 
balance completely unchanged would show a straight horizontal frequency-response plot at the 0 dB level. 
However, real-world equipment deviates somewhat from this ideal  ﬂ at response —indeed, some devices 
deliberately warp their frequency-response curve for creative purposes. 
 
 THE MULTITRACK RECORDING PROCESS 
 Modern studio production revolves around the concept of  multitrack record-
ing , whereby you can capture different electrical signals on different recorder 
 tracks , retaining the ﬂ exibility to process and blend them independently 
afterwards. Furthermore, multitrack recorders also allow you to  overdub  new 

APPENDIX 1 Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview
386
signals to additional tracks while listening back to ( monitoring ) any tracks 
that have already been recorded, which enables complicated musical arrange-
ments to be built up one instrument at a time if required. 
 An equally important cornerstone of the production process in many styles is 
the use of  synthesizers  (which generate audio signals electronically) and  sam-
plers  (which can creatively manipulate selected sections of prerecorded audio). 
These can sometimes mimic the performances of live musicians, but more 
importantly provide the opportunity to design sounds that reach beyond the 
realms of the natural. Typically these devices are digitally controlled using  MIDI 
(Musical Instrument Digital Interface) messages, which can be programmed/
recorded in multitrack form, edited, and replayed using a  MIDI sequencer . 
 Although the production workﬂ ow in different musical styles can contrast rad-
ically, many people in the studio industry ﬁ nd it useful to discuss the prog-
ress of any given project in terms of a series of notional “stages.” Everyone 
has a slightly different view of what constitutes each stage, what they’re called 
exactly, and where the boundaries are between them, but roughly speaking 
they work out as follows:
 
■
 Preproduction  &  Programming . The music is written and arranged. 
Fundamental synth/sampler parts may be programmed at this stage and 
musicians rehearsed in preparation for recording sessions. 
 
■
 Recording  (or  Tracking ). The instruments and vocals required for the 
arrangement are recorded, either all at once or piecemeal via overdubbing. 
Audio editing and corrective processing may also be applied during this 
stage to reﬁ ne the recorded tracks into their ﬁ nal form, in particular when 
pasting together ( comping ) the best sections of several recorded  takes 
to create a single  master take . MIDI-driven synth and sampler parts are 
 bounced down to the multitrack recorder by recording their audio outputs.  
 
■
 Mixing  (or  Mixdown ). All the recorded tracks are balanced and processed 
to create a commercial-sounding stereo mix. 
 
■
 Mastering . The mixdown ﬁ le is further processed to adapt it to different 
release formats. 
 The most common professional studio setup for the recording stage involves 
two separate rooms, acoustically isolated from each other: a  live room  where 
musicians perform with their instruments; and a  control room  containing 
the bulk of the recording equipment, where the recording engineer can make 
judgments about sound quality without the direct sound from the performers 
interfering with what he’s hearing from his monitoring loudspeakers (or  moni-
tors ). Where several performers are playing together in the live room, each 
with their own microphone, every mic will not only pick up the sound of the 
instrument/voice it’s pointing at, but will also pick up some of the sound from 
the other instruments in the room—something variously referred to as  spill , 
 leakage ,  bleed , or  crosstalk , depending on who you speak to! In some studio 
setups, additional sound-proofed rooms ( isolation booths ) are provided to 
get around this and improve the  separation of the signals. 

Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview APPENDIX 1
387
 AUDIO SIGNALS AND MIXERS 
 A typical multitrack recording session can easily involve hundreds of different 
audio signals. Every audio source (microphones, pickups, synths, samplers) 
needs routing to its own track of the multitrack recorder, often through a 
 recording chain  of studio equipment designed to prepare it for capture. Each 
playback signal from the recorder will pass through its own  monitoring chain , 
being blended with all the other tracks so that you can evaluate your work in 
progress via loudspeakers or headphones. Additional  cue/foldback mixes  may 
be required to provide personalized monitoring signals for each different per-
former during a recording session. Further mixes might also feed external (or 
 outboard ) effects processors, the outputs of which must be  returned  to the 
main mix so you can hear their results. 
 The way studios marshal all these signals is by using  mixers  (aka  mixing 
desks ,  boards , or  consoles ). At its most basic, a mixer accepts a number of 
incoming signals, blends them together in some way, and outputs the result-
ing blended signal. Within the mixer’s architecture, each input signal passes 
through its own independent signal-processing path (or  channel ), which is 
furnished with a set of controls (the  channel strip ) for adjusting the level and 
sound character of that signal in the mixed output. In the simplest of mixers, 
each channel strip may have nothing more than a fader to adjust its relative 
level for a single output mix, but most real-world designs have many other fea-
tures besides this:
 
■
 If the  main/master mix  output is stereo (which it usually will be) then each 
mono channel will have a  pan control  (or  pan pot ) which adjusts the rela-
tive levels sent from that channel to the left and right sides of the main mix. 
If the mixer provides dedicated stereo channels, these may have a  balance 
control  instead, which sets the relative level of the stereo input signal’s left 
and right signal streams. 
 
■
 An independent  monitor mix  or  control-room mix  may be available for 
your studio loudspeakers. Although this will usually receive the master mix 
signal by default, you can typically also feed it with any subset of the input 
signals for closer scrutiny by activating per-channel  solo buttons. 
 
■
 In addition to the faders that set each input signal’s level in the main mix, 
there may be controls for creating further  auxiliary mixes  too—perhaps 
labeled as  cue sends  (for the purposes of foldback) and  effects sends  (for 
feeding external effects processors). 
 
■
 There may be buttons on each channel strip that allow you to disconnect 
that channel from the main mix, routing it instead to a separate  group  or 
 subgroup  channel with its own independent output. This provides a con-
venient means of routing different input signals to different tracks of the 
multitrack recorder and of  submixing  several input signals together onto a 
single recorder track. 
 
■
 Audio metering may be built in, visually displaying the signal levels for var-
ious channels as well as for the group, monitor, and master mix signals. 

APPENDIX 1 Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview
388
 Mixer channels that are conveying signals to the multitrack recorder for 
capture are often referred to as  input channels , whereas those which blend 
together the multitrack recorder’s monitor outputs and send them to your 
loudspeakers/headphones are frequently called  monitor channels . Some 
 FIGURE A.2    
 Some of the basic functions of a mixer in the recording studio. Signals from microphones and instruments 
are relayed through the mixer’s input channels to a multitrack recorder. Playback signals from the 
multitrack recorder are passed through the mixer’s monitor channels on their way to the stereo main/
master mix. Auxiliary send facilities on each channel allow independent mixes to be sent to performers 
in the studio (cue/foldback mixes) and to external effects processors (effects send mixes), the latter 
returning their signals to the main/master mix. 

Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview APPENDIX 1
389
mixers just have a bunch of channels with identical functionality, and leave it 
up to you to decide which to use as input and monitor channels, while oth-
ers have dedicated sections of input and monitor channels whose channel-strip 
facilities are speciﬁ cally tailored for their respective tasks. Another design, the 
 in-line mixer , combines the controls of both an input channel and a monitor 
channel within the same channel strip. This is popular in large-scale studio set-
ups because it creates a physically more compact control layout, provides ergo-
nomic beneﬁ ts for advanced users, and allows the two channels to share some 
processing resources. (Plus there’s the added beneﬁ t that it confuses the hell 
out of the uninitiated, which is always gratifying…) 
 Another specialized mixer, called a  monitor controller , has evolved to cater 
for studios where several different playback devices and/or loudspeaker sys-
tems are available. It typically provides switches to select between the different 
audio sources and speaker rigs, as well as a master volume control for which-
ever speaker system is currently active.
 SIGNAL PROCESSING 
 Beyond simply blending and routing signals, multitrack production invariably involves processing them as well. 
In some cases this may comprise nothing more than “preamplifying” the signal to a suitable level for recording 
purposes, but there are several other processes that are frequently applied as well:
 
■
 Spectral Shaping: Audio  ﬁ lters and  equalizers may be used to adjust the levels of different frequencies 
relative to each other. 
 
■
 Dynamics : Tools such as  compressors ,  limiters ,  expanders , and  gates allow the engineer to control the 
level-contour of a signal over time in a semi-automatic manner.  
 
■
 Modulation Effects: A family of processes which introduce cyclic variations into the signal. Includes effects 
such as  chorusing ,  ﬂ anging ,  phasing ,  vibrato , and  tremolo . 
 
■
 Delay-Based Effects: Another group of processes which involve overlaying one or more echoes onto the 
signal. Where these effects become complex, they can begin to artifi cially simulate the reverberation 
characteristics of natural acoustic spaces. 
 In some cases, such processing may be  inserted into the signal path directly—rather than being fed from an 
independent effects send and then returned to the mix (a  send – return confi guration). 
 REAL-WORLD STUDIO SETUPS: SOMETHING OLD, 
SOMETHING NEW 
 Although every recording studio needs to route, record, process, and mix audio 
signals, every engineer’s rig ends up being slightly different, either by virtue 
of the equipment chosen, or because of the way the gear is hooked up. One 
deﬁ ning feature of many systems is the extent to which digital technology is 
used. While there are still some people who uphold the analog-only studio 
tradition of the 1970s, the reliability, features, and pricing of DSP processing 
and data storage have increasingly drawn small studios toward hybrid systems. 
Standalone digital recorders and effects processors began this trend within 
otherwise analog systems, but the advent of comparatively affordable digital 

APPENDIX 1 Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview
390
mixers and “studio in a box” digital  multitrackers during the 1990s eventu-
ally allowed project studios to operate almost entirely in the digital domain, 
converting all analog signals to digital data at the earliest possible opportunity 
and then transferring that data between different digital studio processors loss-
lessly. These days, however, the physical hardware units of early digital studios 
have largely been superseded by Digital Audio Workstation ( DAW ) software, 
which allows a single general-purpose computer to emulate all their routing, 
recording, processing, and mixing functions at once, connecting to the analog 
world where necessary via an  audio interface : a collection of audio input/out-
put ( I/O ) sockets, ADCs, and DACs. 
 A similar trajectory can be observed with synths and samplers. Although early 
devices were all-analog designs, microprocessors quickly made inroads dur-
ing the 1980s as the MIDI standard took hold. The low data bandwidth of 
MIDI messages and the plummeting price of personal computing meant that 
computer-based MIDI sequencing was already the norm 20 years ago, but 
in more recent years the synths and samplers themselves have increasingly 
migrated into that world too, in the form of software  virtual instruments . As 
a result, most modern DAW systems integrate MIDI sequencing and synthesis/
sampling facilities alongside their audio recording and processing capabilities, 
making it possible for productions to be constructed almost entirely within 
a software environment. In practice, however, most small studios occupy a 
middle ground between the all-analog and all-digital extremes, combining 
old and new, analog and digital, hardware and software—depending on 
production priorities, space/budget restrictions, and personal preferences. 
 SETTING UP A SMALL STEREO 
MONITORING SYSTEM 
 When it comes to audio engineering, the equipment you use for monitoring 
purposes is vital—the better you can hear what you’re doing, the faster you’ll 
learn how to improve your sonics. Loudspeakers are usually preferable over 
headphones, because the latter struggle to reproduce low frequencies faithfully 
and create an unnaturally wide “inside your head” stereo sensation. That said, 
if you’ve got less than $750 (£500) to spend, my view is that top-of-the-range 
studio headphones will give you better results for the money than any combi-
nation of speakers and acoustic treatment in that price range. Whatever moni-
toring system you use, it will only become useful to you once you know how 
your favorite productions sound through it. 
 In general, it’s best to choose full-range speakers designed speciﬁ cally for stu-
dio use, rather than general-purpose hi-ﬁ  models which tend to ﬂ atter sounds 
unduly. The speakers themselves should be ﬁ rmly mounted (preferably on 
solid stands) and carefully positioned according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions—setting up across the shorter dimension of a rectangular room will usu-
ally give the better sound. To present a good stereo image, the two speakers 
and the listening “ sweetspot ” should form an equilateral triangle, with the 

Music Studios and the Recording Process: An Overview APPENDIX 1
391
tweeter and woofer of each speaker vertically 
aligned and both tweeters angled toward the 
listener’s ears. Speaker systems with built-in 
ampliﬁ cation (“active” or “powered” speakers) 
are not only convenient, but also offer sonic 
advantages because of the way the ampliﬁ er(s) 
can be matched to the speciﬁ c speaker drivers. 
 Although most small-studio speaker systems are 
 nearﬁ eld  models which are designed to operate 
within about 6 feet (2 m) of the listener, room 
acoustics can still have an enormous impact 
on their tone and ﬁ delity. As such, you should 
probably spend roughly the same amount of 
money on acoustic treatment as on the speaker 
system itself if you’re going to get the best bang 
for your buck. High-frequency reﬂ ections and 
room resonances can be absorbed very effec-
tively with judiciously applied acoustic foam, 
but taming low-end problems requires more 
expensive and bulky acoustics measures.
 
 WEB RESOURCES 
 On this book’s companion website you’ll fi nd a selection of resources to support this 
overview, including:
 
■
 an interactive version of this chapter peppered with dozens of links to more 
detailed further reading and some supporting audio/video materials; 
 
■
 links to some well-maintained audio glossaries in case you need to look up any 
technical terms; 
 
■
 examples of entry-level recording systems suitable for use with this book, in case 
you don’t already have access to any studio gear. 
 
  http://www.cambridge-mt.com/rs-app.htm 
 
 FIGURE A.3    
 For decent stereo imaging on loudspeakers, the listener’s ears 
and the speakers should be positioned in an equilateral triangle 
formation, as shown here. 

This page intentionally left blank

393
 Who’s Who: Selected 
Discography 
 APPENDIX 2 
 APPENDIX 2 
 Here’s a list of all the producers I’ve cited in this book, along with some of the most 
inﬂ uential recordings they’ve been involved with. 
 ABBISS, JIM 
 Arctic Monkeys:  Whatever People Say I Am ,  That’s What I’m Not ; Ladytron:  Witching Hour ; 
Sneaker Pimps:  Becoming X ; Editors:  The Back Room ; Kasabian:  Kasabian ,  Empire ; Adele: 
 19 ,  21 ; KT Tunstall:  Tiger Suit ; The Kooks : Junk Of The Heart ; Stereophonics:  Keep Calm 
and Carry On . 
 ADAMS, ROBBIE 
 U2:  Achtung Baby, Zooropa ; Smashing Pumpkins:  Adore ; Naked:  Naked ; Don Piper:  A Don 
Piper Situation ; Patty Grifﬁ n:  Impossible Dreams . 
 ADDEY, MALCOLM 
 Judy Garland:  The London Studio Recordings 1957 – 1964 ; Cliff Richard:  Cliff/The Young 
Ones ,  Summer Holiday ; The Beatles:  Sgt .  Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band ; Kool & The 
Gang:  Kool & The Gang . 
 AFANASIEFF, WALTER 
 Mariah Carey:  Without You ,  Never Forget You ,  Anytime You Need A Friend ,  All I Want 
For Christmas Is You;  Ricky Martin:  Ricky Martin ; Celine Dion:  My Heart Will Go On ; 
Destiny’s Child:  Survivor . 
 AGNELLO, JOHN 
 Sonic Youth:  Rather Ripped ; Dinosaur Jr.:  Beyond ; Kurt Vile : Smoke Ring For My Halo, 
Wakin On a Pretty Daze ; Jennifer O’Connor:  Here With Me ; The Kills:  No Wow . 
 AHERN, BRIAN 
 Neil Young:  Live At The Riverboat 1969 ; Anne Murray:  What About Me ,  This Way Is 
My Way ,  Snowbird ; Emmylou Harris:  Pieces Of The Sky ,  Elite Hotel ,  Blue Kentucky Girl , 
 Evangeline . 
 AINLAY, CHUCK 
 Trisha Yearwood:  Where Your Road Leads ,  Thinkin’ About You ,  Everybody Knows ,  How Do I 
Live ,  Real Live Woman ; George Strait:  Somewhere Down In Texas ,  Pure Country ,  Blue Clear 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
394
Sky ,  Carrying Your Love With Me ; Vince Gill:  High Lonesome Sound ,  The Key ; Dixie Chicks: 
 Wide Open Spaces ; Mark Knopﬂ er:  Sailing To Philadelphia ,  The Ragpicker’s Dream, Wag The 
Dog ,  Metroland ; Patty Loveless:  If My Heart Had Windows ,  Honky Tonk Angel . 
 ALBINI, STEVE 
 The Pixies:  Surfer Rosa ; Nirvana:  In Utero ; Bush:  Razorblade Suitcase ; PJ Harvey:  Rid Of 
Me ; Jimmy Page & Robert Plant:  Walking Into Clarksdale ; Manic Street Preachers:  Journal 
For Plague Lovers ; The Wedding Present:  El Rey ; The Breeders:  Mountain Battles ; The 
Stooges:  The Weirdness ; Cheap Trick:  Rockford . 
 ALLEN, BEN 
 Bombay Bicycle Club:  So Long, See You Tomorrow ,  A Different Kind Of Fix ; Lenka:  Two ; 
Christina Aguilera:  Back To Basics . 
 ASTLEY, JOHN 
 The Who:  Who Are You ; Eric Clapton:  Just One Night . 
 AUSTIN, DAN 
 Cherry Ghost:  A Thirst For Romance ; Doves:  Kingdom of Rust ; Arcane Roots:  Blood & 
Chemistry ; Airship:  Stuck In This Ocean . 
 AVRON, NEAL 
 Fall Out Boy:  From Under The Cork Trees ,  Inﬁ nity On High ,  Folie A Deux ; Weezer:  Make 
Believe ; Everclear:  So Much For The Afterglow ; Linkin Park:  Minutes To Midnight ; The 
Wallﬂ owers:  Bringing Down The Horse ; Lifehouse:  No Name Face ; Yellowcard:  Ocean 
Avenue . 
 BAKER, ROY THOMAS 
 Queen:  Queen ,  Queen II ,  Jazz ; Ozzy Ozbourne:  No Rest For The Wicked ; The Smashing 
Pumpkins:  Zeitgeist ,  American Gothic ; The Darkness:  One Way Ticket To Hell And Back ; 
Chris de Burgh:  Spark To A Flame ; Mötley Crüe:  Too Fast For Love . 
 BALLARD, GLEN 
 Wilson Phillips:  Wilson Phillips ; Alanis Morissette:  Jagged Little Pill ,  Supposed Former 
Infatuation Junkie ; Michael Jackson:  Thriller ,  Bad ,  Dangerous ; POD:  Testify ; Anastacia: 
 Anastacia ; Goo Goo Dolls:  Let Love In ; Christina Aguilera:  Stripped ; No Doubt:  Return Of 
Saturn ; Aerosmith:  Nine Lives ; Paula Abdul:  Forever Your Girl . 
 BARBE, DAVID 
 Deerhunters:  Halcyon Digest ; Patterson Hood:  Heat Lightning Rumbles In The Distance ; 
Dennis Ellsworth:  Dusk Dreams ; Drive-By Truckers:  Go-Go Boots ,  The Big To-Do ,  Brighter 
Than Creation’s Dark ; New Madrid:  Yard Boat ; Dead Confederate:  In The Marrow . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
395
 BARBIERO, MICHAEL 
 Cutting Crew:  Broadcast ; Peter Frampton:  Fingerprints ; Blues Traveler:  Run-around ; Ziggy 
Marley:  Fallen Is Babylon ; Whitney Houston:  Whitney . 
 BARRESI, JOE 
 Queens Of The Stone Age:  Queens Of The Stone Age ,  Lullabies To Paralyze ; Tool:  10000 
Days ; The Melvins:  Stag, Honky ; Hole:  Celebrity Skin ; Limp Bizkit:  Chocolate Starﬁ sh & The 
Hotdog Flavored Water ; The Lost Prophets:  Start Something ; Skunk Anansie:  Stoosh ; Bad 
Religion:  The Empire Strikes First ,  New Maps Of Hell ,  The Dissent Of Man . 
 BHASKER, JEFF 
 Kanye West:  808s & Heartbreak ,  My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ; Jay-Z:  The Blueprint 3 ; 
Alicia Keys:  The Element Of Freedom ; Mary J. Blige:  Stronger With Each Tear ; Snoop Dogg: 
 Doggumentary ; Beyoncé:  4 ; Lana Del Rey:  Born To Die ; Fun:  Some Nights ; Pink:  The Truth 
About Love ; Eminem:  The Marshall Mathers LP  2; Dido:  Girl Who Got Away ; Taylor Swift: 
 Red ; The Rolling Stones:  GRRR! ; Bruno Mars:  Unorthodox Jukebox . 
 BISHOP, MICHAEL 
 Engineer and producer for many Grammy-winning Telarc releases, including  Copland: 
The Music Of America ,  Vaughan Williams: A Sea Symphony , and  Elgar/Britten: Enigma 
Variations, The Young Person’s Guide To The Orchestra, and Four Sea Interludes , all of which 
won Best Engineered Classical Album Grammies. 
 BLAKE, TCHAD 
 Sheryl Crow:  The Globe Sessions ; Bonnie Raitt:  Souls Alike ; Phish:  Undermind ; Suzanne 
Vega:  Nine Objects Of Desire ,  99 . 9 ° F ,  Beauty And Crime ; Crowded House:  Farewell To 
The World ; Paul Simon:  Surprise ; Peter Gabriel:  Ovo ,  Long Walk Home ,  Up ; The Dandy 
Warhols:  Come Down ,  Odditorium ; Neil Finn:  One Nil, Try Whistling This ; Pearl Jam: 
 Binaural . 
 BOTNIK, BRUCE 
 The Doors:  L . A .  Woman ; Eddie Money:  Eddie Money ,  Life For The Taking ; The Beat:  The 
Beat ,  The Kids Are The Same ; Love:  Forever Changes . 
 BOTTRILL, BILL 
 The Traveling Wilburys:  The Traveling Wilburys Volume 1 ; Tom Petty:  Full Moon Fever ; 
Madonna:  Like A Prayer ; The Jacksons:  Victory ; Michael Jackson:  Bad ,  Dangerous ; Sheryl 
Crow:  Tuesday Night Music Club ,  Sheryl Crow ; Shelby Lynne:  I Am Shelby Lynne ; Elton 
John:  Songs From The West Coast . 
 BOYS, JERRY 
 REM:  Fable Of The Reconstruction ; Everything But The Girl:  Ampliﬁ ed Heart ; The Cat 
Empire:  Two Shoes ; Steeleye Span:  Parcel Of Rogues ; Buena Vista Social Club:  Buena Vista 
Social Club . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
396
 BRADFIELD, ANDY 
 Robbie Robertson:  Contact From The Underworld Of Redboy ; Rufus Wainwright:  Want 
One ,  Want Two ,  Release The Stars ; Josh Groban:  Awake ; Alanis Morissette:  Flavors of 
Entanglement ; Spice Girls:  Spice . 
 BRAUER, MICHAEL 
 Coldplay:  Parachutes ,  X&Y ,  Viva La Vida ; Athlete:  Tourist ; The Fray:  The Fray ; Evans Blue: 
 The Pursuit Begins When This Portrayal of Life Ends ; Paolo Nutini:  These Streets ; John 
Mayer:  Continuum ; James Morrison:  Undiscovered ; The Kooks:  Inside In/Inside Out ; My 
Morning Jacket:  Evil Urges ; Travis:  The Boy With No Name ; Doves:  Kingdom Of Rust ; KT 
Tunstall:  Drastic Fantastic ; Idlewild:  Warnings/Promises ; Fountains Of Wayne:  Trafﬁ c And 
Weather ; Aimee Mann:  Lost In Space ; Bob Dylan:  Lovesick . 
 BRIGHT, MARK 
 Carrie Underwood:  Some Hearts ,  Blown Away ; Scotty McCreery:  Clear As Day ; Rascal 
Flatts:  Rascal Flatts ,  I Melt ,  Feels Like Today . 
 BRION, JON 
 Fiona Apple:  When The Pawn ,  Extraordinary Machine;  Dido:  Safe Trip Home ; Sky 
Ferreira:  Ghost ; Keane:  Perfect Symmetry ; Kanye West:  Late Registration ,  Graduation ; Rufus 
Wainwright:  Rufus Wainwright ; Aimee Mann:  I’m With Stupid ,  Whatever ,  Bachelor No .  2 . 
 BROWN, PHILL 
 Dido:  Life For Rent ; Paper Aeroplanes:  Little Letters ; Robert Plant:  Nine Lives ; Talk Talk: 
 Spirit Of Eden ,  Laughing Stock ; Throwing Muses:  Bright Yellow Gun ,  University ; Paul 
Carrack:  Nightbird ; Amazing Blondel:  Mulgrave Street . 
 BROWN, TONY 
 George Strait:  It Just Comes Natural ,  Troubadour ,  Here For A Good Time ; Vince Gill:  I Still 
Believe In You ,  Let’s Make Sure We Kiss Goodbye ; Steve Earle:  Guitar Town ; Patty Loveless: 
 Honky Tonk Angel ; Lyle Lovett:  Lyle Lovett And His Large Band ; Trisha Yearwood:  Love 
Songs ; Reba McEntire:  Duets ; Lucinda Williams:  Car Wheels On A Gravel Road . 
 BULLOCK, BOB 
 Shania Twain:  Come On Over ,  Up! ; Crazy Horse:  Crazy Moon;  Hank Williams Jr.:  Five-O ; 
Kenny Rogers:  Love Will Turn Around ; Patty Loveless:  Honky Tonk Angel ,  When Fallen 
Angels Fly ; George Strait:  Holding My Own ,  Livin’ It Up ,  Beyond The Blue Neon ; Nancy 
Grifﬁ th:  Little Love Affairs ; Reba McEntire:  What Am I Gonna Do About You ,  My Kind Of 
Country ; Waylon Jennings:  Will The Wolf Survive . 
 BURNETT, T-BONE 
 Elvis Costello:  King Of America ,  Out Of Our Idiot ,  Spike ; Roy Orbison:  In Dreams ,  A Black 
And White Night Live ,  Mystery Girl ,  King of Hearts ; The Wallﬂ owers:  Bringing Down The 
Horse ; Diana Krall:  Glad Rag Doll . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
397
 BUSH, BILLY 
 Garbage:  Not Your Kind Of People ,  Absolute Garbage ,  Beautiful Garbage ,  Bleed Like Me , 
 Version 2 . 0 ; The Boxer Rebellion:  Promises ; Muse: “Neutron Star Collision”; Snow Patrol: 
“In The End”; The Naked And Famous:  In Rolling Waves ,  Passive Me, Aggressive You . 
 BUSH, STEVE 
 Stereophonics:  Word Gets Around ,  Performance & Cocktails ,  Just Enough Education To 
Perform ; Corinne Bailey Rae:  Corinne Bailey Rae . 
 CAILLAT, KEN 
 Fleetwood Mac:  Rumours ,  Tusk ,  Mirage ; Colbie Caillat:  Coco ,  Breakthrough ; Christine 
McVie:  In The Meantime ; Lionel Richie:  Dancing On The Ceiling . 
 CARRANZA, ROBERT 
 Salvador Santana:  Keyboard City ; Zee Avi:  Zee Avi ; Jack Johnson:  Sleep Through The Static , 
 Jack Johnson En Concert ; The Mars Volta:  The Bedlam In Goliath . 
 CHANDLER, STEVE 
 James King:  The Bluegrass Storyteller ,  Three Chords And The Truth ; Dry Branch Fire Squad: 
 Echoes Of The Mountains ; JD Crowe:  Lefty’s Old Guitar ,  Old Friends Get Together ; Mike 
Scott:  Home Sweet Home ,  Take Me Lord And Use Me ; Gene Watson:  A Taste For The Truth ; 
The Happy Goodman Family:  The Final Stand ,  Set Your Sails ; Hazel Dickens:  By The 
Sweat Of My Brow ; Keith Whitley:  Sad Songs And Waltzes . 
 CHAPMAN, NATHAN 
 Taylor Swift:  Taylor Swift ,  Faceless ,  Speak Now ,  Red ; The Band Perry:  The Band Perry ; Point 
Of Grace:  No Changin’ Us ,  Home For The Holidays ; Martina McBride:  Shine ; Jewel:  Sweet 
And Wild . 
 CHERNEY, ED 
 The Rolling Stones:  Stripped, Bridges To Babylon ,  No Secu rity; Bonnie Raitt:  Nick Of Time ,  Luck 
Of The Draw ,  Longing In Their Hearts ,  Road Tested ; Bob Dylan:  Under The Red Sky ,  Unplugged . 
 CHICCARELLI, JOE 
 White Stripes:  Icky Thump ; Frank Zappa:  Sheik Yerbouti ,  Joe’s Garage ,  Tinseltown Rebellion ; 
My Morning Jacket:  Evil Urges ; The Shins:  Wincing The Night Away ; Counting Crows:  The 
Desert Life . 
 CHURCHYARD, STEVE 
 The Pretenders:  Learning To Crawl ; Counting Crows:  Recovering The Satellites ; Celine 
Dion:  Falling Into You ; Ricky Martin:  Vuelve ,  Almas Del Silencio ,  Sound Loaded ; Shakira: 
 Laundry Service ; The Stranglers:  La Folie ,  Feline ; Big Country:  Wonderland ; Bryan Ferry: 
 Boys & Girls ; INXS:  Listen Like Thieves ; Kelly Clarkson:  Thankful . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
398
 CLARKE, ALEX 
 Tom Jones/Mousse T: “Sex Bomb.” 
 CLEARMOUNTAIN, BOB 
 The Pretenders:  Get Close ; Bryan Adams:  Into The Fire ,  Reckless ,  Cuts Like A Knife ,  So Far 
So Good ,  18 Till I Die ,  Room Service ,  11 ; Bruce Springsteen:  Born In The USA ; The Rolling 
Stones:  Tattoo You ; Bon Jovi:  These Days ,  Bounce ,  Crush ; Roxy Music:  Avalon ; David Bowie: 
 Let’s Dance ; INXS:  Kick ,  Full Moon ,  Dirty Hearts ,  Welcome To Wherever You Are ; The Corrs: 
 Talk On Corners ,  Forgiven Not Forgotten ,  Unplugged ; Robbie Williams:  Intensive Care ; 
Simple Minds:  Once Upon A Time ,  Black & White 050505 ,  Grafﬁ ti Soul ; Sheryl Crow: 
 Wildﬂ ower ; Aimee Mann:  Whatever ,  Bachelor No .  2 ; Rufus Wainwright:  Rufus Wainwright . 
 CLIMIE, SIMON 
 Eric Clapton:  Pilgrim ,  Back Home ; BB King & Eric Clapton:  Riding With The King ; Michael 
McDonald:  Motown I ,  Motown II ; Lara Fabian:  TLFM . 
 CLINK, MIKE 
 Guns N′ Roses:  Appetite For Destruction, GNR Lies ,  Use Your Illusion ,  The Spaghetti 
Incident ; Survivor:  Eye Of The Tiger ; Megadeth:  Rust In Peace ; Mötley Crüe:  New Tattoo ; 
Whitesnake:  Whitesnake . 
 COAD, JEZ 
 Simple Minds:  Black & White 050505 ,  Grafﬁ ti Soul ,  Stranger ; Andrew Strong:  Gypsy’s Kiss ; 
The Surﬁ ng Brides:  Sparky’s Dinner . 
 COSARO, JASON 
 Duran Duran:  The Biggest And The Best ; Billy Squier:  Icon; Madonna:  Like A Virgin ; Skylar 
May:  Married To The Moon ; Soundgarden:  Phantasm ,  A-Sides ,  Alive In The Superunknown , 
 Superunknown ; Soulﬂ y:  Soulﬂ y ; Cheap Trick:  Sex ,  America ,  Cheap Trick ; Duran Duran: 
 Thankyou ; Cyndi Lauper:  Seven Deadly Sins And Then Some ; Deep Purple:  The Battle Rages 
On ; Robert Palmer:  Riptide ,  Addictions Vol .  1 & 2 ; The Ramones:  Brain Drain ; Iggy Pop: 
 Instinct ; Motörhead:  Rock ’n’ Roll ; Steve Winwood:  Back In The High Life ; Cyndi Lauper: 
 Tru Colors ; Jeff Beck:  Flash ; Madonna:  Like A Virgin ; Chic:  Believer ,  Take It Off ; Paul 
Simon:  Hearts And Bones . 
 COSTEY, RICH 
 Muse:  Absolution ,  Black Holes & Revelations ; Interpol:  Our Love To Admire ; Polyphonic 
Spree:  Together We’re Heavy ; Franz Ferdinand:  You Could Have It So Much Better ; The Mars 
Volta:  Frances The Mute ,  Deloused In The Comatorium ; Audioslave:  Audioslave ; Weezer: 
 Make Believe ; Bloc Party:  Silent Alarm ; Doves:  Some Cities ; My Chemical Romance:  Three 
Cheers For Sweet Revenge ; Three Days Grace:  Three Days Grace ; Jimmy Eat World:  Futures ; 
POD:  Payable On Death ; Rage Against The Machine:  Renegades ; Fiona Apple:  When The 
Pawn ; Jurassic 5:  Quality Control ; Nine Inch Nails:  With Teeth . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
399
 CUNIBERTI, JOHN 
 Joe Satriani:  Joe Satriani ,  Time Machine ,  Cryin’ ,  The Extremist ,  Flying In A Blue Dream; 
Jack Miller:  Dead Lock Rock ; Michael Manring:  Thonk ; Lynch Mob:  Sacred Grove ; Dead 
Kennedys:  Plastic Surgery Disasters . 
 DAVIDGE, NEIL 
 Massive Attack:  Mezzanine ,  100 th  Window ,  Heligoland ; UNKLE:  Rabbit In Your Headlights , 
 War Stories ; Sinead O’Connor:  She Who Dwells… ; Soundtrack:  Halo 4 ,  Luther . 
 DAVIES, RHETT 
 Genesis:  Selling England By The Pound ; Dire Straits:  Dire Straits ; Bryan Ferry:  Another 
Time, Another Place ,  Boys and Girls ,  Dylanesque ,  Olympia ; Brian Eno:  Taking Tiger 
Mountain ,  Another Green World . 
 DAVIS, WYN 
 Foreigner:  Feels Like The First Time ; Paul Chesne:  White Man’s Curse ; Van Morrison: 
 Moondance ; Dio:  Last In The Line ,  Angry Machines ,  Magica ,  Master Of The Moon ; Ritchie 
Valens:  La Bamba 87 ; Dokken:  Breaking The Chains ,  Dysfunctional ,  Erase The Slate ,  Long Way 
Home ,  Hell To Pay ,  Lightning Strikes Again ; Great White:  Shot In The Dark ,  Icon . 
 DAWSON, SIMON 
 The Stone Roses:  Second Coming ; John Squire:  Time Changes Everything ,  Marshall’s 
House ; New Model Army:  Anthology ; T’Pau:  Red ; XTC:  Apple Venus Vol .  1 ,  Wasp Star ; The 
Darkness:  One Way Ticket To Hell And Back ; Simple Minds:  Grafﬁ ti Soul ; New Model 
Army:  Strange Brotherhood . 
 DODD, RICHARD 
 Uriah Heep:  Raging Silence ,  Time of Revelation ; Clannad:  Harry’s Game ,  Magical Ring , 
 Pastpresent ,  Anam ; Leo Sayer:  Silverbird ; Rosemary Clooney:  Nice To Be Around ; Tina 
Charles:  I Love To Love ,  Heart & Soul ; George Harrison:  Cloud Nine ; The Traveling 
Wilburys:  The Traveling Wilburys Vol .  1 & 3 ; Freddie Mercury:  Barcelona ; Jeff Lynne: 
 Armchair Theatre ; Ringo Starr:  Time Takes Time ,  Weight Of The World ; Roy Orbison:  King 
Of Hearts ; Joe Cocker:  Night Calls ; Hank Marvin:  Heartbeat ; Tom Petty:  Wildﬂ owers ; Steve 
Earle:  I Feel Alright ; Keith Urban:  The Ranch ; Green Day:  Nimrod . 
 DOLLAR, JONNY 
 Neneh Cerry:  Raw Like Sushi ,  Homebrew ,  Man ; Gabrielle:  Rise ; Eliza Dolittle:  Eliza Dolittle . 
 DORFSMAN, NEIL 
 Dire Straits:  Brothers In Arms ,  Love Over Gold ; Bruce Hornsby:  Scenes From The South Side ; 
Paul McCartney:  Flowers In The Dirt ; Bruce Springsteen:  Tracks ,  The River ; Sting:  Nothing 
Like The Sun ,  Brand New Day ; Bjork:  Medulla . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
400
 DOUGLAS, JACK 
 Aerosmith:  Get Your Wings ,  Toys In The Attic ,  Rocks ,  Draw The Line ,  Rock In A Hard Place , 
 Honkin’ On Bobo ; John Lennon:  Imagine ,  Double Fantasy ; Cheap Trick:  Cheap Trick ,  At The 
Budokan ,  Standing On The Edge . 
 DUDGEON, GUS 
 Elton John:  Elton John ,  Madman Across The Water ,  Honky Chateau ,  Goodbye Yellow Brick 
Road ,  Caribou ,  Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy ; David Bowie:  Space Oddity ; 
Original Soundtrack:  Tommy . 
 EASTER, MITCH 
 REM:  Murmur ,  Reckoning ; Suzanne Vega:  Solitude Standing ; Ride:  Tarantula ; Pavement: 
 Brighten The Corners ; Wilco:  Summerteeth ; Velvet Crush:  Melody Freaks ,  Timeless Melodies , 
 Heavy Changes ,  Hold Me Up ; Motocaster:  Acid Rock ,  Stay Loaded ; Dinosaur Jr.:  Whatever’s 
Cool With Me . 
 EMERICK, GEOFF 
 The Beatles:  Revolver ,  Sgt .  Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band ,  Magical Mystery Tour ,  Abbey 
Road ; Paul McCartney:  Band On The Run ,  Flaming Pie ; Elvis Costello:  Imperial Bedroom , 
 All This Useless Beau ty; Badﬁ nger:  No Dice ; Robin Trower:  Bridge Of Sighs . 
 ENDINO, JACK 
 Soundgarden:  Screaming Life ; Mudhoney:  Superfuzz Bigmuff ,  Mudhoney ,  My Brother The 
Cow ; Screaming Trees:  Buzz Factory ; Tad:  God’s Balls ; Nirvana:  Bleach ,  Incesticide ; Afghan 
Whigs:  Up In It ; Gas Huffner:  Janitors Of Tomorrow ; Supersuckers:  The Smoke Of Hell ; 
Seven Year Bitch:  Viva Zapata ; Murder City Devils:  Empty Bottles, Broken Hearts ; Black 
Halo:  The Violent Years ; Zen Guerilla:  Shadows On The Sun ; Therapy:  Shameless . 
 EPSTEIN, STEVEN 
 Produced records for many jazz and classical artists, such as Wynton Marsalis, Joshua 
Bell, Yo-Yo Ma, The Three Tenors, Isaac Stern, Juilliard String Quartet, Murray Perahia, 
Zubin Mehta, Emanuel Ax, Midori, Claudio Abbado, Bobby McFerrin, Radu Lupu. Four 
times winner of the Grammy Award for Classical Producer Of The Year. 
 EPWORTH, PAUL 
 George Martin:  In My Life ; Tom Jones:  Reload ; The Futureheads:  The Futureheads ; Bloc 
Party:  Two More Years ,  Banquet ,  Tulips ,  Silent Alarm ; Maximo Park:  Going Missing ; The 
Rakes:  Retreat ,  Capture/Release ,  22 Grand Job ; The Rapture:  Pieces Of The People We Love ; 
Kate Nash:  Made Of Bricks ; Sam Sparro:  Sam Sparro ; Friendly Fires:  Friendly Fires ,  Pala : 
Adele:  21 , “Skyfall”; Florence & The Machine:  Lungs ,  Ceremonials ; Cee Lo Green:  The 
Lady Killer ; Wonderland:  Wonderland ; Bruno Mars:  Unorthodox Jukebox ; Paul McCartney: 
 New ; Primal Scream:  Beautiful Future . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
401
 ERINGA, DAVE 
 Manic Street Preachers:  Generation Terrorists ,  Gold Against The Soul ,  The Holy Bible , 
 Everything Must Go ,  This Is My Truth Tell Me Yours ,  Send Away The Tigers ,  Journal For Plague 
Lovers ,  Rewind The Film ; Soup Dragons:  Divine Thing ; Tom Jones:  Reload ; Toploader: 
 Onka’s Big Moka ,  At The Magic Hotel ; Idlewild:  100 Broken Windows ,  The Remote Part , 
 Warnings/Promises ,  Make Another World ,  Post Electric Blues ; Ash:  Intergalactic Sonic 7s ; 
Kylie Minogue:  Conﬁ de In Me ,  Impossible Princess ; Suede:  A New Morning ; 3 Colours 
Red:  If You Ain’t Got A Weapon You’ll Never Get A Say ; Ocean Colour Scene:  A Hyperactive 
Workout For The Flying Squad . 
 FAULKNER, TONY 
 Produced records for many classical artists, such as The Tallis Scholars, Allegri String 
Quartet, Murray Perahia, London Symphony Orchestra, Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, 
Joanna McGregor, Vladimir Ashkenazy, Evgeny Kissin, Emma Kirkby, Trevor Pinnock, 
Endellion String Quartet, Placido Domingo, BBC Symphony Orchestra, Colin Davis. 
Recorded the chart-topping Elektra-Nonesuch production of Gorecki: Symphony No. 3 
with Dawn Upshaw. 
 FERGUSON, DAVID R. 
 Johnny Cash:  We The People ,  Water From The Wells Of Home ,  The Mystery Of Life , 
 American I, II, III, IV & V ; Marty Stuart:  Marty Stuart ,  Let There Be Country ; John Prine: 
 Souvenirs ,  In Spite Of Ourselves ; Mac Wiseman:  Standard Songs For Average People ; 
Charley Pride:  Pride & Joy ,  Choices ; Del McCoury Band:  Family Circle ; Ronnie McCoury: 
 Heartbreak Town ,  Little Mo McCoury . 
 FILIPETTI, FRANK 
 Foreigner:  Agent Provocateur ,  Inside Information ; Hole:  Celebrity Skin ; Korn:  Untouchables , 
 Here To Stay ; Carly Simon:  Hello Big Man ,  Spoiled Girl ,  Coming Around Again ,  Film Noir , 
 Bedroom Tapes ; Barbra Streisand:  Higher Ground ; James Taylor:  Hourglass ,  That’s Why I’m 
Here ; Kiss:  Lick It Up ; Bangles:  Everything ; Survivor:  Too Hot To Sleep . 
 FLOOD 
 Editors:  In This Light And On This Evening ; 30 Seconds To Mars:  This Is War ; Goldfrapp: 
 Seventh Tree ; PJ Harvey:  White Chalk ,  Is This Desire ,  To Bring You My Love ; The Killers: 
 Sam’s Town ; U2:  The Joshua Tree ,  Achtung Baby ,  Pop ,  Zooropa ,  How To Dismantle An Atomic 
Bomb ; Smashing Pumpkins:  Mellon Collie And The Inﬁ nite Sadness ,  Machina/Machines 
Of God ,  Adore ; Nine Inch Nails:  Downward Spiral ,  Pretty Hate Machine ; Depeche Mode: 
 Violator ,  Pop Will Eat Itself ,  Songs Of Faith And Devotion ; Nick Cave And The Bad Seeds: 
 From Her To Eternity ,  The Firstborn Is Dead ,  Kicking Against The Pricks ,  Your Funeral My 
Trial ,  Tender Prey ,  The Good Son ; Erasure:  Wonderland ,  The Circus . 
 FORD, JAMES 
 Haim:  Days Are Gone ; Arctic Monkeys:  Suck It And See ,  Favourite Worst Nightmare , 
 Humbug ,  AM ; Florence & The Machine:  Lungs ,  Ceremonials ; Beth Ditto:  Beth Ditto ; 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
402
Klaxons:  Myths Of The Near Future ; Mystery Jets:  Making Dens ; Simian Mobile Disco: 
 Delicacies ,  Temporary Pleasure ,  Attack Decay Sustain Release ; Peaches:  I Feel Cream . 
 FRASER, MIKE 
 AC/DC:  Razor’s Edge ,  Ballbreaker ,  Stiff Upper Lip ,  Black Ice ,  Plug Me In ,  No Bull ; 
Aerosmith:  Permanent Vacation ,  Pump ; Metallica:  Live Shit ; Joe Satriani:  Crystal Planet , 
 Engines Of Creation ,  Is There Love In Space ,  Black Swans And Wormhole Wizards ; Van 
Halen:  Balance ; Slipknot:  Iowa ; Poison:  Flesh And Blood ; Mötley Crüe:  Supersonic And 
Demonic Relics ; Krokus:  Blitz ; Franz Ferdinand:  Tonight ; Enter Shikari:  A Flash Flood Of 
Colour ; Dio:  Strange Highways ; Bryan Adams:  Reckless . 
 FRITZ, OZ 
 Deadline:  Dissident ; The Last Poets:  Holy Terror ,  Time Has Come ; Buckethead:  Day Of The 
Robot ,  Monsters & Robots ; Tom Waits:  Mule Variations ,  Blood Money ,  Alice ,  Orphans ; Bill 
Laswell:  Imaginary Cuba ; Pain Killer:  Buried Secrets ,  Execution Ground . 
 GATICA, HUMBERTO 
 Michael Jackson:  Bad ; Celine Dion:  Celine Dion ,  D’eux ,  Falling Into You ,  Let’s Talk About 
Love ,  A New Day Has Come ,  One Heart ; Michael Bublé:  Call Me Irresponsible ,  Crazy Love ; 
Ricky Martin:  Vuelve ; Cher:  Believe ; Julio Iglesias:  Non Stop ,  Un Hombre Solo ,  Crazy ,  La 
Carretera ,  Tango ; Barbra Streisand:  The Mirror Has Two Faces ,  Higher Ground . 
 GODRICH, NIGEL 
 Radiohead:  The Bends ,  OK Computer ,  Kid A ,  Amnesiac ,  Hail To The Thief ,  In Rainbows ; 
Thom Yorke:  The Eraser ; Natalie Imbruglia:  Left Of The Middle ; Beck:  Mutations ,  Sea 
Change ,  Guero ,  The Information ; The Divine Comedy:  Regeneration ,  Absent Friends ; Travis: 
 The Man Who ,  The Invisible Band ,  The Boy With No Name ; Paul McCartney:  Chaos And 
Creation In The Backyard ; Air:  Talkie Walkie ,  Pocket Symphony ; Pavement:  Terror Twilight ; 
REM:  Up . 
 GRAYDON, JAY 
 Al Jarreau:  Jarreau ,  Breakin’ Away ,  This Time ,  High Crime ; Earth Wind & Fire:  I Am ; 
George Benson: “Turn Your Love Around”; Steeley Dan:  Aja ,  Citizen Steeley Dan ; Dionne 
Warwick:  Love At First Sight ,  Friends In Love ; Barry Manilow:  Even Now ; Cher:  I’d Rather 
Believe In You ,  Take Me Home ; Barbara Streisand:  Lazy Afternoon ,  Streisand Superman , 
 Songbird ,  Wet . 
 HAGUE, STEPHEN 
 Peter Gabriel:  Up ; A-ha:  Lifelines ; Siouxie & The Banshees:  Superstition ; Public Image Ltd: 
 9 ; Orchestral Manoeuvres In The Dark:  The Paciﬁ c Age ,  Crush ; Pet Shop Boys:  Please ; 
Melanie C:  I Want Candy ; Dubstar:  Disgraceful ,  Goodbye ; Erasure:  The Innocents ; Robbie 
Robertson:  Storyville . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
403
 HAMPTON, JOHN 
 The Replacements:  Pleased To Meet Me ,  All For Nothing/Nothing For All ; Todd Rundgren: 
 Nearly Human ; Gin Blossoms:  New Miserable Experience ,  Congratulations I’m Sorry ; 
Afghan Whigs:  Gentlemen ; BB King:  Blues Summit ; Rhett Akins:  A Thousand Memories , 
 Somebody New ; Mudhoney:  Tomorrow Hit Today ; Travis Tritt:  The Rockin’ Side ,  The Lovin’ 
Side ,  T-r-o-u-b-l-e ,  It’s All About To Change ; Ocean Six:  Somewhere Between Day And Night ; 
Todd Agnew:  Better Questions ,  Do You See What I See ,  Reﬂ ection Of Something ,  Grace Like 
Rain . 
 HARRIS, STEPHEN 
 Dave Matthews Band:  Busted Stuff ,  Some Devil ; Ben Kweller:  Sha Sha ; Santana: 
 Supernatural ; Aqualung:  Still Life ; Kula Shaker:  K ; The Kaiser Chiefs:  Employment ; The 
Automatic:  Not Accepted Anywhere ,  This Is A Fix ; Blue Merle:  Burning In The Sun ; U2:  All 
That You Can’t Leave Behind . 
 HEDGES, MIKE 
 Orchestra Manoeuvres In The Dark:  Crush ,  The Paciﬁ c Age ; Blur:  Park Life ; Erasure:  The 
Innocents ; Siouxie And The Banshees:  Superstition ,  Peepshow ; Pet Shop Boys:  Please ,  Very , 
 Disco ,  Disco 2 ; The Cure:  Three Imaginary Boys ,  Seventeen Seconds ; The Undertones:  The 
Sin Of Pride ; Marc Almond:  Vermin In Ermine ,  Stories Of Johnny ,  Mother Fist And Her 
Five Daughters ; The Las:  The Las ; The Beautiful South:  Choke ; McAlmont & Butler:  Yes , 
 The Sound Of ; Manic Street Preachers:  Everything Must Go ,  This Is My Truth Tell Me Yours , 
 Know Your Enemy ; Travis:  The Man Who ,  The Boy With No Name ; U2:  All That You Can’t 
Leave Behind ; Dido:  Life For Rent ; Alﬁ e Bow:  Storyteller . 
 HENDERSON, PETER 
 Jeff Beck:  Wired ; Paul McCartney:  Wings At The Speed Of Sound ,  London Town ,  Flowers In 
The Dirt ; Split Enz:  DizRhythmia ; Frank Zappa:  Sheikh Yerbouti ; Supertramp:  Breakfast In 
America ,  Famous Last Words ; Rush:  Grace Under Pressure . 
 HILLIER, BEN 
 U2:  Pop ; Lighthouse Family:  Postcards From Heaven ; Blur:  13 ,  Think Tank ; Suede:  Head 
Music ; The Wannadies:  Yeah ; Elbow:  Powder Blue ,  Asleep In The Back ,  Fugitive Motel ,  Cast 
Of Thousands ; Echobelly:  People Are Expensive ; Erasure:  Moon & The Sky ; Tom McRae:  Just 
Like Blood ; Doves:  Some Cities ; Depeche Mode:  Playing The Angel ,  Delta Machine ; Natalie 
Imbruglia:  Come To Life . 
 HOBBS, PHILIP 
 Long-time producer for Linn Records, recording artists such as The Dunedin Consort, 
Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Swedish Radio Symphony Orchestra, The Tallis Scholars, 
Nicola Benedetti, Gottlieb Wallisch, James Gilchrist, Capella Nova, Royal Liverpool 
Philharmonic, Valery Gergiev, Charles Mackerras, Phantasm, Alﬁ e Bow, and The 
Brodsky Quartet. 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
404
 HOFFER, TONY 
 Beck:  Midnite Vultures ,  Guero ; Supergrass:  Life On Other Planets ; Suede:  A New Morning ; 
The Thrills:  So Much For The City ,  Teenager ; Phoenix:  Alphabetical ; Idlewild:  Warnings/
Promises ; The Kooks;  Inside In/Inside Out ,  Konk ,  Junk Of The Heart ; Belle & Sebastian: 
 The Life Pursuit ,  Write About Love ; The Fratellis:  Costello Music ; Goldfrapp:  Seventh Tree ; 
Ladyhawke:  Ladyhawke ; Thirty Seconds To Mars:  Love, Lust, Faith, And Dreams ; Turin 
Brakes:  Ether Songs . 
 HOMME, JOSH 
 Member of Queens Of The Stone Age, Kyuss, and Eagles Of Death Metal. 
Collaborations/productions include: Arctic Monkey:  AM,  Humbug; Biffy Clyro:  Only 
Revolutions ; Primal Scream:  Beautiful Future ; UNKLE:  War Stories ; Peaches:  Impeach My 
Bush ; The Hives:  Lex Hives ; The Strokes:  You Only Live Once ; Foo Fighters:  In Your Honor . 
 HORN, TREVOR 
 Buggles:  Adventures In Modern Recording ; Art Of Noise:  Who’s Afraid Of The Art Of Noise , 
 The Seduction Of Claude Debussy ; Yes:  Drama ,  90125 ,  Big Generator ; ABC:  Lexicon Of Love ; 
Dollar:  The Dollar Album ; Frankie Goes To Hollywood:  Welcome To The Pleasuredome , 
 Liverpool ; Band Aid: “Do They Know It’s Christmas”; Grace Jones:  Slave To The Rhythm ; 
Pet Shop Boys:  Introspective ; Simple Minds:  Street Fighting Years ; Paul McCartney:  Flowers 
In The Dirt ; Seal:  Seal  (1991),  Seal (1994),  Human Being ,  Seal IV ,  Soul 2 ; Marc Almond: 
 Tenement Symphony ; LeAnn Rimes:  I Need You ; Tatu:  200kmh In The Wrong Lane ,  Dangerous 
And Moving ; John Legend:  Evolver ; Robbie Williams:  Reality Killed The Video Star . 
 HOSKULDS, S. HUSKY 
 Norah Jones:  Come Away With Me ; Solomon Burke:  Don’t Give Up On Me ; Tom Waits: 
 Blood Money ; Sheryl Crow:  The Globe Sessions ; Turin Brakes:  Ether Songs ; The Wallﬂ owers: 
 Breach ; Vanessa Paradis:  Bliss ; The Gipsy Kings:  Roots ; Aimee Mann:  Bachelor No .  2 ; 
Soulwax:  Much Against ; Joe Henry:  Scar . 
 HOWARD, MARK 
 Bob Dylan:  Time Out Of Mind ,  Oh Mercy ; Tom Waits:  Real Gone ; Lucinda Williams: 
 World Without Tears ; Emmylou Harris:  Wrecking Ball ; U2:  All That You Can’t Leave 
Behind ; REM:  Automatic For The People ; Avril Lavigne:  Let Go ; Natalie Imbruglia:  White 
Lilies Island ; Red Hot Chili Peppers:  Californication ; Iggy Pop:  Avenue B ,  American Caesar ; 
Willie Nelson:  Teatro ; Marianne Faithfull:  Vagabond Ways ; Chris Whitley:  Living With 
The Law . 
 HOWE, “BONES” 
 The Turtles: “It Ain’t Me Babe”; The Association: “Windy,” “One Less Bell To Answer”; 
The Mamas & The Papas: “California Dreamin’,” “Monday, Monday”; 5th Dimension: 
“Go Where You Wanna Go,” “Up, Up, and Away,” “Aquarius”; Ornette Coleman: 
 The Shape Of Jazz to Come ,  Change Of The Century ; Mel Torme:  Comin’ Home Baby ; 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
405
The Crickets:  California Sun ,  Out Of Limits ; Tom Waits:  The Heart Of Saturday Night , 
 Nighthawks At The Diner ,  Small Change ,  Foreign Affairs ,  Blue Valentine ,  Heartattack And 
Vine ; Jerry Lee Lewis:  Rocket 88 . 
 HUDSON, JOHN 
 Gary Glitter:  Glitter ,  Gary Glitter ,  Rock ’n’ Roll ; Alvin Stardust:  The Untouchable ; Lou 
Reed:  Metal Machine Music ; Bucks Fizz:  Bucks Fizz ,  Are You Ready ,  Hand Cut ,  I Hear Talk ; 
Captain Sensible:  Power Of Love ; Tina Turner:  Private Dancer ,  Break Every Rule ,  Simply 
The Best ; Ultravox:  Lament ; A-ha:  Stay On These Roads ; The Moody Blues:  Keys Of The 
Kingdom ,  Time Traveller ; Tanita Tikaram:  Lovers In The City ; Pulp:  Disco 2000 ; Elvis 
Costello:  All This Useless Beauty ; Wynonna Judd:  What The World Needs Now Is Love ; 
Toots & The Maytals:  True Love . 
 JAM, JIMMY 
 Janet Jackson:  Control ,  Janet ,  Rhythm Nation 1814 ,  All For You ,  20 YO ,  The Velvet Rope ; The 
Human League:  Crash ; Mariah Carey:  Rainbow ,  Glitter ,  Charmbracelet ; Beverley Knight: 
 100% ; Michael Jackson:  HIStory ,  Blood On The Dance Floor ; Jordan Knight:  Jordan Knight ; 
Boyz II Men: “I Will Get There,”  II ; TLC:  Fanmail ; Mary J Blige:  Share My World ; George 
Michael:  Faith ; Johnny Gill:  Johnny Gill ; Karyn White:  Ritual Of Love ; Patti LaBelle:  Gems . 
 JEAN, WYCLEF 
 The Fugees:  Blunted On Reality ,  The Score ; Wyclef Jean:  The Carnival ,  The Ecleftic , 
 Masquerade ,  The Preacher’s Son ; Santana:  Supernatural ; Destiny’s Child:  Destiny’s Child ; 
Pras:  Ghetto Supastar; We Lose Or Draw ; Mya:  Fear Of Flying ; Michael Jackson:  Blood On 
The Dance Floor ; Shakira:  Oral Fixation Vol .  2 ,  She Wolf . 
 JERDEN, DAVE 
 Talking Heads:  Remain In Light ; Brian Eno & David Byrne:  My Life In The Bush Of 
Ghosts ; Frank Zappa:  The Man From Utopia ; Herbie Hancock:  Future Shock ; Red Hot 
Chili Peppers:  Red Hot Chili Peppers, Mother’s Milk ; The Rolling Stones:  Dirty Work ; 
Jane’s Addiction:  Nothing’s Shocking ,  Ritual De Lo Habitual ; Alice In Chains:  Facelift ,  Sap , 
 Dirt ; Spinal Tap:  Break Like The Wind ; Anthrax:  Sound Of White Noise ; Dig:  Dig ; The 
Offspring:  Ixnay On The Hombre ,  Americana ; Pitchshifter:  Deviant ; Rust:  Bar Chord Ritual . 
 JERKINS, RODNEY 
 Brandy & Monica: “The Boy Is Mine”; Mary J. Blige:  Share My World ,  The Breakthrough ; 
Whitney Houston:  My Love Is Your Love ; Jennifer Lopez:  On The 6 ; Destiny’s Child:  The 
Writing’s On The Wall ,  Destiny Fulﬁ lled ; Spice Girls:  Forever ; Toni Braxton:  The Heat ; 
Michael Jackson:  Invincible ; Britney Spears:  Britney ; Brandy:  Full Moon ,  Never Say Never ; 
Monica:  All Eyez On Me ; TLC:  3D ; Beyoncé:  B’Day ; Mariah Carey:  The Emancipation Of 
Mimi ,  The Art Of Letting Go ; Janet Jackson:  Discipline ; Pussycat Dolls:  Doll Domination ; 
Lady Gaga:  The Fame Monster ; Kelly Clarkson:  Stronger ; Nelly Furtado:  The Spirit 
Indestructible ; Justin Bieber:  Believe . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
406
 JOHNS, ANDY 
 Led Zeppelin:  Led Zeppelin III ,  Led Zeppelin IV ,  Houses Of The Holy ,  Physical Grafﬁ ti ; The 
Rolling Stones:  Sticky Fingers ,  Exile On Main Street ,  Goat’s Head Soup ; Van Halen:  For 
Unlawful Carnal Knowledge ; Television:  Marquee Moon ; Jethro Tull:  Stand Up . 
 JOHNSTON, BOB 
 Patti Page:  Hush, Hush, Sweet Charlotte ; Bob Dylan:  Highway 61 Revisited ,  Blonde On 
Blonde ; Simon & Garfunkel:  Sounds Of Silence ,  Parsley Sage Rosemary & Thyme ; Johnny 
Cash:  At Folsom Prison ,  I Walk The Line ; Leonard Cohen:  Songs From A Room ,  Songs Of 
Love And Hate ; Lindisfarne:  Fog On The Tyne ; New Riders Of The Purple Sage:  Oh, What 
A Mighty Time ; John Mayall:  Bottom Line ; Pete Seeger:  Link In The Chain . 
 JONES, GARETH 
 Erasure:  Wild! ,  Erasure ,  Cowboy ,  Other People’s Songs ,  Light At The End Of The World ; 
Depeche Mode:  Construction Time Again ,  Some Great Reward ,  Exciter ; Wire:  The Ideal 
Copy; A Bell Is A Cup… Until It Is Struck . 
 JONES, LESLIE ANN 
 Rosemary Clooney:  Sentimental Journey ,  Brazil ,  Mothers & Daughters ,  White Christmas ; 
Herbie Hancock:  Mr .  Hands ,  Monster ,  Light Me Up ; Michael Feinstein:  Michael & George, 
With The Israel Philharmonic ; Bobby McFerrin:  Bobby McFerrin ,  Spontaneous Inventions ; 
Carlos Santana:  The Swing Of Delight ; Wayne Shorter:  High Life ; Dianne Reeves: 
 Goodnight And Good Luck ; Marcus Miller:  Marcus Miller ,  The Sun Don’t Lie ; Manhattan 
Transfer:  The Offbeat Of Avenues ; BB King & Diane Schuur:  Heart To Heart . 
 KELLY, JON 
 Tori Amos:  Little Earthquakes ; Kate Bush:  The Kick Inside ,  Lionheart ; Beautiful South: 
 Quench ,  Carry On Up The Charts ,  Blue Is The Colour ; Heather Nova:  Siren ; Paul 
McCartney:  Tug Of War ,  Pipes Of Peace ; Chris Rea:  Auberge ,  Road To Hell Vol .  1 ,  Chris Rea , 
 Dancing With Strangers ; The Damned:  Phantasmagoria ,  Anything ; Deacon Blue:  Raintown , 
 Fellow Hoodlums . 
 KILLEN, KEVIN 
 Peter Gabriel:  So ; U2:  War ,  The Unforgettable Fire ,  Rattle and Hum ; Elvis Costello: 
 Spike ,  The Juliet Letters ,  Kojak Variety ,  North ,  Mighty Like A Rose ,  Cruel Smile ; Shakira: 
 Oral Fixation Vol .  One ,  Oral Fixation Vol. Two;  Tori Amos:  Under The Pink; Bryan Ferry: 
 Boys And Girls ; Kate Bush:  The Sensual World ,  This Woman’s Work ; Paula Cole:  This Fire , 
 Courage . 
 KING, JACQUIRE 
 Kings Of Leon:  Aha Shake Heartbreak ,  Only By The Night ,  Come Around Sundown ; Norah 
Jones:  The Fall ; Tom Waits:  Blood Money ,  Mule Variations ,  Alice ; Orphans:  Brawlers, 
Bawlers And Bastards ; Modest Mouse:  Good News For People Who Like Bad News . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
407
 KITCHINGHAM, GERRY 
 A-Ha:  Scoundel Days ,  Stay On These Roads ; Pulp:  Disco 2000 ; Cliff Richard:  Small Corners , 
 Always Guaranteed ,  Stronger ,  Together With Cliff Richard ; The Moody Blues:  Time Traveller , 
 Keys Of The Kingdom . 
 KOLOTKIN, GLEN 
 Santana:  Moonﬂ ower ,  Abraxas ,  Supernatural ; Joan Jett & The Blackhearts:  I Love Rock ‘N’ 
Roll ,  Flashback ; Pete Seeger:  Pete ; Janis Joplin:  Pearl ; Barbara Streisand:  Stoney End ,  Release 
Me ; The Jimi Hendrix Experience:  Electric Ladyland ; Moby Grape:  Grape Jam ,  Wow ,  Moby 
Grape ’69 . 
 KOSTEN, DAVID 
 Bat For Lashes:  The Haunted Man ,  Two Suns ,  Fur And Gold ; Everything Everything:  Man 
Alive ; Guillemots:  Walk The River . 
 KRAMER, EDDIE 
 Jimi Hendrix:  Are You Experienced?   Axis: Bold As Love ,  Electric Ladyland ,  Band of Gypsys ; 
Led Zeppelin:  Led Zeppelin II ,  Led Zeppelin III ,  How The West Was Won ,  Houses Of The 
Holy ,  Physical Grafﬁ ti ,  Coda ; Trafﬁ c:  Trafﬁ c ; The Nice:  Nice ,  Five Bridges ; Peter Frampton: 
 Frampton Comes Alive! 
 KURLANDER, JOHN 
 Badﬁ nger:  No Dice ; Toto:  Toto IV : Soundtracks:  Lord Of The Rings  (all three ﬁ lms),  Ice 
Age ,  3:10 To Yuma ,  The Hurt Locker ,  Master And Commander ; Christopher Tin:  Calling All 
Dawns . 
 LANOIS, DANIEL 
 U2:  The Joshua Tree ,  Achtung Baby ,  All That You Can’t Leave Behind ,  No Line On The 
Horizon ; Peter Gabriel:  So ,  Us ; Bob Dylan:  Oh Mercy ,  Time Out Of Mind . 
 LAUNAY, NICK 
 Nick Cave And The Bad Seeds:  Dig Lazarus Dig ,  Abattoir Blues ,  Nocturama ; Grinderman: 
 Grinderman ,  Grinderman 2 ; Maximö Park:  Quicken The Heart ; Supergrass:  Diamond Hoo 
Ha ; Yeah Yeah Yeahs:  Is Is ,  It’s Blitz ; Arcade Fire:  Neon Bible ,  The Suburbs ; Public Image 
Ltd:  The Flowers Of Romance ; Killing Joke:  Follow The Leaders ,  What’s THIS For ; INXS:  The 
Swing ; Semisonic:  Feeling Strangely Fine . 
 LECKIE, JOHN 
 Pink Floyd:  Meddle ; Radiohead:  The Bends ; Muse:  Showbiz ,  Origin Of Symmetry ; The 
Stone Roses:  The Stone Roses ; The Verve:  A Storm In Heaven ; Kula Shaker:  K ; My Morning 
Jacket:  Z ; The Coral:  Butterﬂ y House;  Cast:  All Change ,  Mother Nature Calls ; Doves: 
 Kingdom Of Rust . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
408
 LEVINE, LARRY 
 Beach Boys:  Pet Sounds ; Herb Alpert And The Tijuana Brass: “A Taste Of Honey”; 
Eddie Cochran: “Summertime Blues,” “Twenty Flight Rock,” “C’mon Everybody”; The 
Crystals: “He’s A Rebel,” “Da Doo Ron Ron”; Bob B Soxx & The Blue Jeans: “Zip-A-
Dee-Doo-Dah”; Ronettes: “Be My Baby”; Righteous Brothers: “You’ve Lost That Lovin’ 
Feelin’”; Ike & Tina Turner: “River Deep Mountain High”; Leonard Cohen:  Death Of A 
Ladies’ Man ; The Ramones:  End Of The Century . 
 LEVINE, STEVE 
 Culture Club:  Don’t Mind If I Do ,  Kissing To Be Clever ,  Colour By Numbers ,  Waking Up 
With The House On Fire ; The Beach Boys:  The Beach Boys ; Gary Moore:  Corridors Of 
Power ,  Ballads & Blues ; The Honeyz:  Wonder No .  8 ; Deniece Williams:  Water Under The 
Bridge ; 911:  There It Is . 
 LIDDELL, FRANK 
 Miranda Lambert:  Crazy Ex-girlfriend ,  Revolution ,  Four The Record ; Lee Ann Womack:  I 
Hope You Can Dance ,  Something Worth Leaving Behind ,  The Reason For Romance ; Eli Young 
Band:  Life At Best . 
 LILLYWHITE, STEVE 
 U2:  Boy ,  October ,  War ,  Achtung Baby ,  All That You Can’t Leave Behind ,  How To 
Dismantle An Atomic Bomb ,  No Line On The Horizon ; The Pogues:  If I Should Fall From 
Grace With God ; Dave Matthews Band:  Under The Table And Dreaming ,  Crash ,  Before 
These Crowded Streets ,  Busted Stuff ; The Las:  The Las ; Phish:  Billy Breathes ,  Joy ; Jason 
Mraz:  Mr A-Z ; Crowded House:  Time On Earth ; Thirty Seconds To Mars:  This Is War ; 
XTC:  Drums & Wires ,  Black Sea ; Ultravox:  Ultravox ,  Ha Ha Ha ; Thompson Twins:  Set ; 
The Rolling Stones:  Dirty Work ; The Psychedelic Furs:  The Psychedelic Furs ,  Talk Talk Talk ; 
The Killers:  Battle Born ; Talking Heads:  Naked ; Simple Minds:  Sparkle In The Rain ; Peter 
Gabriel:  Peter Gabriel III ; Joan Armatrading:  Walk Under Ladders ,  The Key ,  Sleight Of 
Hand ; Kirsty MacColl:  Kite ,  Electric Landlady ,  Galore ; Beady Eye:  Still Speeding, Different 
Gear . 
 LIPSON, STEVE 
 Annie Lennox:  Diva ; Frankie Goes To Hollywood:  Welcome To The Pleasuredome , 
 Liverpool ; Paul McCartney:  Flowers In The Dirt ; Grace Jones:  Slave To The Rhythm ; Jordin 
Sparks:  Battleﬁ eld ; Boyzone:  Where We Belong ,  By Request ; Rachel Stevens:  Funky Dory . 
 LIPUMA, TOMMY 
 Diana Krall:  When I Look Into Your Eyes ,  The Look Of Love ,  Live In Paris ; Paul McCartney: 
 Kisses On The Bottom ; Natalie Cole:  Unforgettable ,  Take A Look ,  Ask A Woman Who Knows , 
 Unforgettable With Love ; George Benson:  Breezin’ ,  Weekend In LA ; Barbra Streisand:  The 
Way We Were ; Al Jarreau:  Glow ,  Look To The Rainbow ; Miles Davis:  TuTu . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
409
 LORD-ALGE, CHRIS 
 James Brown:  Living In America ; Prince:  Batman  soundtrack; Joe Cocker:  Unchain My 
Heart ; Chaka Khan:  Destiny ; Green Day:  Nimrod ,  American Idiot ,  21st Century Breakdown ; 
My Chemical Romance:  The Black Parade ; Stevie Nicks:  Trouble In Shangri-La ; POD: 
 Testify ; AFI:  Decemberunderground ; Darren Hayes:  Spin ; Creed:  Full Circle ; Sum 41: 
 Underclass Hero ; Switchfoot:  The Beautiful Letdown ,  Nothing Is Sound ; Slipknot:  Dead 
Memories ,  Sulfur ; Stone Temple Pilots:  Stone Temple Pilots . 
 LUKE, DAVID 
 Earth, Wind & Fire:  Heritage ; MC Hammer:  Too Legit To Quit ; Bobby McFerrin:  Bang 
Zoom ; Johnny Nocturne Band:  Wild And Cool ,  Million Dollar Secret ,  Shake ’Em Up , 
 Wailin’ Daddy ; Dave Ellis:  In The Long Run ; The Delfonics:  Forever New ; Herbie Hancock: 
 Possibilities ; Ladysmith Black Mambazo:  Long Walk To Freedom ; The Spinners:  Down To 
Business . 
 MACK, REINHOLD 
 Black Sabbath:  Dehumanizer ; Extreme:  Extreme ; Queen:  A Kind Of Magic ,  Flash Gordon , 
 The Game ,  The Works ; Meat Loaf:  Bad Attitude ; Sparks:  Angst In My Pants ,  Whomp 
That Sucker ; Billy Squier:  Don’t Say No ; David Coverdale:  White Snake ; Deep Purple: 
 Stormbringer ,  Come Taste The Band ; Rolling Stones:  It’s Only Rock ’n’ Roll ; Scorpions:  Fly 
To The Rainbow ; Electric Light Orchestra:  Balance Of Power ,  Time ,  Xanadu ,  Discovery ,  Out 
Of The Blue ,  A New World Record ,  Face The Music ; T.Rex:  Zinc Alloy And The Hidden Riders 
Of Tomorrow . 
 MALOUF, BRIAN 
 Everclear:  Sparkle And Fade ; David Gray:  White Ladder ; Lit:  A Place In The Sun ; Madonna: 
 I’m Breathless ; Pearl Jam:  Ten ; Slaughter:  Stick It To Ya . 
 MARCANTONIO, STEVE 
 Tim McGraw:  Not A Moment Too Soon ; Reba McEntire:  All The Woman I Am ; Lionel 
Richie:  Tuskegee ; Vince Gill:  Guitar Slinger ,  These Days ,  Let’s Make Sure We Kiss Goodbye , 
 The Key ; Kenny Chesney:  The Road And The Radio ,  Welcome To The Fishbowl ,  Just Who I 
Am ; LeAnn Rimes:  Family ; Brooks & Dunn:  If You See Her ,  Cowboy Town ; Rascal Flatts: 
 Still Feels Good ; Faith Hill:  Fireﬂ ies ; Keith Urban:  Keith Urban ,  The Fuse ; Kenny Rogers: 
 You Can’t Make Old Friends . 
 MARCHAND, PIERRE 
 Sarah McLachlan:  Solace ,  Fumbling Towards Ecstasy ,  Surfacing ,  Afterglow ,  Wintersong ,  Laws 
Of Illusion ; Rufus Wainwright:  Rufus Wainwright ,  Poses ,  All Days Are Nights ; Kate & Anna 
McGarrigle:  Matapedia ,  Heartbeats Accelerating ; Ron Sexsmith:  Ron Sexsmith ; The Devlins: 
 Waiting ; Stevie Nicks:  Trouble In Shagri-la ; Patty Larkin:  Strangers World . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
410
 MASSENBURG, GEORGE 
 Little Feat:  Feats Don’t Fail Me Now ,  Hoy-Hoy ,  Let It Roll, Shake Me Up;  Linda Ronstadt: 
 Mas Canciones ,  Frenesi ,  Feels Like Home ,  Dedicated To The One I Love ,  We Ran;  Lyle Lovett: 
 Joshua Judges Ruth ; Bonnie Raitt:  Nine Lives ; Toto:  The Seventh One ; Earth, Wind & Fire: 
 Gratitude ,  That’s The Way Of The World ,  Spirit ,  I Am ,  All N All ; Journey:  Trial By Fire ,  When 
You Love A Woman . 
 MASSY, SYLVIA 
 Johnny Cash:  Unchained ; Tool:  Opiate ,  Undertow ; Red Hot Chili Peppers:  Love 
Rollercoaster ; Machines Of Loving Grace:  Gilt ; Love And Rockets:  Sweet FA ; Powerman 
5000:  Tonight The Stars Revolt ; System Of A Down:  System Of A Down ; Skunk Anansie: 
 Paranoid & Sunburnt ; Sevendust:  Scream 3 ; Prince:  Diamonds & Pearls ; Lustra:  Lustra ; 
Deftones:  Escape From LA ; Cog:  The New Normal ,  Sharing Space . 
 MAZER, ELLIOT 
 Linda Ronstadt:  Silk Purse ; Bob Dylan:  The Basement Tapes ,  Isle Of Wight ; The Band:  The 
Last Waltz ; Janis Joplin:  Farewell Song ,  Joplin In Concert;  Neil Young:  Lucky 13 ,  Old Ways , 
 Everybody’s Rockin’ ,  Hawks & Doves ,  Decade ,  American Stars & Bars ,  Tonight’s The Night , 
 Time Fades Away ,  Journey Through The Past ,  Harvest . 
 MCDONALD, RODAIDH 
 Gil Scott-Heron:  I’m New Here ,  We’re New Here ; Adele:  21 ; How To Dress Well:  Total Loss ; 
The XX:  XX ,  Coexist ; King Krule:  6 Feet Beneath The Moon ; Vampire Weekend:  Contra . 
 MERCHANT, JOHN 
 Mika:  Life In Cartoon Motion ; Barbra Streisand:  Guilty Pleasures ,  Night Of My Life ; Cliff 
Richard:  I Cannot Give You My Love ; Lenny Kravitz:  Baptism ; Michael Bublé:  How Can You 
Mend A Broken Heart ; Bee Gees:  The Record ,  This Is Where I Come In ,  One Night Only ,  Still 
Waters ,  Storytellers ; Celine Dion:  Immortality ; Natural:  It’s Only Natural ; Ronan Keating: 
 Lovers And Friends . 
 MESSINA, JAY 
 Booker T & The MGs:  Melting Pot ; Aerosmith:  Get Your Wings ,  Toys In The Attic ,  Rocks , 
 Draw The Line ; Supertramp:  Crisis What Crisis ,  Crime Of The Century ,  Some Things Never 
Change ; Kiss:  Destroyer ,  Dynasty ,  Unmasked ; Cheap Trick:  Cheap Trick ; George Benson:  In 
Your Eyes ; Lou Reed:  Berlin ; New York Dolls:  One Day It Will Please Us To Remember This . 
 MEYERSON, ALAN 
 Soundtracks:  Despicable Me 1 & 2 ,  Man Of Steel ,  Halo 4 ,  Battleship ,  Kung Fu Panda 2 , 
 Pirates Of The Caribbean 1, 2, 3, & 4 ,  Tron Legacy ,  Transformers 1 & 2 ,  I Am Legend ,  Iron 
Man ,  Madagascar 1 & 2 ,  The Dark Knight ,  The Dark Knight Rises ,  Taken ,  The Da Vinci 
Code ,  Black Hawk Down ,  The Bourne Identity ,  Gladiator ,  Shrek ,  Mission Impossible 2 , 
 Armageddon ,  Speed . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
411
 MILLER, JACK 
 Duane Eddy:  Have Twangy Guitar Will Travel ,  The Twang’s The Thang ,  Especially For You , 
 Girls Girls Girls ; Anthony Newley:  Newly Recorded, Who Can I Turn To ; also produced 
records for Herman’s Hermits, The Monkees, The Animals, and The Rolling Stones. 
 MINCIELI, ANN 
 Alicia Keys:  Songs In A Minor ,  Diary Of Alicia Keys ,  As I Am ,  The Element Of Freedom ,  Girl 
On Fire ; Emeli Sandé:  Our Version Of Events ; Drake:  Thank Me Later ; Whitney Houston: 
 I Look To You ,  Million Dollar Bill ; Robin Thicke:  Sex Therapy ; Keyshia Cole:  The Way It 
Is ; Usher:  Confessions ; Angie Stone:  Stone Love ; Dru Hill:  Dru World Order ; Yoko Ono: 
 Blueprint For A Sunrise . 
 MOSS, WAYNE 
 Charlie McCoy:  Out On A Limb ,  Harpin’ The Blues ,  The World Of ; Memphis Slim:  Goin’ 
Back To Tennessee ; Barefoot Jerry:  Keys To The Country ,  You Can’t Get Off With Your Shoes 
On ,  Watchin’ TV ,  Southern Delight ; Tony & Terry:  Cross Country ; Mickey Newbury:  Heaven 
Help The Child ,  It Looks Like Rain ,  Live At Montezuma Hall ; John Hambrick:  Windmill In A 
Jet Filled Sky ,  Frisco Mabel Joy ; Leo Kottke:  Mudlark ; Area Code 615:  A Trip In The Country , 
 Area Code 615 ; Steve Miller Band:  Number 5 ; Linda Ronstadt:  Silk Purse ; Eric Andersen: 
 Eric Andersen ; Wes Miller:  9 Out Of 10 ,  Knee Deep In Grass . 
 MURPHY, SHAWN 
 Soundtrack:  Braveheart ,  Dances With Wolves ,  E . T .  The Extra-Terrestrial ,  Ghost ,  Jurassic 
Park ,  Men In Black ,  Pretty Woman ,  Saving Private Ryan ,  The Sixth Sense ,  Star Wars: Episode 
I — The Phantom Menace ,  Episode II —  Attack Of The Clones ,  Titanic . 
 MUSSO, ROBERT 
 Material:  Hallucination Engine ,  The Third Power ,  Memory Serves ,  Seven Souls ,  One Down ; 
Sly & Robbie:  Rhythm Killers ,  Language Barrier ; Tom Waits:  Rain Dogs ; Ginger Baker: 
 Horses & Trees ; Iggy Pop:  Instinct ; Bill Laswell:  Hear No Evil ,  Psychonavigation ,  Silent Recoil , 
 Cymatic Scan ; The Ramones:  Brain Drain ; Al Green:  Don’t Look Back ,  Your Heart’s In Good 
Hands ; The Last Poets:  Holy Terror ; Bootsy Collins:  Blasters Of The Universe ,  The Funk 
Capital Of The World ; George Clinton:  Get Yo Ass In The Water And Swim Like Me ; Sonny 
Sharrock:  Into Another Light ,  Ask The Ages ,  Faith Moves ,  Seize The Rainbow . 
 NEILL, MARK 
 Dan Auerbach:  Keep It Hid ; The Black Keys:  Brothers ; The Paladins:  The Paladins ,  Slippin’ 
In ,  Pavoline No .  7 ; Deke Dickerson:  Rhythm, Rhyme, & Truth ,  In 3 Dimensions ,  The Melody , 
 My Name Is Deke ; Los Straitjackets:  Supersonic Guitars In 3D ,  Encylopaedia Of Sound ; The 
Computers:  Love Triangles And Hate Squares . 
 NELSON, KEN 
 Paolo Nutini:  These Streets ; Coldplay:  Parachutes ,  X&Y ,  A Rush Of Blood To The Head ; 
Kings Of Convenience:  Quiet Is The New Loud ; The Charlatans:  Up At The Lake ; Embrace: 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
412
 If You’ve Never Been ; Snow Patrol:  When It’s All Over We’ll Still Have To Clear Up ; Badly 
Drawn Boy:  Hour Of The Bewilderbeast ; Feeder:  Pushing The Senses ; Gomez:  Bring It On , 
 Liquid Skin ; Skin:  Flesh Wounds . 
 NEWLAND, JAY 
 Norah Jones:  Come Away With Me ,  Feels Like Home ; Ayo:  Joyful ,  Gravity At Last ,  Ticket To The 
World ; Richie Havens:  Nobody Left To Crown ; Charlie Haden:  Land Of The Sun ,  Nocturne , 
Co me Sunday ; Michael Brecker:  Wide Angles ; Herbie Hancock:  Directions In Music ; Rumer: 
 Seasons Of My Soul ; Nigel Kennedy:  Blue Note Sessions ; Etta James:  Blue Gardenia ,  The Heart 
Of A Woman ,  Time After Time ,  Mystery Lady ,  Love Songs ,  Burnin’ Down The House . 
 NICHOLS, ROGER 
 Steeley Dan:  Can’t Buy A Thrill ,  Countdown To Ecstasy ,  Pretzel Logic ,  Gaucho ,  Aja ,  Two 
Against Nature ,  Everything Must Go . 
 NIEBANK, JUSTIN 
 Marty Stuart:  Country Music ; Keith Urban:  Be Here ,  Fuse ,  Get Closer ,  Defying Gravity , 
 Love Pain And The Whole Crazy Thing ; Patty Loveless:  On Your Way Home ,  Dreamin’ My 
Dreams ; Vince Gill:  Next Big Thing ,  These Days;  Rascal Flatts:  Changed ,  Nothing Like This , 
 Unstoppable ,  Still Feels Good ,  Me And My Gang ; George Strait:  George Strait ,  Always Never 
The Same ; Lady Antebellum:  Golden ; Kenny Chesney:  Life Of A Rock ,  Welcome To The 
Fishbowl ,  Hemingway’s Whiskey ,  Lucky Old Sun ; Taylor Swift:  Red ,  Speak Now ,  Fearless ; 
Lionel Richie:  Tuskegee . 
 NORRELL, CLIF 
 Indigo Girls:  Indigo Girls ,  Nomads Indians Saints ; REM:  Automatic For The People ; Inspiral 
Carpets:  I Want You ,  Uniform ,  Cool As ,  Devil Hopping ; Jeff Buckley:  Grace ; Rush:  Test For 
Echo ; Faith No More:  King For A Day Fool For A Lifetime ; Weezer:  Pinkerton ; Mansun: 
 Attack Of The Grey Lantern ; Echo & The Bunnymen:  Evergreen ; Babyshambles:  Back To 
The Bus ; Miley Cyrus:  Start All Over ,  Breakout . 
 OBERG, GUS 
 The Strokes:  Angles ,  Comedown Machine ; The Postelles:  The Postelles ; Albert Hammond Jr.: 
 Como Te Llama ; Turbonegro:  Sexual Harassment ; Har Mar Superstar:  Bye Bye 17 . 
 OLSEN, KEITH 
 Fleetwood Mac:  Fleetwood Mac ; Foreigner:  Double Vision ; Scorpions:  Crazy World ; 
Whitesnake:  Whitesnake ,  Slide It In ,  Slip Of The Tongue . 
 PACZOSA, GARY 
 Alison Krauss:  I Know Who Holds Tomorrow ,  Forget About It ,  Essential Alison Krauss , 
 Lonely Runs Both Ways ,  New Favorite ,  So Long So Wrong ; Dolly Parton:  Those Were The 
Days ,  Little Sparrow ,  The Grass Is Blue ,  Treasures ,  Something Special ,  Slow Dancing With The 
Moon ,  Eagle When She Flies ; Harry Connick Jr.:  Every Man Should Know ; Steep Canyon 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
413
Rangers:  Nobody Knows You ,  Rare Bird Alert ; Yo-Yo Ma:  Songs Of Joy & Peace ; John Prine: 
 Fair & Square . 
 PADGHAM, HUGH 
 Genesis:  Abacab ,  Genesis ,  Invisible Touch ; Phil Collins:  Face Value ,  Hello I Must Be 
Going ,  No Jacket Required ,  But Seriously ,  Both Sides ; The Police:  Ghost In The Machine , 
 Synchronicity ; Sting:  Nothing Like The Sun ,  The Soul Cages ,  Ten Summoner’s Tales ,  Mercury 
Falling ; Peter Gabriel:  Peter Gabriel ; XTC:  Black Sea . 
 PARSONS, ALAN 
 The Beatles:  Abbey Road ; Pink Floyd:  Dark Side Of The Moon ; Al Stewart:  Year Of The 
Cat ; Paul McCartney:  Wild Life ,  Red Rose Symphony ; The Hollies:  Hollies , “He Ain’t Heavy, 
He’s My Brother”; Ambrosia:  Somewhere I’ve Never Travelled ; Alan Parsons Project:  Tales 
Of Mystery And Imagination ,  Pyramid ,  Eve ,  The Turn Of A Friendly Card ,  Eye In The Sky . 
 PETTIBONE, SHEP 
 Madonna:  Celebration ,  You Can Dance ,  I’m Breathless ,  Erotica ,  Like A Prayer ,  Bedtime 
Stories ,  Something To Remember ; Duran Duran:  Big Thing ; Taylor Dayne:  Soul Dancing ; Pet 
Shop Boys:  Actually ; Gary Barlow:  Love Won’t Wait . 
 PLATT, TONY 
 Bob Marley:  Catch A Fire ,  Burnin’ ; Toots & The Maytals:  Funky Kingston ; Aswad:  Aswad ; 
AC/DC:  Highway To Hell ,  Back In Black ; Foreigner:  4 ; Boomtown Rats:  The Fine Art Of 
Surfacing ; Anathema:  Eternity . 
 POOLE, MIKE 
 Robert Plant:  Band Of Joy ; Martina McBride:  Emotion ,  Evolution ,  Wild Angels ,  White 
Christmas ,  The Way That I Am ; Patty Grifﬁ n:  American Kid ,  Downtown Church ; Rick 
Trevino:  In My Dreams ; Keith Urban:  The Ranch ; Little Big Town:  Little Big Town ; Travis 
Tritt:  The Lovin’ Side ,  The Rockin’ Side ,  It’s All About To Change ,  Country Club ; Ricky 
Skaggs:  Kentucky Thunder ,  Comin’ Home To Stay . 
 PORTER, JOHN 
 The Smiths:  The Smiths ,  Meat Is Murder ,  The Queen Is Dead ; Billy Bragg:  Talking With 
The Taxman About Poetry ,  Preaching To The Converted ; Buddy Guy:  Damn Right I’ve Got 
The Blues ,  Feels Like Rain ; Taj Mahal:  Phantom Blues ; Keb Mo:  Keb Mo ,  Just Like You ,  Keep 
It Simple ,  Suitcase ; Maria Muldaur:  Meet Me At Midnite ; John Mayall:  Blues For The Lost 
Days ; John Lee Hooker:  Smile Like Yours ; BB King:  Blues On The Bayou ,  Makin’ Love Is 
Good For You ; RL Burnside:  Wish I Was In Heaven Sitting Down ; Jimmy Smith:  Dot Com 
Blues ; Lucky Peterson:  Double Dealin’ ; Los Lonely Boys:  Los Lonely Boys . 
 POWELL, JEFF 
 Big Star:  In Space ; Stevie Ray Vaughan & Double Trouble:  Live At Carnegie Hall ; Afghan 
Whigs:  Black Love ,  Honky’s Ladder ,  Gentlemen ,  1965 ,  Somethin’ Hot ; Primal Scream:  Give 
Out But Don’t Give Up ; The Bottle Rockets:  Zoysia ; Centro-Matic:  Fort Recovery . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
414
 PRICE, BILL 
 The Sex Pistols:  Never Mind The Bollocks ; The Clash:  The Clash ,  Give ’Em Enough Rope , 
 London Calling ,  Sandinista! ; The Pretenders:  Pretenders ,  Pretenders II ; Elton John:  Too 
Low For Zero ; Pete Townshend:  Empty Glass ; The Jesus & Mary Chain:  Darklands ; 
Babyshambles:  Down In Albion . 
 PRICE, STUART 
 Madonna:  American Life ,  Confessions On A Dance Floor ; New Order:  Waiting For The 
Siren’s Call ; Seal:  System ; The Killers:  Sawdust ,  Day & Age ,  Battle Born ; Keane:  Perfect 
Symmetry ; Scissor Sisters:  Night Work ,  Magic Hour ; Kylie Minogue:  Aphrodite ; Brandon 
Flowers:  Flamingo ; Take That:  Progress ,  Progressed ; Duffy:  Endlessly ; Pet Shop Boys:  Electric . 
 PUIG, JACK JOSEPH 
 Snow Patrol:  Eyes Open ; Goo Goo Dolls:  Let Love In ; Black Eyed Peas:  Monkey 
Business ; Fergie:  The Dutchess;  Mary J. Blige:  The Breakthrough ; Pussy Cat Dolls:  PCD ; 
Stereophonics:  You’ve Got To Go There To Come Back ; Sheryl Crow:  C’mon C’mon ; The 
Rolling Stones:  Forty Licks ,  A Bigger Bang ,  Biggest Mistake ; Greenday:  Warning ; No Doubt: 
 Return Of Saturn ; Hole:  Celebrity Skin ; Weezer:  Pinkerton ; Jellyﬁ sh:  Spilt Milk ,  Bellybutton . 
 PUTNAM, NORBERT 
 New Riders Of The Purple Sage:  Wasted Tasters ,  The Adventures Of Panama Red ; Flying 
Burrito Brothers:  Flying Again ; Dan Fogelberg:  Love Songs ,  Windows And Walls ,  The 
Innocent Age ,  Phoenix ,  Nether Lands ,  Home Free ; Jimmy Buffett:  Boats, Beaches, Bars, and 
Ballads ,  Somewhere Over China ,  Coconut Telegraph ,  Volcano ,  Son Of A Son Of A Sailor , 
 Changes In Latitudes ,  Changes In Attitudes ; Joan Baez:  The Contemporary Ballad Book ,  The 
Night They Drove Old Dixie Down ,  Where Are You Now My Son . 
 RAMONE, PHIL 
 Paul Simon:  There Goes Rhymin’ Simon ,  Still Crazy After All These Years ; Bob Dylan: 
 Blood On The Tracks ; Sinead O’Connor:  Am I Not Your Girl? ; Billy Joel:  52nd Street ,  Glass 
Houses ,  The Nylon Curtain ,  The Bridge . 
 RAPHAEL, GORDON 
 The Strokes:  Is This It ,  Room On Fire ,  First Impressions Of Earth ; Regina Spektor:  Soviet 
Kitsch ; The Plastics:  Shark . 
 REID, L.A. 
 Kanye West:  My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ; Rihanna:  Rated R ,  Loud ; Justin Bieber: 
 My World ,  My World 2 . 0 ; Jay-Z:  Kingdom Come ,  American Gangster ; Mariah Carey:  The 
Emancipation Of Mimi ,  E = MC 2 ; Boyz II Men:  I’ll Make Love To You ,  Cooleyhighharmony ,  II , 
 Full Circle ; Toni Braxton:  Toni Braxton ,  Secrets ,  You’re Makin’ Me High ,  Unbreak My Heart , 
 I Don’t Want To ,  Heat ,  Spanish Guitar ,  Snowﬂ akes ,  More Than A Woman ; TLC:  3D ,  On The 
TLC Tip ,  CrazySexyCool ,  FanMail ; Avril Lavigne:  Let Go ; Whitney Houston:  Love Whitney , 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
415
 Just Whitney ,  I’m Your Baby Tonight ,  Queen Of The Night ; Usher:  Confessions ,  Usher ,  Many 
Ways ,  My Way ,  Nice & Slow ; Outkast:  Outkast ,  Speakerboxx/The Love Below . 
 RICHARDSON, GARTH 
 You Me At Six:  Sinners Never Sleep ; Skunk Anansie:  Stoosh ; Red Hot Chili Peppers: 
 Mother’s Milk ; Rage Against The Machine:  Rage Against The Machine ; The Jesus Lizard: 
 Shot ; Biffy Clyro:  Puzzle ,  Only Revolutions ,  Opposites ; Melvins:  Stoner Witch ,  Stag . 
 ROCK, BOB 
 Bon Jovi:  New Jersey ,  Slippery When Wet ,  Keep The Faith ; Survivor:  Survivor ; The Cult: 
 Sonic Temple ,  The Cult ,  Beyond Good And Evil ; Mötley Crüe:  Dr .  Feelgood ,  Decade Of 
Decadence ,  Mötley Crüe ; Metallica:  Metallica  (The Black Album),  Load ,  ReLoad ,  Garage 
Inc .,  S&M ,  S t. Anger ; Bryan Adams:  On A Day Like Today ; Lost Prophets:  Liberation 
Transmission ; Michael Bublé:  Call Me Irresponsible ,  Crazy Love ,  To Be Loved ; Offspring:  Rise 
And Fall Rage And Grace ,  Days Go By ; 311:  Uplifter ,  Universal Pulse . 
 ROSSE, ERIC 
 Tori Amos:  Little Earthquakes ,  Under The Pink ; Lisa Marie Presley:  To Whom It May 
Concern ; Anna Nalick:  Wreck Of The Day ; Sara Bareilles:  Little Voice; Nerina Pallot:  Fires . 
 SANDS, DENNIS 
 Soundtrack:  American Beauty ,  Back To The Future 1 & 2 ,  Erin Brokovich ,  Forrest Gump , 
 Independence Day ,  Who Framed Roger Rabbit ,  Contact ,  Cast Away ,  The Polar Express ,  Men 
In Black 2 & 3 ,  Terminator Salvation ,  Terminator 3 ,  Bolt ,  Spiderman 1 & 2 ,  The Bourne 
Supremacy ,  Finding Nemo ,  Corpse Bride ,  The Green Mile ,  Pleasantville ,  Good Will Hunting , 
 The Shawshank Redemption ,  Edward Scissorhands . 
 SARAFIN, ERIC (MIXERMAN) 
 Pharcyde:  Bizarre Ride To The Pharcyde ,  Instrumentals ; Brand New Heavies:  Brother Sister ; 
Ben Harper:  Fight For Your Mind ,  The Will To Live ,  Burn To Shine ; David Cassidy:  Old 
Trick New Dog ; Hilary Duff:  Hilary Duff ,  Most Wanted ; Barenaked Ladies:  Everything To 
Everyone ; Terence Trent D’Arby:  Wildcard ; Kathy Troccoli:  Love And Mercy ,  Sounds Of 
Heaven . 
 SARDINA, RAFA 
 Luis Miguel:  Vivo ,  Romances ,  Todos Los Ramances ,  Amarte Es Un Placer ,  Mis Romances , 
 Complices ,  Mexico En La Piel ,  Grandes Exitos ,  Mis Boleros Favoritos ,  33 ; Alejandro Sanz: 
 No Es Lo Mismo ,  El Tren De Los Momentos Tu No Tienes Alma ; Lady Gaga:  Born This Way ; 
Stevie Wonder:  A Time To Love ; Dru Hill:  Enter The Dru . 
 SCHEINER, ELLIOT 
 Steely Dan:  Aja ,  Gaucho ,  Two Against Nature ; Donald Fagan:  Nightﬂ y ; Billy Joel:  Songs In 
The Attic ; Fleetwood Mac:  The Dance ; Roy Orbison:  Black And White Night ; John Fogerty: 
 Premonition ; Van Morrison:  Moondance ; Bruce Hornsby & The Range:  The Way It Is . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
416
 SCHILLING, ERIC 
 Gloria Estefan:  Into The Light ; Ricky Martin:  Sound Loaded ; Julio Iglesias:  Quelque Chose 
de France ; Jon Secada:  Secada ; Bacilos:  Caraluna ,  Sin Vergüenza . 
 SCHLEICHER, CLARKE 
 Martina McBride:  The Time Has Come ,  Evolution ,  Emotion ,  Martina ; Big & Rich:  Comin’ To 
Your City ,  Between Raising Hell And Amazing Grace ; Dixie Chicks:  Wide Open Spaces ,  Fly ; 
Pam Tillis:  Thunder and Roses ; Sara Evans:  Born To Fly ,  Restless ; Mark Chesnutt:  Savin’ The 
Honky-Tonk ; Taylor Swift:  Taylor Swift . 
 SCHMITT, AL 
 George Benson:  Breezin’ ; Steely Dan:  Aja ,  FM (No Static At All) ; Toto:  Toto IV ; Natalie 
Cole:  Unforgettable ; Diana Krall:  When I Look In Your Eyes ,  The Look Of Love ; Ray Charles: 
 Genius Loves Company ; Jefferson Airplane:  After Bathing At Baxter’s ,  Crown Of Creation , 
 Volunteers ; Luis Miguel:  Amarte Es Un Placer . 
 SCOTT, JIM 
 Sting:  Bring On The Night ,  Dream Of The Blue Turtles ; Santana:  Freedom ,  Blues For 
Salvador ,  Supernatural ; Lonesome Romeos:  Lonesome Romeos ; Roy Orbison:  King Of 
Hearts ; Tom Petty & The Heartbreakers:  Wildﬂ owers ,  Playback ,  The Last DJ ,  She’s The One ; 
Slayer:  Divine Intervention ; Ride:  Carnival Of Light ; Johnny Cash:  American Recordings ; 
Screaming Trees:  Dust ; The Rolling Stones:  Bridges To Babylon ; Reef:  Glow ; Natalie 
Merchant;  Ophelia ; Lucinda Williams:  Car Wheels On A Gravel Road ; Wilco:  Being There , 
 Summerteeth ; Red Hot Chili Peppers:  Californication ,  By The Way ; Counting Crows:  This 
Desert Life ,  Films About Ghosts ; Rage Against The Machine:  Renegades ; Barenaked Ladies: 
 Maroon ; Foo Fighters:  One By One ; System Of A Down:  Lonely Day ; Matchbox 20:  Exile 
On Mainstream ,  More Than You Think You Are ; Dixie Chicks:  Taking The Long Way . 
 SCOTT, TOBY 
 Bruce Springsteen:  High Hopes ,  Wrecking Ball ,  Working On A Dream ,  Magic ,  Devils & Dust , 
 The Rising ,  The Ghost Of Tom Joad ,  Human Touch ,  Lucky Town ,  Tunnel Of Love ,  Born In 
The USA ,  The River ,  We Shall Overcome ; Bob Dylan:  Shot Of Love ; Manhattan Transfer: 
 Pastiche ; Booker T & The MGs:  Universal Language ; The Replacements:  All For Nothing/
Nothing For All . 
 SENGPIEL, EBERHARD 
 Produced records for classical artists such as Gidon Kremer, Sviatoslav Richter, Daniel 
Barenboim, Alban Berg Quartet, Mstislav Rostropovich, London Symphony Orchestra, 
András Schiff, Nikolaus Harnoncourt, Il Giardino Armonico, Kurt Masur, Kent Nagano, 
Hélène Grimaud, The Brodsky Quartet, Maxim Vengerov, Chicago Symphony Orchestra, 
New York Philharmonic, Concerto Koeln, Radu Lupu, and Berlin Philharmonic. He 
has won Grammy awards for his recordings of Richard Strauss’s Wind Concertos and 
Richard Wagner’s  Tannhäuser . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
417
 SHEBIB, NOAH “40” 
 Drake:  So Far Gone ,  Thank Me Later ,  Take Care ,  Nothing Was The Same ; Trey Songz: 
 Ready ,  Passion Pain And Pleasure ; Lil Wayne:  No Ceilings ,  I’m Not A Human Being ; Alicia 
Keys:  The Element Of Freedom ; Jamie Foxx:  Best Night Of My Life ; Usher:  Looking 4 
Myself ; Nas:  Life Is Good ; DJ Khaled:  Suffering From Success ,  We The Best Forever ; Beyoncé: 
 Beyoncé . 
 SHIPLEY, MIKE 
 Nickelback:  Dark Horse ; Faith Hill:  Breathe ; Def Leppard:  High ‘n’ Dry ,  Pyromania , 
 Hysteria ,  Adrenalize ; The Cars:  Heartbeat City ; Shania Twain:  The Woman In Me ,  Come On 
Over ,  Up ; The Corrs:  In Blu e; Nickelback:  Dark Horse ; Maroon 5:  Hands All Over . 
 SHOEMAKER, TRINA 
 Sheryl Crow:  Sheryl Crow ,  The Globe Sessions ,  C’mon C’mon ; Queens Of The Stone Age:  R ; 
Steven Curtis Chapman:  All Things New ; Dixie Chicks:  Home . 
 SIMON, JOHN 
 Leonard Cohen:  Songs Of ; Simon & Garfunkel:  Bookends ; Blood Sweat And Tears:  Child 
Is Father To The Man ; Gordon Lightfoot:  Did She Mention My Name ; Big Brother And 
The Holding Company:  Cheap Thrills ; The Band:  Music From Big Pink ,  The Band ,  The Last 
Waltz ; John Hartford:  Morning Glory ; Steve Forbert:  Jackrabbit Slim ; Gil Evans:  Priestess ; 
Mama Cass:  Dream A Little Dream Of Me ; Michael Franks:  Tiger In The Rain . 
 SMITH, ANDY 
 Paul Simon:  So Beautiful Or So What ,  Surprise, You’re The One ,  Songs From The Caperman ; 
Carl Perkins:  Go Cat Go ; Mariah Carey:  Daydream ,  Merry Christmas ; The Waterboys: 
 Dream Harder ; Frank Sinatra:  Duets I & II ; The Gaddabouts:  Look Out Now ,  The 
Gaddabouts ; Edie Brickell:  Volcano ,  Picture Perfect Morning . 
 SMITH, DON 
 The Rolling Stones:  Voodoo Lounge ; Ry Cooder:  Chavez Ravine ,  My Name Is Buddy ; Stevie 
Nicks:  Rock A Little ,  Trouble In Shangri-La ; The Tragically Hip:  Up To Here ,  Road Apples ; 
Tom Petty:  Long After Dark ,  Southern Accents ,  Full Moon Fever ,  The Last DJ ; Roy Orbison: 
 Mystery Girl ; Eurythmics:  Be Yourself Tonight . 
 SMITH, FRASER T. 
 Craig David:  Born To Do It ,  Slicker Than Your Average ,  Trust Me ; Rachel Stevens:  Come 
And Get It ; Tinchy Stryder:  Catch 22 ,  Third Strike ; Taio Cruz;  Rokstarr ; Cheryl Cole:  Three 
Words ; Ellie Goulding:  Lights ; Kano:  Home Sweet Home ,  London Town ; Beyoncé:  B’Day ; 
James Morrison:  Songs For You Truths For Me ; N-Dubz:  Uncle B ; Jennifer Hudson:  Jennifer 
Hudson ; Pixie Lott:  Turn It Up ; Chipmunk:  I Am Chipmunk . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
418
 STAUB, RANDY 
 Nickelback:  Silver Side Up ,  The Long Road ,  Here And Now ,  All The Right Reasons , 
 Dark Horse ; Alice In Chains:  The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here ,  Black Gives Way To Blue ; 
Metallica:  Some Kind Of Monster ,  Metallica  (The Black Album),  Reload ,  Load;  Our 
Lady Peace:  Healthy In Paranoid Times ,  Gravity ; Mötley Crüe:  Mötley Crüe, Decade Of 
Decadence ,  Dr .  Feelgood ; U2:  Rattle & Hum ; David Bowie:  Black Tie White Noise : The Cult: 
 The Cult ,  Beyond Good And Evil ; POD:  Satellite ; Avril Lavigne:  My Happy Ending ; Simple 
Plan:  Still Not Getting Any . 
 STAVROU, MIKE 
 Siouxie And The Banshees:  Join Hands ,  The Scream;  T.Rex:  Dandy In The Underworld ; 
Cat Stevens:  Back To Earth ; Pretenders:  Pretenders ,  Pirate Radio ,  I’ll Stand By You ; Paul 
McCartney:  Tug Of War ; John Williams:  Spanish Guitar Music ; Joan Baez:  Blowin’ Away ; 
Steeleye Span:  All Around My Hat . 
 STEINER, ARMIN 
 Bread:  Baby I’m A Want You ,  Guitar Man ,  Manna ,  On The Waters ; Neil Diamond:  Moods , 
 Stones ; Gladys Knight:  Miss Gladys Knight ; Barbra Streisand:  Songbird ,  Streisand Superman , 
 What Matters Most ; Soundtrack:  Home Alone ,  Presumed Innocent ,  The Matrix ,  The Matrix 
Reloaded ,  The Matrix Revolutions ,  Jurassic Park 3 . 
 STONE, AL 
 Jamiroquai:  Return Of The Space Cowboy ,  Travelling Without Moving ,  Synkronized ; Daniel 
Bedingﬁ eld:  Gotta Get Through This ; Stereo MCs:  Connected ; Bjork:  Debut ,  Post ; Turin 
Brakes:  The Optimist ; Lamb:  Fear Of Fours ; Eagle Eye Cherry:  Sub Rosa; Spice Girls:  Spice . 
 STREET, STEPHEN 
 The Smiths:  Meat Is Murder ,  The Queen Is Dead ,  Strangeways Here We Come ; Morrissey: 
 Viva Hate ,  Bona Drag ; Blur:  Modern Life Is Rubbish ,  Parklife ,  The Great Escape ,  Blur ; 
Cranberries:  Everybody Else Is Doing It So Why Can’t We ,  No Need To Argue ,  Wake Up And 
Smell The Coffee ,  Roses ; Kaiser Chiefs:  Employment ,  Yours Truly Angry Mob ; Babyshambles: 
 Shotter’s Nation . 
 STREICHER, RON 
 Produced recordings for: Bolshoi Theatre Orchestra, Philadelphia Orchestra, Los 
Angeles Philharmonic, The Orford String Quartet, Shanghai Symphony Orchestra. 
 SULLIVAN, STUART 
 Sublime:  Sublime ; Sublime with Rome:  Yours Truly ; Meat Puppets:  Too High To Die , 
 Huevos ; Willie Nelson:  How Great Thou Art ,  Let’s Face The Music And Dance ; Dead 
Milkmen:  Metaphysical Grafﬁ ti ,  Beelzebubba ; James Cotton:  Cotton Mouth Man ,  Giant , 
 Baby Don’t You Tear My Clothes ,  Mighty Long Time . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
419
 SWANN, DARRYL 
 Macy Gray:  On How Life Is ,  The Id ,  The Trouble With Being Myself ,  The World Is Yours . 
 SWEDIEN, BRUCE 
 Michael Jackson:  Off The Wall ,  Thriller ,  Bad ,  Dangerous ; Quincy Jones:  Back On The Block , 
 Q’s Juke Joint ; The Jacksons:  Victory ; George Benson:  Give Me The Night ; Jennifer Lopez: 
 This Is Me … Then ,  Rebirth ,  Brave . 
 SYROWSKI, TOM 
 Incubus:  If Not Now When ,  Light Grenades ; Pearl Jam:  Lightning Bolt ,  Backspacer ; Seether: 
 Holding Onto Strings Better Left To Fray ; The Fray:  Scars And Stories ; Avril Lavigne:  The Best 
Damn Thing ; Cheap Trick:  The Latest ; Brandon Flowers:  Flamingo . 
 TARSIA, MIKE 
 Teddy Pendergrass:  You And I ; Patti LaBelle:  Timeless Journey ,  Flame ,  Gems ,  Burnin’ ,  This 
Christmas ,  Be Yourself : Dru Hill:  Dru Hill ; Sister Sledge:  African Eyes ; The O’Jays:  Home For 
Christmas ,  Love You To Tears ,  Serious . 
 THOENER, DAVID 
 AC/DC:  For Those About To Rock We Salute You ; Aerosmith: “I Don’t Wanna Miss 
A Thing,”  Get A Grip ,  Nine Lives ; Brooks & Dunn:  Red Dirt Road ,  Tight Rope ; John 
Mellencamp:  Dance Naked ,  Uh-Huh ,  John Mellencamp ; Willie Nelson:  The Great Divide , 
 Rainbow Connection ; Matchbox 20:  Exile On Mainstream ,  Mad Season . 
 THORNALLEY, PHIL 
 Natalie Imbruglia:  Left Of The Middle ,  White Lillies Island ; The Cure:  Pornography ; Johnny 
Hates Jazz:  Turn Back The Clock ,  Tall Stories ; Pixie Lott:  Young Foolish Happy ,  Turn It Up ; 
Eliza Doolittle:  Eliza Doolittle ; Melanie C:  This Time ,  Reason ,  Beautiful Intentions ; Ronan 
Keating:  Ronan Keating ,  Destination ,  Ronan ; Lulu:  Back On Track . 
 TOKIC, ANDRIJA 
 Alabama Shakes:  Boys & Girls ; Josephine Foster:  Blood Rushing ,  I’m A Dreamer ; Promised 
Land Sound:  Promised Land Sound; Cheap Time:  Exit Smiles . 
 VALENTINE, ERIC 
 Slash:  Apocalyptic Love ,  Slash ; Aqualung:  Memory Man ; Lostprophets:  Start Something ; 
Good Charlotte:  The Young And The Hopeless ; Queens Of The Stone Age:  Songs For The 
Deaf ; Smash Mouth:  Smash Mouth ,  Astro Lounge ,  Fush Yu Mang ; Third Eye Blind:  Third 
Eye Blind ; Hot Hot Heat:  Happiness Ltd ; All-American Rejects:  When The World Comes 
Down . 

APPENDIX 2 Who’s Who: Selected Discography
420
 VERNON, MIKE 
 John Mayall & The Bluesbreakers:  With Eric Clapton ,  A Hard Road ,  Crusade ,  Bare Wires , 
 Diary Of A Band 1 & 2 ; John Mayall:  Blues Alone ,  Blues From Laurel Canyon ,  Thru The 
Years ; Eric Clapton:  Crossroads ; Fleetwood Mac:  Fleetwood Mac ,  Mr Wonderful ,  English 
Rose ,  The Pious Bird Of Good Omen ,  Black Magic Woman ; Peter Green:  The End Of The 
Game ; Savoy Brown:  Shake Down ,  Getting To The Point ; David Bowie:  David Bowie . 
 VIG, BUTCH 
 Nirvana:  Nevermind ; Smashing Pumpkins:  Gish ,  Siamese Dream ; Sonic Youth:  Dirty , 
 Experimental Jet Set Trash And No Star ; Garbage:  Garbage ,  Version 2 . 0 ,  Beautiful Garbage , 
 Bleed Like Me ,  Not Your Kind Of People ; Green Day:  20th Century Breakdown ; Foo Fighters: 
 Wasting Light . 
 VISCONTI, TONY 
 T.Rex:  Electric Warrior ,  The Slider ; David Bowie:  Diamond Dogs ,  Young Americans ,  Heroes , 
 Low ,  Scary Monsters ,  Heathen ,  Reality ; Iggy Pop:  The Idiot ; The Moody Blues:  The Other 
Side of Life ,  Sur La Mer ; Thin Lizzy:  Bad Reputation ,  Live And Dangerous ,  Black Rose . 
 VORNDICK, BIL 
 Charlie Haden:  Rambling Boy ; Lynn Anderson:  The Bluegrass Sessions ; Rhonda Vincent: 
 One Step Ahead ; Ralph Stanley II:  Stanley Blues ,  Clinch Mountain Sweethearts ; Bela Fleck: 
 Left Of Cool ;  Tales From The Acoustic Planet 1 & 2 ,  UFO TOFU ,  Flight Of The Cosmic 
Hippo ,  Sinister Minister ; Doc Watson:  On Praying Ground ,  My Dear Old Southern Home ; 
Alison Krauss:  I’ve Got That Old Feeling ; Mark O’Connor:  The New Nashville Cats ,  Heroes ; 
Nashville Bluegrass Band:  Waitin’ For The Hard Times To Go ,  Home Of The Blues ; Jerry 
Douglas:  Slide Rule ,  Glide, Great Dobro Sessions ,  Plant Early ,  Changing Channels ,  Under The 
Wire . 
 WAGENER, MICHAEL 
 Skid Row:  Slave To The Grind ,  Skid Row ; Metallica:  Master Of Puppets ; Megadeth:  So Far So 
Good So What ; Ozzy Ozbourne:  No More Tears ; Extreme:  Pornografﬁ ti ; Dokken:  Breaking 
The Chains ,  Tooth And Nail ,  Under Lock And Key ; Alice Cooper:  Constrictor ,  Raise Your Fist 
And Yell ; Great White:  Great White . 
 WAS, DON 
 Carly Simon:  Spoilt Girl ; Bonnie Raitt:  Nick Of Time ,  Luck Of The Draw ,  Road Tested ; The 
B52s:  Cosmic Thing ,  Good Stuff ; Bob Dylan:  Under The Red Sky ; Elton John:  To Be Continued ; 
Willie Nelson:  Across The Borderline ,  Countryman ; Jackson Browne:  I’m Alive ; The Rolling 
Stones:  Stripped ,  Voodoo Lounge ,  Bridges To Babylon ,  A Bigger Bang ; Roy Orbison:  King Of 
Hearts ; Barenaked Ladies:  Maroon ; Hootie And The Blowﬁ sh:  Hootie And The Blowﬁ sh ; 
Stone Temple Pilots:  Stone Temple Pilots ; Ziggy Marley:  Spirit Of Music ,  Wild and Free . 
 WESTON, BOB 
 Sebadoh:  Bakesale ,  Bubble & Scrape ; Superchunk:  Come Pick Me Up ; June Of 44:  Anahata ,  Four 
Great Points ,  Tropics And Meridians ; Polvo:  Shapes ,  Exploded Drawing ,  Today’s Active Lifestyles ; 
Coctails:  Coctails ; Archers Of Loaf:  Vee Vee ,  White Trash Heroes ,  All The Nations Airports . 

Who’s Who: Selected Discography APPENDIX 2
421
 WINSTANLEY, ALAN 
 Madness:  One Step Beyond ,  Absolutely ,  7 ,  The Rise & Fall ,  Keep Moving ,  The Liberty Of 
Norton Folgate ,  Mad Not Mad ; Stranglers:  The Raven ; The Teardrop Explodes:  Kilimanjaro ; 
Dexys Midnight Runners:  Too-Rye-Ay ; Elvis Costello & The Attractions:  Punch The Clock , 
 Goodbye Cruel World ; Hothouse Flowers:  People ,  Horne : Bush:  Sixteen Stone ,  The Science 
Of Things ; A-ha:  Lifelines . 
 WORLEY, PAUL 
 Martina McBride:  The Time Has Come ,  The Way That I Am ,  Evolution ,  Emotion ,  Martina ; 
Pam Tillis:  Put Yourself In My Place ,  Homeward Looking Angel ,  Thunder And Roses ; The 
Dixie Chicks:  Wide Open Spaces ,  Fly ; Big & Rich:  Horse Of A Different Color ,  Comin’ To 
Your City . 
 WRIGHT, TOBY 
 Slayer:  Divine Intervention ,  Soundtrack To The Apocalypse ; Alice In Chains:  Jar Of Flies , 
 Alice In Chains ,  Unplugged ; Korn:  Follow The Leader ; Metallica:  And Justice For All ; Mötley 
Crüe:  Girls Girls Girls ; Soulﬂ y:  Primitive . 
 YAKUS, SHELLY 
 Tom Petty:  Let Me Up ,  Southern Accents ,  Long After Dark ,  Hard Promises ,  Damn The 
Torpedoes ; Blue Öyster Cult:  Spectres ,  Agents Of Fortune ; Dire Straits:  Making Movies ; Don 
Henley:  The End Of The Innocence ; Van Morrison:  Moondance ; Alice Cooper:  Billion Dollar 
Babies ,  School’s Out ; The Band:  Music From The Big Pink ; Stevie Nicks:  Rock A Little ,  The 
Wild Heart ; Lou Reed:  Berlin ; Patti Smith:  Dream Of Life ,  Easter ; Suzanne Vega:  Solitude 
Standing . 
 YOUNG GURU 
 Jay-Z:  The Blueprint 3 ,  American Gangster ,  Kingdom Come ,  Collision Course ,  The Blueprint ; 
Beyoncé:  B’Day ; Ludacris:  Theater Of The Mind ; Ghostface Killah;  Ghostdeini The Great ; 
Method Man:  Blackout 2 ; Mariah Carey:  Charmbracelet . 
 ZDAR, PHILIPPE 
 Cassius:  I Love Techno ,  The Rawkers ,  15 Again ,  Au Reve ,  1999 ; Phoenix:  Wolfgang Amadeus 
Phoenix ,  United ; The Rapture:  In The Grace Of Your Love ; Two Door Cinema Club:  Tourist 
History ; MC Solaar:  Paradisiaque ; Drake:  Nothing Was The Same . 
 ZOOK, JOE 
 Modest Mouse:  We Were Dead Before The Ship Even Sank ; Sheryl Crow:  C’mon C’mon ; 
Courtney Love:  America’s Sweetheart ; One Republic:  Dreaming Out Loud ; Rancid:  Life 
Won’t Wait ; Brooke Fraser:  Albertine . 

This page intentionally left blank

423
 CHAPTER 1 
 1 
 Mix With The Masters (2012). Al Schmitt seminar publicity video.  http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=LaEjRx9Ix2Q , April. 
 2 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 3 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 CHAPTER 2 
 1 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 2 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 3 
 Robbins, J. (1999). Interview with John Agnello.  Tape Op , Fall. 
 4 
 Hatschek, K. (2006)  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 5 
 Fritz, O. (2000). Visual Images In The Recording Studio.  Tape Op , September/October. And 
Crews, E. (2010). Interview with Oz Fritz.  Tape Op , January/February. 
 6 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks: Eddie Kramer. Jimi Hendrix Experience: “All Along The 
Watchtower.”  Sound On Sound , November. 
 7 
 Baccigaluppi, J. (2013). Steve Lillywhite Will Steer Your Boat Safely To Port.  Tape Op , January/
February. 
 8 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 9 
 Weiss, P. (2013). Interview with Jeff Powell.  Tape Op , May/June. 
 10 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 11 
 Daley, D. (2004). Interview with Wyclef Jean.  Sound On Sound , July. 
 12 
 Crane, L. (2012). Jacquire King: Finding The Truth.  Tape Op , March/April. 
 13 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 14 
 Crane, L. (2012). Jacquire King: Finding The Truth.  Tape Op , March/April. 
 15 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
  16 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Inside Track: Mike Poole. Robert Plant: “Angel Dance.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 17 
 Tingen, P. (2006). Roy Thomas Baker: Producing The Darkness’  One Way Ticket To Hell…And 
Back .  Sound On Sound , February. 
 18 
 Inglis, S. (2003). Rhett Davies & Bob Clearmountain: Recording & remixing Roxy Music’s 
 Avalon .  Sound On Sound , August. 
 Quote References 
 APPENDIX 3 
 APPENDIX 3 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
424
 19 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 20 
 Buskin, R. (2009). Classic Tracks: Jack Douglas & Jay Messina. Aerosmith: “Walk This Way.” 
 Sound On Sound , August. 
 21 
 Buskin, R. (1994). Don Was & Don Smith: Recording The Rolling Stones.  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 22 
 Droney, M. (2002). Interview With Dennis Sands.  Mix , September. 
 23 
 Frost, M. (2012). John Porter: From The Smiths To The Blues.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 24 
 Doyle, T. (2012). David Kosten: Producing Bat For Lashes & Everything Everything.  Sound On 
Sound , December. 
 25 
 Saraﬁ n, E. (“Mixerman”) (2012).  Zen And The Art Of Producing . Hal Leonard. 
 26 
 Lockwood, D. (2001). Jay Graydon: Musician & Producer.  Sound On Sound , December. 
 27 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 28 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Josh Homme: Producing Arctic Monkeys.  Sound On Sound , February. 
 29 
 Savona, A. (2005)  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat Books.  
 CHAPTER 3 
 1 
 Tingen, P. (2009). Inside Track: Mike Fraser. AC/DC:  Black Ice .  Sound On Sound , January. 
 2 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR. 
 3 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Inside Track: David R. Ferguson. Johnny Cash: “Ain’t No Grave.”   Sound On 
Sound , June. 
 4 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 
 5 
 Tingen, P. (2009). Inside Track: Mike Fraser. AC/DC:  Black Ice .  Sound On Sound , January. 
 6 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 7 
 Crane, L. (2013). Ken Caillat: Making History And Rumours.  Tape Op , July/August. 
 8 
 Flint, T. (2001). Tony Platt: Rock Island Life.  Sound On Sound , April. 
 9 
 Crane, L. & Smith, C. (1999). Interview with Joe Chiccarelli.  Tape Op , Fall. 
 10 
 Daley, D. (2004). Mixing Engineers: The Next Generation.  Sound On Sound , February. 
 11 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat Books.  
 12 
 Frost, M. (2009). Jez Coad. Simple Minds: Recording  Grafﬁ ti Soul .  Sound On Sound , July. 
 13 
 Bilerman, H. & Foot, J. (2010). Interview with Bob Johnston.  Tape Op , November/December. 
 14 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 15 
 Droney, M. (2002). Interview with Neil Dorfsman.  Mix , April. 
 16 
 Droney, M. (1999) Interview with Brian Malouf.  Mix , December. 
 CHAPTER 4 
 1 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 2 
 Stavrou, M.P. (2003).  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 

Quote References APPENDIX 3
425
 3 
 Simons, D. (2011). Mark Neill: Recording The Black Keys At Muscle Shoals.  Sound On Sound , 
August. 
 4 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 5 
 Buskin, R. (2003). Classic Tracks: Bruce Botnick. The Doors: “Strange Days.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 6 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 7 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 8 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 9 
 Massey, H. (2000)  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 10 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 11 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Steve Albini: Sound Engineer Extraordinaire.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 12 
 Buskin, R. (2004). Classic Tracks: John Hudson. Tina Turner: “What’s Love Got To Do With 
It?”  Sound On Sound , May. 
 13 
 Lockwood, D. (2001). Jay Graydon: Musician & Producer.  Sound On Sound , December. 
 14 
 Tingen, P. (2000). Pierre Marchand: Producing Sarah McLachlan.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 15 
 Recording seminar at British Grove Studios, May 2010. 
 16 
 Buskin, R. (2004). Classic Tracks: John Hudson. Tina Turner: “What’s Love Got To Do With 
It?”  Sound On Sound , May. 
 17 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
  18 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 19 
 Buskin, R. (2004) Classic Tracks: John Hudson. Tina Turner: ‘What’s Love Got To Do With 
It?’.  Sound On Sound , May. 
 20 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 21 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 22 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 23 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 24 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Phil Thornalley: From Rock Producer To Pop Songwriter.  Sound On Sound , 
June. 
 25 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 26 
 Tingen, P. (2009). Inside Track: Young Guru. Jay Z:  The Blueprint 3 .  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 27 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 
 28 
 Sillitoe, S. (1994). Stephen Street: Recording Blur & The Cranberries.  Sound On Sound , July. 
 29 
 Senior, M. (2000). Jonny Dollar & Simon Palmskin: Recording Gabrielle’s “Rise.”  Sound On 
Sound , July. 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
426
 30 
 Buskin, R. (2006) Classic Tracks: Alan Winstanley. Madness: “Our House.”  Sound On Sound , 
June. 
 31 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 32 
 Humberstone, N. (2003) Neil Davidge: Recording Massive Attack’s  100th Window .  Sound On 
Sound , April. 
 33 
 Senior, M. (2000) Jonny Dollar & Simon Palmskin: Recording Gabrielle’s “Rise.”  Sound On 
Sound , July. 
 34 
 Stavrou, M P. (2003).  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 
 35 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Joe Barresi: Recording Queens Of The Stone Age.  Sound On Sound , July. 
 36 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 37 
 Buskin, R. (2003). Rich Costey: Recording Muse’s  Absolution .  Sound On Sound , December. 
 38 
 Droney, M. (1999). Interview with Leslie Ann Jones.  Mix , August. 
 39 
 Buskin, R. (2009). Classic Tracks: Jack Douglas & Jay Messina. Aerosmith: “Walk This Way.” 
 Sound On Sound , August. 
 40 
 Crane, L. & Smith, C. (1999). Interview with Joe Chiccarelli.  Tape Op , Fall. 
 41 
 Sillitoe, S. (1999). Stephen Street: Producing Blur, Cranberries & Catatonia.  Sound On Sound , 
August. 
 42 
 Inglis, S. (2009). Paul Epworth: Producing Almost Everyone.  Sound On Sound , January. 
 43 
 Owsinski, B. (2010).  The Music Producer’s Handbook . Hal Leonard. 
 44 
 McKenzie, A. (2010). Interview with Ben Allen.  Tape Op , March/April. 
 45 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 46 
 Saxon, J. (2011). Dave Jerden: Really Wrong Productions, Handle With Care.  Tape Op , 
November/December. 
 47 
 Senior, M. Author’s personal experience, Spring 1995. 
 48 
 Owsinski, B. (2010).  The Music Producer’s Handbook . Hal Leonard. 
 49 
 Saxon, J. (2011). Dave Jerden: Really Wrong Productions, Handle With Care.  Tape Op , 
November/December. 
 50 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 51 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 52 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 53 
 Doyle, T. (2008). Stuart Price: Producing Seal & Madonna.  Sound On Sound , February. 
 54 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 55 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 56 
 Flint, T. (2001). Tony Platt: Rock Island Life.  Sound On Sound , April. 
 57 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 58 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Mike Shipley. Alison Krauss: “Paper Airplane.”  Sound On 
Sound , July. 

Quote References APPENDIX 3
427
 59 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 60 
 Tingen, P. (2012). Inside Track: Jeff Bhasker. Fun: “We Are Young.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 61 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 62 
 Inglis, S. (2002). Butch Vig, Duke Erikson, & Billy Bush: Recording Garbage.  Sound On Sound , 
June. 
 63 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Phil Thornalley: From Rock Producer To Pop Songwriter.  Sound On Sound , 
June. 
 64 
 Flint, T. (2001). Tony Platt: Rock Island Life.  Sound On Sound , April. 
 CHAPTER 5 
 1 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 2 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 3 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 4 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 5 
 Senior, M. (2000). Mousse T: Recording Tom Jones’ “Sex Bomb.”  Sound On Sound , August. 
 6 
 Buskin, R. (2004). Classic Tracks: Bill Price. The Sex Pistols: “Anarchy In The UK.”  Sound On 
Sound , September. 
 7 
 Tingen, P. (1994). Robbie Adams: Recording U2’s  Achtung Baby  &  Zooropa .  Sound On Sound , 
March. 
 8 
 Tingen, P. (1997). Flood & Howie B: Producing U2’s  Pop .  Sound On Sound , July. 
 9 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 10 
 Inglis, S. (2001). Stephen Harris: The Waiting Game.  Sound On Sound, October. 
 11 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks: The Stone Roses “Fool’s Gold.”  Sound On Sound , February. 
 12 
 Sokal, R. (2002). GGGarth Richardson: A Sergeant Leading His Troop Into Battle.  Tape Op , 
March. 
 13 
 Inglis, S. (1999). Dave Eringa: Recording The Manic Street Preachers’ “If You Tolerate This 
Your Children Will Be Next.”  Sound On Sound , April. 
 14 
 Buskin, R. (2006). Classic Tracks: Bob Clearmountain. Bryan Adams: “Run To You.”  Sound 
On Sound , July. 
 15 
 Tingen, P. (1999). Jim Scott: Recording Red Hot Chili Peppers’  Californication .  Sound On 
Sound , December. 
 16 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 17 
 Buskin, R. (2003). Rich Costey: Recording Muse’s  Absolution .  Sound On Sound , December. 
 18 
 Tingen, P. (2007). Inside Track: Joe Chiccarelli. The White Stripes:  Icky Thump .  Sound On 
Sound , October. 
 19 
 Tingen, P. (2009). Inside Track: Mike Fraser. AC/DC:  Black Ice .  Sound On Sound , January. 
 20 
 Buskin, R. (2012). Classic Tracks: Narada Michael Walden & Michael Barbiero. Whitney 
Houston: “I Wanna Dance With Somebody.”  Sound On Sound , May. 
 21 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
428
 22 
 Buskin, R. (1996). Hugh Padgham: The Master Craftsman Behind Sting & Phil Collins.  Sound 
On Sound , October. 
 23 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks: Stephen Hague. New Order: “True Faith.”  Sound On Sound , 
March. 
 24 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 25 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Steve Albini: Sound Engineer Extraordinaire.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 26 
 Sillitoe, S. (1999). Mike Hedges: Recording Travis’ “Why Does It Always Rain On Me?”  Sound 
On Sound , November. 
 27 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks: Stephen Hague. New Order: “True Faith.”  Sound On Sound , 
March. 
 28 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 29 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 30 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 
 31 
 Senior, M. (2000). Bird & Bush: Producing Stereophonics.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 32 
 Inglis, S. (2009). Paul Epworth: Producing Almost Everyone.  Sound On Sound , January. 
 33 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 
 34 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 35 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning PTR.  
 36 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 37 
 Tingen, P. (1996). Steve Levine: Digital Domain.  Sound On Sound , December. 
 38 
 Bruce, B. (1999). Al Stone: Recording Jamiroquai’s “Supersonic.”  Sound On Sound , December. 
 39 
 Buskin, R. (2009). Classic Tracks: Jack Douglas & Jay Messina. Aerosmith: “Walk This Way.” 
 Sound On Sound , August. 
 CHAPTER 6 
 1 
 Droney, M. (1998). Interview with Al Schmitt.  Mix , October. 
 2 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 
 3 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 4 
 Jackson, M. (2013). Stuart Sullivan. Ready For It.  Tape Op , March. 
 5 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 6 
 Davies, B. (2009). Elliot Mazer, A Da Vinci In His Own Time.  Tape Op , July. 
 7 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 8 
 Mix With The Masters (2012). Al Schmitt seminar publicity video.  http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=LaEjRx9Ix2Q , April. 
 9 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Joe Zook. One Republic: “Stop & Stare.”  Sound On Sound , 
June. 
 10 
 Baccigaluppi, J. & Crane L. (2012). Who’s Trevor Horn?  Tape Op , May. 
 11 
 Flint, T. (2001). Tony Platt: Rock Island Life.  Sound On Sound , April. 
 12 
 Tingen, P. (2000). Pierre Marchand: Producing Sarah McLachlan.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 13 
 Daley, D. (2002). Nashville Recording: The American Way.  Sound On Sound , October. 

Quote References APPENDIX 3
429
 14 
 Multi-Platinum Production (2010).  The Magic Of A Nashville Tuned Guitar.   http://www.you-
tube.com/watch?v=YFjhTdmbSIg , December. 
 15 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 16 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 17 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 18 
 Crane, L. (2000). Interview With Bob Weston.  Tape Op , July/August. 
 19 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 20 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Phil Ramone & Andy Smith. Paul Simon:  So Beautiful So 
What .  Sound On Sound , October. 
 21 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat Books.  
 22 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 23 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 24 
 Stavrou, M.P. (2003).  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 
 25 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 26 
 Lockwood, D. (2001). Jay Graydon: Musician & Producer.  Sound On Sound , December. 
 27 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 28 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 
 29 
 Borgerson, B. (2002). Shelly Yakus: Nuggets Of Wisdom.  Tape Op , September. 
 30 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 31 
 Mix With The Masters (2012). Al Schmitt seminar publicity video.  http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=LaEjRx9Ix2Q , April. 
 32 
 Droney, M. (2001). Interview with David Thoener.  Mix , January. 
 33 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning PTR.  
 34 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. 
 35 
 Daley, D. (2002). Nashville Recording: The American Way.  Sound On Sound , October. 
 36 
 Recording seminar at British Grove Studios, May 2010. 
 37 
 Stavrou, M.P. (2003)  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 
 38 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning PTR.  
 39 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Steve Albini: Sound Engineer Extraordinaire.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 40 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 41 
 Tingen, P. (1999). Jim Scott: Recording Red Hot Chili Peppers’  Californication .  Sound On 
Sound , December. 
 42 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR. 
 43 
 Crane, L. (2000). Jon Brion: Producer, Session Player, Film Scorer, Etc… Tape Op , July/August.  
 44 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 45 
 Tingen, P. (2009). Inside Track: Mike Fraser. AC/DC:  Black Ice .  Sound On Sound , January. 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
430
 46 
 Nichols, R. (2013).  The Roger Nichols Recording Method: A Primer For The 21st Century Audio 
Engineer. Alfred Publishing. 
 47 
 Frost, M. (2012). John Porter: From The Smiths To The Blues.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 48 
 Cunningham, M. (1997). John Leckie: True Brit.  Sound On Sound , May. 
 49 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 50 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 51 
 Buskin, R. (2009). Classic Tracks: Mitch Easter. REM: “Radio Free Europe.”  Sound On Sound , 
November. 
 52 
 Droney, M. (1998). Interview with Al Schmitt.  Mix , October. 
 53 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 54 
 Crane, L. (2000). Interview with Bob Weston.  Tape Op , July/August. 
 55 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 56 
 Cunningham, M. (1995). Roy Thomas Baker & Gary Langan: The Making Of Queen’s 
“Bohemian Rhapsody.”  Sound On Sound , October. 
 57 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Tom Syrowski. Incubus: “Adolescents.”  Sound On Sound , 
November. 
 58 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 59 
 Royer Microphones  Royer Demo CD#1 .  http://www.royerlabs.com/royerdemocd1.html . 
 60 
 Stavrou, M.P. (2003).  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 
  61 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 62 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat Books.  
 63 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 64 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Robert Carranza. Jack Johnson:  Sleep Through The Static . 
 Sound On Sound , May. 
 65 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 CHAPTER 7 
 1 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 2 
 Daley, D. (2002). Nashville Recording: The American Way.  Sound On Sound , October. 
 3 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits 
(Vol. I). Miller Freeman Books. And Stevenson, P. (2004). Andy Johns archival interview. 
 Tape Op , January. 
 4 
 Tingen, P. (2006). Roy Thomas Baker: Producing The Darkness’  One Way Ticket to Hell…And 
Back .  Sound On Sound , February. 
 5 
 Inglis, S. (2000). Ken Nelson: Recording Coldplay’s  Parachutes .  Sound On Sound , October. 
 6 
 Cunningham, M. (1997). John Leckie: True Brit.  Sound On Sound , May. 
 7 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 8 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks: Stephen Street. The Smiths: “The Queen Is Dead.”  Sound 
On Sound , January. 

Quote References APPENDIX 3
431
 9 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Steve Albini: Sound Engineer Extraordinaire.  Sound On Sound , September. 
And B. Owsinski (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 10 
 Tingen, P. (1999). Jim Scott: Recording Red Hot Chili Peppers’  Californication .  Sound On 
Sound , December. 
 11 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 12 
 Buskin, R. (2004). Classic Tracks: John Hudson. Tina Turner: “What’s Love Got To Do With 
It?”  Sound On Sound , May. 
 13 
 Tingen, P. (2006). Jim Abbiss: Producing Kasabian & Arctic Monkeys.  Sound On Sound , 
September. 
 14 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Joe Barresi: Recording Queens Of The Stone Age.  Sound On Sound , July. 
 15 
 Mayes-Wright, C. (2007). Jerry Boys & Livingston Studios.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 16 
 Tingen, P. (2009). Inside Track: Mike Fraser. AC/DC:  Black Ice .  Sound On Sound , January. 
 17 
 Doyle, T. (2009). Dan Austin & Jez Williams: Producing Doves’  Kingdom Of Rust .  Sound On 
Sound , July. 
 18 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Inside Track: Mike Poole. Robert Plant: “Angel Dance.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 19 
 Saraﬁ n, E. (“Mixerman”) (2008). The Womb Forums post.  http://www.thewombforums.com/
showpost.php?p=122671&postcount=15 , April. 
 20 
 Wagener, M. (2002) Gearslutz forums post.  http://www.gearslutz.com/board/1461-post11.
html , June. 
 21 
 Lewisohn, M (1988).  The Beatles Recording Sessions. Harmony Books. 
 22 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. 
 23 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. 
 24 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Inside Track: Eric Valentine. Recording Slash.  Sound On Sound , July. 
 25 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 26 
 Daley, D. (2002). Nashville Recording: The American Way.  Sound On Sound , October. 
 27 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 28 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 29 
 Jackson, B. (2003). Recording Piano.  Mix , November. 
 30 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 31 
 Buskin, R. (1994). Don Was & Don Smith: Recording The Rolling Stones.  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 32 
 Daley, D. (2005). Toby Wright: Recording Hard Rock.  Sound On Sound , December. 
 33 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 34 
 Daley, D. (2002). Nashville Recording: The American Way.  Sound On Sound , October. 
 35 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 36 
 Tingen, P. (1994). Robbie Adams: Recording U2’s  Achtung Baby  &  Zooropa .  Sound On Sound , 
March. 
 37 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Steve Albini: Sound Engineer Extraordinaire.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 38 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
432
 39 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. 
 40 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks; Glyn Johns & Jon Astley. The Who: “Who Are You?”  Sound 
On Sound , May. 
 41 
 Buskin, R. (2004). Classic Tracks: Bill Price. The Sex Pistols: “Anarchy In The UK.”  Sound On 
Sound , September. 
 42 
 Buskin, R. (2006). Classic Tracks: Alan Winstanley. Madness: “Our House.”  Sound On Sound , 
June. 
 43 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 44 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 45 
 Droney, M. (2003). Interview with Elliott Scheiner.  Mix , January. 
 46 
 Buskin, R. (2003). David Bowie & Toni Visconti: Recording  Reality .  Sound On Sound , October. 
 47 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 48 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 49 
 Owsinski, B. (2009)  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 50 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 51 
 Buskin, R. (2004). Classic Tracks: Jon Kelly. Kate Bush: “Wuthering Heights.”  Sound On 
Sound , June. 
 52 
 Tingen, P. (1994). Robbie Adams: Recording U2’s  Achtung Baby  &  Zooropa .  Sound On Sound , 
March. 
 53 
 Daley, D. (2004). Bob Bullock: Recording Shania Twain’s  Up! Sound On Sound , August. 
 54 
 Buskin, R. (2010). Classic Tracks: Bob Clearmountain & Toby Scott. Bruce Springsteen: “Born 
In The USA.”  Sound On Sound , March. 
 55 
 Senior, M. (2003). Husky S. Hoskulds: Recording Solomon Burke’s  Don’t Give Up On Me . 
 Sound On Sound , July. 
 56 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 57 
 Jackson, M. (2013). Stuart Sullivan. Ready For It.  Tape Op , March. 
 58 
 Bell, M. (1995). Simon Dawson: Recording The Stone Roses’  Second Coming .  Sound On Sound , 
May. 
 59 
 Greeves, D. (2003). Ben Hillier: Recording Blur, Tom McRae & Elbow.  Sound On Sound , July. 
 60 
 Buskin, R. (2006). Classic Tracks: Bob Clearmountain. Bryan Adams: “Run To You.”  Sound 
On Sound , July. 
 61 
 Clark, R. (2011)  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR. 
 62 
 Buskin, R. (2007). Classic Tracks: Jason Corsaro. Madonna “Like A Virgin.”  Sound On Sound , 
September. 
 63 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Steve Albini: Sound Engineer Extraordinaire.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 64 
 Stevenson, P. (2004). Andy Johns Archival Interview.  Tape Op , January. 
 65 
 Buskin, R. (2000). Glen Kolotkin: Recording Santana.  Sound On Sound , June. 
 66 
 Droney, M. (1998). Interview With Dave Jerden.  Mix , December. 
 67 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Inside Track: Eric Valentine. Recording Slash.  Sound On Sound , July. 

Quote References APPENDIX 3
433
 68 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 69 
 Inglis, S. (2000). Ken Nelson: Recording Coldplay’s  Parachutes .  Sound On Sound , October. 
 70 
 Frost, M. (2009). Jez Coad. Simple Minds: Recording  Grafﬁ ti Soul .  Sound On Sound , July. 
 71 
 Doyle, T. (2009). Dan Austin & Jez Williams: Producing Doves’  Kingdom Of Rust .  Sound On 
Sound , July. 
 72 
 Senior, M. (2009). Bruce Swedien: Recording Michael Jackson.  Sound On Sound , November. 
 73 
 Buskin, R. (2007). Classic Tracks: Gareth Jones. Depeche Mode: “People Are People.”  Sound 
On Sound , February. 
 74 
 Tingen, P. (1994). Daniel Lanois: For The Beauty Of Wynona, Vintage Gear.  Sound On Sound , 
September. 
 75 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Eric Rosse. Sara Bareilles: “Love Song.”  Sound On Sound , 
September. 
 76 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Daniel Lanois & Mark Howard: Recording Neil Young’s  Le Noise .  Sound On 
Sound , February. 
 77 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 78 
 Frost, M. (2012). John Porter: From The Smiths To The Blues.  Sound On Sound , September. 
 CHAPTER 8 
 1 
 Stavrou, M.P. (2003).  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 
 2 
 Murray, S. (2000). Interview with Tchad Blake.  Tape Op , March/April. 
 3 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 4 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. 
 5 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Mike Shipley. Alison Krauss: “Paper Airplane.”  Sound On 
Sound , July. 
 6 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. And Daley, D. (2010).
Nashville Guitars: Recording Today’s Country Guitar Sounds.  Sound On Sound , December. 
 7 
 Flint, T. (2001). Tony Platt: Rock Island Life.  Sound On Sound , April. 
 8 
 Jackson, B. (2008). Recording Bluegrass Instruments.  Mix , May. 
 CHAPTER 9 
 1 
 Vdovin, M. (2009). Leslie Ann Jones: Anticipating And Succeeding.  Tape Op , November. 
 2 
 Crane, L. (1999). Interview With Jack Endino.  Tape Op , Summer. 
 3 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR. 
 4 
 Buskin, R. (2002). Gordon Raphael: Producing The Strokes.  Sound On Sound , April. 
 5 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 6 
 Inglis, S. (2013). Philip Hobbs & Linn Records: Recording The Dunedin Consort.  Sound On 
Sound , April. 
 7 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 8 
 Sengpiel, E.  Decca Tree Recording mit Neumann - Druckempfängern M50.   http://www.sengpielau-
dio.com?DeccaTreeRecordingM50.pdf . 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
434
 9 
 Streicher, R.  The Decca Tree — It’s Not Just For Stereo Any More.   http://www.wesdooley.com/pdf/
Surround_Sound_Decca_Tree-urtext.pdf . 
 10 
 Royer Microphones.  Alan Meyerson Recording The Score For  Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead 
Man’s Chest.  http://www.royerlabs.com/pirates.html . 
 11 
 Streicher, R.  The Decca Tree — It’s Not Just For Stereo Any More.   http://www.wesdooley.com/pdf/
Surround_Sound_Decca_Tree-urtext.pdf . 
 12 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 13 
 Faulkner, T. (2009). Gearslutz forums post.  http://www.gearslutz.com/board/3981037-
post29.html , March. 
 14 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 15 
 Droney, M. (1994). Interview With Shawn Murphy.  Mix , February. 
 16 
 Stavrou, M.P. (2003).  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 
 17 
 Buskin, R. (1997). Butch Vig: Nevermind The Garbage.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 18 
 Swedien, B. (2009).  Make Mine Music . Hal Leonard. 
 19 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 20 
 Droney, M. (1994). Interview with Shawn Murphy.  Mix , February. 
 21 
 Crane, L. (2011). Reinhold Mack: The Invisible Man.  Tape Op , January. 
 22 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
  23 
 Faulkner, T. (2009). Gearslutz forums post.  http://www.gearslutz.com/board/3981037-
post29.html , March. 
 24 
 Daley, D. (2004). Bones Howe & Tom Waits: The Odd Couple?  Sound On Sound , February. 
 25 
 Crane, L. (2011). Reinhold Mack: The Invisible Man.  Tape Op , January. 
 26 
 Crane, L. (2011). Jack Miller: Arizona’s National Treasure.  Tape Op , November. 
 27 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR.  
 28 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 29 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR. 
 30 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR. 
 CHAPTER 10 
 1 
 Senior, M. (2003). S. Husky Hoskulds: Recording Solomon Burke’s  Don’t Give Up On Me . 
 Sound On Sound , July. 
 2 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 3 
 Crane, L. & Eckman, C. (1999). Sharing Food And Conversation With Phill Brown.  Tape Op , 
Spring. 
 4 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 5 
 Daley, D. (2004). Bones Howe & Tom Waits: The Odd Couple?  Sound On Sound , February. 
 6 
 Fiegel, E. (2011). Wayne Moss: Cinderella Sound, Nashville.  Sound On Sound , October. 
 7 
 Droney, M. (1998). Interview with Al Schmitt.  Mix , October. 
 8 
 Droney, M. (2001). Interview with Armin Steiner.  Mix , May. 
 9 
 Droney, M. (1998). Interview with Al Schmitt.  Mix , October. 

Quote References APPENDIX 3
435
 10 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 11 
 Doyle, T. (2008). Nick Launay: Producing Nick Cave, Kate Bush…And Snoop Dogg.  Sound 
On Sound , July. 
 12 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 13 
 Stavrou, M.P. (2003).  Mixing With Your Mind . Flux Research. 
 14 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 15 
 Buskin, R. (2004). Classic Tracks: Bill Price. The Sex Pistols: “Anarchy In The UK.”  Sound On 
Sound , September. 
 16 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks: Steve Churchyard. The Pretenders: “Back On The Chain 
Gang.”  Sound On Sound , September. 
 17 
 Saxon, J. (2011). Dave Jerden: Really Wrong Productions, Handle With Care.  Tape Op , 
November/December. 
 18 
 Sokal, R. (2000). The Db Of Dave Bottrill.  Tape Op , September/October. 
 19 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. And Tingen, P. (2010). Paul Worley Producing Lady Antebellum.  Sound On 
Sound , September. 
 20 
 Owsinski, B. (2010).  The Music Producer’s Handbook . Hal Leonard. 
 21 
 Owsinski, B. (2010).  The Music Producer’s Handbook . Hal Leonard. 
 22 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 23 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Neal Avron. Fall Out Boy: “This Ain’t A Scene, It’s An Arms 
Race.”  Sound On Sound , January. 
 24 
 Owsinski, B. (2010).  The Music Producer’s Handbook . Hal Leonard. 
 25 
 Doyle, T. (2011). James Ford: Producing Arctic Monkeys.  Sound On Sound , July. 
 26 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Tom Syrowski. Incubus: “Adolescents.”  Sound On Sound , 
November. 
 27 
 Tingen, P. (2011) Inside Track: Gus Oberg. The Strokes:  Angles .  Sound On Sound , June. 
 28 
 Wetherbee, P. (2013). Robert Musso: Working With Laswell And More.  Tape Op , January. 
 29 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 30 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 31 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 32 
 Senior, M. (2000). Bird & Bush: Producing Stereophonics.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 33 
 Droney, M. (2001). Interview with Armin Steiner.  Mix , May. 
 34 
 Droney, M. (2001). Interview with Frank Filipetti.  Mix , March. 
 35 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 36 
 Robinson, A. (1997). Interview With Nigel Godrich.  The Mix , August. 
 37 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 38 
 Buskin, R. (2003). Classic Tracks: Malcolm Addey. Cliff Richard: “Move It.”  Sound On Sound , 
November. 
 39 
 Stevenson, P. (2004). Andy Johns Archival Interview.  Tape Op , January. 
  40 
 Tingen, P. (2005). Steve Albini: Sound Engineer Extraordinaire.  Sound On Sound , September. 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
436
 41 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 42 
 Daley, D. (2004). Bones Howe & Tom Waits: The Odd Couple?  Sound On Sound , February. 
 43 
 Tingen, P. (1994). Robbie Adams: Recording U2’s  Achtung Baby  &  Zooropa .  Sound On Sound , 
March. 
 44 
 Buskin, R. (2003). Classic Tracks: Bruce Botnick. The Doors: “Strange Days.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. And Baccigaluppi, J., Crane L., Hiller, J. (2009) Bruce Botnick: A Perception Of 
The Doors And Much More.  Tape Op , November. 
 45 
 Bruce, B. (1999). Al Stone: Recording Jamiroquai’s “Supersonic.”  Sound On Sound , December. 
 46 
 Flint, T. (2001). Tony Platt: Rock Island Life.  Sound On Sound , April. 
 47 
 Sillitoe, S. (1999). Mike Hedges: Recording Travis’ “Why Does It Always Rain On Me?”  Sound 
On Sound , November. 
 48 
 Crane, L. (2012). Interview with Jacquire King.  Tape Op , March/April. 
 49 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 50 
 Buskin, R. (2005). Classic Tracks: Peter Henderson. Supertramp: “Logical Song.”  Sound On 
Sound , July. 
 51 
 Droney, M. (2001). Interview with David Thoener.  Mix , January. 
 52 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 53 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 54 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 55 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Daniel Lanois & Mark Howard: Recording Neil Young’s  Le Noise .  Sound On 
Sound , February. 
 56 
 Saraﬁ n, E. (“Mixerman”) (2012).  Zen And The Art Of Producing . Hal Leonard. 
 57 
 Recording seminar at British Grove Studios, May 2010. 
 58 
 Droney, M. (1999). Interview with Leslie Ann Jones.  Mix , August. 
 59 
 Crane, L. & Smith, C. (1999). Interview with Joe Chiccarelli.  Tape Op , Fall. 
 60 
 Baccigaluppi, J., Crane L., & Hiller, J. (2009). Bruce Botnick: A Perception Of The Doors And 
Much More.  Tape Op , November. 
 61 
 Clark, R. (2011).  Mixing, Recording, And Producing Techniques Of The Pros . Cengage Learning 
PTR. 
 62 
 Droney, M. (2003). Interview with Elliott Scheiner.  Mix , January. 
 63 
 Saraﬁ n, E. (“Mixerman”) (2012).  Zen And The Art Of Producing . Hal Leonard. 
 64 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 65 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 CHAPTER 11 
 1 
 Doyle, T. (2008). Tony Hoffer: Producing Belle & Sebastian, The Fratellis & The Kooks.  Sound 
On Sound , May. 
 2 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 3 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Phil Thornalley: From Rock Producer To Pop Songwriter.  Sound On Sound , 
June. 

Quote References APPENDIX 3
437
 4 
 Buskin, R. (2012). Inside Track: Tommy LiPuma. Paul McCartney:  Kisses On The Bottom . 
 Sound On Sound , May. 
 5 
 Crane, L. (1999). Interview with Jack Endino.  Tape Op , Summer. 
 6 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 7 
 Owings, H. (1999). Interview with David Barbe.  Tape Op , Fall. 
 8 
 Tingen, P. (2000). Pierre Marchand: Producing Sarah McLachlan.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 9 
 Senior, M. (2000). Bird & Bush: Producing Stereophonics.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 10 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 11 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 12 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 13 
 Massey, H. (2000).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits (Vol. I). 
Miller Freeman Books. 
 14 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 15 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Nathan Chapman & Justin Niebank. Taylor Swift:  Speak Now . 
 Sound On Sound , February. 
 16 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Tom Elmhirst. Adele: “Rolling In The Deep.”  Sound On Sound , 
September. 
 17 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat Books.  
 18 
 Owsinski, B. (2009).  The Recording Engineer’s Handbook . Cengage Learning PTR. 
 19 
 Frost, M. (2012). Andrija Tokic: Recording Alabama Shakes’  Boys & Girls .  Sound On Sound , July.  
 20 
 Frost, M. (2011). Rodaidh McDonald: Recording The XX.  Sound On Sound , June. 
 21 
 Saraﬁ n, E. (“Mixerman”) (2012).  Zen And The Art Of Producing . Hal Leonard. 
 22 
 Owsinski, B. (2010).  The Music Producer’s Handbook . Hal Leonard. 
 23 
 Senior, M. (2000). Bird & Bush: Producing Stereophonics.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 24 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat Books.  
 25 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat Books.  
 26 
 Senior, M. (2000). Bird & Bush: Producing Stereophonics.  Sound On Sound , March. 
 27 
 Owsinski, B. (2010).  The Music Producer’s Handbook . Hal Leonard. 
 28 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 29 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Robert Carranza. Jack Johnson:  Sleep Through The Static . 
 Sound On Sound , May. 
 30 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 31 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Nathan Chapman & Justin Niebank. Taylor Swift:  Speak Now . 
 Sound On Sound , February. 
 32 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Jacquire King. Kings Of Leon: “Sex On Fire.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 33 
 Tingen, P. (2007). Inside Track: Joe Chiccarelli. The White Stripes:  Icky Thump .  Sound On 
Sound , October. 
 34 
 Tingen, P. (2012). Inside Track: Noah “40” Shebib. Drake: “Headlines.”  Sound On Sound , 
March. 

APPENDIX 3 Quote References
438
 35 
 Savona, A. (2005).  Console Confessions: The Great Producers In Their Own Words . Backbeat 
Books. 
 36 
 Crane, L. (2013). Ken Caillat: Making History And Rumours.  Tape Op , July/August. 
 37 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Robert Carranza. Jack Johnson:  Sleep Through The Static . 
 Sound On Sound , May. 
 38 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Jacquire King. Kings Of Leon: “Sex On Fire.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 39 
 Tingen, P. (2011). Inside Track: Philippe Zdar. Beastie Boys: “Make Some Noise.”  Sound On 
Sound , August. 
 40 
 Frost, M. (2010). Mike Vernon: Producing British Blues.  Sound On Sound , December. 
 41 
 Robinson, A. (1997). Interview with Nigel Godrich.  The Mix , August. 
 42 
 Tingen, P. (2010) Inside Track: Mike Poole. Robert Plant: “Angel Dance.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 43 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Inside Track: Mike Poole. Robert Plant: “Angel Dance.”  Sound On Sound , 
December. 
 44 
 Senior, M. (2003). Glen Ballard. Songwriter & Producer: Alanis Morissette.  Sound On Sound , 
March. 
 45 
 Tingen, P. (2012). Inside Track: Randy Staub. Evanescence: “What You Want.”  Sound On 
Sound , January. 
 46 
 Tingen, P. (2012). Inside Track: Randy Staub. Evanescence: “What You Want.”  Sound On 
Sound , January. 
 47 
 Tingen, P. (2010). Inside Track: David R. Ferguson. Johnny Cash: “Ain’t No Grave.”  Sound On 
Sound , June. 
 48 
 Tingen, P. (2009). Inside Track: Fraser T Smith. Tinchy Stryder: “Number One.”  Sound On 
Sound , November. 
 49 
 Tingen, P. (2008). Inside Track: Michael Brauer. Coldplay: “Viva La Vida.”  Sound On Sound , 
November. 
 50 
 Doyle, T. (2008). Tony Hoffer: Producing Belle & Sebastian, The Fratellis & The Kooks.  Sound 
On Sound , May. 
 CHAPTER 12 
 1 
 Tingen, P. (2012). Inside Track: Randy Staub: ‘What You Want.’  Sound On Sound , January. 
 2 
 Droney, M. (1998). Interview With Dave Jerden.  Mix , December. 
 3 
 Hatschek, K. (2006).  The Golden Moment: Recording Secrets From The Pros . Backbeat Books. 
 4 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 5 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 6 
 Droney, M. (1998). Interview with Al Schmitt.  Mix , October. 
 7 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 8 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 9 
 Massey, H. (2009).  Behind The Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft The Hits  (Vol. II). 
Backbeat Books. 
 10 
 Faulhaber, H.D. (2012). John Hampton: You Call This Work?  Tape Op , November. 
 

439
 Picture Credits 
 APPENDIX 4 
 APPENDIX 4 
 CHAPTER 3 
 Figure 3.1: Image courtesy of Radial Engineering®. 
 Figure 3.2: Images courtesy of Palmer® and L.R. Baggs®.  
 Figure 3.6: Image courtesy of Palmer®. 
 CHAPTER 4 
 Figure 4.1: Image courtesy of AKG®. 
 Figure 4.9: Microphone speciﬁ cations courtesy of the Microphone Data archive 
( www.microphone-data.com ). 
 CHAPTER 5 
 Figure 5.2: Image courtesy of Neumann®. Microphone speciﬁ cations courtesy of the 
Microphone Data archive ( www.microphone-data.com ). 
 Figure 5.3: Images courtesy of Shure®, Beyerdynamic®, and Electrovoice®.  
 Figure 5.4: Images courtesy of Sontronics®, Superlux®, and Cloud®.  
 Figure 5.7: Image courtesy of DAP Audio®. 
 CHAPTER 6 
 Figure 6.3: Image courtesy of Stewis Media ( www.stewismedia.com ). 
 Figure 6.4: Image courtesy of  Sound On Sound ® magazine ( www.soundonsound.com ). 
 Figure 6.5: Image courtesy of Stewis Media ( www.stewismedia.com ). 
 Figure 6.6: Image courtesy of  Sound On Sound ® magazine ( www.soundonsound.com ). 
 Figure 6.7: Image courtesy of Stewis Media ( www.stewismedia.com ). 
 Figure 6.9: Image courtesy of  Sound On Sound ® magazine ( www.soundonsound.com ). 
 Figure 6.10: Ibid. 
 Figure 6.12: Ibid. 
 Figure 6.13: Image courtesy of Cornford®. 
 Figure 6.19: Image courtesy of Pearl®. 
 Figure 6.20: Images courtesy of Superlux®, AKG®, and Samson®.  
 Figure 6.23: Images courtesy of Sennheiser®, Shure®, and AKG®.  
 CHAPTER 7 
 Figure 7.3: Central image courtesy of  Sound On Sound ® magazine ( www.soundonsound.com ).  
 Figure 7.6: Right-hand image courtesy of  Sound On Sound ® magazine ( www.soundonsound
.com ).  
 Figure 7.8: Image courtesy of Little Labs®. 
 Figure 7.10: Image courtesy of Radial Engineering®. 

APPENDIX 4 Picture Credits
440
 CHAPTER 8 
 Figure 8.2: Images courtesy of Studio Projects®, Rode®, and Royer®.  
 CHAPTER 9 
 Figure 9.8: Image by John McBride, courtesy of Linn Records ( www.linnrecords.com ). 
 Figure 9.11: Image by Jason Williams; courtesy of Neil Rogers at Half Ton Studios, 
Cambridge, UK ( www.halftonstudios.co.uk ). 
 Figure 9.12: Images courtesy of AKG®, Shure®, SE Electronics®, and Cascade®. Microphone 
speciﬁ cations courtesy of the Microphone Data archive ( www.microphone-data
.com ).  
 CHAPTER 10 
 Figure 10.2: Image courtesy of  Sound On Sound ® magazine ( www.soundonsound.com ). 
 Figure 10.14: Image courtesy of Latch Lake®. 
 Figure 10.16: Image courtesy of Stewis Media ( www.stewismedia.com ). 

441
 A 
 Abbiss, Jim   224 
 AC/DC   96 ,  110  ,  177 ,  265 
 Adams, Bryan   159 ,  233 
 Adams, Robbie   158 ,  225–6 ,  230 ,  360 
 Addey, Malcolm   360 
 Adele   369 
 Aerosmith   165 
 Afanasieff, Walter   138 ,  149 
 Agnello, John   46 
 Aguilera, Christina   147 
 Ahern, Brian   317 
 Ainlay, Chuck   190 ,  221 ,  362 
 Alabama Shakes   372 
 Albini, Steve   127 ,  159 ,  181 ,  190 ,  197 , 
 223–6 ,  233 ,  296 ,  326 ,  360 
 Alice in Chains   340 
 Allen, Ben   147 
 Allman, Duane   177 
 Astley, John   228 
 Austin, Dan   224 ,  235 
 Avron, Neal   345 
 B 
 Baker, Ray Thomas   63 ,  199 ,  221 
 Ballard, Glen   377 
 Barbe, David   368 
 Barbiero, Michael   159 
 Bareille, Sara   238 
 Barresi, Joe   145 ,  160 ,  224 
 Benner, Jack   287 
 Bhasker, Jeff   149 
 Bird, Marshall  373 
 Bishop, Michael   173–4 ,  260 ,  287 ,  307 
 Blake, Tchad   199 ,  260 
 Bono  158 
 Botnick, Bruce  127 ,  349 ,  360 ,  362 
 Bottrill, Dave  340 
 Bowie, David   228 
 Boys, Jerry   224 
 Bradﬁ eld, Andy   382 
 Brauer, Michael   377 
 Bright, Mark   147–8 
 Brion, Jon   192 
 Brown, Ian   158 
 Brown, Phill   325 
 Brown, Tony   345 ,  368 
 Buckingham, Lindsey   375 
 Bullock, Bob   175 ,  221 ,  230 
 Burnett, T-Bone   177 
 Bush, Billy   149 
 Bush, Kate   230 
 Bush, Steve  162 ,  351 ,  368 ,  373 
 Butt, John   277 
 C 
 Caillat, Ken   99–100 ,  375 
 Carranza, Robert  210  ,  374–5 
 Cash, Johnny   91  ,  377 
 Chandler, Steve  226 
 Chapman, Nathan   374 
 Cherney, Ed   190 ,  225 ,  361 
 Chiccarelli, Joe   100 ,  145–6 ,  159 ,  163 , 
 333 ,  362 ,  374 ,  382 
 Churchyard, Steve   127 ,  225 ,  340 ,  360 
 Clapton, Eric  177 
 Clarke, Alan   156 
 Clearmountain, Bob  159 
 Climie, Simon   147 
 Clink, Mike   145 ,  148 
 Coad, Jez   104 ,  235 
 Cohen, Leonard  105  
 Coldplay   235 
 Coleman, Ornette   360 
 Collins, Phil   159 
 Costey, Rich  145 ,  159 
 Cuniberti, John  381 
 D 
 Davidge, Neil   145 
 Davies, Rhett   64 
 Davis, Wyn  143 ,  317 ,  351 
 Dawson, Simon   233 
 Day, Doris   160 
 Deal, Kim   233 
 Depeche Mode  238 
 Dion   159 
 Dodd, Richard   359 
 Dollar, Johnny   144–5 
 The Doors   360 
 Dorfsman, Neil  107  
 Douglas, Jack   229 ,  345 
 Dudgeon, Gus  366 
 E 
 Easter, Mitch   193 
 Emerick, Geoff   127 ,  179 ,  193 ,  224 ,  360 
 Endino, Jack   272 ,  366 
 Eno, Brian   48 
 Epstein, Steven  212 ,  351 
 Epworth, Paul   146 ,  162 ,  369 
 Eringa, Dave   158 
 F 
 Faulkner, Tony   257 ,  294 ,  307  
 Ferguson, David R.   91  ,  377 
 Filipetti, Frank   210 ,  223 ,  229 ,  323 ,  356 , 
 360–1 
 Flood   158 
 Fraser, Mike   84 ,  96 ,  159 ,  192 ,  224 
 Free and Bad Company   159 
 Fun   149 
 G 
 Gabrielle   143 
 Gatica, Humberto   139 
 G-Funk  110  
 Godrich, Nigel   359 ,  376 
 Gray, Macy   369 
 Graydon, Jay   74 ,  136 ,  182 
 H 
 Hague, Stephen   139 ,  148 ,  159–60 
 Hampton, John  272 ,  382 
 Harris, Stephen   158 
 Hedges, Mike   159–60 ,  234 ,  360 
 Henderson, Peter   360 
 Hendrix, Jimi   47 
 Hillier, Ben   233 
 Hobbs, Philip   277–8 
 Hoffer, Tony   365 ,  378 
 Homme, Josh   76 
 Horn, Trevor   175 
 Hoskulds, S. Husky   232 ,  322–3 
 Houston, Whitney  159 
 Howard, Mark   236 ,  361 
 Howe, Bones  316 ,  327 ,  360 
 Hudson, John  130 ,  138–9 ,  223 
 J 
 Jackson, Michael   144 ,  159 ,  162–3 ,  238 
 Jagger, Mick   72 
 Jam, Jimmy   369 ,  373 
 James, Etta   146 
 James, Harry   366 
 Jamiroquai   164 ,  360 
 Jay Z  144 
 Jean, Wyclef   57 
 Jepsen, Carly Rae   107  
 Jerden, Dave   148 ,  234 ,  340 ,  381 
 Jerkins, Rodney   363 
 Johns, Andy   234 
 Johns, Glyn   360 
 Johnson, Jack  374–5 
 Index of Names 

Index of Names
442
 Johnston, Bob   105  
 Jones, Gareth   238 ,  345 ,  373 
 Jones, Leslie Ann   145 ,  271 ,  362 
 Jones, Quincy   236 
 Jones, Tom   156 
 K 
 Kelly, Jon  230 
 Kemp, Warwick  94 
 Kieklak, Scott   101  
 Killen, Kevin  64 ,  77 ,  375 
 King, Jacquire  57–8 ,  360 ,  374–6 
 Kings of Leon   360 ,  374 
 Kitchingham, Gerry   148 
 Kolotkin, Glen   234 
 Kosten, David   73 
 Kramer, Eddie   47 ,  127 ,  159 ,  163 ,  229 , 
 360 ,  370 
 Krauss, Alison   149 ,  265 
 Kurlander, John  58 ,  182 ,  294 
 L 
 Lange, Mutt   100 
 Lanois, Daniel   44  ,  175  ,  180  ,  238  ,  363  ,  374 
 Launay, Nick   327 
 Leckie, John  145 ,  158 ,  162 ,  193 ,  223 , 
 228 ,  239 ,  327 ,  368–9 
 Led Zeppelin   360 
 Le Master, Andy  368 
 Levine, Larry   274 
 Levine, Steve   148–9 ,  164 
 Liddell, Frank   107  
 Lillywhite, Steve   48 
 Lipson, Stephen   120 
 LiPuma, Tommy   366 
 Lord-Alge, Chris   177 ,  223 
 Luke, David   207  
 M 
 McCartney, Paul   160 ,  193 ,  224 
 McDonald, Rodaidh   372 
 Mack, Reinhold   305  ,  316 
 Madness   144 
 Madonna  144–5 ,  233 
 The Manic Street Preachers   158–9 
 Marcantonio, Steve   225 
 Marchand, Pierre  175 ,  368 
 Massenburg, George   138 
 Massy, Sylvia   225 
 Mazer, Elliot   174 
 Merchant, John  177 
 Messina, Jay   64 ,  145 ,  165 
 Meyerson, Alan  293 
 Miller, Jack  317 
 Mincieli, Ann   158 
 Moretti, Fabrizio   272 
 Moss, Wayne   327 
 Murphy, Shawn  297 ,  302  
 Muse  145 
 Musso, Robert  349 
 N 
 Neill, Mark   126 
 Nelson, Ken   221 ,  235 
 Newland, Jay   225 
 Nichols, Roger   193 
 Niebank, Justin   58 ,  177 ,  382 
 Nirvana   298 ,  373–4 
 Norrell, Clif  88 ,  163 ,  317 
 O 
 Oberg, Gus  349 
 Olsen, Keith   156 ,  192 
 P 
 Paczosa, Gary   225 ,  265 
 Padgham, Hugh  159 
 Parsons, Alan   193 ,  228 ,  327 
 Pettibone, Shep   144 
 Pink Floyd  127 
 Platt, Tony   100 ,  149–50 ,  175 ,  265 ,  360 
 Poole, Mike   58 ,  224 ,  376 
 Porter, John   73 ,  193 ,  239 
 Powell, Jeff   55 ,  190 ,  317 ,  362 
 The Pretenders   340 
 Price, Bill   158 ,  228 ,  340 
 Price, Stuart   148 
 Puig, Jack Joseph   103  ,  182 ,  210  
  Putnam, Bill   171 
 Putnam, Norbert   190 
 R 
 Rage Against The Machine   158 
 Ramone, Phil   57  ,  139  ,  149  ,  155  ,  359  ,  361  
 Raphael, Gordon   272 
 The Rat Pack   160 
 The Red Hot Chilly Peppers  159 
 Reid, L.A.   373 
 REM   193 
 Richard, Cliff   360 
 Richards, Keith  177 
 Richardson, Garth  158 
 Rock, Bob   49 
 The Rolling Stones   225 ,  340 
 Rosse, Eric  238 
 S 
 Sands, Dennis   73 
 Santana, Carlos  234 
 Saraﬁ n, Eric   74 ,  224 ,  361 ,  363 ,  372–3 
 Sardina, Rafa   75 ,  139 
 Scheiner, Elliott   126–7 ,  228 ,  362 
 Schilling, Eric  159 
 Schleicher, Clarke   148 ,  368 
 Schmidt, Peter  48 
 Schmitt, Al   10  ,  45  ,  127  ,  155 ,  171  ,  174 ,  186  , 
 190  ,  194–5 ,  198  ,  225  ,  230  ,  327  ,  366  ,  382  
 Scott, Jim   159 ,  190 ,  223 
 Scott, Toby  230 
 The Sex Pistols  158 
 Shebib, Noah   374 
 Shipley, Mike  149 ,  265 
 Shoemaker, Trina   174 
 Simon, John  98 ,  382 
 Simon, Paul   179 
 Simple Minds  235 
 Smith, Andy   179 
 Smith, Don   225 
 Smith, Fraser T.   377 
 Springsteen, Bruce  230 
 Starr, Ringo   160 ,  179 
 Staub, Randy   377 ,  381 
 Stavrou, Mike   125–6 ,  145 ,  181 ,  190 ,  203  , 
 254 ,  298 ,  330 
 Steiner, Armin   327  ,  354 
 The Stereophonics   162 
 Stone, Al   164 ,  360 
 The Stone Roses   158 
 Strauss, Volker   219 
 Street, Stephen   144 ,  146 ,  223 
 Streicher, Ron   293–4 
 The Strokes   349 
 Sullivan, Stuart  173 ,  233 
 Sumner, Bernard   159 
 Swann, Darryl   139 ,  298 ,  369 
 Swedien, Bruce   94 ,  144 ,  159 ,  162–3 ,  171 , 
 182 ,  238 ,  298 
 Swift, Taylor  369 ,  374 
 Syrowski, Tom   199 ,  349 
 T 
 Tankersley, Bill   225 
 Tarsia, Michael   155 
 Thoener, David   186 ,  360 
 Thornalley, Phil   143 ,  150 ,  266 
 Tokic, Andrija   372 
 Tool  340 
 Turner, Tina   223 
 Twain, Shania   230 
 U 
 Upson, Stephen   160 
 Usher  110  
 U2   230 ,  360 
 V 
 Valentine, Eric   225 ,  234 
 Vig, Butch   298 ,  373–4 
 Visconti, Tony   181–2 ,  225 ,  228 ,  233 
 VornDick, Bill   188 ,  224 ,  226 ,  265 
 W 
 Waits, Tom   360 
 Was, Don  72 ,  345 
 Wegener, Michael   224 
 Weston, Bob  179 ,  197 
 White, Barry   181 
 The White Stripes   159 ,  374 
 Winstanley, Alan   144–5 ,  228 
 Worley, Paul   345 
 Wright, Toby   46 ,  225 ,  382 
 X 
 The XX   372 
 Y 
 Yakus, Shelly   182 ,  187 
 Young Guru   144 
 Z 
 Zdar, Philippe   376 
 Zook, Joe   174 

443
 A 
 AAC audio   19 
 AB stereo microphone arrays  255–60 , 
 263–6 ,  284–5 
 absorbers, acoustic   92 ,  131–4 ,  180 , 
 273–5 ,  277 ,  298 
 acceptance angle and acceptance 
zone  244–66 ,  281–2 ,  287 ,  300 
 accordion   188 ,  194 ,  204 
 acoustic considerations in vocal 
recording   131–6 ,  162–3 
 in instrument recording   180–2 
 acoustic monitoring   135–6 ,  139 ,  316–8 
 acoustic reﬂ ections, use of in vocal 
recording   162–3 
 use of in instrument 
recording   194–5 
 use of for acoustic 
monitoring   316–7 
 active DI boxes   85 
 active pickup systems   85 
 adaptors 
 BNC “T”-piece   30  ,  32 
 female-to-female XLR   210 
 for headphone extension   42 
 for microphone-stand screw 
threads   123 
 for polarity inversion   165 
 for TRS minijack connectors   6–7 
 headphone output splitters   43 
 ADAT digital connections   28 
 AES-EBU digital connections  7–9 ,  28 
 air resonance of instruments   189–90 
 of recording rooms   134–5 ,  181–2 
 AKG C12 microphone   119 
 C414 microphone   230 
 C414B-XLS microphone   118 , 
 308–14 ,  340–7 
 C452 microphone  156 ,  225 
 D112 microphone  207–8 ,  308–14 , 
 344–7 
 “alarm bells” while recording   23 
 ambience microphones   230 ,  233 
 analog mindset   375–7 
 analog tape, recording on   21  
 arches of tension in music   108 
 arrangements, musical  106–7 ,  111 
 ART T8 transformer isolator   6 
 articulation   71  
 ASC Studio Traps   162 
 ASIO Direct Monitoring  88 
 ASIO4ALL software audio driver   53 
 Audio-Technica AT2020 microphone 
 208 
 Auto monitoring mode   50–1 
 B 
 “back-of-the-hand trick”   190 
 Backdrop of a spot array   296–7 
 of a peer array  322 
 background noise   143 ,  176 
 backup power systems   358 
 bafﬂ ed stereo microphone 
techniques   260 ,  328 
 bafﬂ ing  see  acoustic absorbers 
 balance, musical   71  ,  190 ,  221–2 ,  276 ; 
see also  dry/wet balance 
 balanced audio connections   4–5 
 for combating earth loops  25–7 ; 
see also  unbalanced audio 
connection 
 bantam jack connectors   35 
 bassoon   305  
 batteries   85 ,  121 ,  236 ,  357 
 Beyerdynamic M380 microphone   224 
 M88 microphone   159 
 bidirectional microphones see  ﬁ gure-eight 
microphones 
 bit depths for recording   15 
 bleed see  spill 
 Blumlein stereo microphone array   250 
 BNC connectors   30  
 bone conduction   136 ,  173 ,  203  ,  317 
 boundary microphones   201–4 ,  299 
 bowing of string instruments   105  
 brass instruments   187 ,  298 
 B-type jack connectors   35 
 building productions from scratch   46 
 C 
 cable level checkpoint  17–18 
 cables   7–10 ,  123–5 ,  355–6 
 cancellation pass for foldback spill 
 166–7 ,  334 
 capacitor microphones see  condenser 
microphones 
 capsule of microphone   200 
 cardioid polar pattern   118–9 ,  127–9 , 
 172–3 ,  233 
 in AB stereo microphone 
arrays   257 
 in MS stereo microphone 
arrays   254 
 Cascade Victor microphone   308–14 , 
 340–7 
 cello   105  ,  181 ,  184 ,  189 ,  191 ,  193 ,  297 , 
 300–1 
 centre-versus-edge balance of a stereo 
microphone array   248–9 ,  254 ,  259 , 
 264 ,  281–2 ,  294 
 choirs  282–3 ,  301  
 classically-trained musicians   108–11 
 click tracks see  guide tracks 
 close AB stereo microphone arrays   284–5 
 closed-back headphones   85 ,  135 ,  139 , 
 183 
 close-miking   124–31 ,  192–4 ,  208 ,  263–4 , 
 297 
 Cloud Microphones Cloudlifter   161 
 coincident multimiking 
 in mono   217–24 
 in stereo   243–55 ,  285–6 
 coincident stereo microphone 
arrays   243–55 
 comb-ﬁ ltering   31  ,  132–4 ,  136–7 ,  133 , 
 163 ,  180–2 ,  195 ,  226–30 ,  305  , 
 334–5 
 combi-jack/XLR connectors   5 
 comfort effects for singers  140–3 
 commercial studios see  professional 
studios 
 commitment to decisions on sonics   238–
9 ,  370 
 comp sheets   97–8 
 comping techniques   95–8 ,  147–9 
 compression   62 ,  137–8 ,  328 
 condenser microphones   117–22 ,  155–6 , 
 162 ,  196–204 
 largediaphragm type   117–22 , 
 155–6 ,  196–9 
 smalldiaphragm type  162 , 
 198–200 
 
  Subject Index 

Subject Index
444
 connectors for audio signals   3–7 
 contrast between sections of music  106 
 conversion level checkpoint   17–18 
 countermelody in musical 
arrangements   110  
 counterweights for microphone 
stands  122 ,  354–6 
 CPU load  29 ,  53 ,  62 ,  67 ,  84 ,  238 
 critical distance   273 
 crossed-pair multimiking   219–21 ; see also 
 XY stereo microphone arrays 
 crosstalk see  spill 
 cue sheets  44–5 
 cymbals  177–8 ,  180 ,  187 ,  191–2 ,  195 , 
 204 ,  296 ,  298 ,  336 
 D 
 damping  177–9 
 data-compressed ﬁ le formats   19 
 “Decca Tree” technique   292–4 
 dehydration  144–5 
 delaying the engineer's monitor mix    92 , 
 183 
 delaying room microphone signals   233 
 delegation of workload   351–3 
 depth distortion   287–9 ,  302–6 
 diaphragm of microphone  117 
 diaphragm resonance   118 ,  160 ,  198 ,  201  
 diction  148–9 
 digital clocking   9 ,  29–32 
 digital errors   28–9 
 digital peak meters   19 
 direct injection (DI) signals and DI 
boxes  81–3 ,  85 
 direct monitoring see  zero-latency 
monitoring 
 dissonance in musical arrangements   110  
 distortion   22–3 ,  64–65 ,  96 ,  119 ,  146 , 
 238 ; see also  gain setting 
 dominant-array approach to 
recording   269–318 ,  324–5 
 case-studies of   308–14 
 using multimic arrays   285–95 
 using a simple stereo array   281–5 
 using a single microphone   271–81 
 double bass  105 ,  189 ; see also  upright 
bass 
 double monitoring  88 
 “double-take trick”   138 
 double-tracking   96 
 drinks, provision of   45–7 ,  144–5 
 drop arms for microphone stands   356 
 dropping in see  punching in 
 drums   175–9 ,  296 ,  306 ,  324–5 ,  327 , 
 349 ,  360 
 dry/wet balance  64 ,  172–3 ,  221 ,  232–5 , 
 245–6 ,  255 ,  259 ,  274–5 ,  278–80 , 
 286–9 ,  302–3 ,  340 
 DSP-driven low-latency monitoring   88 
 D-Sub digital connectors   28 
  dual-diaphragm condenser 
microphones   156 
 dummy-head stereo microphone 
technique   260 
 dynamic microphones   90  ,  158–60 , 
 206–7 ,  232 ,  274 ,  298–9 
 E 
 earplugs, use of   55 
 earth loops   24–7 
 earthless systems   27 
 Ebtech Hum Eliminator transformer 
isolator   6 
 editing multitrack ensemble 
recordings   350–1 
 effects, recording with  64 
 efﬁ ciency in musical arrangement   107  
 electret microphones  200 
 electromechanical keyboards  107  
 Electrovoice RE20 microphone   159 ,  206 
 emotional reactions to a performance   70  
 end-ﬁ re microphones  124 
 engineer's quickstart guides 
 drums  178 
 drum kits   296 
 electromechanical keyboards   107 
 guitars   103  
 string instruments   105  
 vocalists   144 
 wind instruments  187 
 ensemble recording   269–364 
 case studies of  308–14 ,  339–347 
 editing of   350–1 
 with a dominant-array 
approach   271–318 
 with peer arrays   321–63 
 equalization   62 ,  65–6 ,  139 ,  210 ,  302  , 
 305  ,  334–5 
 equipment redundancy   236 ,  356–8 
 evaluation 
 of performances   69–72 
 of sonics   61–66 
 expectations, conﬂ icting   232 
 exploratory nature of recording 
sessions   348–9 
 eyes closed while performing  104 ,  131 
 F 
 feedback loops  29–31 ,  54 ,  86 ,  89 ,  164 , 
 318 
 ﬁ gure-eight polar pattern   156 ,  164 ,  173 , 
 192 ,  197 ,  205  ,  221 ,  233 ,  257 ,  274 , 
 285 ,  298 
 ﬂ attery of performers   83 ,  175 ,  300 
 ﬂ oor resonance   182 
 ﬂ utter echo   134 
 ﬂ ying connectors of multicore cable    355 
 Focus of a spot array   296–297 
 of a peer array  322 
 foldback see  monitor mixing 
 foldback spill  139 ,  163–7 ,  316 ,  318 ,  334 , 
 336 
 framing a recording session   47–9 
 French horns   187–8 ,  277 
 “freezing” virtual instruments   53 
 G 
 gaffer tape   27 ,  92 ,  124 ,  131 ,  135 ,  160 , 
 176 ,  178–9 ,  195–6 ,  202  ,  218–9 ,  236 , 
 280 ,  317 
 gain setting  14–21 ,  33–4 ,  57 
 gain-matching stereo microphone 
setups   258 
 gaps in musical arrangement   107  
 Ghost of a peer array   337–9 
 Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter 
(GFCI)   236 
 guide tracks   46 ,  139 ,  316 ,  366 
 guitar picks   103  
 guitars   103  ,  175–80 
 acoustic  83 ,  175 ,  189–93 ,  195–6 , 
 205  ,  219 ,  221 ,  224 ,  231 ,  234 , 
 238 ,  261–3 ,  272 ,  299 
 electric   81  ,  91  ,  93 ,  99 ,  175 ,  177 , 
 180–2 ,  187 ,  194 ,  200 ,  204–7 , 
 209–10 ,  221 ,  223 ,  225 ,  228–30 , 
 234–8 ,  299 ,  326 
 H 
 harmonica   180 ,  188 
 harp   175 ,  177 ,  196 ,  219 ,  272 ,  305  ,  368 
 harpsichord  203  ,  277 
 headphone monitoring   42–4 ,  53–5 , 
 84–7 ,  92 ,  135–6 ,  139 ,  264 ,  316–8 , 
 330 
 headphones 
 extension cables for   42 
 practical problems found with   210  
 splitting a single output to 
multiple   43–4 
 use of as microphones   224 ; 
see also  closed-back headphones ; 
 openback headphones 
 headroom   20  ,  33 ,  56 ,  66 
 Heilsound PR40 microphone   206 
 hi-hat   187 ,  191 ,  195 ,  205  ,  272 ,  296 ,  298 , 
 336 
 high-frequency air damping   232 
 high-frequency beams   125 ,  187–8 ,  231 , 
 277 ,  296 
 high-frequency shadows   187–8 ,  246 ,  260 
 high-impedance inputs  81  
 high-pass ﬁ lters   65–6 ,  128 ,  167 ,  223 ,  302  
 “hole in the middle” effect  287–8 
 howlround see  feedback loop 
 humidity  232 ,  349 
  hypercardioid polar pattern   156 ,  172 , 
 221 ,  246 ,  249–50 ,  253 ,  259 

Subject Index
445
 I 
 input-monitoring facilities   50–1 ,  86–8 
 Input monitoring mode  50–1 
 isolation booths   92 ,  135 ,  377 
 isolation cabinets   194 
 J 
 jackﬁ elds   35 
 jam nuts  123–4 
 jitter  30  
 K 
 K&M 238 Microphone Holder   220 
 Mini Boom Arm  356 
 key, choice of   366 
 key-jangling test for microphones   203  
 kick drum   178 ,  182 ,  189–90 ,  197 ,  205–
7 ,  224–6 ,  230 ,  298–9 ,  354 
 “tunnel” for spill-reduction   298 
 kicksnare microphone   349 
 kit list   236–7 
 L 
 large-scale recording sessions   351–8 
 latency  51–4 ,  136–7 
 layering  96 ,  149 
 lead vocals  147–9 ,  285–6 ,  366–9 ,  379 
 leakage see  spill 
 Leslie cabinet   187 ,  192 ,  205  
 level checkpoints 
 cable  17–8 
 conversion   17–8 
 tape  21 
 level-difference stereo   243–5 
 combined with time-difference 
stereo   258–61 
 library of mic positions  186 
 line-checking   10–14 ,  353 
 line-level signals   3 
 listen microphone see  studio 
communications 
 listening levels while overdubbing   42–3 , 
 55 
 location recording   91  ,  236–7 
 locking pliers   236 
 locking rings on microphone 
stands  123–4 
 loudspeaker monitoring   42 ,  85–6 ,  163–8 
 low-frequency shufﬂ ing   254 
 low-pass ﬁ lters   167 
 lyrics  102 ,  131 ,  146–9 
 M 
 mains-tester plug   236 
 maintenance in professional studios  378 
 mandolin   83 ,  175 ,  188 
 “mechanical ﬁ ltering”   199 
 mechanical noise from instruments 
 187–8 ,  191–2 ,  204 ,  297–8 ,  305  
 Meld in peer-array recording   334–6 
 memorization for vocalists   143–4 ,  151 
 meter readings   19–21 ,  33–4 
 metronomes, use of   46 
 microphone positioning   124–31 ,  171–3 , 
 183–96 ,  246–66 
 microphone preamps   146 
 microphone stands   121–5 ,  151 ,  354–6 , 
 364 
 microphones  117–31 ,  155–62 ,  196–209 
 all-in-one stereo type   248 
 for ensemble recording  273–4 
 frequency response charts 
for   208–9 
 handheld   155 ,  159–60 ,  164 
 loudspeakers or headphones used 
as   224 
 mixing sonic ﬂ avours from   223 
 pre-session testing of   203  
 price of   119–20 ,  151 
 protection from moisture and 
dust   205  
 shoot-outs  145–7 ,  368 ;  see also 
individual types of microphone 
 middle-sides (MS) stereo format   251–5 ; 
see also  MS stereo microphone arrays 
 MIDI performances, recording of   67 
 miking distance   127–8 ,  132 ,  172 ,  230–4 , 
 246 ,  255 ,  273–4 ,  278 ,  297 
 miking height  174 ,  280 ,  284 ,  354 
 miniature condenser microphones  201  
 minimal drum miking   360 
 mirrors   133–4 ,  317 
 mistakes, acknowledgment of   74 ,  375 
 mobile phones, use of   83 
 monitor mixing for one-room 
overdubbing   55–6 
 for vocal overdubbing   138–9 
 for peer-array ensemble 
recording   330–9 ; see also  latency 
 monitoring through digital systems   58 
 mono compatibility  66 ,  250 ,  254–7 , 
 260 ,  265 ,  285 ,  293 ,  295 ,  332 
 for AB stereo miking  255–7 
 for Blumlein stereo miking   250 
 for Decca Tree stereo miking  293 
 for phased-array stereo 
miking   295 
 Moongel   179 
 movement of performers   104–5 ,  128–
131 ,  150 ,  195 ,  230 ,  262 ,  279–80 , 
 304–5 
 MP3 audio   19 
 MS stereo microphone arrays   251–255 , 
 286 ,  294 
 decoding to LR stereo format  251 
 multi-channel digital connections    28 
 multicore cables   355 
 multimiking 
 coincident   217–24 ,  243–55 , 
 285–6 
 in mono   217–41 
 in stereo   243–67 ,  285–95 
 mounting hardware for   220 
 near-coincident  258–61 
 noncoincident   224–34 ,  255–8 , 
 286–95 
 multiple ampliﬁ ers   234–5 
 multiple sessions and multiple 
rooms   365–72 
 multitasking in recording sessions   67–
74 ,  351–3 
 music stand position for recording   133–4 
 musical notation   108–9 
 mutual angle  244–9 ,  258–9 ,  262–4 ,  281 
 N 
 Nashville guitar tuning   177 
 near-coincident stereo microphone 
arrays  258–61 
 Neumann KM86 microphone   230 
 M49 microphone  119 ,  158 
 U47 microphone   119 ,  158 
 U47 FET microphone   230 
 U67 microphone   119 
 U87 microphone   156 ,  230 
 No Input monitoring mode   86–8 ,  136–
7 ,  140 ,  164 
 noise minimisation see  gain setting 
 noise ﬁ ngerprints   34 
 non-coincident multimiking 
 in mono   224–34 
 in stereo   255–8 ,  286–95 
 NOS (Nederlandse Omroep Stichting) 
array   261 
 notation, musical   108–9 
 note-taking   67–9 ,  351 
 O 
 Occlusion Effect  173 ,  317 
 omnidirectional polar pattern   155–6 , 
 172–3 ,  192 ,  197 ,  200–2 ,  221 ,  233 , 
 245 ,  253 ,  265 ,  278 ,  282 ,  286 ,  291–4 
 in AB stereo microphone 
arrays   257 
 in bafﬂ ed stereo microphone 
arrays   260 
 in crossed pairs   221 ,  245 
 in MS stereo microphone 
arrays   254 
 in XY stereo microphone 
arrays   244 
 one-room monitoring  41–3 ,  84–5 ,  91–4 , 
 150 ,  183 
 open-back headphones   42 ,  85–6 ,  89 , 
 92 ,  236 

Subject Index
446
 optical digital cables   8 ,  10  ,  28 
 orchestra  276 ,  286 ,  290–3 ,  306–8 
 ORTF (Ofﬁ ce de Radio-Télévision 
Française) array  261 
 outrigger microphones   287–92 ,  306 
 P 
 pacing of a session   36–7 ,  57–61 ,  143–6 , 
 211–2 ,  307–8 ,  347–8 ,  359–61 , 
 372–5 
 padding, acoustic see  acoustic absorbers 
 panning  10  ,  96 ,  136 ,  243 ,  245 ,  247 ,  255 , 
 262–5 ,  284 ,  287–9 ,  291–2 ,  300 , 
 328–9 ,  362 
 passive DI boxes   85 
 patchbays  35 
 peak hold function   36 
 peak program meters (PPMs)   20  
 peer array approach to recording   270 , 
 321–63 
 case studies of   339–51 
 session mixing method   330–9 
 session planning for  324–30 
 use of room microphones in  340 
 “pencil trick”   127 
 percussion   176 ,  194–8 ,  200–1 ,  204 ,  206 , 
 301 ,  336 ,  347 
 performance headroom   56 
 performance pointers   101–5 ,  149–50 
 performer choreography   279–80 
 phantom power   5 ,  84 ,  121 ,  161 ,  358 
 phase alignment of coincident 
multimics   217–9 
 of mic and DI signals   234 
 of mics in a coincident stereo 
array   246 
 of non-coincident 
multimics   226–30 
 of peer arrays   334–6 
 of spot arrays   302  ,  304–5 
 of multimic dominant arrays   287 , 
 291 ,  294–5 
 “phase EQ” technique   229–30 
 phase relationships, creative use 
of  229–34 
 phase response  227 
 phased arrays   227 ,  289 ,  294–5 
 phrasing, musical   71  
 piano  175–6 ,  181 ,  188 ,  190–2 ,  195 ,  197 , 
 201–2 ,  204 ,  221 ,  225 ,  230 ,  249–50 , 
 327 ,  332–3 
 pickup signals  81–5 
 combined with those from 
microphones   234 
 piezo-electric pickups   83 
 “piggy-backing”   186–7 
 pitch register  106–7 ,  147 ,  225 ,  249 ,  262 
 playbacks   55 ,  72 ,  99 ,  352 ,  361–3 
 playing through mistakes  104 
 playing for time during a recording 
session   59 
 plosives   126–7 
 polar patterns  118 ,  128–9 ,  155–7 
 combination of  218–21 ,  227 ,  259 , 
 285–6 
 polarity inversion  164–7 ,  217–8 ,  221 , 
 227–30 ,  234 ,  250–1 ,  286 ,  334–5 
 pop shields   126–7 ,  130–1 ,  161 ,  205  ,  298 
 positive spin  101–2 
 posture of performers  104–5 ,  150 
 power cuts   357 
 powersoak   91  
 “pre-echo trick”   48 
 preparing multitracks for mixdown   377 
 preprocessing of input signals  62 
 professional studios  91  ,  176 ,  181 ,  186 , 
 224 ,  315 ,  349 ,  377–8 
 proximity effect   127–30 ,  151 ,  156 ,  172 , 
 197 ,  203  
 pseudo-balanced cable   25–6 
 punching in   50–1 ,  74–8 ,  95–7 
 Q 
 questions, use of   103  
 R 
 Radial Phazer   228 
 RCA phono connectors   4–8 
 reamping   81  ,  235–8 ,  299 ,  370 
 rear pickup of a stereo microphone 
array   250 ,  282–4 ,  285–6 
 recall notes  68–9 
 reconnaissance of ensembles and 
venues   271–3 ,  324 
 “Record” button, importance of hitting 
see  pacing of a session 
 rectangular-diaphragm microphones   201  
 reed instruments   187 ,  190 
 reﬂ ectors, acoustic   135–6 ,  151 ,  273 ,  316–
19 ; see also  acoustic reﬂ ections  
 refreshments for performers   45–7 ,  144–5 
 rehearsal   50  ,  97 ,  108–9 ,  231 ,  271 ,  277 , 
 324 ,  345 ,  347 ,  359 ,  366 
 Residual Current Device (RCD)   236 
 resonance  see air resonance; diaphragm 
resonance; room resonance; ﬂ oor 
resonance; sympathetic resonance 
 reverberation   64  ,  118  ,  131–2  ,  140–3  ,  193  , 
 232–4  ,  239  ,  246  ,  262–3  ,  274–5  ,  278–
9  ,  284–7  ,  291–2  ,  303  ,  326–7  ,  336  ,  340 
 artiﬁ cially added   232 ,  235 ,  239 , 
 303 
 RIAA equalization   11 
 ribbon microphones   160–2 ,  204–5 ,  232 , 
 265 ,  274 ,  293 ,  298 
 riding faders while recording   362 
 room resonance   134 
 room microphones  232–4 ,  262–3 , 
 286–7 ,  322–3 ,  340 
 room reﬂ ections  see  acoustic reﬂ ections 
 Rycote InVision shockmounts  122 
 S 
 safety samples, recording of   336 
 sample rates for recording   8–9 ,  15 ,  30  , 
 377 
 saxophone   190 ,  193 ,  208 ,  305  ,  335 
 Schoeps CCM5 microphone   156 
 Polarﬂ ex microphone system   286 
 SE Electronics Reﬂ exion Filter   132 ,  156 
 SE1A microphone  308–14 ,  340–7 
 Sennheiser MD421 microphone   206–7 , 
 225 ,  228 
 MD441 microphone   206 
 session minutes   69 
 session pacing see  pacing of a session 
 shadowing effects see  high-frequency 
shadows 
 shockmounts for microphones   122–4 
 shufﬂ ing of low frequencies   254 
 Shure KSM141 microphone   199 
 SM57 microphone  158–9 ,  199 , 
 206 ,  208 ,  221 ,  223 ,  225 ,  308–11 , 
 344–7 
 SM58 microphone   158–9 ,  206 , 
 308–11 
 SM7 microphone   159 
 sibilance   126–7 ,  160 ,  208 
 side-ﬁ re microphones   125 
 sight lines   317 
 signal levels, setting of see  gain setting 
 simplifying the signal path   34–5 
 sine-wave signals   133 ,  227 
 singing lessons   145 
 slapback effect  234 ,  286 
 slating  343 
 slave reels   94 
 snakes  355 
 snare drum   110  ,  176 ,  179 ,  192 ,  197 ,  206 , 
 223 ,  228 ,  296 ,  298 ,  325 ,  336 
 software audio drivers   9 ,  29  ,  53 ,  121 
 software monitoring   50–4 
 Sontronics Sigma microphone   161 
 Sony C800G microphone   119 
 Sound on Sound magazine   62 ,  175 ,  185 , 
 205  
 small rooms   182 ,  201–2 ,  327 
 spaced microphone techniques see 
 non-coincident multimiking 
 S/PDIF digital connections   7–9 ,  28 
 speaker cable   7 
 speaker cone   187 ,  205  ,  221 ,  224–5 
 speakers, use of as microphones   224 
 spill in ensemble recording setups   289 , 
 296–302 ,  304 ,  307 ,  321–3 ,  326–38 , 
 340 ,  349 ,  359–60 ,  370–2  ; see also 
 foldback spill 
 splay angle see  mutual angle 
 split-input monitoring  51–52 ,  140–2 

Subject Index
447
 spot arrays   295–308 
 depth adjustment effects of   302–5 
 tonal adjustment using   301–2 
 low-frequency corrections for   302  
 managing spill on   296–300 
 psychological effects of   300 
 spotlighting   192–5 ,  197 ,  201  ,  219 ,  226 , 
 230 ,  254 
 stage box   355 
 standing up while singing   144 
 “star” mains wiring   25 
 steam inhalers   145 
 stereo bar   220 
 stereo image shift   300–1 ,  328–30 
 stereo recording of line-level signals  5 ,  66 
 with multimic arrays   285–95 
 with simple mic pairs   243–67 , 
 281–5 
 with unmatched 
microphones   265 
 with unusual acceptance 
angles   262–5 
 stereo recording angle see  acceptance 
angle 
 Strauss Paket   219 ,  286 
 string bass see  upright bass 
 string instruments   105 ,  111  ,  298 
 studio communications   88–92 ,  95 , 
 149–50 ,  316 ,  343 
 studio decor   47–9 
 studio layout   41–4 ,  271 ,  327 ,  370–2 
 subcardioid polar pattern   156 ,  172 ,  202  , 
 219 ,  245–6 ,  253–4 ,  259 ,  289 ,  294 
 supercardioid polar pattern   156 ,  172 , 
 221 ,  230 ,  246 ,  249 ,  253 ,  259 ,  276  
 Superlux R102 microphone   161 
 supporting the performer   72–4 
 surround-sound miking  262 
 sympathetic resonance  176 
 synchronization of digital equipment   9 , 
 29–32 
 T 
 tag-team microphone technique   184 
 tag-team production   373 
 tails of multicore cable   355 
 takes  see comping; editing multitrack 
ensemble recordings 
 talkback see  studio communications 
 tape level checkpoint   21  
 team-working   101 ,  351–3 
 Telefunken ELA M251 microphone   119 
 tempo, choice of   366 
 test recordings   92–4 ,  183–4 
 3:1 Rule   304 
 time-difference stereo   255 
 combined with level-difference 
stereo   258–61 
 tonguing of wind instruments   187 
 “to record” lists   67 
 Toslink digital connectors   7 ,  28 
 total phase cancellation  133 
 track lists   67–8 
 trombone   204 ,  206 ,  286 ,  317 
 troubleshooting techniques   11–4 ,  22–31 
 TRS minijack connectors   6–7 
 TRS jack connectors   4–7 
 trumpet   204 ,  277 ,  286 ,  317 ,  335 ,  362 , 
 367 
 TS jack connectors  4–7 
 Tube Traps see  ASC Studio Traps 
 tuba   188 
 tuning   69–70 ,  99 ,  177 ,  279 
 turntables, recording from   11 
 U 
 unbalanced audio connections   5 
 from balanced equipment 
outputs   6 
 to balanced equipment inputs   5 
 uninterruptible power supply 
(UPS)   357–8 
 unity gain   10–11 
 upright bass   182 ,  190 ,  226 ,  234 ,  272 , 
 305  
 USB microphones  121 
 V 
 valve microphones   118–9 ,  121 ,  128 , 
 146 ,  151 
 variable phase adjusters   228 ,  234 
 variations in musical arrangements    106 
 vectorscopes   264 
 violin   105  ,  188 ,  189 ,  204 
 viola   189 ,  277 ,  300–1 
 visual imagery   102  ,  111  
 vocal booths   135 
 vocal recording: “vanilla” setup   117–51 
 extension beyond  155–67 
 volume unit (VU) meters   19–20 
 Voxengo MSED software   251 
 W 
 “wall wart” power supplies   27 
 wide AB stereo microphone arrays   284 
 wooden-bodied instruments   175 ,  189–
90  ,  194–5 ,  224 
 word clock signals   30  
 work-in-progress mixes   48 ,  361–3 
 X 
 XLR connectors   4–8 
 XY stereo microphone arrays   243–51 , 
 266 
 alignment of   246 
 Y 
 Yamaha NS10 woofer, use of as 
microphone   224 
 Z 
 zero-latency monitoring   137 ,  142 ,  151 , 
 376 ; see also  DSP-driven low-latency 
monitoring 

