
Recording 
Voiceover

Bound to Create 
You are a creator. 
Whatever your form of expression -
photography, filmmaking, 
animation, games, audio, media communication, web design, or 
theatre- you simply want to create without limitation. Bound 
by nothing except your own creativity and determination. 
Focal Press can help. 
For over 75 years Focal has published books that support your 
creative goals. Our founder, Andor Kraszna-Krausz, established 
Focal in 1938 so you could have access to leading-edge expert 
knowledge, techniques, and tools that allow you to create 
without constraint. We strive to create exceptional, engaging, 
and practical content that helps you master your passion . 
Focal Press and you. 
Bound to create. 
We'd love to hear how we've helped 
you create. Share your experience: 
www. foca lpress.com/bou ndtocreate 

Recording 
Voiceover
The Spoken Word 
in Media
Tom Blakemore

First published 2015
by Focal Press
70 Blanchard Road, Suite 402, Burlington, MA 01803
and by Focal Press
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Focal Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Taylor & Francis
The right of Tom Blakemore to be identiﬁed as author of this work
has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 
and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing. 
As new research and experience broaden our understanding, changes
in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may
become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own
experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information,
methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such
information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety
and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a
professional responsibility.
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation
without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Blakemore, Tom.
Recording voiceover: the spoken word in media/Tom Blakemore.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references.
1. Voice-overs—Vocational guidance. 2. Sound—Recordings and
reproduction—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Sound recordings—
Production and direction—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title. 
PN1990.9.A54B53 2015
621.382′8—dc23
2014039136
ISBN: 978-0-415-71608-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-71609-3 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-88017-4 (ebk)
Typeset in Times and Trade Gothic
by Florence Production Ltd, Stoodleigh, Devon, UK

For Jim Thomson: 
recording engineer extraordinaire, 
inventor, friend, and the best mentor 
an aspiring young engineer could 
possibly have had. This is for you—
thanks, Jim, we miss you.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Author’s Biography
xi
Foreword
xiii
Preface
xvii
Acknowledgments
xix
Chapter 1
Introduction
1
A Life in Sound  2
A Bit About This Book  2
The Making of a Superior Voiceover Recording  4
A Short Case Study  6
Chapter 2
The Voice in Media
9
Information Theory  10
The Beginning of Digital Audio  13
Historical Precedents  15
Psychoacoustics  17
Reverberation  20
The Disembodied Voice  21
Recording Foreign Languages  23
Chapter 3
Room Acoustics
27
Insight: Daniel Porter  33
Insight: John Storyk  40
Chapter 4
Microphones
45
Fundamentals of the Human Voice  46
Microphone Design Types  49
Polar Response  50
Frequency Response  54
Microphone Experiments  56
Dynamic Microphones  59
Condenser Microphones  61
Digital Microphones  65
USB Microphones  67

Chapter 5
The Engineer
69
The Role of the Engineer in Voice Recording  69
Collaboration—Communication—Responsibility  71
Multitasking  72
Insight: Interview with Terry Schedeler  74
Insight: Charlie Pickard  76
Building a Sense of Trust  78
Preparation  79
Insight: Interview with Linda Wolfe  82
The Team  83
Chapter 6
The Studio
87
A Few Simple Truths  88
Lighting  88
Insight: John Storyk  90
The Script Easel  92
Seated or Standing?  94
Monitoring  95
Video Monitoring  98
Keep it Organized  100
Additional Considerations  101
Chapter 7
The Session
103
Insight: Bryen Hensley  104
Documentation and Notes  105
The Co-producer Role  112
Working With the Voice Talent  113
Insight: Harlan Hogan  114
Insight: Doug James  117
Some Tips and Tricks  118
Documentation (Part II)  121
Studio Weirdness  124
Chapter 8
Your Personal Recording Space
127
The Basics  128
The Space  130
Hardware  134
viii
Contents

Software  139
Delivery—The Remote Session  141
Additional Costs  145
The Matter of Trust  147
Chapter 9
Recording for Commercials
149
The Dictatorship of the Clock  151
How Long Is Too Long?  153
The Commercial Session  157
Insert Lines and Redos  162
Editing and Intercutting  165
After the Session  168
One Final Word  169
Chapter 10
Recording Long-Form Narration
171
The Long-Form Session  175
Documentation  177
Recording to Picture  178
Further Thoughts on Long-Form Narration  181
Chapter 11
Recording for Games and Animation
185
Game Voice Recording  186
Insight: D. B. Cooper  188
Recording for Animation  191
Watch Your Levels!  192
Insight: Vince Caro  193
An Experiment in Voice Recording  197
Chapter 12
Recording Interviews and Roundtable 
Discussions
201
Interviews  203
Insight: Ray Van Steen  208
Video Interviews  210
Boom and Shotgun Mic Techniques  211
Recording Roundtable Discussions  214
Live Mixing of Roundtable Discussions  217
Chapter 13
More Voiceover Opportunities
221
Voice Response  222
Public Announcements  223
Contents
ix

Web Content  223
Voice Talent Demos  224
Audio Books  225
The Wacky World of Toys  226
Audio Tours  226
Something Completely Different  227
In Conclusion  228
Chapter 14
That’s a Wrap
229
Building the Sense of Trust  230
Your Insurance Policy  233
A Passion for Voice  235
Resources
237
Bibliography  237
Useful Web Sites  238
Index
241
x
Contents

Author’s Biography
Tom Blakemore has been an active audio engineer for over thirty years, working in
ﬁlm, television, commercial, and corporate communications as a supervising sound
editor and mixer. He has edited and mixed for virtually all of the major broadcast
and cable outlets and is a veteran of thousands of national radio and television
commercials. His ﬁlm work includes Emmy Award-winning documentaries, Academy
Award nominees, Directors Guild of America Best Documentary winners, and
Audience Award winners at the Toronto, Chicago, and Amsterdam Film Festivals.
Tom lives in Chicago, where he is an Adjunct Professor at Tribeca Flashpoint Media
Arts Academy, teaching ﬁlm sound, and works as a freelance audio engineer. He is
a member of the Motion Picture Sound Editors and the Audio Engineering Society.

This page intentionally left blank

Foreword
If you have a strong interest in recording and would like to learn how those great-
sounding voices that you hear on radio spots, television commercials, and even your
favorite animated movies come together, then Tom Blakemore’s Recording Voiceover
is your pathway into the microphone, through the tape rollers, and over the record
heads.
Tom has written the ﬁrst book I have ever read on the subject of recording
voiceover itself. Accurate and thorough, it is clear that only a professional sound
engineer, with years of recording experience and a teaching background, could 
have written it. Tom gives his readers a clear explanation of the steps it takes to
prepare for a voiceover session, from script preparation to picking the proper
microphone.
In this book, Tom gives you insights on what is expected from a voiceover
recording engineer. Will the recording session be for a radio spot, television
commercial, or a ﬁlm trailer? Choice of microphone and its placement will vary for
each of these projects. Keep in mind, a talented engineer had to capture all the grit
and gravel of the famous voiceover artist, Don La Fontaine, recording one of the
most recognized lines in ﬁlm trailer history: “In a world gone mad.”
You are entering into a very specialized area of the entertainment industry that
operates behind the scenes, with no glamour and no paparazzi. Not even an article
in Mix Magazine in sight! Your new clients have all gathered into a recording studio,
where they have booked you to capture the smooth, velvety tones of their voiceover
talent for a deodorant commercial. A director, a writer, and a producer are all
hanging on to every word, listing intently to every phrase, every breath, and all that
velvet is passing through your perfectly positioned, very expensive, German
microphone, which itself is transferring that velvet through your very expensive
Canare mic cable, into your very expensive analog microphone preamp and
compressor, through your hands, into your DAW, and, oh wow, this talent is sounding
like a god or goddess, with perfect diction! You play the take back, every syllable
captured, no esses, no breath pops, no P pops. This is what you live for—a perfect
recording. For that moment, you are a star. The director reaches for the talk back
and gives you a perfectly deadpan: “That was perfect, let’s go again!” Welcome
back to reality, and your world of voiceover recording.
Maybe you are reading this book because you want information on what it takes
to build your own recording space. Tom’s book covers studio design and the proper
materials required for construction of the studio. Pay special attention to the record
room, as this is where all your great recordings will start, and, if you can, build it
with a high ceiling. Make sure you have a control room that is big enough for your
future clients. Here is an example of a session that you might someday experience.

What could be simpler then recording a regional bank spot or a tag line for an
automobile commercial? These projects involve many people, and, come the day of
the recording for these spots, you might just ﬁnd those many people all descending
into your studio! This might include the advertising representatives, producers of
the commercial, and the copywriters of the spot. Now, bring in the director and
voiceover talent, and you have yourself a full house. Moments later, a few executives
from the company that these spots are for have arrived with their wives, entirely
unannounced. You can see how quick your control room is ﬁlling up!
Tom gives such great advice in his book, but, to me, his most important is: Be
prepared and ready to roll at all times. And, I would like to add, never be late for
a session. I was in a session once where an actor had arrived early, went straight
for the mic and started rifﬁng on anything that came to his head, testing out a new
stand-up routine on fresh ears. Some of those bits and pieces could actually be used
in the movie he was there to record for, all because we were record-ready and
punched in way before the talent’s call time.
The studio I work in is capable of animation recording, VO recording, and ADR,
but each of these conﬁgurations requires different record-room seating and microphone
arrangements. We call it “turning the room around.” On Monday, I may be recording
an ADR session and, on Tuesday, a four-microphone setup for our animation clients.
Wednesday will be back to ADR for a video game involving forty actors. Turning
the room around for each of these sessions can take up to two hours. I always try
to have the studio record-ready the evening before the actual session; yes, I might
have to stay late! And that also includes making sure my Pro Tools session template
is named properly and routed correctly in my I/O setup. I double check to make
sure all the microphone signals are truly routed to the proper record channels (DAWs
can, and will, boot up cranky).
Another reason I like to be ready early is so, when the client arrives, we can
have some face time, talk about family and how the kids are, and then move on to
how the show is coming along. Keep it relaxed! Moving chairs, go-betweens, and
boom stands while trying to have a conversation is a bit like talking to a mechanic
while he’s under your car.
My favorite chapter in Recording Voiceover is Chapter 11: Recording for Games
and Animation. I would like to offer an exercise that will forever keep you from
getting in trouble with your talent in the future!
I had the pleasure of working with the late Robin Williams on several projects.
He was fantastic, but notorious for being able to go from a whisper to a scream
without notice. Robin would be listening to his voice through headphones while
recording, and any microphone distortion would stop him right away, thus taking
him out of his brilliant thought process and interrupting the magic. It never sat well
with him.
If you are currently working in a studio and have not been subject to such a
dynamic voice talent, then this exercise may help you. Put up a Neumann U87. If
the studio does not own one, ask if they can rent one for you. Ask a friend with a
big voice to join you at the studio and explain to him that this is a microphone
xiv
Foreword

distortion test. Your friend will have to whisper, then talk in his normal voice, then
scream, then talk in his normal voice, then scream, then whisper and scream. Have
him repeat this for as long as he can. This is the only way to learn how the mic
and yourself will respond under these extreme level changes. This is also the time
to dial in the proper levels for your microphone preamps and compressor settings.
Document your ﬁnal settings, so that, when the day comes, you can dial them in.
Remember . . . no distortion!
I use the U87 in this test because I truly believe this will be your go-to microphone
for many of your voiceover recording sessions.
Vince Caro, my friend and colleague from Pixar Animation Studios, writes a
terriﬁc section about how he plans and prepares for his sessions, from a large orchestra
to a multiple-microphone animation session for Pixar. Vince explains his use of
vintage microphones, and how he incorporates them into today’s recording sessions.
When I had to say goodbye to our analog mixing console and enter into the world
of Pro Tools and digital recording, Vince was there to help me through the transition
with his invaluable knowledge of the digital recording medium.
I want to thank Tom Blakemore for offering me the opportunity to write this
foreword for Recording Voiceover. Tom’s love for recording and his love for teaching
shine throughout his book.
Doc Kane
ADR and Dialogue Mixer, The Walt Disney 
Studios, Burbank, California
Foreword
xv

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
In the course of my recording and teaching career, I’ve constantly been amazed at
the lackadaisical attitude that many people have in recording a voiceover. This is
equally true for students and professionals alike. Although they may obsess for hours
over what microphone to use to record a particular guitar or vocalist, in many, many
instances, when it comes to voiceover recording, they will set up the closest mic at
hand and then sit back as the actor dutifully reads the copy. There is often little
thought given to the peculiarities of the voiceover session, and, although these
people may give a commendable level of attention to detail in a music session, for
the voice session, it seems they are barely paying attention. As with anything else
that we create, paying attention to the minutiae of the job at hand is the only way
to arrive at a superior result.
When it comes to voiceover recording, this extends beyond the choice of
microphone to such things as how to work with many different types of people, how
to keep proper and meaningful notes, and giving close thought to the comfort of the
artist (the voice actor). Those voiceover recordings that you recognize as setting
themselves apart are only achieved through this attention to detail. In music recording,
the engineer will be paying attention to whether the musicians are playing in tune
and playing on the beat. In voiceover recording, we must pay attention to the quality
of the signal coming to us over the monitor speakers, looking for a slurred word,
or perhaps an inﬂection that could be spoken better. And then, of course, we must
have the diplomatic skills to gently suggest to the actor that they should do the line
differently. As with all aspects of the recording industry, it is the quality of the end
product that will make your reputation, and all of the skills discussed in this book
are, I believe, essential to arriving at that ﬁnal product.
This book deals more with techniques of voice recording and only occasionally
discusses the technology that we use. There are two reasons for this: First, I am a
ﬁrm believer that a superior end product can be created with virtually any type of
tool (one only has to listen to the classic Count Basie recordings from the 1930s to
be convinced of this point of view); and, second, most books that deal with purely
technical subjects in the media ﬁeld tend to become dated quite quickly. Owing to
the time it takes to write the book, edit, print and publish, and then ﬁnally release
and distribute, software changes have inevitably occurred during the process, new
technologies are constantly being introduced, and the book is dated before it ever
gets to the consumer. I am assuming at least an introductory level of knowledge of
computer systems, editing and mixing techniques, and acoustics from the reader who
has picked this book up off the shelf. I deal instead with the day-to-day concerns
of the recording engineer, producer, and voiceover talent in producing the spoken
word. If you feel you need additional guidance with tasks such as editing, processing

or mixing, or any other technological aspect of our profession, I would recommend
that you do a bit of research and then seek out any of the numerous texts and web
sites devoted to these individual subjects. You may ﬁnd the Resources section at
the end of this book of use in searching out further material; many of the resources
that I list in this section were very helpful to me in my research for the book.
It is for these reasons that I set out to write this book. Although each voiceover
engineer that you talk to will have different approaches and suggestions on how to
improve your own work, and some engineers will disagree with my methods and
suggestions, be aware that there are many ways to get to the destination, and there
is no “right,” single way to approach a session. What you now hold is the result of
my career in the business, and my experiences are by necessity different from
others’, but I do believe that a careful reading of this text will give you a good
foundation from which to discover your own approach. By diligent practice of your
own recording techniques and your own experimentations, you will get to your own,
unique way of recording this most important material. But, before you set out on
the path to making your own way of doing this, you should be aware of what have
been long-accepted ways of doing things. As legendary baseball manager Leo
Durocher once said, “I believe in rules—sure I do. If there weren’t any rules, how
could you break them?”
Tom Blakemore
Chicago, Illinois USA
August, 2014
xviii
Preface

Acknowledgments
There were a number of people who were instrumental in helping me with this
project and who helped bring it to fruition. I’m sure to leave someone out of this
mention, and, if that’s the case, the oversight is not intentional, and I offer my
sincere apology.
At Taylor and Francis, Anais Wheeler was incredibly patient in guiding me through
the process in her role as Acquisitions Editor. Her suggestions and gentle humor
gave me conﬁdence that the subject matter was worthwhile, and that I could complete
the book. Also at Taylor and Francis, Editorial Project Manager Meagan White never
seemed to tire of my endless questions and revisions, and her hand-holding throughout
the process was reassuring. Her patience at times seemed boundless. And thanks to
the Technical Editor, Charles Jude Weinberg, for his comments and insights that
kept me on track with all of the myriad technical details this text required.
My appreciation goes to all of the recording engineers, voiceover performers,
and producers who took time out of their busy schedules to answer my research
questions—all of your input helped inform the direction this book would take, whether
your comments are included here in print or not. I would especially like to give a
special thanks to three individuals whose help was paramount: Terry Schededer, for
his input and suggestions throughout the writing and for his friendship throughout
our professional careers (not to mention his grilling recipes); to Harlan Hogan, for
sharing his experiences and for helping me to navigate my way through this publishing
adventure; and to John Storyk of the Walters–Storyk Design Group for his
conversations on acoustics and studio design. I’m not sure I could have completed
this without their generous help.
My appreciation to Tribeca Flashpoint Media Arts Academy (TFMAA), for use
of their facilities for photography, and to the students, whose curiosity and dedication
led directly to the discussions in this book. Also, to my colleagues at TFMAA for
suggestions and general conversation on the subject that led to further thought and
exploration on my part. As well, my gratitude to Resolution Digital Studios, Second
City Sound, Noise Floor Recording, Ltd., and the Chicago Recording Company for
use of their facilities for photographic purposes.
I can’t leave out a mention all of the copywriters, without whom we wouldn’t
have any words to say and record.
And, ﬁnally, the largest thank you in the world to my best friend, wife, and life
partner for her understanding, and for allowing me the time and space to accomplish
this. She gave me conﬁdence when I was discouraged and prodded me on when I
got lazy. Without her input and trust in me, this book would never have been started.
Keeping me on an even keel through all of my many moods, she kept the household
together, and for that alone there are not words of praise high enough. So, thank

you—and now I promise I’ll get back to working on the house! And I can’t forget
my good buddy Travis for his limited understanding and patience; now we can get
back to the park, chasing squirrels again.
xx
Acknowledgments

One microphone, one actor, and one channel on the mixer. What could possibly be
simpler or more straightforward? This is how the majority of spoken-word recording
is done, and on the surface it appears there’s nothing to it. Certainly nothing compared
with a high-powered music session, right? Well, if there’s one thing that I’ve learned
in more than thirty years in the studio, it’s that this can often be the most demanding
recording situation that you’ll be thrown into. Think about this for a minute: If you
are performing with a symphony orchestra, you are playing with perhaps eighty
other musicians. But now step onto a stage with only your instrument and with the
audience in front of you. There’s no place to hide, and every moment is magniﬁed.
It’s the same with recording the human voice. One microphone, one voice, and only
one channel on the mixer. It’s now just you and your skill to make or break this
moment. Much of the information that we share as human beings comes through
spoken words, and the majority of media that we come into contact with every day
1
Introduction
CHAPTER

has a spoken component. Radio, television, movies, video games, even the annoying
“Your call is very important to us . . . a representative will be with you shortly”—
they all rely heavily on listening to someone pass information to us through words.
And the interesting thing to consider is this: Some audio professional somewhere
is responsible for recording all of this material.
One microphone, one voice, and only one channel on the mixer. Simple, right?
With this book I hope to give you some techniques to think about and put into
practice to make recording the spoken word a strong part of your professional
repertoire.
A LIFE IN SOUND
For as long as I can remember, from when I was very young, I’ve been fascinated
with the sound of the world happening around me. While my friends were playing
baseball or gazing at a line of ants, I would stand transﬁxed, listening to the sound
of a running stream, or to a far-off train. When I was about seven or so, my parents
gave me a small transistor radio as a Christmas present. A radio of my own, to listen
to whatever I wanted! Late on Christmas afternoon, I lay on my bed and turned on
the radio. I always thought that radios were for listening to music or the ballgame,
but that afternoon I tuned in to a broadcast of a radio play—A Christmas Carol, by
Charles Dickens. I had never experienced anything like it—a complete movie playing
only in my head and imagination, performed by actors in a studio, using their voices
to bring this story to life. On that long-ago Christmas, I discovered the power of
the spoken word, and I still marvel at it to this day. Later, in junior high, I acquired
a small tape recorder and began recording the sounds of my neighborhood. I soon
discovered that I could play these sounds backwards and that, by using a pair of
scissors and some Scotch tape, I could put the sounds in a different order. From
these childhood beginnings, a life in sound as a recording engineer was born.
Back when record stores were the only way of purchasing new music, every
record store had a large section called “Spoken Word Recordings.” Comedy albums,
audio documentaries, recorded speeches—all of these and more found their way into
the spoken-word bins, and in those days sales were brisk. With the demise of vinyl,
spoken-word recordings morphed into podcasts, walking tours, news and information
on specialized topics, and the like. But the spoken word is still with us, now more
than ever, and on a greater range of topics. All of this information must be recorded,
edited, and produced, and this is the topic of this book. The greater the skill with
which the voice is recorded, the wider the potential audience for this work.
A BIT ABOUT THIS BOOK
This project was conceived at the 2012 AES annual convention in San Francisco.
While browsing through the selection of titles available at the Focal Press booth, 
2
CHAPTER 1 Introduction

I was struck by the absence of any information on the subject of voiceover recording.
After a lengthy conversation with the person at the booth, and after thinking about
it for the following two days, on the four-hour ﬂight back home I started putting
together some notes and a sample table of contents and sent them off to the woman
I had met and talked to in San Francisco. It turns out that she was an Acquisitions
Editor at Focal and she began to guide me through the process of getting a green
light for my idea. Now, here we are in 2015, and the results are in your hands.
In the following pages, I am going to take a few things for granted. First, that
you have a working knowledge of basic recording techniques, including microphone
design and signal ﬂow in the studio, and that you are familiar with audio editing
concepts in general. In the examples, I will be using Pro Tools screens and
terminology, but the concepts that I’ll be discussing apply equally to any digital
audio workstation (DAW) platform, as well as good old analog recording and editing
on that quaint medium, magnetic tape. After all, we’ll be discussing capturing the
sound of the voice and not the theory of any one recording medium. Also, this is
not a book that discusses voice acting, recording vocals for music, location recording
for ﬁlm and television, or audio editing and processing in general. Those subjects
are deserving of books devoted exclusively to each subject, and indeed there are a
number of ﬁne texts available on those topics. But I’ve found that, for spoken-word
recording, there’s just not a lot of information out there.
What I will be talking about in these pages is improving your techniques in
recording voiceover performances for narrations and commercials, documentaries,
corporate communications, and games and animation. We will also take a brief look
at the world of recording in the ﬁeld, doing interviews and roundtable discussions.
Also, we can’t really discuss any of this without revisiting the types of microphone
and processing that are incorporated into this work. So, in this book, we’ll take a
look at the various types of microphone and when you would use one versus another,
understanding how the human voice is produced, what makes a good-sounding
recording environment, working with voice actors, capturing a high-quality recording
of the voice, and speciﬁc techniques for various types of media.
And ﬁnally, we’ll be dealing with the space in which the voiceover reading takes
place, the studio, or booth, and not the control room, where the engineer listens to
the sound coming from the monitor speakers. My deﬁnition of the two might be
stated, “studio = performance space” and “control room = recording space.” To clear
up any misunderstanding, throughout the book I make reference to “the studio”—
this is the performance space, whereas “the recording studio” is the business itself,
which is comprised of many different rooms—ofﬁces, lounge area, tech shop, the
control room (or more than one), the studio, storage vault, etc.
The book is structured into two parts. In the ﬁrst part, Chapters 3 and 4 cover
technical and theoretical information on acoustics and microphones that we should
be aware of, and Chapters 4–7 discuss the role of the voice engineer and the session
itself. Chapter 8 is devoted to designing the voice studio and is aimed primarily at
those who would like to record themselves at home, as many voiceover professionals
do. The second part, Chapters 9–14, is devoted to discussing speciﬁc voiceover
Introduction
3

situations and types of session (commercials, games and animations, interview
situations, and a brief mention of other types of voiceover opportunity). At intervals
throughout the book, there are short sections that I am calling “Insight” sections.
These offer thoughts on various aspects of our profession, and my guest contributors
offer their views gained from many years of experience in the industry. Of course,
I am very indebted to these individuals for sharing their thoughts with you. Read
them closely and learn from their wisdom.
As I mentioned above, over the course of thirty-ﬁve years in the studio, I’ve been
fortunate to encounter a wide variety of recording situations, almost all of them
involving working with the human voice in some manner. Drawing on this experience,
I would like to share some of these situations with you and give you some small
insight into the skills that each requires. It is my hope that, by sharing some of what
I’ve learned with you, you can more easily make your way in the industry and avoid
some mistakes that most of us have made, thus becoming a true professional more
quickly.
THE MAKING OF A SUPERIOR VOICEOVER RECORDING
I’ve noticed that those engineers who consistently produce great-sounding voice
recordings have a number of things in common. First and foremost, they are world-
class multitaskers. When doing any type of recording, we must be aware of many
stimuli coming at us at once. With voice recording, we oftentimes must keep our
ears open for problems and mistakes in the recording process and, at the same time,
keep our eyes and concentration on the script and be on the lookout for missed,
slurred, or mispronounced words. Also, we must be aware of the narrative ﬂow and
make sure that the tempo, style, and dynamics remain consistent. At the same time,
we are documenting the recording and keeping track of timings and good takes, and
being aware of possible editing choices we will make later.
Of course, making sure that the actor and the director have fresh coffee, water,
and so on is part of the job, as is acting as amateur psychologist to keep the session
running smoothly and tempers on an even keel. And we have to keep an eye on the
clock to ensure that the session is accomplished in the time allotted and we don’t
run over and cost the client extra money. All of this adds up to an incredible level
of attention to detail that separates the extraordinary engineer from the average, and
keeping all of this in mind is how you keep working on a steady basis. So, in a
sense, it’s as much (or more) about these multitasking skills as it is about your
recording skills. Of course, technical knowledge is the bottom line in any job in
professional audio, but these skills are what will set you apart from the competition.
If there is any one piece of advice that I can give to anyone doing any type of
recording, it would be this: Always be prepared and ready to roll at all times. Digital
audio is cheap—if someone is warming up or practicing, why not drop into record?
You never know—sometimes that’s when that magic take happens, and you don’t
want to miss it. At the least, you can delete those takes if you want to, and you’re
4
CHAPTER 1 Introduction

not out anything, but miss that one special performance, and it’s gone forever. What
this means is that, if the client says she wants the session to begin at 10:00 A.M.,
you have everything set up, the coffee made, the script copied, and a session built
in your workstation, and you have veriﬁed that the signal path is working properly.
At 10:00 A.M., you’re all set to press the record button, capture every moment of
magic, and come out with a superior product. Do all of this, and the client will
return time and again; furthermore, the voice actor will appreciate your efﬁciency
and hard work, and, the next time someone asks him for a recommendation on where
to record the clients’ new project—well, who do you think that actor is going to
suggest?
This book is aimed at anyone who is interested in learning how to effectively
record the human voice. I came to learn about this intuitively, during time spent on
the job, as I started my career in the studio, but only as I began to study communication
theory and pay attention to how the voice is captured did I truly start to understand
all that is involved. I’ll leave the mathematical proofs of much of what I discuss to
others, and, if you’re interested in the math of how things work, I advise you to
discover a number of excellent texts on the subject, some of which I list in the
bibliography for this work.
A few words on terminology: The end product of our work can go by a number
of names: “voiceover,” “VO,” “narration,” “read,” and so on. I use these terms fairly
interchangeably in the book; they all refer to the recorded work. Throughout the
book, I’ll be referring to both “the microphone” and “the mic.” I do this to avoid
redundancy; in our world, either is perfectly acceptable. By the way, “mic” is the
shortened version of “microphone”—it’s never “mike,” which is a person’s name.
Also, when referring to certain people and roles, I use “he” and “she” interchangeably,
not only to avoid redundancy and seeming (possibly) sexist, but also to avoid the
dreaded “he/she” usage or the creation of some sort of strangely androgynous ﬁgure
(“the person” or “them,” and so on). As well, the person that you are recording can
be called “the actor,” “voiceover talent,” “talent,” “narrator,” or simply “the VO.”
All of these refer to the same person and their role in the studio. And ﬁnally, whether
you are a student, a beginning engineer or a seasoned pro, we’re all in this together;
we’re all recording engineers. We simply have different levels of experience. And
so, throughout this book, I refer to “we.”
I’m discussing voiceover recording in this book, but much of the material can
be applied to any type of recording that you may do.
Whether you are engineering a voice session or recording yourself, there are some
things that don’t change: The physics of how sound reacts in a room, how a micro -
phone functions, reaching an agreed-upon quality, and, above all, pleasing the client.
The better that you understand the technical aspects of the recording chain, the better
your ﬁnal product will be, and the more clients you will have. You’ll have to become
familiar with software programs, accepted editing practices, and proper mixing
techniques. This book will give you some practical advice to start you down this
path, as well as introducing you to a variety of markets that need your work and
that you may want to explore, to help you make a living in the world of voiceover.
Introduction
5

I would like to address two ways of looking at things: Facts and opinions. If I
tell you that a particular microphone is a condenser microphone, that is a fact. It
can be proven, and there is no doubt about it. Much of the information in this book
is opinion, based on my experience in recording the human voice since the late
1970s. Over that time, I’ve made plenty of mistakes and also made some discoveries
that helped me along, and it is these experiences that I would like to pass along to
you, so that you can, in a sense, shortcut this process and learn from my mistakes
and discoveries in order to get your recordings and your career to a higher level in
a shorter period of time. You may have a different viewpoint on the best way to
approach voiceover recording, and ten engineers will give you ten different opinions
on what makes the best recording situation. All people are different, and what works
for me may only hold you and your creativity back. There are no absolutes (except
for those pesky facts). Be open and be aware that your opinion is just as valuable
as mine and demands equal consideration.
A SHORT CASE STUDY
To help you begin to appreciate the multiple skills needed for effective voiceover
work, I offer up this short story about an experience that I had some years back. I
was booked to engineer a session at 8:00 A.M. one morning. The afternoon before,
I had received a phone call from the producer’s assistant, who was calling from
England. It seems that a famous British actor was in town ﬁlming a movie, and he
was going to be recording a 2-minute public service message that would air worldwide.
The producer was in London and would be directing the session via phone from
there. They obviously wanted top recording quality, and, owing to the demands of
the movie schedule, the actor would have only 45 minutes to complete the recording
process, because he had to be on set for makeup shortly thereafter. I was to deliver
three digital audiotape (DAT) tapes (you can look that antiquated format up on the
Internet) via three separate overnight delivery services to the United Kingdom and
also archive a safety copy at the studio (this was before the advent of digital phone
setups and the Internet, by the way). At the end of that day, the actor was leaving
the country, as soon as his shooting ended. It was evident that I had only one shot
at this, and the reputation of the studio and my skills were to be tested that morning.
The morning of the session, I got everything set up and tested the signal path,
including the phone connection into and out of the console. Scripts were copied, the
coffee was brewed, and the studio was set up and ready to go before the scheduled
start time. When the actor arrived (hungover, no less), it quickly became clear that
he was nervous doing a voice-only recording that demanded emotion and empathy
on his part; he had spent his entire career as a ﬁlm and stage actor and was much
more comfortable being able to use his body and facial expressions to convey
emotions, rather than just his voice alone. My initial choice of microphone seemed
wrong to me after speaking with him for a short period; there was something in his
voice quality that I wanted to capture and I recognized that my ﬁrst choice of mic
6
CHAPTER 1 Introduction

wasn’t the one to use. A quick change of mic and mic positioning and we were off
and rolling, watching the clock the entire time. At ﬁrst, owing to his nervousness,
none of the takes were usable, and we pushed on. I did all I could to boost his
conﬁdence, as well as supply him with hot coffee in the hopes his hangover would
subside. The takes added up.
Well, the session was completed, a composite edit of various takes was made,
copies were shipped, the message aired around the world, and no one was the wiser
that there were some rather large bumps in the road to getting there. All in a day’s
work in the voiceover recording business, but not only did I have to know my
microphones and the technology that we were using, keep a close watch on the
clock, and note the proper takes in order to make the editing process go more
smoothly and give the producer what he was expecting to receive, I also had to
practice a bit of amateur psychology and diplomacy. As we’ll discover in this book,
this “bedside manner” is an all-important quality to nurture in yourself and oftentimes
makes or breaks the session. One microphone, one actor, and one channel on the
mixer. What could possibly be simpler or more straightforward? As you have already
begun to see, recording a voiceover is not the time to set up any old microphone,
push the record button, and then sit back and read the newspaper.
So, with that, let’s take a look at capturing the spoken word—the VO.
Introduction
7

This page intentionally left blank

Human communication is primarily verbal; for tens of thousands of years, our
stories, traditions, and knowledge were passed from one generation to the next with
the spoken word. Even when the written word is used for communication, the letters
on the page are only a code, a symbol that reﬂects the language of the individual
and the sound of the words. In the modern era, this verbal communication now
surrounds us and has taken us back to the oral traditions of our ancestors. Into 
this world come the art and science of capturing these utterances and passing them
along to others. The majority of our learning, interpersonal communication, and
entertainment is based on listening to others speak and to the content of their words.
We do this instinctively, and we are all quite adept at analyzing the slightest subtlety
in what we are hearing, even if we are not consciously aware that we are doing it.
We are all expert in picking up the slightest cue in the voice of others and attaching
meaning to what we hear. Walter Murch, in his excellent article “Womb Tone”
(refer to http://transom.org/?p=6992), informs us that the ﬁrst of our senses to turn
2
The Voice in Media
CHAPTER

on while we are in the womb is our hearing. Even before we come into the world,
we are aware of sound: The pulsing of our mother’s blood, the mufﬂed sound of
her voice singing to us, and vague, unexplainable sounds from the outside. From
the very beginning—from before the beginning—we are learning to be experts in
the meaning of sound.
Before we delve into the subject of recording the human voice and the tools we
use to accomplish this, I believe a little background is in order, to put things into
perspective.
INFORMATION THEORY
•
1876—Alexander Graham Bell invents the telephone.
•
1877—The Bell Telephone Company is formed.
•
1877—Thomas Alva Edison invents the phonograph (and the recording industry
is born).
•
1920—Regular commercial radio broadcasting begins in the US.
•
1927—The Jazz Singer, the ﬁrst feature ﬁlm with dialogue, debuts.
•
1948—Claude E. Shannon publishes the ﬁrst of his papers on communication
theory.
•
1980s—The proliferation of digital in the audio industry.
From the ﬁrst date on this list until the last, there is a common thread running
through all of them that can help explain why we record the spoken word the way
we do, and the tradition behind it. Both Bell and Shannon were mostly interested
in communication by telephone (for the purposes of our discussion here), and this
fact is signiﬁcant. Shannon’s communication theory, now known by the more inclusive
name of information theory, can help us understand how our spoken communication
works. Claude E. Shannon (1916–2001) worked for Bell Laboratories and was, by
training and by profession, a mathematician. During World War II, he was involved
in the ﬁeld of cryptology and, in his work, found that the key to “breaking” a code
was being able to recognize repetitions. All language contains repetitive sounds,
words, spellings, and phrases. For instance, in English, the letter “q” is always
followed by “u.” Therefore, if a message contained the letter “u,” there was a
probability that the letter preceding it would be a “q” a certain percentage of the
time. From this, he began attacking how a telephone message might be more efﬁciently
delivered. He was working on the problem of how to maximize the distance that a
telephone conversation could be transmitted clearly; at the time, there was a signiﬁcant
amount of line loss to the signal as it traveled over distance, and this required multiple
ampliﬁers (also known as repeaters) along the way. Bell Telephone (by then known
as AT&T) wondered if there might be a better way to attack the problem. Working
on this, Shannon began to develop what he eventually published as his Theory 
of Communication and, in July of 1948, published his “A Mathematical Theory of
10
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media

Communication” in the Bell System Technical Journal. The second portion of this
paper was published by Bell Labs in October of the same year. He started from the
beginning: The nature of communication and the problems such communication faced.
All signals, all communication, travel the same path—from source to destination.
The Voice in Media
11
The telephone message was a continuous signal (much like the recording on an
analog tape). The cause of unclear communication, he theorized, was that, between
the transmitter and receiver, there was always something else, noise. This, he stated,
was anything that hindered the clear and unimpeded transmission of the signal
(communication). It could be anything, depending on the nature of the communication.
If I were to write you a letter, but you had trouble reading my handwriting, this
would constitute noise in the communication. Were we to be having a conversation
in a restaurant, but the restaurant was crowded and ﬁlled with the sound of multiple
conversations, we would have trouble clearly understanding each other’s words, and
thus the meaning would be lost. In a phone conversation, there may be static on the
line, and this noise also impedes the transfer of information. Indeed, both distance
and the air itself can act as noise elements in spoken communication, making the
precise meaning of the words unclear.
No matter the type of signal—written, oral, electronic—they all travel this same
path, from source to destination. Shannon termed source and destination transmitter
and receiver, owing to the electronic nature of his work, and these terms are useful
to our discussions here.
Noise is usually thought of as some type of unwanted sound (hums, buzzes,
outside trafﬁc sounds, and so forth), but, in the context of information theory,
SOURCE 
DESTINATION 
TRANSMITTER 
RECEIVER 
TRANSMITIER 
NOISE 
RECEIVER 

12
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media
“noise” is deﬁned as anything than hinders the comprehension of the transmitted
message, whether that be excessive reverberation, a strong foreign accent, or possibly
your listener’s mind wandering. Anything that impacts the intelligibility or clarity
of the communication can be considered noise. Our goal, then, is to maximize the
intelligibility of the message. In discussing Shannon’s information theory, Jon Gertner
summarizes the problem in this way:
All messages, as they traveled from the information source to the destination,
faced the problem of noise. This could be the background clatter of a cafeteria,
or it could be static (on the radio) or snow (on television). Noise interfered
with the accurate delivery of the message. And every channel that carried a
message was, to some extent, a noisy channel.1
Think about that again for a minute: All messages, moving from source to destination,
must travel across a noisy channel. Our goal in recording the spoken word, then, is
to reduce the noise as much as possible and increase the level of understanding at
the destination—our audience.
Relating this theoretical discussion to our subject at hand, recording the spoken
word, let’s change our terminology once more. Instead of “source/destination,” which
we changed to “transmitter/receiver,” we might now substitute “spoken word” and
“comprehended word.” The theory still applies.
Once again, the meaning is clear: We must do all we can to reduce the noise and
increase the intelligibility of the message—the spoken word.
Incidentally, in working on this theory, Claude Shannon did not care what the
application of his theory would be. He never considered the practical application of
his work, dealing only in the abstract mathematical proofs of his ideas. However,
from this paper came the beginnings of digital audio. As mentioned, this work was
done with the intention of solving the problem of transmitting telephone messages
over long distances. A revolution in how we handle messages was beginning.
1 Gertner, Jon, The Idea Factory; Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation. New
York: Penguin Press, 2012, p. 128.
SPOKEN WORD 
TRANSMITIER/ 
SPOKEN WORD 
NOISE 
NOISE 
COMPREHENDED 
WORD 
RECEIVER/ 
COMPREHENDED 
WORD 

THE BEGINNING OF DIGITAL AUDIO
Long-distance telephonic communication was plagued by the introduction of noise
into the signal as the transmission traveled through the line. During World War II,
Shannon was very interested in problems dealing not only with creating coded
messages, but also in how to “break” the codes of the enemy. He realized that the
more complex the message, the more complex the transmission path must be. Also,
he realized that the English language is ﬁlled with redundancies, and one of the key
methods of breaking a coded message is to search out the redundancies and repeated
parts of the message. He sought out a simpler method of encrypting messages that
not only avoided redundant words and phrases, but, likewise, avoided the nature of
a continuous signal, which telephone messages entailed, and thus would prove to
be less likely to be broken. Moving away from thinking in terms of a continuous
signal, Shannon began formulating a method of encoding the message as discrete
“packets” of information, each of which could be sent long distances without loss
and being capable of being decoded at the other end in their original (or near-original)
state. To do this, he theorized that the signal could be sampled and mapped, and,
instead of the original signal being transmitted, this map could be sent, much more
efﬁciently and without the introduction of the noise element. He postulated sampling
the information up to 8,000 times a second (a far cry from our current practice of
sampling audio at 48,000, 96,000, or even 192,000 times a second!), and, upon
reception, the message could be read back as a continuous signal, without the
introduction of noise. By sampling the message, instead of sending the original,
continuous information, this process sliced the continuous audio into discrete
“snapshots” of that particular moment in time. The message could be transformed
from words and phrases into a series of “on/off” instructions, or the 0s and 1s of
the binary system. Surprisingly, this method of encoding messages was far from
new. One of the earliest methods of long-distance communication was the telegraph,
operating with a code made of dashes and dots (the Morse code). A telegraph message
can be seen as a binary encryption, and, from this code, words and sentences can
be read and thoughts can be transmitted over very long distances. For instance, the
phrase “The Beginning of Digital” translates in Morse code as:
– • • • • • / – • • • • – – • • • – • – • • • – • – – • / – –
– • • – • / – • • • • – – • • • – • – • – • •
(The slashes in this example illustrate where each word begins; in sending or receiving
a telegraph message, there are slight pauses at word ends. The end of a sentence is
noted by tapping out the word “Stop”: • 
• • 
– – – – 
• 
– 
– •). We see a
series of dots and dashes, which are heard on the receiving end of the communica-
tion after being transmitted electronically. It is a binary system, just as 0 and 1
represent our current digital binary code. Each of these 0s and 1s Shannon termed
“bits”; he didn’t coin the term, but was the ﬁrst to use it publicly. This word is an
abbreviation of “binary digit” and was ﬁrst used by Shannon’s colleague at Bell
The Voice in Media
13

Labs, John Tukey. Shannon explained that the bit, “corresponds to the information
produced when a choice is made from two equally likely possibilities.” In binary
digital language, “The Beginning of Digital” is represented as:
01010100 01101000 01100101 00100000 01100010 01100101 01100111
01101001 01101110 01101110 01101001 01101110 01100111 00100000
01101111 01100110 00100000 01100100 01101001 01100111 01101001
01110100 01100001 01101100
Each of these discrete “packets” of information can be reproduced exactly any number
of times, without any generational loss and without the introduction of noise. If, for
some reason, noise does interfere with the translation of the message, error correction
is built into the system to predict which of the missing bits is the culprit, and that
bit is restored. The 0s and 1s correspond to the “off/on” voltage of an electrical
signal and, thus, are capable of being easily dealt with by computers, which are
binary in their operation and operate with “off/on” coding.
Working with Shannon, Harry Nyquist (1889–1976) developed what has come
to be known as the Nyquist Theorem, which is essential to the successful encoding
of digital information. Simply stated, Nyquist showed that, in order for any frequency
to be successfully sampled, that sample must be quantized, or measured, at least
twice each cycle, to measure the frequency content of the sample. This is necessary
for the decoding of the message to be able to predict the correct frequency content
of the sample. If the original, continuous signal was thought of as a “waveform” of
discrete frequencies, each being sampled and then represented by a series of 0s and
1s, that waveform could be reproduced exactly at a later time or in a distant place.
On the receiving end of the message, the 0s and 1s were used to reconstruct the
waveform, and an exact copy of the original message resulted. It is essential that
each frequency be represented by two points per cycle, if the frequency is to be
accurately reproduced. Thus, if we wish to sample and reproduce a frequency of 
1 kHz (1 kiloHertz, or 1,000 cycles per second), the sampling rate must be a minimum
of 2 kHz. In Shannon’s early work (and the Bell System’s early transmissions), 
he was working with a sampling rate of 8 kHz; the resulting signal could only be
reproduced to an upper frequency limit of 4 kHz. So, when we discuss the sampling
frequency or sampling rate in talking about digital audio, we are referring to the
upper limit of the frequency range that we can record and reproduce. The bit depth
of a sample is directly responsible for the dynamic range of our audio—the greater
the bit number of a sample (8, 16, 24, and so on), the greater the dynamic range of
the recording. Although the digital signal is represented by the 0s and 1s, known as
binary digits, or “bits,” the sampling rate and the bit depth should not be confused.
The practical application of this theorem for our work in recording the human voice
will be further explained in later chapters, but it is essential that Nyquist’s work be
kept in mind when digitizing any audio signal.
The system of digitally encoding the information came from Bell Lab’s
involvement in the development of a system known as “pulse code modulation,” or
14
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media

PCM. As seen above, the series of dashes and dots, or 0s and 1s, create this “pulse”
and can be read as the encoded message. Although not invented at Bell Labs, PCM
was perfected there, with Shannon’s help.2 Whether it be a dash or a dot, or an off
or an on voltage, these various codes are a matter of “yes/no” choices and can be
summed up as follows:
[1] All communication could be thought of in terms of information; [2] all
information could be measured in bits; [3] all measurable bits of information
could be thought of, and indeed should be thought of, digitally. This could
mean dots and dashes, heads or tails, or the on/off pulses that comprised
PCM. Or it could simply be a string of, say, ﬁve or six 1s and 0s.3
Shannon’s “Mathematical Theory of Communication” is largely that, a paper of
mathematics, and, if you are interested in this part of our discussion, I urge you to
reference any number of excellent books on the subject, some of which I list in the
Resources section of this text. Through his work, Shannon showed that, “all
information, at least from the view of someone trying to move it from place to place,
was the same, whether it was a phone call or a microwave transmission or a television
signal.”4
This pioneering work at Bell Labs was an ongoing effort to improve telephone
services, and all communications, and soon led to the transatlantic cable, satellite
communication, and the cell phone. The efforts at Bell Labs have important
implications for our goal of recording the spoken word for media applications, all
thanks to Claude Shannon.
HISTORICAL PRECEDENTS
As vocal media expanded beyond telephone communications, many of the ﬁndings
that were useful in achieving a higher level of clarity in a telephone conversation
became commonplace in new technologies. Early radio broadcasts faced many of
the same inherent problems that were found in a telephone call, namely, the intro -
duction of noise into the signal owing to the sound of static and the limited frequency
bandwidth available to the early pioneers in these industries. With telephone
communications, it was found that, if the bandwidth was limited even further, greater
intelligibility of the signal (transmission) could be gained, at the same time reducing
the nonessential frequencies of the voice that are not needed for effective com -
munication. Many of our forerunners in the radio sound business came from the
telephone industry, because of their experience with voice communication and
electronics, and brought their skills with them to the new medium. As a result,
The Voice in Media
15
2 Gertner, Jon, The Idea Factory; Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation. New
York: Penguin Press, 2012, p. 126.
3 Ibid., p. 129.
4 Ibid., p. 130.

recordings of early radio broadcasts often sound quite thin, and there isn’t a full
range of the frequency spectrum in the broadcast. Sacriﬁcing ﬁdelity for clarity was
a tradeoff worth making.
Then, in the mid-1920s, a new drive was begun to bring sound to motion pictures.
As ﬁlm moved into the sound era, the same problems were encountered as found
in telephony and radio with respect to the clarity of the human voice. Early movie
theatres were usually converted from vaudeville theatres, and there wasn’t much
thought or energy given to making these venues suitable for playback of ﬁlm sound.
The theatres were somewhat reverberant, because they were built to accommodate
musical performance, were not soundproofed, and had little to no acoustical treatment
of any kind. Quite unlike the modern ﬁlm theatre, which is specially constructed
for even distribution of the audio signal across the entire frequency spectrum, and
facing the additional problems of early ampliﬁer and loudspeaker designs, these
theatres were quite poor in reproducing voice recordings. Additionally, the means
of recording the soundtrack were limited to two choices: Either recording and
reproducing the sound for the ﬁlm on a disk (the Vitaphone system), which contained
static and pops, or recording directly onto the ﬁlm using a process known as “optical
recording.” Again, this system was inherently noisy and was not capable of repro -
ducing the entire frequency range of voice and music. Because of these limitations,
again we ﬁnd that there is a boost in the mid frequencies of the dialogue recording
to increase understanding of the words, with little to no artiﬁcial reverberation added
to the soundtrack (which, when added to the natural reverberation of the theatre
space, would further blur the sound of the voice). As a result, although the soundtracks
of early ﬁlms may sound thin and have a very limited bandwidth, this was a conscious
decision on the part of the sound engineers of the day, to help overcome the limitations
of the playback systems.
In the late 1940s, television broadcasting was coming into its own, and this form
of communication faced the same problems and limitations as radio of the time,
with the added problems of both how the program was heard and where it was
heard. Most home living rooms are not quiet places—noise from the outside and
sounds created within the home (refrigerator running, forced air heating systems,
and so on) mask a signiﬁcant amount of the sound bandwidth, and living rooms are
generally reverberant rooms to a certain extent. Also, the speakers in a typical
television receiver were tiny—in the area of only 2 inches, and a speaker of this
size cannot adequately reproduce much bass information. As a result, the early
television engineers, many of whom had come from the world of radio broadcasting,
turned to what had worked for both telephone and radio and began frequency
limiting their signal. As a result of all of these technologies using this method of
increasing the intelligibility of the signal and overcoming the “noise” portion of the
communication chain, as stated by Claude Shannon, we have all come to accept 
this altered sound as natural and what we expect to hear. By repeated exposure 
to this way of reproducing the voice, we have become acclimated to the sound 
and, to this day, accept the boosted midrange as the proper method of experiencing
recorded vocal information.
16
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media

Not all traditions use this midrange boost, however; in the French and English
ﬁlm industries, more emphasis is put on accurately reproducing the sound of the
program (more emphasis on ﬁdelity rather than clarity), owing to the history of
classical-music broadcasting in early radio in these countries, and, as a result, many
of the early ﬁlms from Europe sound unclear to us in the US today. By the way, I
should point out that becoming aware of this factor is important to our understanding
of recording the spoken word and will help us achieve a much more pleasing
recording; many manufacturers design into their products a midrange boost to help
increase intelligibility, and, if we become used to this sound, without being aware
of the design decisions made by the makers of our equipment, we are apt to add
even more boost to the signal and end up with an overly bright sound. This boost
is built into both microphones and loudspeakers, and being aware of these design
parameters will help in your ﬁnal product.
PSYCHOACOUSTICS
The work that Claude Shannon and others at Bell Labs were doing showed one
amazing insight: In recording, transmitting, and reproducing any information, the
content of that information does not matter. Although this may seem perfectly obvious
to us now, at the time Shannon published his paper, the idea was earth shattering.
The recording, transmission, and reproduction of information are, by and large,
technical matters, and we should never lose sight of that fact. We work in a technical
ﬁeld, and this is our main focus, as engineers and as others who want to capture
the spoken word for any type of medium. The more we can learn about how the
technical aspects of our task work, the more closely we can get to the desired outcome
that we hear in our “mind’s ear.” When working in media, it’s obvious that the
content of what we are recording matters—after all, that is the point—but how the
audio signal (the voice) is generated and how we (and our audience) perceive that
signal are equally important, if we are to be successful in imparting the information
content to our intended listeners.
The ﬁeld of psychoacoustics is very complex, and many people spend their entire
career studying this subject and formulating new theories of how sound interacts
with the human brain, but sufﬁce it to say, for the purposes of our discussion here,
that psychoacoustics can be simply deﬁned as how the brain perceives and processes
audio stimuli—that is, our subjective response to sound. Understanding how our
brains perceive the sounds that we hear is essential to effectively transmitting the
information in the message to our audience. (For a discussion of how the human
voice is produced, see Chapter 4, Microphones.) By taking into account both how
we perceive sound and our knowledge of the intended mode of playback when
listening, we can begin to understand how to overcome the noise inherent in any
signal and increase the intelligibility, or clarity, of the information content of the
recorded signal. It is generally accepted that human beings have a theoretical audio
sensitivity of between 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz (20 kHz) in the human audible range.
The Voice in Media
17

18
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media
I say theoretically, because we are all individuals, and all of us have a different
range of sensitivity owing to the physical shape of our ears and heads, our gender,
our age, the possibility of hearing loss, and other factors. However, if there is equal
power across all frequencies that we hear, we do not perceive the loudness of all
these frequencies equally, and we can use this fact to our advantage.
Loudness Versus Frequency
If a given frequency is played at a certain SPL (sound pressure level), and we perceive
it as being X loud, how strongly must another frequency be played so that we perceive
it as being equally loud? It turns out that we don’t perceive all frequencies as being
equally loud across our audio perception spectrum, even if the SPL is measured as
being identical. This is owing to the fact that we are most sensitive to frequencies
in the midrange portion of our hearing, around 3 kHz or so. As the frequency is
lowered or raised, our sensitivity falls off. This phenomenon can be charted, as seen
in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1 shows equal loudness curves, also known by the names of the two
scientists who developed this theory, Fletcher–Munson curves. What we see is that,
for signals of equal strength, the signals at the lowest and highest parts of the graph
fall off dramatically toward the threshold of hearing, whereas there is a rise in the
perception of loudness in the mid frequencies, centered around 3 kHz. This becomes
important to us in the mixing stage of our project especially—to sound equally as
loud as the midrange, more acoustic energy is needed at the lowest and highest
frequency ranges of our program material; the more bass is added to the content of
the program material, the more energy those frequencies take up, although we may
not appreciably notice more bass content in the mix. We can see the loudness on a
meter, but don’t necessarily experience it with our ears.
Perception Versus Frequency
As we evolved as human beings, our hearing adapted to provide greater protection
from threats in our environment; as a result, we are quite sensitive to sounds that
present the greatest threats and have lost sensitivity to other frequencies. As with
the perception of loudness versus frequency, we perceive frequencies in the midrange
area with greater sensitivity, with that sensitivity falling off in the upper and lower
frequency ranges. As this midrange is where we are most sensitive to sound, it is
in these frequencies that we perceive the most information that we receive and, thus,
the most clarity and intelligibility.
Thus, when recording and processing the voice for media, we can increase the
intelligibility of the voice by increasing the mid frequencies (depending on the voice,
generally in the 2–3 kHz range). Care must be taken when adding a boost to these
frequencies, or the voice can become thin or nasal sounding, but a small increase
can be of value to us. Alternatively, we can reduce frequencies in other bands to
increase clarity, particularly those frequencies that lie in the lower spectrum of the

human voice. By a reduction in the amount of acoustical information competing for
our attention, greater intelligibility is gained. Once again, care must be taken in
processing the voice in this manner, or the voice will rapidly become thin and
unnatural sounding. There is a ﬁne line between having a natural-sounding recording
and one that may carry the greatest amount of clarity but doesn’t strike our ear as
a natural and full representation of the human voice. By applying these principles
of psychoacoustics and how the human brain responds to sound, we can begin to
mold our recorded voice to give the audience a greatly enhanced listening experience.
For example, if we want to produce a television commercial that stands out from
all of the commercials around it, we might boost that 1.5–3 kHz midrange frequency
(as well as add some compression to the audio signal to reduce the dynamic range);
the resulting recording will sound not only brighter, but louder also. And, our audience
will gain more information as a result (see Figure 2.1 above). Another added beneﬁt
might be that the voice will tend to stand out from any music we use in the commercial,
provided that we also lower those mid frequencies in the music. There are many
The Voice in Media
19
FIGURE 2.1
Equal loudness curves
Source: Courtesy of Walters-Storyk Design Group
Ill 
""0 
c 
a:; 
> 
~ 
~ 
"iii 
c 
Q) c 
150 
140 
130 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
-10 
-20 
20 
II..., 
~ 
~ ;:~=: 
... 
•§ ~;: 
::::---.... 
~~::: ~ 
~~ ~ 
~ 
'' 
" 
100 
UPPER LIMIT OF HEARING 
-~ 
---.. ' -
~ 
-"' 
~ 
....-:, 
......._, ..._ ., '~ 
~/ 
--""-
~ f / 
"'-
.... 
-.... ~ ~ f ., 
~ 
...... ~ ~ 
,~ / 
-
!'-
""' 
I"'- ,..... 
~~ ./ 
~ ' 
-.... 
~""-,... 
~ 
_/ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
1'- ..., , 
~ 
~ 
'"I~ 
L.l 
,. 
I"'-
~ 
' 
~ -..... 
t..l 
,_../ 
~ 
............... 
~ ~ ~ 
...... ~ 
~ 
..... 
~ 
\ 
LOW I iR Ll~ lTC ;FA ~[!lEI 
____J 
1 K 
Frequency in Hz 
1° 
K 
20 K 

other purposes for putting this information to work for you, but the idea remains
the same in any signal that we hear. These psychoacoustic principles are used routinely
in making the voice more intelligible in very noisy environments, such as in radio
communication to an airplane pilot or race car driver. The more the mid frequencies
are boosted, the more the voice on the radio will stand out from the background
noise of engines, rushing air, and other sounds.
The opposite can also be used for dealing with the voice in media: If we were
to eliminate these midrange frequencies, we would lose clarity, and, for the purpose
of an intentional effect, this might prove very useful to us. Think about the sound
of the human voice in the ﬁlm Saving Private Ryan (directed by Steven Spielberg,
1998). When the character played by actor Tom Hanks hears the sound of heavy
gunﬁre, the voices of those soldiers around him are ﬁltered down in the frequency
spectrum, approximating the sound of temporarily losing one’s hearing. So,
manipulating the frequency content of the program material can be used to either
heighten or reduce the amount of information that the audience receives.
REVERBERATION
We are able to tell a large number of things about our environment from the sounds
we hear: The size of a room, the distance from another sound source, the location
of that sound source, and so on. We can use these acoustic cues to great advantage
when recording and mixing sound for media. One of the most useful psychoacoustic
principles is localization—that is, determining the direction of a sound source. We
are able to receive sounds from 360° around us; the ability to perceive the sound
as coming from, let’s say, our left front is mainly a function of our hearing with
two ears—the difference in direct sound from the object arriving at one ear and a
slightly delayed signal reaching the other ear, owing to both the distance between
our two ears and a slight change in amplitude due to the acoustical shadow introduced
by the head. This effect can be very effectively utilized when mixing in stereo, 
but working in a monophonic environment makes this left–right location impossible.
If we were to mix in a surround-sound mode, we could also include front–back
information to further localize sounds in space. However, even in monophonic, 
we can quite accurately reproduce a spatial element, at least in two dimensions. By
using reverberation, we can approximate the distance of a sound source from the
listening position. Thinking about the real world, when someone at a distance speaks
to us, we hear more of the reverberation characteristics of the room we are in, as
well as a roll-off of high-frequency information. As well, there is a drop in amplitude
of the person’s voice as a result of distance. So, by combining these three effects,
the front–back plane can be convincingly introduced into a monophonic recording.
We can see that the three elements needed to introduce a spatial dimension to our
work are frequency, amplitude, and time (the reverb element).
Reverberation also can allow us to make a sound fuller; as we add reverberation
to a signal, the individual reﬂections that make up the reverberant ﬁeld come together
20
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media

in an additive manner and reinforce one another. When combined with the original,
direct sound, these reﬂections can provide a richer and more up-front sound. However,
if too much reverberation is added, the sound starts to become muddy and hard to
deﬁne, and so we must be judicious in the amount of reverberation that we add into
the original signal. In the case of having too much reverberation, instead of reinforcing
our direct signal with the additive effect, we move to the position of the reverberation
adding too many discrete signals to what we hear, and thus we can’t make out the
original signal as clearly. (For a further discussion of the effects of reverberation,
refer to Chapter 3, Room Acoustics.)
THE DISEMBODIED VOICE
In working with the human voice in any type of medium, there are two choices that
the actor and the engineer, working in concert, can make in deciding on an approach
to the performance and the recording. These are what I term “the personal voice”
and “the disembodied voice.” In most media applications, we deal with the personal
voice—that is, the feeling that the actor is speaking directly to each one of us, in a
personal way. Think of a line from a commercial: “Let me tell you about this
wonderful new dish soap that I tried from Sudso Soaps.” Or perhaps this line from
a political spot: “A vote for Congressman Moneygrubber is a vote for the special
interests, and that’s not the American way.” In both of these instances, the voice is
speaking directly to each of us individually, one on one. The voice is recorded
relatively free of reverberation and in a dead-sounding room, and the microphone
is close to the actor’s mouth. The resulting intimate sound places the listener’s ear
close to the actor, and the result is that of hearing a friend giving you a piece of
advice or information. The actor and the engineer together make the choice of how
these lines will be recorded—one with the delivery and closeness to the mic, and
the other with the type of microphone and the processing employed in the recording
and mixing of the voice. Note that this personal approach does not necessarily
depend on the volume at which the lines are delivered; it is more a question of style
of delivery and recording. The personal voice is a matter of someone having a
conversation with you, regardless of the medium; at times, our conversations become
boisterous, other times they are quiet and contemplative, and at times we are simply
stating something to the listener. But all of these situations are examples of that
personal voice.
Another use for this approach is the narration that we often hear in ﬁlm (both
documentary and narrative) and games. The opening narration spoken by Tommy
Lee Jones in No Country for Old Men (directed by Joel and Ethan Coen, 2007) is
a perfect example of this type of delivery. Recorded at close proximity to the actor’s
mouth, with little to no reverberation and sounding brighter than his lines on screen
(and recorded on the set), this opening narration is Tommy Lee Jones’s character
speaking directly to each one of us and informing us of his state of mind and the
situation he ﬁnds himself in. There are numerous examples of this type of voice
The Voice in Media
21

recording in ﬁlm. These narrations provide the listener with background information
and let us know more about the character speaking the lines. In video games, this
technique is used for the same reasons, to great effect. And, of course, there is the
movie cliché of hearing the character’s voice but not seeing their lips move, while
a noticeable amount of added reverberation is also added: Ah, the “hearing their
inner thoughts” scenario. Effective? Yes. Original? Not so much.
For those performing the voiceover, remember this: The voiceover is usually
thought of as a one-on-one conversation; the actor isn’t a rock star shouting, “Hello,
Cleveland!” in a stadium. Rather, the voiceover is about holding a conversation with
a friend, even if we are aware that millions of people will hear the words. And it
is this intimacy that we are trying to capture, with all of its friendliness and personal
content. Don’t announce; have a conversation with a speciﬁc individual. The voiceover
is speaking to one person and telling her why you believe in what is being said.
Remember, she won’t believe it if you don’t. It is this intimacy and speaking to the
individual that give the voiceover its power and appeal. Don’t announce—talk; tell
a story, even if that story is about a new laundry detergent. Remember, the microphone
is your substitute for your listener’s ear. One person is your audience when you are
using the personal voice. Those voice actors who are the least effective are those
who use the disembodied voice, instead of the personal.
At the other end of the spectrum is the disembodied voice, often referred to as
“the voice of God.” Having less to do with the deep, rumbling voice of an almighty,
it is the voice speaking to us from above. The difference in the approach is that,
whereas the personal voice speaks to each individual, the disembodied voice speaks
to all at once: The same approach that one would take when speaking to one person,
or addressing an entire room full of people. The disembodied voice is omniscient:
It comes from everywhere and from nowhere at the same time. We hear this approach
many times in announcements; for example, at a sales meeting, we might hear,
“Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome the President and CEO, John Smith.” The
disembodied voice addresses a large number of people at the same time. In this
instance, the recording would be done with the microphone at a greater distance
from the actor (this may be a subtle difference in placement), and the equalization
would not be as bright. There may be a small amount of reverb added to the voice,
but be careful in adding reverberation to this type of delivery—if the room that the
announcement is to be played back in has its own reverberant character, the added
reverb may lead to a loss of intelligibility of the voice recording, and the message
could be lost. Also, if the intended playback venue is likely to be crowded or noisy,
such as at an airport, added reverb will add to the loss of clarity and understanding
that the listener can gain from hearing the announcement. Even though the voice is
generally recorded from a slightly further distance from the actor, we’re still concerned
with clarity in the recording. The disembodied voice generally uses more projection
on the part of the actor while speaking. So, the difference between the personal and
the disembodied voice is in the approach taken in both delivery and recording.
Of these two approaches, the personal voice is the one most often encountered
in media applications. We are trying to create the illusion of information ﬂowing
22
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media

from one person to another, even if the delivery method is a national television
commercial that is experienced by millions of people at the same time. The voice
in media is mainly used for passing information; in a video game, the voice is often
used for character development, the health status of the character, background
information, warnings, and other purposes. In a telephone prerecorded message, we
might learn how much we still have in our savings account at the bank, set up an
appointment with our auto mechanic, or learn how to update our stock portfolio.
We might encounter an online tutorial on how to effectively use a new piece of
software, and so on. In each of these instances, information is being delivered from
one person to another for education, information, entertainment, or all at the same
time. At the root of any recording of the spoken word is the choice of the personal
or disembodied approach. As the engineer, you play a large part in determining how
the audience perceives the approach.
RECORDING FOREIGN LANGUAGES
As a voiceover engineer, you may be requested to record various projects in a foreign
language. This is nothing to shy away from and can add to your client base, even
if you are not ﬂuent in the language(s) that will be recorded. In fact, this work can
be quite lucrative; for instance, in the world of video games, there is a process
known as “localization.” The idea is that the player of the game wants to hear the
dialogue in his or her own language. Unlike in movies, subtitles aren’t very effective
in games, and, as a result, all of the dialogue must be translated into various other
languages. This is a large and growing ﬁeld of recording work that you may want
to explore. In carrying out this aspect of VO recording, I have discovered that, far
from it being an intimidating situation, the recording of foreign languages can be
quite educational for the engineer in ways you may not have thought about.
A few years ago, I was in France, and late one night decided to see what was
on French television at that time of day. I came across a nature documentary that
was produced in Germany, then dubbed into Italian and now broadcast with French
subtitles. It was one of the more interesting audio experiences that I’ve come across:
Because I don’t speak any of those languages with any facility, I couldn’t understand
what the narrator was saying. As a consequence, there was no content to what I was
experiencing, only pure audio. I could concentrate solely on the quality of the narration
recording, the effectiveness of the sound effects, and how the mix was done, without
being distracted by the story that the documentary told. It had something to do with
birds in a forest, but that’s all I could get out of it. The key here was that there was
no meaning gained from the content of the program. Try this experiment, which I
do with my sound design students: Watch a ﬁlm that is in a language you do not
understand, but that has good sound design, and disable the subtitles on the DVD.
You will ﬁnd that you can concentrate on the sound much more effectively because
you’re not being distracted with the story and with trying to ﬁgure out who the
characters are and what the situation is. The quality of the audio becomes much
The Voice in Media
23

more apparent, because your brain is desperately trying to make sense out of what
you are experiencing. With no words (content), all of the sound becomes much more
important in this process of trying to decode what is going on. All you are left with
is pure sound. This can be a very powerful way to study the way sound works in
ﬁlm and is pertinent to our discussions of recording voiceover as well. (By the way,
the ﬁlm I usually do this experiment with is the 1981 German ﬁlm Das Boot, directed
by Wolfgang Petersen, although any ﬁlm with good sound design, in any language
you don’t speak, would work just as well.)
If we can divorce our brain from the language component of what we are hearing,
we can focus much more deeply on the pure sound of what we are hearing. Our
brains are wired to search for content and meaning when we hear a voice, but, if
we can’t understand the language in which the voice is speaking, we ignore the
built-in multitasking that we do all the time, without even realizing, when analyzing
and taking meaning from the words, and we can concentrate much more closely on
the quality of the voice. This is the state that good voiceover engineers strive to
reach in all of our sessions, but of course it becomes very difﬁcult, because we are
also supposed to be listening closely for mispronunciations and grammatical errors
while we’re recording. We search for meaning even when we are having trouble
making out what the message is. Hearing a foreign language is encountering a code,
and, if you remember what Claude Shannon discovered in his work in cryptology
during World War II, the key to deciphering a code lies in recognizing repetitions.
This became very apparent to me during the course of a multiday session, recording
the voiceover for a series of training videos on the maintenance and repair of road-
building and construction vehicles for a major construction industry supplier, for
use in the Japanese market. I don’t understand Japanese, and Asian languages at
times present a particular problem because of the way that words are inﬂected at
the end of sentences; these languages don’t follow the European model of ending
a sentence on a down inﬂection—quite often, the word ending that ends a sentence
in Japanese or Chinese (either Cantonese or Mandarin) is inﬂected upwards. As a
result, I have trouble spotting the sentence breaks in these languages, and editing
becomes very difﬁcult. However, in doing these Japanese-language sessions, I found
a very interesting thought process developing.
The name of the manufacturer was the same in either English or Japanese, and
I could pick that word out of any sentence quite easily. During the course of the
session, I began to notice that the product name was oftentimes followed by a word
I didn’t understand, but, in referring to my English script, I saw that, in English,
the product was followed by a certain word. I asked the Japanese translator who
was producing the session if I had made the correct translation, and it turned out
that I had. I began to look for other patterns like this, and by the end of the recording
and editing found that I was beginning to learn a small amount of Japanese because
of the experience. Now, this doesn’t prove my facility with foreign languages, but
rather that recording in another language is simply part of the job and something
that can be important in learning our craft. When recording and editing languages
of Western European origin, I usually don’t have any problem whatsoever, even if
24
CHAPTER 2 The Voice in Media

I don’t speak that language. The reason is because these languages use the Roman
alphabet, as does English, and so, even if I might not understand the meaning of
the words, I can follow along on the script and know where I am, and I’m able to
mark my edit points and later make those edits without any problem. The scripts
that are impossible for me to deal with are those that do not use the Roman alphabet,
but rather some other form of written communication, and for these sessions I need
a translator sitting next to me telling me where to make the edits. Russian, Chinese,
Japanese, Arabic, Hebrew—all are a complete mystery to me. But here’s the thing:
The less I understand of the words (the content), the more I can pay attention to the
technical quality of the recording. If we can train ourselves to reach this point, even
in dealing with a script that’s in our native tongue, we will become better engineers.
Learning to divorce yourself from the content, even when keeping in mind that
paying close attention to content is a vital piece of the job, is a skill worth developing
and one that marks a good engineer. Granted, it takes a splitting of the mind to be
able to do this, but it can be accomplished. Don’t back away from recording 
in another language—it can be fun and educational and open new doors for you as
a successful recording professional. All of the rules of VO recording still apply, and
the same equipment is used. After all, a human voice is a human voice.
If you have the time and skill, consider learning another language. Where I live
and work, the most common foreign language spoken is Spanish; where you live it
might be something else. By becoming bilingual, you will become immensely more
employable and open up new markets for your studio owner, especially if the studio
owner is you!
Coming back to where this chapter opened, beginning with information (or
communication) theory and from there understanding how the human brain perceives
sound impulses, we can start to recognize the essentials of vocal communication
and how our recording of the spoken word ﬁts into these patterns. By putting these
principles into action when recording the voiceover, our projects will be better able
to reﬂect the communication intended and help our listeners more easily grasp the
intent and meaning of the words.
The Voice in Media
25

This page intentionally left blank

Achieving superior quality in the recorded voiceover is a result of the interaction
of three factors: The room, the voice, and the microphone. In the following two
chapters, we’ll look at each of these. This chapter deals with the studio space and
acoustics; Chapter 4 will delve into how speech is produced, and how the microphone
captures the spoken word. Please be aware that this chapter is not meant to be a
comprehensive examination of the subject of acoustics, but rather an introduction
to the subject for the purpose of achieving a good-sounding recording in the studio.
The ﬁrst step in evaluating the studio space is to listen to what the room sounds
like; get out the diagnostic tools and measure all you want, but simply listening to
what the room is doing can get you far down the road to solving potential problem
areas. The other thing to keep in mind is that any evaluation of the studio space must
be done in that room itself. All rooms will have their own acoustic signature, and that
3
Room Acoustics
CHAPTER

includes the control room—just like the studio, the control room will have its own
reﬂections, reverberation, and other anomalies. Judging the sound of the studio while
monitoring in the control room will introduce the control room’s acoustics to the
studio’s, and it will be nearly impossible to determine accurately what the studio sounds
like. Monitoring on headphones will eliminate the control room’s signature and let
you determine what the studio’s acoustics are doing. The listening space can inﬂuence
our perception of the sound, and so acoustic control in all areas is essential.
With a voice recording, our goal is to capture as pure a signal as possible and
to eliminate any noise factors that we can. “Noise” has been deﬁned as “unorganized
sound,” and, for the purposes of this discussion, we can say it is any extraneous
sound that is not the spoken word. It can be classiﬁed as external sound getting into
the studio, excess reverberation in the room, sounds from loud HVAC, and the like.
For the voice recording, we want maximum intelligibility and clarity in the recording;
any effect that we would like the ﬁnished and produced recording to have we normally
add in the editing and mixing stages. Above all, intelligibility is the one absolute
that we strive to attain. Anything that intrudes upon the recording will distract the
listener, and intelligibility will be diminished. And keep in mind that, unlike with
a musical vocal, there is often little or nothing that will mask these unwanted sounds
(music or sound effects are most times played at a much lower level than the voice
to retain the intelligibility).
To achieve this, we must ﬁrst review some fundamentals of acoustics and the
way in which sound is propagated in an enclosed space and then captured by the
microphone. This chapter will look at the voice studio—the physical space itself,
how the microphone “hears” the space, and some thoughts on setting up the studio
to maximize the recorded quality of the voice. There are four factors to consider
when attempting to control noise (or other unwanted signals) from intruding into
the spoken-word recording: Isolation, room dimensions, the room shape, and the
room acoustics. We’ll begin with a short discussion of how sound reacts in an
enclosed space—the studio.
When a sound is created, the sound wave radiates out from the source in all
directions, until it either dies away or is reﬂected by a surface.
Sound waves react to reﬂection from a surface in the same way that light waves
do; that is, when a sound strikes a surface, it is reﬂected at the same angle that 
it originally struck at. This pattern of reﬂected sound is known as the “angle of
incidence” and the “angle of reﬂection.” The sound wave then travels through the
air until it strikes another surface, where it bounces off that wall, losing energy and
becoming softer with each reﬂection, and so on, until it dies away and is no longer
heard. Another way of thinking about this and visualizing how sound interacts with
a room is to imagine a billiard table. The table has no pockets for the ball to
disappear into, and wherever the ball strikes one of the sides of the table, it will
rebound back. So now we roll a ball across the table (all of this is assuming that
there is no spin or “English” on the ball that would affect the angle at which the
ball rebounds), and it bounces off the side. Notice that the angle of reﬂection equals
the angle of incidence, just like with the analogy of a beam of light above. If we
28
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics

Room Acoustics
29
could see all the trails that the rebounding ball makes as it travels around the table,
we could begin to visualize what happens to sound in an enclosed space. To help
control these reﬂections, we can add something that absorbs some of the energy of
the ball; in this case, we can replace the hard rubber of the table sides with a softer
foam. The foam will absorb some of the energy of the ball, and it will lose momentum
on the reﬂection. In the same way, we can add absorption to a room with acoustical
treatments and reduce the amount of reﬂected sound. Now, let’s change our billiard
table to a pool table and introduce pockets into the corners—when the ball goes in
this direction, it disappears into the pocket, and there is no reﬂection at all. This
would be analogous to bass trapping in the corners of the room.
Of course, sound isn’t a single-point event like a beam of light or a ball rolling
across a table; it radiates in all directions at the same time. If we imagine an inﬁnite
number of billiard balls all emanating from the same source point, radiating in all
directions at the same time, and then reﬂecting off of all six boundaries, we can
begin to see the complexity of how sound acts in a room. It becomes imperative to
control these reﬂections, and this is the aim of the acoustic designer.
Whether we think of sound waves as acting like light waves or billiard balls, in
neither case does the wave travel straight out and disappear if it is conﬁned in a
reﬂective space; it always bounces at the angle of reﬂection. Besides the six surfaces
that make up the room—four walls, ceiling, and ﬂoor—it is wise to remember that
anything within the room will also reﬂect sound waves, to a greater or lesser extent,
depending on its size. As you can imagine, the wave pattern in a room quickly
becomes very complex.
The sound wave is made of molecules of air that are compressed and in relaxation
(known as compression and rarefaction). When these areas of compression strike a
surface, they are reﬂected back into the space, where they pile up with other areas
of compression. As you can imagine, the resulting sound may not be ideal. One
result is that one frequency can cancel another, owing to the phase relationships 
of the waves, and can result in a comb ﬁlter effect and, thus, highly color the sound.
What we are trying to do with the acoustics of the voice studio (or any room 
for that matter) is control these reﬂections so that they don’t color the sound we are
attempting to capture. We do this by means of absorption and diffusion. If we can
absorb the sound wave in some manner, it won’t have the chance to reﬂect back
into the space and color our sound. Likewise, if we can break the sound wave up
so that its angle of reﬂection does not equal the angle of incidence, it is less likely
to present difﬁculties. All of the above assumes the wave to be a pure sine wave of
ﬁxed frequency and is useful in discussing how sound reacts in an enclosed space,
but this is never the case, except under test conditions in the studio. The problem
in a real-world setting is that how a wave behaves is a result of the frequency of
the sound and the resulting length of the sound wave, as well as amplitude and the
angles of reﬂection. For instance, low-frequency sounds have much longer
wavelengths than high-frequency ones. As a result, the amount of absorption that
must be accomplished is likewise much greater, and a more massive absorber must
be used to be effective. This is most effectively done with the use of bass traps.

30
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics
FIGURE 3.1
Absorber Panels
Source: Courtesy of Auralex Acoustics
FIGURE 3.2
Diffuser Panel
Source: Courtesy of Auralex Acoustics

Sound reﬂected off walls, ceilings, and ﬂoors directly inﬂuences the quality of
the sound picked up by the microphone. At the microphone, the majority of energy
captured will be direct sound, emanating directly from the source (in our case, the
actor’s mouth). However, reﬂected sound also makes its way back to the microphone
and interacts with the direct sound, causing many unwanted artifacts. After reﬂecting
off a wall or ﬂoor, a signal will bounce back to the listening position. This is known
as an early reﬂection. Early reﬂections help us to determine the size of a room, as
well as distance from the source. Sound that reﬂects off two or more surfaces before
arriving at the listening position is known as a secondary reﬂection. As the signal
continues to reﬂect off boundaries, the number of reﬂections builds until the room
is ﬁlled with reﬂected sound, and we now experience reverberation, the state in
which it becomes impossible to determine the direction of the source sound and
which lasts after the original signal has ceased to be emitted. In this instance, the
acoustical energy has become equal across the entire room.
The role of acoustic design in the studio space is to control these artifacts and
eliminate as many of them as possible. When designing a studio space for music
recording, some reverberation is oftentimes built into the room—for this type of
recording, the warmth and naturalness of room reverberation is more pleasing than
artiﬁcial reverb, and, depending on what type of music is being recorded, the decay
time of the room is taken into consideration. For instance, a longer reverberation
time is often speciﬁed for studios recording classical music, so that the instruments
avoid sounding “brittle” and “dry.” Acoustic jazz may call for shorter-duration decay
times, and so on. For voiceover work, the room should be nearly unnaturally dead.
The voice studio is the most acoustically dead sounding of any recording space.
We must do all we can to capture only the sounds on which we intentionally
want the audience to focus, and this means eliminating as many of the reﬂections
as we can. By absorbing and diffusing the sound waves, we can arrive at much
better control of the sound picked up by the microphone and a more pleasing recording.
Part of this control comes from the size of the room itself. I have recorded in all
manner and size of rooms, and it is my experience that, the smaller the room,
generally the more problems with reﬂection and coloration you will end up with.
This is because the boundaries of the room are much closer to the microphone,
making the reﬂected sound much stronger in relation to the direct sound that the
mic is picking up. Also, the shape of the room is of vital importance to the end
quality of the recording. I realize that we can’t always construct the ideal room and
must live with the existing space that we have. The good news is that virtually any
room can be improved with proper application of acoustic materials. The ﬁrst step
in eliminating unwanted reﬂection is to eliminate any 90° angle that you possibly
can. A 90° angle (either two walls or wall–ﬂoor or ceiling–wall) will lead to a
buildup in bass frequencies that must be controlled, either by trapping these
frequencies or by eliminating the 90° angle. When constructing a space, take care
that there are no parallel wall surfaces. As you can imagine, a sound wave striking
a wall straight on will reﬂect off that wall straight back toward the opposite wall,
creating what is known as a “standing wave.” In rooms that have a problem with
Room Acoustics
31

standing waves, you can easily hear the result: A sine wave is played back into the
room, and, as you move about the space, the amplitude of the sound gets louder
and softer as you move. What you are hearing is the “piling up” of the reﬂected
waves in certain parts of the room (or, to be more accurate, the reinforced compression
portion of the waves and the associated relaxed, or rariﬁed, portion), and this will
give a highly inaccurate representation of the original sound. Using measurement
devices, we can often detect a wide variation in amplitude in areas just a few inches
apart. Whether a particular room is a candidate for standing waves can be easily
computed: If the roundtrip path length from one wall to the opposite wall and back
(front to back or side to side) is exactly the same length as the wavelength of the
sound wave, or a multiple of that number, without proper treatment the room will
cause a standing wave at that frequency, and you (and your microphone) will hear
either louder or softer reproduction of that frequency, depending on where the hearing
apparatus is located. Even with a good deal of absorption, it is difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to eliminate the resonance. The answer is to avoid the use of parallel
surfaces when at all possible.
A room will not absorb all frequencies equally, and there will be a variance in
the time it takes for any given frequency to die away; this results in a different
reverberation time for two differing frequencies in the same space. These variations
32
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics
FIGURE 3.3
RT60 Target Values
Source: Courtesy of Walters–Storyk Design Group
Honest and trustworthy 
Honest and trustworthy 
Honest and trustworthy 
Honest and trustworthy 
Honest and trustworthy 
Firm 
Firm 

Room Acoustics
33
INSIGHT: Daniel Porter, Regional Manager and Product Training
Specialist, Auralex® Acoustics, Inc.
A Word on Project Studio Acoustics
Now that all you need to produce music is a laptop, the will to create, and a
space to work in, the demand for larger traditional studios with acoustically dedicated
spaces has been signiﬁcantly reduced, the obvious reason for this being simple
economics. The operating cost of a multiroomed traditional studio can be daunting
for both engineers and musicians alike. The majority of music production now
takes place in what the industry has labeled “project studios.” These types of
studio are multipurpose facilities that are housed in a single room and are designed
to accommodate every stage of production. More often than not, project studios
are found in residential areas and are converted living spaces of some sort (bedroom,
ofﬁce, closet, etc.). The rapid development of project studios by both hobbyists
and professionals is a direct result of the development of affordable and easy-to-
use digital recording technologies. The following is a list of ﬁve fundamental
acoustical topics that are applicable to nearly all project-studio environments:
Isolation (Room-to-Room Sound Leakage)
Unfortunately, the only way to truly isolate a studio is to add multiple layers of
mass with varying densities to the existing walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling, or to build an
entirely new space. This often proves to be too costly an option for project-studio
operators. For those without the money or the permission of the landlord to alter
their studio so dramatically, here is a helpful tip: Think of sound like you would
light or water: If you were to ﬁll your room with water, where would it leak out?
If you shone a spotlight around the room, where would it escape to the exterior?
Addressing these weak points in your room’s inherent design with off-the-shelf
weather stripping or homemade MDF window plugs can produce audible results.
This will give you better insight into how isolated the studio is already, and what
steps need to be taken to improve it.
Acoustical Symmetry (Studio Layout)
When choosing a room to convert into a project studio, the rectangular design that
dominates living spaces is often the best option, despite its parallel surfaces. Even
though such spaces are havens for ﬂutter echo and low-frequency summation/
cancellation, they allow for one to orient the listening position and studio monitors
symmetrically with respect to the sidewalls. This ensures that, with or without
acoustical treatment, the sound in the room is arriving at the listening position
symmetrically with respect to the left and right stereo channels.

are what give any room its sonic signature, and the room can be “tuned” by the
designer to achieve a certain sound and feel. The reverberation time is measured
using RT60—the time it takes for a level to drop 60 dB. As mentioned, all rooms
and all frequencies exhibit differing RT60 times, and a well-designed room will take
this into consideration. Through the use of high-frequency and low-frequency
absorption, the RT60 time can be molded and controlled to a great degree. Figure
3.3 shows the ideal RT60 measurements for studios designed for music and voice
applications.
34
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics
Absorption (Acoustical Foam, Fiberglass, Recycled Cotton, etc.)
Nearly all project studios acoustically beneﬁt from the application of absorptive
materials to otherwise reﬂective walls and ceilings. Once a room is oriented
symmetrically, placing treatment to the left, right, in front, behind, and above the
monitors and listening position will reduce the extraneous reﬂections that would
otherwise distort the sound being reproduced.
Bass Trapping (Low-Frequency Absorption)
It is almost impossible to over-bass trap a project studio. However, one can apply
so much bass trapping to a room that otherwise usable space is sacriﬁced for
relatively small acoustical gains and substantial monetary investment. For this
reason, a compromise in acoustical design is typical. The most efﬁcient place in
a project studio for bass trapping is in the upper vertical and horizontal corners.
This is where the traps can have the greatest acoustical impact, without limiting
the amount of physical space available for production equipment, furniture,
engineers, and musicians.
Diffusion (High-Frequency Scattering)
Diffusors are often used as a counterbalance to absorption. By design, they add
acoustical character rather than reduce it, as absorption would do. Whether or not
this is appropriate is completely at the discretion of the studio operator’s needs
and wants. In any case, an important thing to consider with regard to diffusion is
the distance from the listening position. Keeping most diffusors at least 6 feet
away from the listening position will allow for them to operate as they are intended.
It is not uncommon to see diffusors on the ceiling or the wall behind the listening
position in a project studio. These conﬁgurations can create a more natural sense
of spaciousness for either recording or listening when used strategically.
For more information regarding acoustic treatment or studio design, visit
www.auralex.com

Room Acoustics
35
When it comes to very large rooms, such as music studios or ﬁlm stages, the
effect can be equally disconcerting. The problem of unwanted reﬂections is eliminated
to a large degree because of the distance the sound waves must travel; however, we
now often have the problem of reverberation to deal with. Music studios are oftentimes
purposely constructed to have a reverberant quality to a greater or lesser degree,
and this reverberation, although accepted and even welcomed in music, is not
conducive to a good-quality voice recording. To overcome the problems of a very
large room, we can work closer to the microphone, which has ramiﬁcations that 
we should be aware of and that will be discussed in later chapters, or use movable
bafﬂes, also known as “gobos” or “ﬂats.” These portable panels are constructed
using an absorption material such as ﬁberglass insulation or foam and covered with
an acoustically transparent fabric (much like a loudspeaker grill cover). This effectively
isolates the microphone from the larger room, creating a smaller and more controlled
recording area. These panels are available commercially or are an easy do-it-yourself
project if you are handy with basic woodworking tools. By arranging these gobos
around a microphone, we in essence create a micro-recording environment within
the studio space and can then more accurately control the reﬂection of sound waves.
The gobo can also be used to help isolate one microphone from another acoustically,
if more than one actor is recording at the same time.
FIGURE 3.4
Corner Bass Trap
Source: Courtesy of Auralex Acoustics

36
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics
If the resources to specially construct the perfect room are lacking, there are
prefab solutions available that can be custom ordered in various sizes and shapes
and offer many window and door options. A product known as WhisperRoom™,
from WhisperRoom, Inc. (www.whisperroom.com), comes in a wide variety of sizes
and can be equipped with customizable acoustic treatment, as well as a wide
assortment of window and door options. Another product is the Porta-Booth™
(available at www.voiceoveressentials.com). This product, developed by a well-
known voiceover actor, encloses the microphone in an acoustic treatment and renders
virtually any space quite usable for voice recording. It is (as the name suggests)
portable and can be used with a wide variety of microphone types and sizes, in
virtually any setting.
Whatever the ﬁnal decision on arriving at an acoustically pleasing space, there
is one aspect to the studio that must not be overlooked, and that is proper ventilation.
This is a vital design consideration for two reasons: First, the recording space must
remain comfortable for the actor for long periods of time, and the lack of air movement
and excessive heat that come with improper ventilation can be very wearing on the
person involved. Second, the sound of noisy ventilation can and will ruin an otherwise
good recording. Air in motion coming from heating and cooling ducts as well as
the fans can generate a lot of noise, and proper precautions must be taken to eliminate
most, if not all, of this sound. The ideal solution is to employ bafﬂed ductwork and
to use large-diameter ducting and vents. Low-ﬂow air handlers are ideal, as a large
volume of air moving slowly is much quieter than a fast-moving amount of the same
volume. Designing proper ventilation into the studio upon construction is preferable
FIGURE 3.5
Tube Traps
Source: Courtesy of Applied Sciences Corporation (ASC)

Room Acoustics
37
FIGURE 3.6 
WhisperRoom
Source: Courtesy of WhisperRoom, Inc.
FIGURE 3.7 
PortaBooth Pro
Source: Courtesy of Harlan Hogan’s VoiceOver Essentials

to attempting to retroﬁt the ducting and air handling into an existing space, as quite
often this would require demolition of the ceiling and some of the walls. For prefab
spaces such as the WhisperRoom™, ventilation can be included in the package as
an option and is very well designed. If care is not taken in this area, the sound of
the ventilation will be very apparent in the recording and will be extremely difﬁcult
to remove. Equalization rarely does much good on this type of noise, because the
frequency spectrum of the HVAC noise is broadband and includes the same frequen -
cies as the voice, so that attenuating the noise signal attenuates the voice frequencies
as well. One other aspect of having the studio space adequately ventilated is that 
of the life span of the microphone. You don’t want to spend signiﬁcant amounts of
money on a mic, only to have it sit in an overheated and humid environment, 
or one that might have signiﬁcant temperature variations. We will discuss other
considerations of studio comfort and utility in Chapter 6, The Studio (talent comfort,
lighting, copy stands, etc.).
There are many other potential sources of noise creation in the studio; ﬂuorescent
lights are notorious for their buzzing sound, loose items on shelving can vibrate in
sympathy with certain frequencies, computer fans, etc. All of these noise sources
within the studio must be addressed, or they will be heard by the audience. The
background noise level in a studio (or any room) can be measured using a rating
system known as the noise criteria (NC) level. For any intended use of a space, 
an optimal NC level can be determined by the room designer or acoustician (see
Table 3.1).
Besides acoustical problems within the room (reﬂections, reverberation, HVAC,
ﬂuorescent light buzzes, and so on), we also must be aware that the studio should
be free of any ambient or external noise. Noise from the outside is constant and can
come from trafﬁc, airplanes, weather, and so on. The amount of this outside sound
that enters the studio, as well as sound generated inside the room, contributes to the
noise ﬂoor of the room, and this ambient noise will interfere with the listening
experience. The background noise level in a room can be measured and is rated as
an NC number.
38
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics
Table 3.1 Typical NC Ratings
Condition
NC Level
Sleeping
25–35
Living space
35–45
Ofﬁce
30–45
Restaurant
35–50
Home theatre
20–25
Concert hall
20–25
Motion picture theatre
25–30
Audio studio
15–20

Depending on the intended use of a given room, varying NC ratings are acceptable:
A sports stadium would be around NC50, a movie theatre generally around NC20.
For voice studios, the recommended level is around NC12–15, meaning that these
rooms are very quiet. If they are not, the noise will not only interfere with the
aesthetic experience of listening to the voice, it can become so distracting that the
intelligibility of the voice is lost. With voice recording, as previously stated, there
is oftentimes nothing to mask this noise on the voice recording.
Exterior noise can come from either of two sources: Air-borne sounds or structure-
borne sounds. If there is sound coming from outside the studio that enters through
the walls or because of air leaks in the room, that sound will be picked up by the
microphone and be a source of distraction to the listener, thus contaminating our
clean recording. The same is true of sound that enters through the building structure.
These sounds can be extremely difﬁcult to deal with, and eliminating structure-borne
noise takes careful planning of the studio space. Most times, this type of noise
contamination will be low-frequency information that travels through the building’s
structure and can be caused by a passing truck or bus or something of that sort. I
once was invited to open a new recording space and went to check it out. It was in
the basement of a building that was suitable in all regards for a studio space, but,
Room Acoustics
39
FIGURE 3.8
NC Curves
Source: Courtesy of Walters–Storyk Design Group
One of the most 
commonly used 
single-number 
readings for 
quietness is the 
Noise Criteria (NC).
NC curves are 
convenient but can 
be deceiving in 
accuracy for individual 
frequency values
sound-pressure level (dB)
NC 70 
NC 65 
NC 60 
NC 55 
NC 50 
NC45 
NC 40 
NC 35 
NC 30 
NC 25 
NC 20
NC 35
31.S 
6 3  
125 
2 5 0  
5 00  
lk  
2k 
4k 
8k
octave band center frequencies (Hz)
100
9 0
8 0
70
60
50
4 0
30
20
,0
0

as I stood in the unﬁnished space, I realized that about every 5 minutes there was
a very audible rumbling sound. I discovered that the building was about a block or
so from a major subway line, and, as an underground train passed, its vibrations
were traveling through the ground and into the building’s foundations and then into
the air inside the room. Needless to say, I passed on building a studio in that space
and moved on with my life.
These types of problem can best be overcome by using what is known as “box-
in-a-box” construction. Leave the existing walls, ceiling, and ﬂoor as is, insulate all
around the interior, and construct a new room that is “ﬂoating” within the existing
room. By placing the ﬂoor of the new studio room on isolating pads or springs and
hanging the ceiling in the same manner, then making sure that the new walls do not
physically connect with the existing walls, you decouple the new space from the
original, and no structure- or air-borne sound is able to enter.
Many of the pre-fab solutions discussed above are fairly simple ﬁxes to these
types of noise issue, and, if you must place a studio in an existing space, adjacent
sound issues and noise sources should be investigated. Of course, if you begin all-
new construction, instead of trying to retroﬁt a new studio into an existing space,
you are free to design in all the proper features, such as non-parallel walls, a ﬂoating
structure, and so on.
40
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics
INSIGHT: John Storyk, R.A., Principal—Walters–Storyk 
Design Group
Studio Design and Acoustics
To me, a studio recording space means any environment with a live microphone.
I recognize that recording takes place without live mics, but that is another book.
Now, having said that, people do put live microphones in their control rooms, but
for this discussion we’ll assume there is a control room and there is then one
space or X number of other spaces that become the preferred live-microphone
locations—in other words the iso booth. As always, good design starts with good
programming. As designers, the ﬁrst thing that we try to get our arms around in
the studio space is how is it programmed? What type of recording will happen in
that space? Music, spoken word, what are we trying to record there? Very quickly
in this process, we need to determine the size of this small room—how many
people do we need to accommodate? The recording type drives style and acoustic
signature. These are the early questions we need to resolve. Almost immediately
following this discussion, we need to address issues such as budget, location,
ergonomics, natural daylight, special features, isolation, etc. It’s a big list, and at
times it seems to be a puzzle that cannot be easily pieced together. But it all
starts with the type of recording, the type of music or non-music (e.g., voice only),

Room Acoustics
41
and size. If we don’t get these issues sorted out, nothing else is going to make
much sense.
If it’s voice only, we typically are not as concerned with very low-frequency response
issues. Usually, there isn’t much recorded information below 80 Hz. For instance,
recently we were asked to improve the acoustics of a very small (22 square feet)
vocal booth. In this case, as in many booths, there was a “boominess,” a lack of
clarity at the lower frequencies, that did in fact seem to translate into some of
their recordings. The geometry was so small there was no opportunity to really
address 80 Hz as a fundamental eigentone (standing-wave frequency). There
wasn’t even any room for thin membrane absorbers. Our solution in this case was
a simple one—try to put some air behind our broadband absorbers, essentially
extending the absorptive frequency range of the panels. The recording engineer
will accomplish the rest of this task with roll-off equalization.
We’re very strict on the NC15 rule for voiceover rooms. Generally speaking, those
rooms are on the dry side. Music is much harder to deal with, as it depends on
a broader range of frequencies. Even more complicated are multipurpose
environments. The fully isolated or fully decoupled room design is typically how
an NC15 is accomplished (see NC curves graphic—Figure 3.8). We should remind
FIGURE 3.9 
Relative Sound Pressure Levels
Source: Courtesy of Walters–Storyk Design Group
Sound Pressure Level (dB)
Threshold 
" o f  Pain 
^
CO
T3
Onr
20 
50 
100 
BOO 500 
lk 
3k 5k 
10k 
20k
Frequency (Hz)
Speech
80 to 4,000Hz
Music
120
100
80
-
40
20
0
Threshold 
of Hearing
co
TD
OCO
20 to 20,000 Hz

42
CHAPTER 3 Room Acoustics
ourselves of one of the oldest rules of noise control—to obtain a quiet room, choose
a quiet site!
If you’re building an iso booth in the middle of the woods and you don’t record
when it rains, it is conceivable that the boundary for this room could literally be
a tent! Sounds silly, but it’s true. More typically, iso booths will tend to be fully
or partially decoupled, because they’re often adjacent to control rooms, which get
loud. Again, these small, quiet rooms need to maintain NC15 quietness values.
Decoupling rooms is expensive—no two ways about it. If we’re going to make a
compromise for budget on a project (this is called value engineering), one can
allow control rooms to be a bit louder, particularly larger control rooms that monitor
at loud levels. Designing a control room to NC15 is usually a waste of money. I
have seen them as high as NC25 and still working very well. Background noise
from people and equipment will override NC15 specs!
As far as achieving maximum voice intelligibility, just make sure the room is
attenuated as equally as possible through its useful frequency recording range.
The ideal RT60 time for a booth is very low—often .1–.3 seconds (max) at 1 K.
Some people would argue that these rooms are so small and so “dead” that they
simply do not have a measureable reverberation value. Regardless of whether you
think there is reverberation or not, or whether you think it’s statistically correct,
there is a decay rate. You can measure it and you can deﬁne it. For me, more
important than an exact value at 1K is the variation between octave bands of this
decay rate—particularly as we approach the lower frequencies. In the problematic
room we previously discussed, the simple explanation for this poor performance
was basically inadequate low-frequency absorption. The “run away” low end was
thus easily explained. The room displaying a .2 second decay rate at 1 K, while
at the same time displaying a decay rate of nearly 1 second at 125 K, is most
deﬁnitely not going to perform correctly. Why is this happening? Simple—there’s
no absorption at 60 Hz in the room. There wasn’t any room, or, more typically,
somebody just installed foam, thinking that, “You walk in and it sounds dead—
thus better.” For speech, it’s possible this is satisfactory. But, put a bass guitar
in that room and it will be bothersome. In general, less foam, which is really mid-
frequency absorption, and more attention to low-frequency attenuation might be
a better approach to these rooms. Corner bass trapping (low-frequency control)
may often be your only option. And, by the way, there’s more than just one corner.
Most people think of corners in a square or rectangular plan, but you can put the
corner traps at the intersection of the wall and the ceiling.
Most projects that start out as “speech-only vocal” booths aren’t really, in fact,
speech-only vocal booths. In the end, the client really wants an iso booth that can
also double for solo instruments—i.e., put a guitar in there, maybe a sax, throw
a bass guitar amp in, etc. Many times, a guitar amp is in the small iso booth,
and the player is in the control room. So, in an initial client discussion, they will

Through all of this discussion, the most important point to take away is this: The
spoken voice is a relatively quiet source, and any type of noise contamination will
be immediately apparent and must be avoided at all times. Unlike music being
recorded, the voice at a conversational level is generally in the 65 dB range, and so
it is easily disturbed with any type of intruding information, whether that be
reverberation, heavy HVAC sound, or the sound of a passing train!
start off with, “Yeah, we’re only going to do vocals,” and, about 20 minutes later,
after you have a little conversation with them, you realize that what you’re really
building is not a vocal booth but an iso booth. The difference to me is that an
iso booth is one that will accommodate music as well as vocals. Again, our argument
for planning and programming!
Typically, I would encourage a studio owner to make the booth as large as possible,
as this will help tackle the low-frequency issue. For instance, if someone says, 
“I want an iso booth and I want it big enough for a baby grand piano or big enough
for a drum kit,” then the footprint of the piano or the drum kit starts to drive the
design—simple as that! If it’s literally, “I want an iso booth and what I’m really
going to be doing there, day in and day out, are one to two vocals but maybe an
instrumentalist,” then it can be a bit smaller. It always circles back to programming:
What are you trying to do in this room? Imagine a room where a baby grand piano
has to move in and out on a daily basis. When this happens, we would try for
double doors. This is a classic example of an ergonomic condition driving the
architecture and ultimately directing the ﬁnal acoustic solution. Architecture and
acoustics—a love affair that leans on creativity and compromise!
For more information, visit www.wsdg.com
Room Acoustics
43

This page intentionally left blank

“What microphone should I use to record a voiceover?” This is the most common
question on this subject that I hear, and the short answer is, “I can’t answer that.”
Sad, but true. It’s a bit like you asking me what car you should buy; the answer is,
“It depends.” Are you looking for a sports car, a pickup truck to use at a construction
site, a family van? What is your budget? There are too many choices and too many
possible uses when choosing a new car. So, examine your needs and your personal
driving style and start whittling the list down a bit. Choosing an ideal, one-size-ﬁts-
all mic is much the same—impossible to ﬁnd. But, in this chapter, maybe we can
help you with the decision-making process.
In this chapter, we will examine our tools of the trade—microphones. We’ll take
a look at different microphone types and what choices we might make to achieve
a quality voice recording. The wide range of microphone types and designs can be
confusing at ﬁrst, and, in this chapter, a number of different types of mic will be
4
Microphones
CHAPTER

explored and their suitability for voice recording discussed. We’ve looked at the
acoustics of the room and the importance of taking acoustics into account when
setting up an optimal signal chain, and now we will be discussing the next step in
that chain and the importance of being aware of the characteristics of various types
of microphone. But, before we get to that, let’s ﬁrst examine the instrument, the
human voice, and how sound is produced.
FUNDAMENTALS OF THE HUMAN VOICE
Certainly, one of the ﬁrst things that we must note in discussing the human voice
and the recording process is that each of us, whether we realize it or not, is an expert
in the subject of the voice. After all, we spend most of our waking hours listening
to speech in all its different forms and means of transmission. If we stop and analyze
how much information we absorb throughout the day by means of the spoken word,
we come to see that any anomaly or distortion of the voice is immediately noticeable
and will strike us as being “wrong,” without our even stopping to think about it.
We can easily distinguish between a “friendly” voice and an “angry” voice; between
the authorative or the soothing; between nervous and conﬁdent; male and female.
Each of us is so accustomed to hearing and analyzing human speech that it has
become second nature to us, and we go about our daily lives hardly being aware
that we are doing so. So, it is with this in mind that the discussion of the voice, and
the microphones used to record it, begins.
Although each of us has a unique voice, and although we may speak in different
languages, the method by which the voice is produced is universal. Involving more
than just the vocal cords, the sound of speech is produced by nearly the entire upper
half of the body, and understanding how the voice is formed is essential to recording
it well. There are four areas in the body that provide the sound of the voice: The
chest, the throat, the mouth, and the nose. The chest acts as a resonating chamber
and is the source of much of the bass content in the voice. As well, the chest is 
the location of the diaphragm, a muscle in the lower abdomen that pushes upwards
on the lungs and is responsible for the controlled use of the breath when one is
speaking or singing. As air exits the lungs, it passes into the throat and across 
the larynx, or vocal cords. Remember that sound is air in motion, and that what we
perceive as sound is the vibration of an object that creates waves in the air. It is the
vibration of the larynx that creates the sound of the voice.
The modulated vibration of the air column then moves upward into the mouth
and the nose. The mouth functions to form the various components of speech and
articulate the words with the tongue and lips. The nose is the source of much of the
air content that we hear with speech. Each of these parts of the anatomy is important
in forming the voice, and each must be considered when recording. The more we
understand how the voice is produced, the better the decisions we can make on
proper microphone placement and on avoiding the unwanted artifacts that the speaking
voice contains. These can include popped Ps, sibilance, and nose honks (yes, a real
46
CHAPTER 4 Microphones

Microphones
47
problem for some speakers). These artifacts and how to deal with them in the course
of a session are a main component of our job.
The individual components of speech are known as “phonemes.” These are the
most basic sounds that we make, even below the syllable level. Knowledge of how
the voice is produced is essential in avoiding problems in our recordings. There are
certain phonemes, or sounds that we make, that adversely affect the recording when
picked up with a microphone, and the most common and problematic of these are
called “plosives.” These are those sounds that produce an explosive burst of air
coming out of the mouth, sounds such as P, D, T. If you speak a word that starts
with one of these letters and hold your hand in front of your mouth, you will feel
the burst of air, and, if this hits the mic, a loud “thump” will be heard, ruining an
otherwise perfect recording. This sound, known as a “pop,” is the sound of distortion
as the mic overloads from the air pressure hitting the capsule. If you experience this
situation, there are two ways of dealing with it: You can reposition the microphone
so that the plosive isn’t spoken directly into the element of the mic (usually off to
one side of the mouth or slightly above, so the air burst doesn’t go directly into the
front of the microphone), or you can use a windscreen or pop ﬁlter. I much prefer
a pop ﬁlter over the foam windscreen that comes with almost all microphones when
you purchase them; in my experience, the foam windscreen, although effective in
FIGURE 4.1 
Pop Filter
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by the author

eliminating pops, reduces the high-frequency content of the signal. On the other
hand, pop ﬁlters, either nylon fabric or a metal grid, are acoustically transparent but
highly effective in eliminating the dreaded “P pop.” Also, the metal screen is easier
to disinfect and keep clean. This is not as inconsequential as you might think—early
in my career, I had a job as a radio announcer, and the mics we used had foam
windscreens. If one of the announcers caught a cold, it was passed to every other
announcer, because of the germs being captured in that foam! So please, be kind to
our voiceover announcer brethren and keep those ﬁlters clean.
Another sound that will intrude on a perfect take is “sibilance.” This is the
unnatural stressing of the S sound (or phoneme). Again, this is a type of distortion
that we must strive to eliminate. Some people are more sibilant than others, and this
can be especially true for women announcers. Metal and foam pop ﬁlters are of little
use in eliminating excessive sibilance, and your only recourse is a repositioning of
the mic. I’ve found that positioning the mic above the mouth—at about eye level
and angled downward—often helps alleviate this problem. There are processors
known as “de-essers” that can help with the problem; a de-esser is a frequency-
dependent compressor. You set the frequency that you would like to control (the
approximate frequency of the offending S) and the amount of cut (in decibels) that
you would like, and you can attack the problem in that way. However, being aware
of the problem so that it can be rectiﬁed at the source is much more preferable than
resorting to electronic manipulation. It may take some experimentation with mic
placement, but this is by far the best way to go about this problem.
With music, the frequency range that we hear can be quite wide, from an average
of around 40 Hz upwards to 20 kHz and beyond. Therefore, choosing a microphone
that is capable of capturing this full range of frequencies is paramount. However,
the human voice is much more limited in its range: For the average human voice,
the fundamental frequency is approximately 125 Hz for males and 225 Hz for females.
I say approximately, because all of us have a slightly different pitch to our voice,
and this fundamental frequency will shift depending on the individual speaking. The
upper range of the voice is in the 1,500–2,500 Hz range for the harmonics of the
voice (this refers to the speaking voice—a female operatic soprano singer reaches
around 6 kHz). The voice contains overtones above this fundamental frequency.
In music, the dynamic levels are quite wide, reaching perhaps 90 dB SPL or so,
but the voice, at a normal conversational level, is in the range of 65 dB. What this
means in actual practice is that the levels in a voice studio never reach those found
in a music studio, and the acoustic footprint of the room is much less noticeable.
However, paradoxically, owing to the relatively quiet nature of speech, the acoustics
become all the more important. If there is a signiﬁcant noise ﬂoor in the studio,
there isn’t enough volume from the source signal to mask the noise. Also, although
some reverberation is expected in a music studio, any reverberation in the voice
studio becomes immediately obvious, and all steps must be taken to eliminate it.
Refer back to the NC ratings in Table 3.1, in the previous chapter, to see how this
works in practice. Knowing this information is important, and it will be affected by
where a person is placed in regards to the microphone.
48
CHAPTER 4 Microphones

MICROPHONE DESIGN TYPES
A microphone is a transducer, which is a device that changes one type of energy
into another type of energy, in this case acoustical energy (air in motion and the
associated sound waves) into electrical energy. There are three basic design types
that have been implemented to accomplish this, and each has its own characteristic.
First, we have the dynamic, or moving coil, microphone. With this design, a thin
diaphragm of metal or Mylar is attached to a coil of wire and is set inside a magnetic
housing; when the diaphragm is struck by the moving air produced by a sound, the
diaphragm and coil move back and forth over the magnet, creating the electrical
energy needed for recording. Dynamic microphones are known for their ruggedness
in a wide range of situations, and this is by far the most common microphone type
for live-performance vocals and ﬁeld use by news crews and the like. Dynamic
microphones often exhibit more self-noise than either of the other two types of
design, and they can be limited in high-frequency response and transient response
owing to the inertia of the moving coil. Dynamic mics utilize a diaphragm of the
largest mass of any of these three microphone types, and this is what introduces the
inertia and limits some of their overall response.
Another design is the condenser microphone. With the condenser mic, acoustical
energy once again strikes a thin metal diaphragm suspended inside the mic. Unlike
in a dynamic mic, however, the diaphragm is placed in front of a ﬁxed metal plate
that has an electrical charge applied to it. As the diaphragm moves back and forth
in relation to the ﬁxed plate, the output varies in relation to the distance of the two
elements from each other, and this varies the output signal. So, instead of creating
its own electrical signal, as the moving coil design does, a condenser has to have a
source of electricity supplied to it to charge the metal plate. This charge is most
commonly +48 V, DC, and is referred to as phantom power, so called because an
outside source (either the microphone preampliﬁer or a separate power supply)
provides the electricity directly through the mic cable, which also sends the mic’s
output to the mic preamp. Power for this mic can also be supplied by a battery
placed inside the microphone’s body. Condenser microphones are most often
associated with in-studio use, because they can be quite fragile, but their sound is
much fuller and more robust than the dynamic’s, with a wider frequency range. The
electrical output of a condenser microphone is very small, and, therefore, it has to
be boosted to be of use, and so there is a small ampliﬁer built into the mic body.
This ampliﬁer can either operate with a vacuum tube or using solid state electronics;
solid state models are by far the commonest that you will see, although there are
tube condensers available, either vintage or new designs, and these are considered
to be warmer in sound and more responsive; they are thus often sought out for digital
recording because of the “hard” edge that digital recording can introduce. Because
of the design, suspending the diaphragm in front of a charged plate, a condenser
mic is much more sensitive to changes in air pressure and can pick up subtleties
that the dynamic does not; a condenser has far superior transient response and is
Microphones
49

more sensitive to minute changes in pressure at the diaphragm. Part of the appeal
of condenser mics, especially the large diaphragm variety, is the richness and fullness
that are produced because of this design.
Finally, the third common type of mic that you might encounter is the ribbon
mic. Here, a thin, corrugated metal diaphragm is suspended between two poles of
a magnet, which produces its own electricity. The ribbon mic is a variant of the
dynamic design. Ribbon mics are highly susceptible to wind (breath), and not much
air movement is needed to knock the ribbon out of the magnet’s inﬂuence and
destroy the microphone. Most older designs are also very susceptible to high SPLs
(very loud sounds), which could destroy the microphone, although more modern
ribbon mic designs exhibit a much higher tolerance of high SPL values. Highly
fragile, they should be treated with due caution. A pop ﬁlter or windscreen is a
necessity with this type of mic, and be aware that, if you connect a ribbon mic to
phantom power, you might destroy the microphone, so always be aware of what
you are connecting the mic to before plugging it in. There have been some very
interesting developments in the design of ribbon mics in recent years, involving
varying the polar response and being able to tolerate very high SPL levels. Also,
many of the more recent innovations utilize phantom power for the mics, so, when
using a ribbon mic, be very aware of what model you have in your hand. As
mentioned, if the mic is not designed for phantom power, you risk destroying it if
phantom power is applied. Manufacturers such as Royer, Beyerdynamics, Shure,
and others have been making inroads with new designs, but, to date, nearly all are
aimed at music recording. Ribbon microphones were, at one time (that is, in the
dark ages of early radio), the mic of choice and fell out of favor quite some time
ago for use as a voice mic. Once thin and “vintage sounding,” the new mics on the
market produce a very pleasing and natural sound that many ﬁnd quite appealing
for voice and music recording. Ribbon mics have a lowered high-frequency response
curve, and this can give them a warming effect on the voice that many ﬁnd quite
desirable. Ribbon mics have a very low electrical output (the lowest of the three
major microphone designs, and, therefore, a transformer must be used to bring the
output signal up to a usable level). However, self-generated noise is also quite low.
There are two other microphone designs that we will touch on in this chapter:
The USB microphone and the new models of digital mics; however, neither is yet
widely used for voice recording. For professional voiceover recording, condenser
mics are the most widely used, although, as we will see, certain dynamics are highly
regarded as well. Microphones can cost anywhere from under $100 to well over
$12,000 for a mint, vintage tube condenser, and so there is a choice and a model
for every budget.
POLAR RESPONSE
Every microphone has a pattern of accepting sound that the manufacturer builds into
it. Many microphones (most commonly the condenser mics) have a selector switch
50
CHAPTER 4 Microphones

Microphones
51
on the microphone body that allows you to alter this pattern. This pattern of acceptance
of the incoming sound signal is known as the polar pattern or polar response of
the microphone. The polar response is a plot of how much of the incoming signal
is picked up by the microphone’s front, as seen from directly overhead (much as if
you were looking at a map of the world from directly over the North Pole), sides,
and back. There are ﬁve main patterns: Omnidirectional, cardioid, hyper-cardioid,
super-cardioid, and bidirectional (or ﬁgure 8). Each of the patterns has its own use
and function when the voice is being recorded. Every microphone is delivered with
a speciﬁcation sheet that lists not only its frequency response and sensitivity to sound
(measured in SPL), but its polar response as well.
Many microphones have a selector switch on the body of the mic that allows
you to change the pickup polar response. This feature will help you adjust the
microphone to meet a large number of recording situations and room acoustic
signatures, and save you the expense of having to purchase multiple microphones.
The microphone in Figure 4.3 has ﬁve response patterns from which to choose; most
mics will allow for perhaps three different patterns (such as omnidirectional, cardioid,
and ﬁgure 8). Not all mics have a selector switch, so, if this is something that you
might ﬁnd useful, be sure to check for this feature before you purchase.
An omnidirectional microphone picks up sound equally from all directions. Because
of this pickup pattern, the omnidirectional mic can not only pick up the wanted
FIGURE 4.2 
Polar Response Curves
omni
cardioid
supercardioid
hypercardioid
bidirectional

52
CHAPTER 4 Microphones
signal (the narrator’s voice), but also any reﬂections and room noise present. Although
often used in music recording, omnidirectional microphones aren’t used with regularity
for voiceover work, because of this factor. It should be noted, however, that some
broadcast organizations prefer the warm, even sound of the omnidirectional
microphone, including the BBC. For recording in a well-designed acoustical space,
the omnidirectional mic can have a very pleasing and smooth, warm sound. However,
you should pay attention to any unwanted artifacts making their way into your
recording if the room is less than optimal. Also, if you must record a number of
actors at the same time and only have, or only have room for, one microphone, an
omnidirectional pattern may work well. For this reason, they are also used when
recording radio dramas and the like.
The cardioid pattern, as shown in Figure 4.2, accepts sound mainly from the front
of the microphone, in a shape that is reminiscent of a heart shape—hence the term
cardioid, meaning heart. Instead of being omnidirectional, this type of mic is
unidirectional. This is by far the most prevalent pickup pattern for recording the
voice. Because of the pattern, the mic rejects sound from the rear of the microphone,
eliminating many of the reverberations and reﬂections within the room, and the mic
can be situated to point away from any noise-generating problems. The cardioid
pattern lends a phenomenon known as proximity effect to the microphone, which is
a boot of the low frequencies in the voice as the sound source gets closer to the
microphone. This phenomenon can be very beneﬁcial when recording voiceover to
FIGURE 4.3
AKG C414 Polar Pattern Switch
Source: Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

help give a larger, “voice of God” quality to the actor and also can help to compensate
for a thin or high-pitched voice. However, if the actor has a naturally deep and
resonant voice, the proximity effect can lend a “boominess” to the voice and can
be distracting to the audience. Proximity effect is most pronounced in ribbon mics
and virtually nonexistent in omnidirectional-pattern microphones. Cardioid patterns
can be found in dynamic or condenser microphones, depending on the manufacturer’s
design. Dynamic mics designed for stage vocals are meant to be used quite close
to the mouth and count on the proximity effect for their sound. When used at a
normal speaking distance, these dynamics often sound thin, without much bass
reproduction.
Hyper-cardioid microphones have a pickup pattern similar to the cardioid, but
“squeezed,” resulting in lower sensitivity from the rear and sides of the mic. This
results in a more directional pickup when the sound source is directly in front of
the microphone. Sometimes referred to as a longer “reach,” and used in shotgun
mics, hyper-cardioid microphones don’t actually have a “longer” range of acceptance,
but do reject more of the sound from the rear and sides. When using this microphone
for voiceover recording, the actor must be very conscious not to move his head from
side to side when speaking, or the resulting sound will vary greatly and be quite
noticeable. For this reason, I would recommend using a hyper-cardioid mic only on
experienced voice talent who have a good working knowledge of microphone
technique and the technical limitations of various microphones. However, having
said that, I can also mention that the voice recorded with this type of microphone
is very present and “in your face” and is quite useful in advertising situations
especially. Because of this up-front sound, it may prove tiring to listen to in a longer
narration read. It isn’t as smooth and warm as the sound of a cardioid mic, and
using this mic isn’t for all voices that you will record. Experimentation is the key
here: I would recommend setting up a hyper-cardioid mic directly in front of the
talent and another, cardioid, microphone in close proximity, either to the side or
perhaps above the hyper-cardioid. Then, by comparing the two signals, you have a
choice of which to use.
The super-cardioid design is much like the hyper-cardioid and lies between the
cardiod and hyper-cardiod in its pickup pattern. For this reason, side-to-side motion
from the sound source can be very pronounced and should be monitored closely.
When the hyper- or super-cardioid microphone is used, the directionality of the
pickup pattern is achieved through the use of ports along the body of the microphone,
called rejection ports. As sound enters these holes in the mic body, it arrives at the
capsule out of phase and, through the principle of phase cancellation, is not introduced
into the recorded sound. Care should be taken never to block these rejection ports,
with the hand for example, if holding the mic in the hand, or perhaps with tape or
some other foreign substance. This will negate the directionality of the microphone,
and more off-axis sound will be recorded. Because of their inherent directional pickup
patterns, both hyper- and super-cardioid microphones can be useful in avoiding any
source of noise generation in the studio—if you are aware of any off-axis sound due
to side-to-side movement from the actor.
Microphones
53

54
CHAPTER 4 Microphones
Then there is the ﬁgure-8 pattern, or bidirectional microphone. As its name
implies, sound is accepted from both the front and the rear of the mic capsule,
whereas sound coming from the sides is rejected. Useful for recording two people
with one microphone, the ﬁgure 8 has the roundness and warmth associated with
an omnidirectional mic, and also its inherent problem of picking up sound reﬂections
from the rear. Once again, if choosing this pattern, be sure that the room is acoustically
adequate.
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
Not all microphones are designed equally; depending on the mic’s design, they will
exhibit various responses in regard to the audio frequencies that they “hear.” If you
were to graph the range of frequencies that any particular microphone picks up, you
might notice that, at the extreme upper and lower frequency ranges, there is a fall
off in the mic’s sensitivity. There may be peaks or a gentle rise at certain frequencies,
or perhaps a bit of a dip at a particular frequency.
The curve shown in Figure 4.4 tells us that the frequency response is fairly uniform
in the upper bass and midrange frequencies; in other words, we can say that this
microphone has a “ﬂat” response. There is a drop off at the upper and lower ends
of the scale, and these frequencies lie outside the frequency range of the human
speaking voice. As the graph becomes less ﬂat, more colorization is introduced into
the sound that the microphone reproduces. This may be a good thing, or it may be
an undesirable trait of the particular microphone; it depends what your goals are
when choosing a particular microphone. For this reason, in addition to the pickup
FIGURE 4.4 
Frequency Response Graph
Source: Shure, Inc.

or polar pattern of the mic we might choose, we also have to take its frequency
response into consideration. By paying attention to the frequency response of the
microphone, you can begin to shape your sound without the use of equalization after
the fact. If you want a brighter sound, there are microphones that have this built
into them; the same is true for a warmer sound, or a sound that is more pleasing
for male or female voices. Attention to the frequency response of any given micro -
phone is the ﬁrst consideration in choosing one over another. There are microphones
designed speciﬁcally for certain applications—for the bass drum, for instance, or
for harmonicas. Know your application and choose your microphone accordingly.
Many condenser microphones have a selector switch on the body that reduces
the mic’s sensitivity in the low frequencies. Called a bass roll-off switch, this feature
is useful for reducing unwanted frequencies such as room rumble caused by HVAC
noise or perhaps unwanted proximity effect. The bass roll-off can be engaged if you
are recording outdoors, to help control wind sound to a certain extent. The bass roll-
off attenuates the low frequencies and is a built-in high pass ﬁlter.
In Figure 4.5, we see a microphone with a variable bass roll-off switch. This
assortment of frequencies from which to choose is unusual, but, as you might imagine,
this allows for great ﬂexibility in shaping exactly the sound you want, for a wide
range of possible room or other acoustic problems.
Also seen in Figure 4.5 is another selector switch that allows the user to set the
microphone’s sensitivity to loud signals. Again, most mics that you encounter will
Microphones
55
FIGURE 4.5 
AKG C414 Bass Roll-off Select
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

have a single, or possibly a two-position, selector, but here we have a wide range
to choose from. Known as a pad, this switch is used to decrease the amount of
signal level going to the preamp by a set amount and, on most microphones, will
be in the –10 dB range. Some models allow up to a –20 dB pad. As you are setting
up your session, if you are either hearing distortion from the mic or if you have to
lower the gain on the microphone preamp to a major degree, the pad can be engaged
to help keep things under control.
MICROPHONE EXPERIMENTS
Now that we have looked at the types of microphone design and how they pick up
the sound (the polar patterns), what might be the best choice for your voiceover
recording? Remember my answer from the beginning of this chapter? “It depends.”
Each situation is different, and the important thing to keep in mind is that each
individual is different, as well. Just as a musical instrument can take on a distinct
quality with one microphone and exhibit another quality entirely when recorded with
a different mic, each person’s voice will have a varying quality, depending on what
microphone is used to record that voice. So how do we decide where to start?
A good way to learn about microphone characteristics and mic technique is to
go into the studio and record yourself, and then listen back and analyze the results
of your recordings. Also, this can be a wonderful ear training exercise and will help
your critical listening skills. Try a variety of microphones, any that you can get your
hands on, including those that you think would not be suitable for voice recording,
and ask yourself: Which give the best results for voice recording? (And don’t forget
to also ask yourself, “Why?”) Position yourself at various distances from the
microphone—where does the proximity effect become pronounced? Move to the
left and right of the microphone to experience and learn to recognize off-axis sounds.
Record with and without a foam windscreen, as well as a pop ﬁlter. Place the
microphone in various places around the studio space to learn where the optimal
position for voice recording (the “sweet spot”) is. Remember, the sound is going to
change, dependent on mic placement within the room. Search out that “sweet spot”
and remember it!
For these experiments, choose a short piece of copy, something around 30 seconds
long. It could be anything: Advertising copy in a magazine ad, part of a newspaper
story, a script pulled at random from a previous session, a poem, a page from a
book. Remember, the content is not important, nor is your delivery (your voice
acting skills). We’re after the differences all of these variations make in the sound.
Keep reading the same thing for each mic variation. This reduces the number of
variables from one test recording to the next. And remember to mute the mic and
turn off the phantom power when changing out condenser microphones! The
differences from one setup or mic positioning to another may be subtle, but, with
careful listening and practice, the change in sound and quality will soon become
apparent.
56
CHAPTER 4 Microphones

I would recommend that you break the recording and listening sessions down
into microphone types, distance from the mic, and placement in the room. This way
you can easily keep your focus on each of these individual elements. Also, be sure
to keep the signal chain consistent throughout your various experiments: Use the
same microphone preamp for all of the mics you test and be certain to record
everything at the same sample rate and bit depth. We don’t want to begin introducing
further variables into the equation—after all, we are testing microphones and acoustics,
not mic preamps or the differences in audio quality between a recording at 44.1 kHz
and one at 96 kHz.
Doing this type of experimentation by yourself is a good way to begin to learn
what to listen for, and is a no-stress situation for you. You are not performing for
anyone else and you can take your time (although you may put some miles on your
shoes with all of the trips between studio and control room to start and stop recording).
If you feel comfortable with it, have a friend assist you; it makes life easier, but is
not necessary by any means. Just make sure to keep track of what you’re doing and
do each variation as a separate take, so that you can later identify what’s what and
what is most successful in your listening and analyzing session, once you’re done
recording. This is a very good method for learning your microphones and the studio
space. You certainly don’t have to do all of these variations in one go; however,
the critical listening analysis should be done in one session period to give you the
best idea of what is most effective with voice recording.
One thing to keep in mind, which I’ve mentioned before, is that each human
voice is a unique instrument, so that a mic that works best for one person might be
found lacking for another. A number of years ago, I was employed as a staff engineer
at a studio that did a lot of voiceover work. A well-known voice actor by the name
of Ray rented ofﬁce space at this studio, so we had quite a bit of time to discuss
some of our mutual interests, such as ﬁlms of the 1940s and old-time radio. The
point here is that I had a lot of time to just listen to the sound of his voice, outside
a studio environment. Whenever he stepped into my studio to record a voiceover,
however, I always found something lacking in his voice quality as it came through
the microphone. Then, as now, my “go-to” mic for voice work was the Neumann
U87. This microphone works well in a wide variety of situations, but for Ray it
didn’t capture the “Ray-ness” that I wanted, and so, for every session, I would put
up the U87 and another mic as well. Nothing was giving me what I was looking
for, and, after a time, I had gone through virtually every mic the studio owned.
Finally, there was only one left, a ratty-looking old mic, no longer in production,
and in such bad condition that the foam windscreen that completely surrounds the
mic had disintegrated into dust. But, with the attitude of, “Nothing else has worked,
what do I have to lose?”, I arranged this orphan in front of Ray one day. Well, you
know why I’m telling you this. It was gold! This dynamic microphone, with little
output gain and a noticeable noise ﬂoor, was that magic sound I had been looking
for on his voice for so long. To make a long story short, I sent this mic and the
others of that model that we had back to the manufacturer for refurbishing, and they
came back looking brand new. Unfortunately, owing to the design of this particular
Microphones
57

58
CHAPTER 4 Microphones
mic, nothing could be done to raise the output gain or lessen the noise ﬂoor, but it
didn’t matter much if I could ﬁnd the right applications for when to use this model.
As it turns out, Ray bought two of them (offsetting the cost of refurbishing), and
the studio had two as-new mics to put back into service. The moral of the story: If
you are looking for that indescribable “something,” keep looking. You just might
ﬁnd it in the unlikeliest of places. In this case, a beat-up Shure SM5B.
One thing that I can’t recommend highly enough on this matter is the use of ear-
training materials. It’s certainly true that some people have a more acute sense of
hearing than others, but anyone working in the studio can beneﬁt from ear training.
After all, you won’t be able to identify problems if you don’t know what they sound
like. There are a large number of web sites and CD sets available—do a search for
“ear training” and you are sure to ﬁnd plenty to choose from. I have included a
couple of web addresses in the Resources section at the back of the book. CD sets
have a price, of course, but many web sites are free or charge a minimal amount
for their use. To reiterate: You can’t identify and ﬁx problems, if you don’t know
what it is you’re listening for to begin with.
With so many microphones available on the market, what are some of the most
common that we ﬁnd being used for voiceover? It’s true that any microphone can
capture speech and reproduce it, but remember that our goal is to record a full,
robust, and natural sound. There are exceptions, of course, but this is true for 95
percent or more of all spoken-word recordings. As part of my research when beginning
this book, I sent a short questionnaire to a large number of recording engineers and
voiceover performers, asking what their preferred microphone was for this type of
recording. The answers were what I had expected: The most common mic that was
mentioned was the Neumann U87, by a wide margin. Although many other mics
FIGURE 4.6 
Shure SM5B
Source: Courtesy of Shure, Inc.

were mentioned, the U87 was far and away the consensus winner for an all-around,
“go-to” mic for most any situation in voiceover.
We’ll get back to the Neumann U87 shortly, but let’s take a look at some other
common choices for voiceover recording, broken down by design type. What I am
giving here is not a comprehensive listing, by any means, but these are the
microphones that you are most likely to encounter and are commonly available.
DYNAMIC MICROPHONES
As I mentioned a bit earlier, dynamic mics are the most cost-effective design (in
most instances), but aren’t as transparent sounding as condenser mics. However,
they may be a good choice on certain voices (such as my friend Ray) and in certain
situations. To start, there is the Shure SM57 and its sibling, the SM58. These mics
are very common in live-performance situations and can often be seen micing a
drum set or used as vocal mics.
They are low cost and rugged and perform well in live situations, which is why
many live sound engineers keep many of them on hand. For voice work, you may
ﬁnd that the SM57 works well on males, and the SM58 favors the female voice.
Microphones
59
FIGURE 4.7 
Neumann U87
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

60
CHAPTER 4 Microphones
FIGURE 4.8
Shure SM57
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo
by the author
FIGURE 4.9 
Shure SM58
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo
by the author
FIGURE 4.10 
Shure SM7B
Source: Courtesy of Shure, Inc.
FIGURE 4.11 
EV RE20
Source: Courtesy of Chicago Recording Company; photo by the author

These mics were designed with the stage performer in mind and exhibit a reduced
bass response unless worked at a close distance. This design also helps to control
feedback on stage. You may have to position your voice talent closer to the mic
than if you were using a condenser mic, but they can be effective, especially if you
are on a tight budget.
Two dynamic mics that are widely used in broadcast situations are the Shure
SM7B and the Electrovoice RE20. Both of these mics have a large diaphragm and
exhibit a wide frequency response. They can be a wonderful alternative to the more
expensive condensers and are worth trying.
CONDENSER MICROPHONES
Moving up in performance from dynamic microphones, we next come to condenser
mics. As explained above, condensers have a more open, transparent sound owing
to the design of the diaphragm element and how it responds to acoustic energy. The
transient response is more accurate, and the frequency response is generally wider
than with a dynamic mic. For these reasons, a condenser microphone works very
well in a wide range of voice applications. When you begin to research the condensers
on the market, you will ﬁnd a very wide spread of body designs and price points.
Keep in mind that the mic that works great on one person may not be ideal for
another, so that you may have to do quite a bit of testing to locate that one microphone
that works especially well for you. I’ll highlight a few of the better-known mics that
are quite commonly found in a voiceover session.
As I’ve mentioned, I sent a questionnaire to a large number of recording engineers
working in the voiceover ﬁeld, and one of the questions on it was, “What is the one
microphone that you would set up if you only had one mic to choose from?” By a
very large percentage, the one mic that engineers use most often for voice work is
the U87 from the German manufacturer Neumann. Nearly every studio has this mic
in its collection, and the performance of the mic is hard to beat.
This ubiquitous microphone has a clean, clear, open sound and has the added
beneﬁt of having a very wide dynamic range. It has switchable polar patterns and
a 10 dB pad, making it an ideal choice for many applications. The sound of this
mic can be molded very easily with just a small amount of equalization, thus making
it a good ﬁt for any number of voices and actors. If I had to choose only one mic
to purchase with which to record voiceovers, this would be it. It’s my personal
favorite for voice work, it’s rugged, and it looks great. The professional engineers’
choice, hands down.
If you’re lucky enough to have nearly unlimited funds, this is what many consider
the ﬁnest microphone ever made: The Neumann U47.
Take a look at a few old photographs of Frank Sinatra, the early Beatles, or Billy
Holiday in the studio, and there is the U47, set up and ready to go. Its warmth and
clarity make it legendary for vocal (and voiceover) use; however—if you can locate
one—we’re almost getting into the price of buying a new car with the cost of this
Microphones
61

mic. They are tube powered and are as rare as they are desired. Based on its
predecessor, the U47 from Telefunken Electroakustik, this was the ﬁrst mic with a
switchable polar pattern and was based on the design of Georg Neumann from 1928.
A true classic. (The latest listing for a Telefunken U47 that I saw had a price of
$16,000.) Also from Neumann and popular with engineers recording voiceover is
the TLM103.
In the price range of the U87, there is the AKGC414, also from Germany. Again,
a very popular choice with engineers, this is the mic that I used for illustrations of
switchable polar patterns and pads earlier in this chapter. Although many engineers
like this mic for voice work, I’ve always found it to be a bit on the bright side for
my taste and tend to avoid it. That is, unless the producer tells me that we’ll be
recording a television commercial and it should really cut through; then, this is my
ﬁrst choice.
There are a large number of newer models on the market these days, many from
China, Russia, or Eastern Europe. These mics can offer excellent value for the price
and should be considered in your evaluations when making a purchase. One that is
gaining popularity is the Marshall MXL V88 (which was designed especially for
62
CHAPTER 4 Microphones
FIGURE 4.12 
Neumannn U87
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by
the author
FIGURE 4.13 
Neumannn U47
Source: Courtesy of Chicago Recording Company; photo
by the author

voiceover recording). Marshall also gives us the MXL M3B. If you are recording
a variety of voice actors, you might also consider the MXL 9090; this mic is unique
in that it contains two separate diaphragms, one of which is warmer sounding, the
other brighter.
I’ve had good results with some of the mics from the Audio Technica line. The
4040 and 4050 are not only very responsive to the human voice, they are priced at
a nice midpoint and should be seriously considered for voiceover applications.
Back in the US, Shure has many choices suitable for voice work in its condenser
lineup. One popular model is the Shure KSM32, which you are likely to ﬁnd in
many mic closets today. Also widely used are mics from Blue Microphones, especially
the Blue Mouse. Most microphones follow pretty much the same basic body design,
and they tend to look very similar as a result. Blue Microphones has created an
entirely new design statement with its line: All of Blue’s mics are absolutely beautiful
and quite unlike any other mic on the market. Blue seems to have a sense of humor
about naming the mics, which I like, and the names aren’t the usual number
designations, but imaginative take-offs on the look of the product: the Dragonﬂy,
the Mouse, the Yeti, Bottle, Bluebird, Bottle Rocket, Snowball, and so on.
Microphones
63
FIGURE 4.14 
Neumannn TLM103
Source: Courtesy of Noise Floor Ltd.; photo by the author
FIGURE 4.15 
AKG C414
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo
by the author

64
CHAPTER 4 Microphones
Before we leave the subject of condenser microphones, there is one other that
deserves mention when we are talking about voiceover recording, and it’s one that
you might not initially consider. The Sennheiser 416 is a short shotgun mic and has
become very popular with voiceover artists and engineers. Now, choosing a shotgun
mic to record voiceover might sound like a choice loaded with problems: Shotguns
are highly directional, and the smallest amount of movement of the head from side
to side is immediately apparent. However, this mic has a powerful, “in your face”
sound that is hard to beat for commercial applications. A word of warning here:
Make sure that your actor has very good mic technique and is aware of the need to
remain stationary when recording using this mic (due to the directionality of a
shotgun). If you want impact with the recording, try this one out.
(For more about shotgun microphones, see Chapter 12: Recording Interviews and
Roundtable Discussions.)
I’m not going to attempt a listing of all the condenser microphones that people
use to record voiceovers; the list could probably run to a hundred different mics or
more. Once again, my advice is to do your homework, ask plenty of questions, and
try as many mics as you can get your hands on.
FIGURE 4.16 
Audio Technica 4040
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by
Bryen Hensley
FIGURE 4.17 
Blue Snowball
Source: Courtesy of Blue Microphones

Microphones
65
I will confess that I haven’t had much experience recording voiceovers with a
ribbon mic. They were the standard for many years, until condenser technology
began to evolve following World War II. Most of the classic mics we think of today
come to us from the 1950s and are hard to top. Ribbons have made a comeback in
recent years (especially in the music industry), but, because of my lack of experience
with them, I am leaving them out of this survey.
DIGITAL MICROPHONES
In the past few years, a new type of microphone design has come onto the market—
the digital microphone. We work in a completely integrated digital environment
from start to ﬁnish in our productions, with the exception of capturing the sound.
This is still accomplished using microphone technology that was developed over the
past ninety years and that hasn’t changed fundamentally in that time. Is it possible
FIGURE 4.18 
Blue Mouse
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios;
photo by Bryen Hensley
FIGURE 4.19 
Sennheiser MKH416
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by Bryen
Hensley

to replace the microphone as we know it with one that captures the sound digitally,
thus completing our fully digital production path?
Let’s review some basic facts about the world we live in. We, as human beings,
are not digital creatures. We do not perceive the world around us in discrete quantized
steps, but rather as an uninterrupted ﬂow of sensations coming into our eyes, ears,
and nerve impulses. In other words, we can say that we live in an analog world and
perceive it as such. The sound we hear is created by air molecules vibrating and
moving and tickling our ears. These air-pressure variations are then changed into
electrical impulses by our ear mechanism and sent on to our brains, where they are
perceived as “sound.” A microphone works in much the same manner—moving air
hits the microphone diaphragm, and that in turn creates a small electrical charge
that we can now send along the mic cable and on to our recording device. The
microphone is a transducer, changing one type of energy (acoustic) into a different
type of energy (electrical). At the other end of the chain, we once again ﬁnd a
transducer, in this case the loudspeaker, which takes the electrical signal and alters
it back into acoustic energy that vibrates the air molecules and, thus, passes on to
our ears. So, to claim that we now have an “entirely digital signal ﬂow” isn’t really
accurate at all. This change from acoustic to electrical energy is the fundamental
basis of microphone design and construction (at least as we understand microphones
today). So, is it even possible to create a totally digital microphone, and what do
we mean by that term? There are a number of mics available today that advertise
themselves as “digital mics,” including the USB mics on the market. Let’s take a
quick look at what they’re talking about when using that terminology.
Currently, the term refers to a microphone’s output being a digital stream (we’ll
examine this output stream in further detail in a moment). The microphone element
still has to change the acoustical energy of the sound wave into electrical energy
before the signal can be converted into the digital realm, and this step remains the
same as it’s always been. In other words, the “front end” of the sound capture
remains in the analog domain. The new digital mic design eliminates the need for
an analog-to-digital (A/D) converter separate from the mic itself: Housed within the
microphone body, an A/D converter is placed in close proximity to the diaphragm
and allows for the digital stream to be sent directly out of the microphone. This has
a couple of beneﬁts: First, as mentioned above, it eliminates the need for a separate
A/D converter. The manufacturer can design the converter that best matches the
desired sound of the microphone, eliminating the variable of the user choosing a
converter and coloring the sound of the mic. Because of this, the sound of the mic
remains constant in all uses and better matches the manufacturer’s intended sound,
in much the same way that an active loudspeaker contains its own ampliﬁer that the
manufacturer deems best for the loudspeaker design.
Also, the mic preamp is housed in the body of the microphone. Once again, this
element can be designed to match the sound the manufacturer intends. The beneﬁt
here, of course, is that the frequency response and overall sound of the microphone
remain the same, regardless of where you might use it, eliminating the coloration
of different mic preamps. Second, because the microphone outputs a digital stream,
66
CHAPTER 4 Microphones

the problem of longer cable runs is now less of a concern. As we know, with an
analog signal, there is a loss over distance through a cable (you might remember
our discussion of the beginnings of digital audio and the developments pioneered
by Bell Labs and AT&T that were focused on overcoming this very issue with a
telephone signal). By streaming 0s and 1s, we can receive a cleaner signal at a
greater distance.
Digital microphones output a signal known as AES42. This is not the same as
standard AES digital, which is widely used in the industry, and, to connect the
microphone to most digital devices, a converter must be used to change the AES42
signal to AES/EBU digital standard. There are a limited number of direct AES42
devices available now—the Sound Devices 788t comes to mind—and the selection
is growing rapidly; if you want to connect a digital mic to your current gear, check
to make sure that your equipment is AES42 compliant. Further complicating the
picture, digital mics operate either as a Mode 1 device or as Mode 2. Mode 2 has
deﬁnite advantages, although the mics are more expensive. Using Mode 2, the cable
runs can be much longer, and this mode also allows for remote control of microphone
parameters such as polar pattern selection, onboard DSP processing and sample rate
selection. The digital microphone comes with a special cable (not the standard three-
pin XLR microphone cable) and a converter (AES42 to AES/EBU). Microphone
parameters are controlled via software.
Although currently quite expensive, digital microphones have many distinct
advantages over their analog cousins, and the selection is bound to grow over the
currently available mics. In my estimation, they are well worth checking up on.
USB MICROPHONES
With the advent of laptop computers and the digital audio software revolution in
the twenty-ﬁrst century, a new type of microphone has appeared. The USB microphone
takes advantage of the fact that, these days, virtually all the recording we do is done
on a computer. A USB mic has, instead of the usual three-prong XLR cable coming
from it, a cable terminating in a USB plug and connects directly into the USB slot
of the computer.
There is no need for mic preamps or A/D converters. This presents both a blessing
and a curse, however. In principle, it sounds like the ideal solution. But, and this is
a very important “but,” USB mics rely on the mic preamp and converter that are
on the computer’s sound card, and, quite frankly, they’re terrible. Avoid them if
you want to produce professional audio. There’s a very good reason for this, and it
comes down to price. If you buy a computer for, say, $1,000, how expensive can
any given component in the computer be? And there is a lot going on inside a
computer, in terms of both hardware and software. If you were to purchase a
moderately priced microphone preamp ($250) and a moderately priced A/D converter
($350) and put components of that level inside the computer, the machine would
now cost $1,600—and the manufacturer just isn’t going to do that if it hopes to
Microphones
67

68
CHAPTER 4 Microphones
continue selling these machines. Add to that the fact that the inside of a computer
is a very busy place, with a lot of electronic noise being generated. For these reasons,
avoid using the preamp and converter that are on your computer’s sound card.
Most USB mics have these components housed inside the mic body, but, once
again, the components simply aren’t up to the level you want to attain in a professional
setting. Another thing to keep in mind is that the length of the cable is critical. It
can’t be too long (more than about 4 or 5 feet), or the sound quality is greatly
compromised. In practice, this means that the mic is always in the sound ﬁeld of
the computer’s fan and hard drive, and this introduces an element of noise into the
recording that you do not want. Although ﬁne for hobbyists and podcasting (for
which they were originally developed), and coming in at a very desirable price, at
this time USB microphones are not serious professional instruments, and they should
be avoided for voiceover recording. As the saying goes, these mics aren’t ready for
prime time and should be avoided for serious voice work. Likewise, forget trying
to get satisfactory results from the microphone in your laptop, tablet, or digital
camera. It may be ﬁne for recording Aunt Martha’s birthday party, but it does not
make the grade for full-bandwidth broadcast applications.
So, to return to our original question: “What microphone should I use to record
a voiceover?” As you can see from this chapter, the choices available to you vary
considerably. My advice is to experiment with a wide variety of microphones to
ﬁnd the one that works best on an individual voice.
FIGURE 4.20 
Blue Snowball
Source: Courtesy Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

THE ROLE OF THE ENGINEER IN VOICE RECORDING
Of all the subjects covered in this book, the one most difﬁcult to understand is 
that of the role of the engineer. In this chapter, I will give you my ideas on what
makes a good voice engineer and, hopefully, provide you with some tools that will
help to make you an engineer that both producers and voice actors want to work
with. To help us understand what qualities these folks look for and admire in a good
engineer, I’ve enlisted the input from both voice talent and established producers
who have worked in the industry for a long period of time. With the help of these
experienced people, you may come to understand your role in the studio more fully,
and their advice will give you some ideas on what to work on to make you desirable
in engineering their projects.
5
The Engineer
CHAPTER

In preparation for writing this book, I sent out a questionnaire to a great number
of both actors and producers and asked for their input based on their many years of
working in the ﬁeld. These people, from across North America and Great Britain,
were kind enough to offer their thoughts on the subject of the engineer, and I would
like to take this opportunity to thank all who responded, even if their words didn’t
make it into the ﬁnished volume. All of their responses were valuable and informed
me a great deal when I was thinking about this chapter. I think that hearing from
these seasoned pros will help guide your thinking about the task of voice recording,
and that hearing from them is a help in your understanding of what both clients and
talent look for and expect from the engineer. A number of issues that they touch on
will be covered in further detail later in the chapter.
For those of you who have your own project studio and act in the roles of both
voice actor and engineer, much of this chapter won’t apply to you. But, before 
you ﬂip to the next chapter, I would recommend doing a quick read of this one;
many of the same issues of dealing with the client and giving your best apply to all
of us, regardless if we are doing it all ourselves or if we are an engineer in a
commercial studio.
For the uninitiated, doing a voiceover session appears to be the simplest thing in
the world. After all, you are generally working with one microphone, one talent,
and one input on the console or controller. What could possibly be difﬁcult about
that? Understanding basic recording skills, acoustics, microphone operation, and so
on is, of course, essential to performing your job. People expect the engineer to be
technically savvy and to have the operation of the equipment down cold. But, beyond
these skills lies another level of concern for the voiceover engineer. One microphone,
one actor, and one channel on the mixer. What could possibly be more simple and
straightforward? This is how the majority of spoken-word recording is done, and,
on the surface, it appears there’s nothing to it. Certainly nothing compared with a
high-powered music session, right? Well, if there’s one thing that I’ve learned in
more than thirty years in the studio, it’s that this can often be the most demanding
recording situation that you’ll be thrown into. Think about it for a minute: As I said
in the Introduction, if you are performing with a symphony orchestra, you are
playing with eighty or a hundred other musicians. But now step onto a stage with
only your instrument and with an audience in front of you. There’s no place to hide,
and every moment is magniﬁed. It’s the same with recording the human voice. One
microphone, one voice, and only one channel on the mixer. It’s now just you and
your skill to make or break this moment. Much of the information that we share as
human beings comes through spoken words, and the majority of media that we come
into contact with every day has a spoken component. Radio, television, movies,
video games, even the annoying “Your call is very important to us . . . a representative
will be with you shortly”—they all rely heavily on listening to someone pass inform -
ation to us through words. And the important point to remember is this—some audio
professional somewhere was responsible for recording all of this material.
70
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer

COLLABORATION—COMMUNICATION—RESPONSIBILITY
Working in media of any kind is an exercise in collaboration. We can’t function
solely by ourselves in this business; others are necessarily involved, and, if you
don’t work well in a group setting, you won’t make it in the recording industry.
You will be working with artists, producers, directors, writers, and a host of others,
all of whom have their own concerns and agendas. Learning to navigate your way
through this maze of human ambition, insecurity, and ego is the perhaps the hardest
part of becoming a successful engineer, but one that all of us have successfully
managed to conquer. Learning how to read people and to get to the point of what
it is that they’re really asking you to do is a skill that takes time and patience to
develop, and you will make mistakes and sometimes get the wrong message, 
but, over time and with experience, you will get better at this. It’s just the same as
learning your technology: The learning curve stretches out in front of you, but,
before you know it, you are well on the way to performing your job without thinking
about each individual step, and your skill level skyrockets, at times surprising even
yourself. Noted sound designer and ﬁlm editor Walter Murch makes the observation
that the average Hollywood feature ﬁlm takes approximately 400 man-years to
complete. If you don’t believe in collaboration and want to make the ﬁlm yourself
and have it released tomorrow, this means that you would have had to start on it
before the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth Rock!
The key to successful collaboration is communication. Because of the number of
people involved in any given project, information sometimes becomes lost or garbled,
and the project suffers. The only way to arrive at a successful outcome is to make
sure that everyone is communicating with all the other members of the production
team, at all times. Phone calls, emails, talking, and social media all play a key part
in the communication process. When you are scheduled for a session, immediately
contact the person in charge (usually the producer or director, or their assistant) and
begin gathering information that you’ll need to make the project a success. Exchange
contact information with everyone involved. The longer the project, the more critical
communication becomes. For a 30-second commercial spot, the necessary information
can usually be exchanged face to face, once everyone is at the studio. But, for a
feature-length ﬁlm project that might last for six months or more, the opportunity
for face-to-face discussions becomes harder to come by. Always keep everyone
involved informed about where you are in the process and what they can expect
from you in the near future. Keep the questions coming and make sure you get the
answers you need. Assume nothing! The more buttoned-down you can be prior to
the session, and as the project progresses, the more successful the outcome and the
more your reputation will grow. Although you may appear to be a pest to some,
your attention to detail will only help the project in the end, and this whole business
exists for only one purpose—to serve the project.
The better the communication ﬂow, the less stress and sense of panic for you.
I’ve always put communication high on my priority list in my work, and I think
The Engineer
71

that it pays off in my feelings for my job. I’ve never viewed engineering as work;
I really do think that what I am privileged enough to do every day is play with my
friends. We work with really cool gear, work with creative and intelligent people,
and make a creative and entertaining product. Where is the work in that? I truly
believe that I’m one of the luckiest people in the world, because I don’t work for
a living. And a large part of why I feel this way is because I make sure that everyone
is honestly communicating all the time.
Communication is part of your responsibility as an engineer. But responsibility
goes beyond that. It addresses your professionalism as well as your skill. Being
responsible also means owning your work and taking responsibility for all of your
actions, good or bad. Stand up and own the choices you make, for better or worse.
If you make a mistake, admit it, apologize, ﬁx it, and move on. In Chicago, where
I live, there can be no better praise for a person than to have someone say, “He’s
a stand-up guy.” Being honest, ethical, and taking responsibility for all of his actions.
He has integrity. He stands for something and isn’t an opportunist who is out for
anything he can get at this moment. Become that “stand-up guy.” This concept scares
a lot of people, and those are the ones who make excuses and constantly blame
someone else or the equipment when things go wrong. In my work as studio manager,
and now with the students in my classroom, I tell them that I am not interested in
excuses: If you make a mistake, ﬁx it. It’s a waste of time to spend a 10-minute
conversation telling me how or why it happened. You know it’s wrong, and I know
it’s wrong, so ﬁx it, and let’s keep moving ahead and getting better. Those who
don’t take the responsibility for their work and their life are afraid of the possible
consequences (“Oh, everyone will know that this is my fault!”). Don’t fear
responsibility; accept it. The perception that others have of you will only grow as
a result.
This gets down to the subject of commitment, to the project and to the people
that you’re working with. Remember that what goes out the door at the end of the
day has your name on it, and, as such, why wouldn’t you want it to be the best that
it could be? Collaboration, communication, and responsibility. These things show
that you are committed to the project, and that you are taking ownership of the
project. Now, I don’t mean that you are taking over the project. I mean that you are
fully committed to making it the best that it can possibly be. Treat each and every
session as if it’s the most important session you have ever done. And here’s a little
secret: It is!
MULTITASKING
I’ve noticed that those engineers who consistently produce great-sounding voice
recordings have a number of things in common. First and foremost, they are world-
class multitaskers. When doing any type of recording, we must be aware of many
stimuli coming at us at once. With voice recording, we oftentimes must keep our
ears open for problems and mistakes in the recording process and, at the same time,
72
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer

keep our eyes and concentration on a script and be on the lookout for missed or
mispronounced words. Also, we must be aware of the narrative ﬂow and make sure
that the tempo and style remain consistent. At the same time, we are documenting
the recording and keeping track of timings and good takes and being aware of
possible editing choices we will make later. In Chapter 7, The Session, I’ll cover
many of these issues and how to deal with them in greater detail, but the importance
of concentration and multitasking cannot be stressed too greatly: If you have one
eye on your cell phone or tablet looking for that text from your friend about the
concert tonight, you are not paying attention to the session, and, trust me, the client
will notice. When you are in session, all of your energies should be focused on that
session and nothing else.
Multitasking is essential during the session and comes with practice and experience.
However, it doesn’t appear out of nowhere; you should keep it in mind throughout
all of your sessions. The number of things that you keep running in your head are
staggering when you start listing them. First, of course, is the technical: Are my
levels clipping? Is the mic properly placed? Do I hear any popped Ps or excessive
sibilance? Is my workstation session set up properly? And on and on—it goes without
saying that the technical aspects are your primary responsibility in the studio.
At the same time, you must pay attention to the content of what you’re hearing.
Are there any grammatical errors? Redundancies? Changes of tense? Do the words
ﬂow naturally for the ear? There are many writers who write for the eye and not
the ear. What ﬂows wonderfully on the page oftentimes sounds stilted or unnatural
when read aloud (what I sometimes refer to as “brochurese”). Content matters; this
is, after all, the information being passed to the listener.
Also, we must be aware of the editing process. Can we intercut two or more
takes together? If you are recording a character voice or accent, is that voice staying
consistent, or is the actor straying from where he or she started? Did the talent take
an unnaturally long pause between sentences that must be tightened up? And, of
course, you are keeping accurate track of take numbers and timings.
Is the talent becoming fatigued? Would a short break help her or the session
vibe? Is everyone involved with the session comfortable, and do they have fresh
coffee or water? Is the lighting comfortable for the talent, so that he can see the
script but not feel like he’s being interrogated in a police line-up? All this and more
comes under your responsibility and is what sets one voiceover engineer apart from
all the rest.
Yet another part of the job is acting as amateur psychologist to keep the session
running smoothly and tempers on an even keel. Being keenly aware of the others
in the room and being able to anticipate their needs is a big reason why these people
come to you. And we have to keep an eye on the clock to ensure that the session
is accomplished in the time allotted, and we don’t run over and cost the client extra
money. All of this adds up to an incredible level of attention to detail that separates
the extraordinary engineer from the average, and keeping all of this in mind is how
you keep working on a steady basis. So, in a sense, it’s as much (or more) about
these multitasking skills as it is about your recording skills. Of course, technical
The Engineer
73

74
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer
knowledge is the bottom line in any job in professional audio, but these other skills
are what will set you apart from the competition.
If there is one piece of advice that I can give to someone doing any type of
recording, it would be this: Always be prepared and ready to roll at all times. Digital
audio is cheap—if someone is warming up or practicing, why not drop into record?
You never know—sometimes that’s when that magic take happens, and you don’t
want to miss it. At the least, you can delete those takes if you want to, and you’re
not out anything; but miss that one special performance, and it’s gone forever. What
this means is that, if the client says she wants the session to begin at 10:00 A.M.,
you have everything set up, the coffee made, the script copied, and a session built
in your workstation, and you have veriﬁed that the signal path is working. At 10:00
A.M., you’re all set to press the record button, capture every moment of magic, and
come out with a superior product.
Being on time is of the utmost importance, as you can imagine. In any job you
may have, if you are constantly showing up late, you won’t have that job for very
long. Working in a studio is certainly no different. In working on commercial
productions, often the airtime is already purchased, before the producer and the voice
actor walk into the studio, and the spot has to ship immediately. If you show up
late, the chance of missing the air deadline is very possible, and, if that happens,
you can kiss that particular client goodbye! So being on time is essential. And, as
ﬁlm director Woody Allen once observed, “80 percent of success is showing up.”
If you do all of this, the client will return time and again; furthermore, the voice
actor will appreciate your efﬁciency and hard work, and, the next time someone
asks him or her for a recommendation on where to record the client’s new project—
well, who do you think that actor is going to suggest?
INSIGHT: Interview with Terry Schedeler, Writer/Producer, 
Dallas, TX
Q: What qualities do you feel a successful VO engineer should have?
A: In the work I’ve done over the years, in studios across the country, there are
a number of key characteristics I’ve noticed that top engineers seem to have
in common. (1.) By their actions, they make everyone (producer, talent, agency
people, clients) feel as if theirs is the most important project in the world. (2.)
They are incredibly laid back, yet laser focused. (3.) They adapt to the mood,
tone, and pace of the session and anticipate the needs of the producer and
talent seamlessly.
Q: What can the engineer do to make your experience in the studio go more
smoothly and that would help you to capture the intent of your project?

The Engineer
75
A: Prepare. Listen. Know your stuff.
I think of a session as a performance in which the engineer plays a vital role
as part of the entire ensemble. It all begins with preparation. Understanding
the overall scope and goals of the session, creative approach, etc. Having the
studio ready to go, even if you’re backing up to another session. Knowing the
players (producer, talent, client, etc.).
During the session, listening for things the writer/producer may not be listening
for, especially in sessions where I’ve written the script. By nature, I’m going
to hear what I wrote, which actually may not be the way it comes across to
someone hearing it for the ﬁrst time. An engineer who can ensure that the
execution is technically correct, but also communicates the message as intended
is a big asset.
The great engineers I’ve worked with know their stuff. By that I mean they
know every acoustical characteristic of their studio, every quirk in their hardware,
their entire music library and how to make their software and gadgets do amazing
things. As I said, they are part of the ensemble. Their instrument is the entire
studio, and their performance is the ﬁnished track.
Q: Do you have any horror stories about what an engineer did wrong that ruined
the studio experience for you?
A: No horror stories. But I do remember one time when one of my all-time favorite
engineers moved to the big city, and the new guy who replaced him insisted
on telling anyone who would listen how much more he knew about recording
than any of us who’d been doing this since before he was in kindergarten.
Q: What is your feeling about the engineer/producer/talent collaboration during a
session?
A: As the producer, I’m always acutely aware that we’re in the studio rapidly
spending someone else’s money on a project for which I am ultimately going
to be held responsible. That said, the best work I’ve done has been a collaboration
between the engineer, producer, and talent. These relationships are built on
trust, experience, and judgment, even if these are established in the ﬁrst session
working together. We all earn our spurs, and the proof is there for everyone to
hear.
Before every session, I have an idea in my head of what the project is going
to sound like. The ﬁnished product never does. Something doesn’t work the
way I thought it would, so we adjust. Or the talent has a better way of reading
it than I imagined. Or the engineer suggests a technique or approach I hadn’t
considered. So I know at some point, the way it’s actually going to sound is
the way it’s going to sound, and I need to adapt to this reality—which is usually
better than I had originally imagined.

76
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer
My goal, as producer, is to create a comfortable environment in which everyone
can do their best work, to set expectations and create a clear picture of what
success looks like. And if I get some good advice along the way, to take it. My
favorite engineers are the ones who follow my lead, understand that it is my
responsibility to direct the talent and the session, yet who know how and when
to steer me in a better direction.
Good sessions are like rhythm tracks. They ﬁnd their own “groove.” A good
engineer is instrumental in making this happen, session after session.
Q: Any other comments you would care to add?
A: Don’t be surprised if some of your most cherished friendships start in the studio.
Talented people like to work with other talented people. That also explains why
getting back in touch with them after many years is as if you’d seen them just
yesterday.
INSIGHT: Charlie Pickard, Voice Actor, Columbus, OH
The greatest asset of a successful VO engineer is a pair of very discriminating
ears! The ability to skillfully mic someone to his or her best advantage is absolutely
important. It’s up to the VO engineer to make him sound as good as is possible.
Also important is getting balance between two readers or among three or more.
Editing comes next, I think. The ability to blend portions of several takes into one
great read is priceless. Today’s “razor blade” is an electron wide, and incredible
things can be done in the editing process. But it’s not just cutting—it’s editing:
The matching, blending, and smoothing to make a take a winner.
A successful VO engineer is a consummate diplomat! Producers can be pains,
readers can be prima donnas, and clients in the control room are the biggest pests
since the rats left Hamelin! Diplomacy can be acquired, but it’s tough. A good
engineer wants to do his job and be done, but human beings are involved, and
everything can go downhill fast. Like it or not, the VO engineer is the go-between
for the talent and the producer, guiding the voice toward what the engineer hopes
the producer wants, keeping the producer aware of what he or she is demanding
of their talent, keeping them from expecting more than is reasonable. I’ve freelanced
for thirty-ﬁve years, and my mantra has always been the same: There are only two
people a voice talent needs to cultivate—the person in charge of Accounts Payable
and the VO engineer, and not necessarily in that order. Always follow the rules for
submitting an invoice, no matter how arcane. And know that the only true friend

One thing that is sure to elicit groans from all involved is for the client to show
up for the session. These folks assume that, as they’re paying for the session and
its product, they have the right to come in and begin taking over the session. This
is as logical as going to a ﬁne restaurant and, because you are paying for the meal,
walking into the kitchen and telling the chef how to prepare the food. Look, you
The Engineer
77
you can have at a studio is the engineer. How he handles your mic can make or
break you; how he deals with the producer can make your job a joy or hell; your
relationship with the engineer can relax you and help you do your best, or put you
on edge and make you miserable.
I would encourage anyone who wants to be a VO engineer to be as friendly as
possible in the circumstances. Try to put the voice talent at ease and advise him
or her of the quirks of the producer, if the talent has never worked for that person
before. Keeping things as loose as possible (within reason!) really helps the session
turn out well. And being the trusted intermediary is a great skill.
Two quick cases where the engineer saved the day—the engineer was the same
in both cases: In the ﬁrst instance, I was recording a spot for a well-known
department store, and the copy included the word “accessories.” The producer,
an otherwise great guy, insisted I pronounce the word “a-SESS-ories.” It took the
engineer 10 minutes to convince him otherwise, but he did, and saved the spot.
The other instance of duty above and beyond came one afternoon. I was to cut a
spot for a client I can’t remember, but the producer was an old hand who knew
his job and was slow to lose his cool. He was accompanied by a young man who
was being broken in as a future producer. There I was in the studio, with the
producer, the engineer, and the young man in the control room. Suddenly, in came
the account exec and three people from the client! I could see the producer’s face
getting redder by the minute, but somehow the engineer, with his skill and
professionalism, got us through the session without a murder occurring. I took my
sweet time leaving the studio to let things clear up in the control room! A good
engineer is a pearl of great price!
I’ve sort of touched on the engineer–talent relationship earlier. Let me just say
that technical skill is the foundation, of course. But diplomacy and the ability to
relax other people in a stressful situation are just as important. Being able to learn
the idiosyncrasies of both the different actors and the various producers you work
with is well worth the effort. And one other thing, of supreme importance: The VO
engineer is the king of his or her domain. The producer/agency is paying money,
and their wishes are important; the talent’s abilities and feelings are important,
too. But the smooth operation and meshing of the technical and the human is in
the engineer’s hands. And so is the continuing smooth operation of the control
room. The engineer’s word must be ﬁnal!

hired us because we are creative, talented people who do this for a living and, most
likely, have spent years learning our craft. The last thing we need is to have someone
come in and start micromanaging every decision and every action that we take. The
client may own the company, or manufacture a wonderful product, but they don’t
understand that every session has its own “groove,” or ﬂow, and that it usually takes
a couple of read-throughs for the rhythm to be found. Nor do they understand that
the powerful and nuanced ﬁnished product is quite often the result of a combination
of pieces from numerous takes edited together, and that the engineer and the actor,
not to mention the producer, are very well aware of which pieces will ﬁt together
in the completed edit. The assumption is that the actor can come up with the perfect
read the ﬁrst time through the script (“Why do we have to do it again?”). The client
(most times) doesn’t know how to direct an actor, nor has the technical vocabulary
to communicate his ideas with the engineer or producer. They most often give
confusing, conﬂicting direction to the actor, question every move an engineer makes,
and second-guess the producer with every decision made. They simply can’t get out
of their own way and end up with an over-budget end product that isn’t nearly as
good as it could and should have been, if only they had remained in their ofﬁce.
And, of course, this state of affairs is all because those people doing the session
didn’t know what they were doing! In short, they are quite useless in the session.
My auto mechanic has a wonderful sign hanging on the wall of his shop: “Labor—
$45/hr . . . If You Watch—$90/hr.” Oh, how I wish we could send out a similar
notice to the clients thinking about coming to the session! I’ve often, and only half
in jest, said that 80 percent of our job is saving people from themselves, and I do
believe that ﬁrmly, but politely, telling the client to just sit back and watch is doing
them (and everyone else) a world of good.
BUILDING A SENSE OF TRUST
Both Terry and Charlie touched on a very important point, and one that I cannot
stress strongly enough: The key to a successful career, not just as a VO engineer
but in anything we might do, is to establish a sense of trust with the people you
work with. The old saying, “You’re only as good as your last job,” certainly is true.
Now sure, we all have off days, and we hope that one of those is not the ﬁrst time
you work with a client, but, if the majority of the time you’re on your game and
you keep the session running smoothly, the client will want to come back time and
again, because they know that you are going to give them your best. In a conversation
I had with studio designer and engineer Dave Hampton (author of The Business of
Audio Engineering), he relayed a very valuable piece of wisdom: “Trust ain’t an
app. It doesn’t cost 99 cents, and you can’t download it.” Trust is earned through
repeated effort, every minute of every day. It’s hard to earn and is the most valuable
commodity that you possess. Guard it with your life! If you say you’re going to do
something, then carry through and make sure you do it. Remember, at the end of
the day, you have only one thing, and that is your good name.
78
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer

And here’s another thing to keep in mind that I learned from a studio owner that
I worked for a long time ago: There is no such thing as an insigniﬁcant session.
Every day, treat every session you do as if it’s the most important thing that you’ve
ever done. It’s very easy to see an inexperienced and bumbling producer trying to
get a handle on turning the product out and think, “This bum’s not going to last till
the end of the month—why should I care?” Easy enough to blow him off and move
on. But, and here’s the moral of this story: I once had a producer like this come in;
it was evident that he didn’t have a clue as to how to arrive at where he wanted to
get to. Instead of just pushing the buttons and watching the clock, I gently took over
the direction of the session, explaining each step as I was doing it, from recording
through editing and mixing. Over the course of a couple of sessions, I gained his
trust because of the interest that I took in his project, and we became close friends.
He came in about every two weeks with another long session to accomplish, and,
after an amazingly short period, he turned into one of the ﬁnest producers that I
knew. After three years, this client had turned into a $7 million account for the
studio! Not bad for a small, independent studio, and an account we would not have
had if I had just hustled him out of the studio because the ﬁrst session was a pain.
I used the occasion to build his trust in both the studio and me; we kept our word
on pricing and deadlines, were fair and open with him, and treated him as the
professional he was (even if he wasn’t aware of being one yet). Trust wins another
one!
Always keep in mind that we are in the service business (and that this is a business,
no matter how much we claim that we’re in it for the art of it all). If someone treats
me fairly and respects me as a person, and not just as a button-pusher or as an
engineer, I will repay that with a respect for their work and a commitment to their
project and their vision for the project. Being in a service industry, we work on
what is called a “fee-for-service” basis. That is, I agree to provide you with a service
(recording, editing, and mixing whatever audio you require) for an agreed-upon
price. It makes no difference if you are an independent contractor or the owner of
a huge multiroom complex; this is the business that we live in. As a practical result,
your service to the client is paramount, if you want to stay in business. How you
treat the client and live up to what you promise to do is the determining factor in
your success.
PREPARATION
Preparation is key to a successful session. Before the session, try to get as much
information as possible from the client about what the session will entail. For instance,
how many actors will be recording at once? Is this session a radio spot or a piece
of long-form narration? What types of deliverable are the client expecting? What
ﬁle format is required for the deliverables (including sample rate and bit depth)?
Are you going to be receiving any materials from another studio (such as a music
track or a previously recorded actor that will be cut into the ﬁnal track)? Discovering
The Engineer
79

all of this and more will, ﬁrst of all, make your job much easier and help the session
run more smoothly, but, more importantly, it will tell the client that you care about
them and their project and you are working overtime to make sure that you give
them what they want. By asking as many questions as you can beforehand, you will
have everything set up and ready to go the minute the client and voice talent walk
in the door. This is crucial if you are recording radio or television commercials. Try
to get the script beforehand and then, with stopwatch in hand, read it aloud. See if,
reading at a comfortable pace, it ﬁts into the allotted time (30 seconds, 15 seconds,
what have you). I stress the importance of reading it out loud, because reading it
silently or under your breath will lead to a false sense of timing; we read much
faster with our eyes than we speak, and you must be sure that your timing is accurate.
If you detect a problem, alert the client immediately. Calmly explain the situation
(“This copy runs about 10 seconds too long—can you cut some words?”), and once
again you show that you are thinking about them and only them. Everyone likes
that feeling! After all, time is money, and, if you can catch something up front that
saves them money in the studio, they’ll really appreciate it. Mistakes in the script
aren’t your fault, and, if a make-up session is needed to correct things, make sure
that you have stated up front that any re-dos will be charged over and above the
price that you have agreed on for the session.
Before you can begin recording the spoken word, ﬁrst you need a script. Now,
this isn’t your responsibility, but you should be aware of what the script represents.
A well-written script is like the score to a musical work—it’s a guide and it is open
to interpretation by the artist. I don’t necessarily mean changing the notes on the
page (or, in our case, the words), but rather things such as the tempo and emphasis
of the performance. The writer who is experienced in writing voiceover scripts
knows that there is a large difference between writing for the ear versus writing for
the eye. Things that look good and make sense on paper do not necessarily strike
the ear as conversational and logical. This idea of writing for the eye versus the ear
is a difﬁcult thing for writers to learn, unless they regularly write for actors, e.g.,
writing screenplays and the like. If you are presented with a script written for the
eye, there may not be a lot you can do about it other than (politely) point out that
something would make more sense if worded in another manner. Be aware that there
will be times that no changes can be made; remember that your client most times
has a client that they are working for, and that the ultimate client may have approved
the script with no changes to be made. Also, there may be some type of legal
consideration that you are unaware of, and that is why the script is worded the way
it is. (My current favorite is from political advertising, where the candidate must
say, “My name is Joe Schmoe, and I approve this advertising.” Why not
“advertisement”? Some Board of Elections Commission lawyer somewhere, I
suppose.)
When it’s time to start the session, everyone must be working from the same
version of the script. I’ve seen confusion during sessions because there were two
or three different versions of the script ﬂoating around the control room; no one is
then quite sure which is the correct version, and time is wasted trying to contact the
80
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer

writer or whoever may know the answer. It has always amazed me how many times
we have recorded the wrong version of an “approved” script, only to have to book
another session to get the correct words down. I ask myself, “Wasn’t anybody paying
attention?” Apparently not.
When discussing the script with the client, remind them of a couple of formatting
suggestions that will greatly help the talent and the engineer: Have them double-
space the lines of type and leave wide margins on the page for notes to be taken;
avoid breaking sentences over a page break (an invitation to paper-shufﬂing noise);
spell out any words that may be confusing (for instance, do we want to pronounce
the client’s name as “Inc.” or “Incorporated”?); the same goes for numbers (105
could be read as “one hundred and ﬁve,” “one hundred ﬁve,” “one oh ﬁve,” and so
on—which is preferred?); and, if the script consists of multiple pages, have the page
numbers clearly marked. All of these things will help the session run in a much
more efﬁcient manner and avoid excess billing charges for the client. Above all,
make sure that the script is laid out in a clear and concise way that is easily read
on the ﬁrst run-through.
It should be added here that part of your preparation is staying current in the
technology. After all, we work in a technological profession and we are expected
to know the latest and greatest. Gather as much information as you can get your
hands on about what’s happening in the industry and what the hot new products
are. A case in point: A long time ago, I read an article in Mix magazine that said
that the technology was now available to be able to synchronize an audio tape
recorder to a video machine using time code. I was curious about how this worked
and did a bit of research (this was long before the Internet, and so the research was
more difﬁcult to do, but, by talking to a large number of people and reading as
much as I could ﬁnd, I started to get a handle on the process). After learning enough
about it to be able to intelligently discuss the subject, I brought up to my studio
owner that, if we invested in this technology, we could work to picture, recording
directly to an audio tape machine and not have to go through the cumbersome and
expensive process of recording to magnetic ﬁlm. He gave me the go-ahead to contact
the manufacturer of the synchronization equipment, who then came in and gave us
a demo. The owner purchased the gear, I spent a couple of months really getting it
down, and we were in business as the only studio in the area being able to work in
this manner. Over time, I started to become known as the time code ﬁx-it guy, and
people would come to me if they were having problems with their synchronization.
I then got a job at another studio precisely because I knew how all of this worked,
and the owner was looking to branch out into working to picture. I spent eight years
at that studio and was then hired by yet another studio because of this knowledge.
So, for over twelve years, I kept my career thriving because of the initial curiosity
I had over that long-ago article, and I kept up with advances in the technology. After
working at the third studio for a number of years, I elected to begin a freelance
business, and even then people would hire my services for their synchronization
jobs and problems. All part of the preparation for the session—even if that session
is twelve years in the future.
The Engineer
81

82
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer
INSIGHT: Interview with Linda Wolfe, Producer, Chicago, IL
Q: What qualities do you feel that a successful VO engineer should have?
A: Obviously technical skills, but also the ability to “Zen” the process. If the
process isn’t second nature ﬁrst and foremost, then all the creativity in the
world won’t matter. Collaboration and having ideas is what it’s all about as
well. A monkey can be taught to push buttons. Producers need solutions to
challenges and problems that might arise, and they always do. An even temper,
not being too talkative, an ability to continue working while all hell is breaking
loose around you. An ability to stay “removed” from the chatter and idiotic
banters of young creatives or clients who have silly ideas. The ability to make
everyone feel like they are being heard and yet staying focused.
Q: What can the engineer do to make your experience in the studio go more
smoothly and that would help you to capture the intent of your project?
A: Do your homework! Understand and study the project before it arrives at your
door. Have everything loaded, review takes and tracks if possible. If you are
recording VO, understand the intent of the spot. If music, have some
conversations with your client beforehand if possible to discuss direction and
challenges. Be ready to go. Although we all love being in a studio, time is
money, and we hate wasting both. If you are doing sound design, have some
ideas for sfx and stock music. Time the script beforehand if you are working
on a spot. Do not own the session! Arrogance is not pretty. You will have great
ideas that will not be accepted. Be prepared to give up your darlings! It’s not
life and death. Although you may disagree with a producer or client, in the end
it’s their dime. I love working with an engineer who can “discuss” why something
is a good or bad idea with me. I like to be challenged, but in the end, it’s my
gut that will make the decision.
Q: Do you have any horror stories about what an engineer did wrong that ruined
the studio experience for you?
A: Yes! An un-named engineer “lost” an entire recording session’s takes. Back
up! Additionally, I hate slow engineers who are unsure of what buttons to push.
It drives me crazy!
Q: What is your feeling about the engineer–producer–talent collaboration during a
session?
A: It’s a partnership. First you have to have the “right” talent. If you have that,
you are a third of the way there. If you have a seasoned producer who can get
what is needed in less that a million takes and who understands the intent of
the message, you are two-thirds there. If you have an engineer who is on the

THE TEAM
All three of these guests brought up an interesting point, and something that you
should carefully think about. Life in the studio is an exercise in collaboration. I’ve
worked with producers who wanted me to only push the buttons and never open
my mouth, and I’ve worked with producers who considered me a co-producer on
their project. In the end, I’m ﬁne with whatever role is expected of me, but I ﬁrmly
believe that everyone working as a team, with open and honest communication, is
the way to achieve a superior product. If you are comfortable with your technical
skills, they become almost second nature, and you won’t spend excess energy thinking
your way through a session. It takes time, patience, and practice to get there, but,
once you’ve mastered your equipment, your work ﬂow will be much faster and
much more creative. Then, and only then, can you begin to be a collaborative part
of the recording team and have the client and voice talent really start to trust your
skills and your decision-making. For me, this collaboration is by far the most enjoyable
part of engineering. If I hear something that I think can be improved, I don’t hesitate
to point it out. And Linda Wolfe brings up another point: In the end, this is the
client’s party and their dime, and their decision is ﬁnal. If you don’t agree, do what
they ask for and move on to the next session. Many times I’ve sat in a studio with
a young producer who thought he or she had all the answers and would ask for
something in a particular way. I would patiently (and politely) try to explain that it
wouldn’t work. “For me, this is going to work—nobody else knew how to do it!”
comes the response. Again, I would explain that I’ve had years of experience doing
The Engineer
83
same page and can put it all together, and most importantly has the “timing”
to get it right, you win. There is nothing worse than a good script that has bad
timing: Pauses that are too long, bad edits, clipped voices. I hear everything.
If you can hear something and it’s not perfect, ﬁx it! A good engineer is a
trusted partner.
Q: Other comments?
A: When you start getting clients, you will have some that never come back. Don’t
worry. It’s like dating or ﬁnding a good doctor. Only be concerned with the
ones who think you walk on water. I also use different engineers depending on
the content of the project: Comedy, long-format, tons of effects, lots of stock
tracks. It would be great to be a master of it all, but most times you can’t.
Understand what you are good at ﬁrst, nail that, and then move on. It takes
years to be great. It took me about ﬁfteen years before I knew I was one of
the best producers in the city. Be patient. Practice, practice, practice. Fast
and good is what it is all about.

this type of project, and it’s been tried before, and whatever they are asking for
never works. “I’m telling you, for me this is going to be great.” So, OK, hotshot,
I’ll give it my best go. And of course it doesn’t work, and then what happens? They
blame you! Get used to it; this scenario will play itself out countless times.
There will be situations where you can tell what the client’s ﬁnal goal is, and
yet they have no idea how to get there, or you know that you have a better, more
creative approach to something than they are directing you to do. In this case, I
advise you to give the client what they want, even if they don’t know it yet. By
this, I don’t mean to try and impose your own vision on the project, but rather to
take it in the direction that you are certain is the correct way to go, and, with a bit
of luck, the client will see where you’re heading and agree that you may indeed
have a better idea. But, as Linda pointed out, be prepared to kill your children! All
of that great editing and sound design may be thrown out, and all you can do in
that case is move on and give them what they want.
Part of the job of a studio engineer entails working with all different kinds of
people. I’ve always thought that being a successful engineer is about 20 percent
technical skills and 80 percent people skills. As I mentioned above, being an amateur
psychologist (and sometime mind-reader) is a prerequisite. Not every minute of every
session is going to be spent recording takes; there will be times of casual conversation
and getting to know one another. Because your clients and talents are all different
people, with their own interests and experiences, developing your own wide-ranging
interests will help you relate to them and take an active part in conversation in the
studio. Read. See more movies. Learn a bit about history or science. It’s actually
fun and enlivens your life outside the studio. For most of my life, I didn’t pay much
attention to professional football, but, every Monday through Wednesday, everyone
in the studio was talking about last weekend’s game, and I was left out of the
conversation and felt like there was something wrong with me. So I started to take
some time on Sunday afternoons and watch the home team and began to learn the
players and the strengths of the various teams in the league. After a short while,
joining in the conversation about the game became easy and fun and helped me
build a relationship with a diverse group of people. All part of the job.
I always try to instruct an apprentice or beginning engineer on when to speak up
and when to keep their mouth closed. As with anything else in the studio, this takes
time and practice to master; diplomacy doesn’t always come naturally. You have to
gain the experience to be able to read a situation and react accordingly, and you
will make mistakes. If so, apologize and move on. You have just learned something
about the client or actor with whom you are working, so ﬁle it away for the next
time you work with/for them. At the end of the day, your feelings are not the
important issue—it’s all about the project.
This brings me to my next point: Leave your ego at home. What with the clients
and the actors, there will be more than enough ego to go around when it comes time
to do the session, and yours is the least important. We don’t need yet another prima
donna in the studio, and constantly attempting to tell everyone how great you are
is a sure way to drive them from your studio. Know that you’re great, but be humble
84
CHAPTER 5 The Engineer

about it. If you do your job correctly and creatively, everyone will acknowledge
your expertise and skill; you don’t need to advertise it. Always keep in mind that
this is not your project—you are there to help bring the vision to life as a part of
the creative partnership.
A long time ago, my father told me that, if you don’t like your job, go ﬁnd
something else to do. Life is too short for you to be miserable while you’re trying
to make a living. The recording profession in one of passion, and one that most of
us feel that we simply have to do. This passion will carry over into everything you
do and will be evident in your work. I’ve always said that I may not be the most
technical of engineers, but I am certainly one of the most passionate. I learn everything
I can about this industry—its history, new products, new (and old) ways of doing
things. All of this shows in my work, I think, and makes me want to leap out of
bed in the morning and get back into the studio. As far as I’m concerned, there is
no better place to be than in a studio, and that’s because I’ve developed a passion
for doing this work. If you feel that you can’t possibly do anything else except
record and mix, you’re on your way to being a ﬁne engineer.
The Engineer
85

This page intentionally left blank

Each type of session makes its own demands on the studio space and the setup of
the studio. Music sessions rarely need video playback, whereas an ADR or Foley
session absolutely needs picture in the studio space. A commercial recording session
may or may not have such a need. When discussing setting up the room for voiceover
recording, keep in mind that this type of session has its own needs and is unique.
Every engineer will set up their studio in a way that works for him or her, and I
wouldn’t attempt to prescribe a one-size-ﬁts-all solution, but I can offer some advice
that applies to most situations and leave it up to you to customize your setup so it
works best for you.
6
The Studio
CHAPTER

A FEW SIMPLE TRUTHS
No matter how you prefer your studio to be set up for a voice-recording session,
there are some things that will not change, no matter how you set up the room. The
physics of sound and the acoustics of the room remain a constant (see Chapter 3,
Room Acoustics). The size of the room will certainly play a role in how your
recording sounds and it cannot be changed (except by the addition of gobos and the
like, or some other method of altering the shape and size of the space). How a
microphone functions and how it captures and reproduces the sound remain constant,
although microphone placement within the room can alter the sound and quality of
the recording (see Chapter 4, Microphones).
Above all, the studio is a place for humans to work and create and must be treated
as such: Comfort and ergonomics must be taken into account. Lighting, heating, air
conditioning and so on are very important considerations and should never be taken
lightly. After all, for the talent to give his or her best performance, they must ﬁrst
of all be comfortable and relaxed, and a room that is poorly lit or is much too warm
and claustrophobic is not conducive to being a creative work space. Although all
of this may seem perfectly obvious, I’ve witnessed engineers doing a voice session
in a cavernous music studio, and, although it may have cool “mood” lighting that
adds to the vibe of a music session, the lighting makes it difﬁcult to read a script,
and there is no video playback if needed. Furthermore, because the studio was large
enough to accommodate a great number of musicians at the same time, having just
one person standing alone in the room leads to an isolated feeling, and the talent
doesn’t feel connected to what is happening in the control room. A single individual
standing by herself in the corner can be pretty lonely. One only has to take a look
at the Beatles recording their early music, set up in a corner of Studio B at EMI
Abbey Road studios, which is large enough to accommodate an entire symphony
orchestra, to get a small feeling for what this experience must be like.
One last point: In those studios where I have been the lead engineer or studio
manager, I always tell my assistants and the other engineers that no one notices a
clean studio, but everyone notices a cluttered and dirty studio. So make sure you
keep the studio space neat and tidy. Now, I’m a bit of a fanatic on this score, but
everyone should be able to keep cables neatly coiled and be capable of clearing out
the used coffee cups from two sessions ago.
So, in this chapter, we’re going to take a look at some ideas for setting up the
studio space for maximum talent comfort and creativity.
LIGHTING
The ﬁrst step in setting up the studio space for the voiceover actor is making sure
that the lighting level is appropriate for comfortable reading without eye strain or
glare. There are two types of lighting you should be cognizant of: The overall room
lighting and the lighting of the script itself. Let’s address general room lighting ﬁrst.
88
CHAPTER 6 The Studio

The light level in the room should be comfortable for most activities and not be
too bright or too dim. I do appreciate having the room lights on a dimmer to set the
mood of the script—provided the script light is adequate for illuminating the page.
Many actors prefer having low-level ambient lighting when they’re in the studio
and feel that it helps the performance, especially if the read is to be intimate and
quiet. Considering this ability to dim down the room lighting leads us immediately
to what type of lighting we’re working with. Fluorescent lights usually can’t be
dimmed and they introduce a great number of other problems into the space. First
of all, by design, ﬂuorescent lights ﬂicker, and this can cause eyestrain in a great
number of people. As well, they are quite bright, and the color balance of the lighting
element is harsh. Although good for work lights when wiring a room, for example,
they are not recommended for overall ambient lighting needs in the studio. Another
thing to keep in mind is that ﬂuorescent lights tend to buzz, owing to the ballast
used to power the lights, and this buzzing sound is easily picked up by the microphone
and is very difﬁcult to remove from the recording. So, ﬂuorescents are out.
Incandescent lights (regular light bulbs) are by far the most common to ﬁnd in
the studio. They are low cost, give good light balance, are dimmable, and are easily
changed if one burns out—all good reasons to choose this type of lighting design.
By altering the wattage of the bulbs, you can adjust the overall level of lighting in
the space and then, with the addition of a dimmer on the light switch, you can raise
or lower the room brightness to match the required level. One word of caution here,
however: When installing dimmers on the lights, be very aware that dimmers often
cause a 60 cycle hum or buzz in the audio lines, and so you may have to go with
theatrical dimmers, which use a resistor to prevent this noise—a bit more money,
but well worth it for a clean audio signal. A downside to incandescent lighting is
that it tends to throw off quite a bit of heat. Put your hand over a light bulb in your
home and you’ll see what I mean. If you have a dozen or so light ﬁxtures in the
room, all throwing off that much heat, you can see how the temperature levels in
the room rise pretty rapidly, and this will require a greater amount of air conditioning
to be introduced into the room to counteract it. This, in turn, presents its own problems
in the form of additional noise coming from the ventilation system, but, far and
away, the incandescent lighting system is the prevalent solution to studio lighting.
However, things are changing—there are some new options that you should
consider. Compact ﬂuorescent light bulbs have some positives going for them: They
ﬁt right into the incandescent ﬁxture, so you don’t have to do any rewiring. They
last up to six times the life span of an incandescent light and operate at a cooler
temperature. However, they still have the ﬂicker and color-balance issues that are
inherent in ﬂuorescent ﬁxtures.
A new player on the scene in the past few years is the LED (light-emitting diode)
light. These lights use an extremely small amount of energy and are surprisingly
low in operating temperature (hence, less cooling is required), and the life span is
incredible compared with the standard incandescent light bulb. You can put them
on dimmers, and there is an almost inﬁnite range of colors of light that you can
have with them.
The Studio
89

When John Storyk designed Electric Lady Studios for Jimi Hendrix in 1970, the
artist wanted to have stage-type lighting in the studio. The solution was to paint all
of the studio walls white and then hang a theatrical lighting grid in the studio, so
that the walls could be washed with a wide variety of colors, as ﬁtted the mood of
the moment. Needless to say, they were very hot and used a large amount of energy
to achieve the effect. Now, with the advent of LED lighting, we can achieve the
same effect in a much more cost-effective and energy-efﬁcient manner. Here is John
Storyk on the subject of studio lighting:
90
CHAPTER 6 The Studio
INSIGHT: John Storyk, R.A., Principal—Walters–Storyk 
Design Group
Let’s go down the list here: Fluorescents are just ugly. These rooms are usually
small, so, unless you use them as cove lights, stay away from them. And they do
make noise, because the ballast is usually on the ﬁxture. So, stay away from them,
period. There are very, very cool incandescent lights, and most of the time if you
put them on dimmers they’re going to be dialed down. We’re now starting to use
a lot of LED lighting—everybody is. And they’re terriﬁc: They cut down on your
air conditioning because you use a ﬁfth of the energy, and they don’t make any
noise. And it’s going to be the law pretty soon, so you might as well start using
them. You can put them on dimmers. They come in color shades and they now
have bulbs that are RGB bulbs—the bulbs themselves have all the colors. They’re
very cool, no two ways about it.
Dimmers work—just use the right dimmer and the right ﬁxture. Our rule of thumb
is: “Stay away from low voltage, just stay away from transformers.” Get the
transformers out. These new LED lights are really good. They don’t make any noise.
The next issue to address after the ambient lighting in the room is the illumination
of the script itself. For this purpose, it is best to have a small light mounted directly
above the script that isn’t affected by overall room lighting levels and colors. Many
people use a clip-on reading lamp for this purpose, but I don’t like them for two
reasons: First, they create a “hot spot” on the script, and glare is produced from this
small area, and, second, they are not as sturdy as we would like in a studio setting.
For lighting the script, the best solution is a light from the Manhasset music-stand
company (www.manhasset-specialty.com). The model 1000 music lamp provides
consistent illumination across the entire page (thus eliminating any hot spots), is
glare-free, and is shielded from the front. Thus, if you are viewing the actor from

The Studio
91
FIGURE 6.2 
Manhasset Model 1050 LED Light
Source: Courtesy of Manhasset Specialty Company
FIGURE 6.3
Manhasset Model Light and Stand
Source: Courtesy of Manhasset Specialty Company
FIGURE 6.1 
Manhasset Model 1000 Music Stand Light
Source: Courtesy of Manhasset Specialty Company

the control room through the window, you won’t be bothered by looking into the
light when addressing the actor. The lamp operates on a long, slender 40-W bulb
and comes with an 8-foot-long AC cord. The light attaches to the music stand with
two strong clips, making it very sturdy and wobble-free. This light was designed
for orchestra and band musicians on stage and is ideal for our purposes in the studio.
Keep in mind that your voice talent needs all you can provide in the way of help
in order to deliver the best performance, and it all starts with being able to see the
script clearly, without shadows or glare.
The Manhasset company also makes a new product that is a nice combination
of lighting and energy efﬁciency: The model 1050 light. It has the shield/reﬂector
of the older model 1000, but incorporates LED lighting powered by a rechargeable
battery. The estimated battery life is eight hours, and this stand light provides a very
comfortable lighting level and color balance for the talent.
THE SCRIPT EASEL
We don’t want the actor to have to hold multiple pages of a script while trying to
read and so rustle the paper, and so something must be provided to place the script
on while he performs. The natural solution is a music stand, and music stands come
in a few basic models. The ﬁrst is the portable and collapsible wire music stand
familiar to anyone who has played in their grade-school band. These stands are
ﬂimsy, and the maximum height they can be raised to doesn’t work well with standing
adults. Again, we turn to the Manhasset company for our answer. The model 48
Symphony Stand answers all of our basic needs for a voiceover performer in the
studio. Sturdy and good-looking, the stand is inﬁnitely variable from 26 to 48 inches,
for a maximum overall height of 60 inches. This stand also comes in a “tall” model
that extends to 60 inches (72 inches overall height). It is well suited to match the
music stand light mentioned above. The easel itself tilts from 0 to 180°, making this
stand an ideal candidate, not only to hold the script, but to tilt to 90° and serve as
a lightweight table to hold bottled water, pencils, jewelry, and so on, when placed
directly next to the voice talent.
The easel should accommodate two to three full pages of the script side by side,
to help the talent avoid excessive paper-shufﬂing noise. A good talent is able to turn
pages silently, but giving them a little help in this area is always appreciated. A
piece of paper doesn’t make a very efﬁcient sound absorber, so there should also
be some sort of absorbing material placed on the easel itself to help control reﬂections.
This can be a piece of carpet remnant cut to ﬁt the size of the easel or, better still,
a piece of foam. The padding on the stand also helps to mitigate the sound of paper
rustling when pages are being turned. Although necessary, this makes writing and
making notes on the script while it’s on the easel difﬁcult without putting holes in
the paper, but it’s one of the things we gladly trade off to capture the best possible
recording. Also, the easel should be tilted such that sound bouncing off of it isn’t
reﬂected directly back into the microphone.
92
CHAPTER 6 The Studio

The Studio
93
In trying to ﬁnd ways to conserve Earth’s resources, some have suggested that
scripts should no longer exist in paper format. By moving away from the use of
paper, we use less energy and protect the environment by cutting fewer trees. After
all, in this digital age, there are numerous ways to present the printed word for an
actor to read. With that in mind, let’s take a look at using laptop and tablet computers
for this purpose. I would not recommend using a laptop in the studio for two main
reasons: Because of the size and weight of a laptop computer, it’s difﬁcult to place
the machine at a proper height for the talent to read from. Many music stands won’t
accept the weight of a laptop and will lower themselves, and there is always the
risk of the computer falling to the ﬂoor. And then there is the noise issue. Even the
quietest of laptops have a cooling fan and perhaps a spinning disk drive inside, and
these sounds are easily captured by the microphone and can ruin an otherwise
pristine recording. The sounds are very noticeable and annoying in a recording of
the voice.
Avoiding the problems of the laptop computer, there is the tablet. Tablets are
very quiet, lightweight, and convenient to handle. The price is reasonable compared
FIGURE 6.4 
The Studio Ready To Go
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by the author

with a laptop. And there are a number of good-quality, reasonably priced stands
available on the market that hold the tablet securely and that are fully adjustable.
At present, my favorite is from Pyle Audio. This model clips onto any microphone
stand and will adjust in any way that the stand will. Another is from Standzfree.
This model doesn’t come up high enough to be read from easily. You can ﬁnd these
and other stands at Amazon.com and other retailers.
Many actors are using tablet computers, such as Apple’s iPad, the Kindle, or
other brands, for script purposes these days. Although they are in widespread use,
I would suggest that you think about some of the inherent problems with this
technology for a moment. The ﬁrst hurdle that I see with the tablet being used for
voiceover purposes comes from presenting the script on one of these tablets. We
have a problem with the type size: Although these devices are convenient, to read
a multipage script from one requires the machine being quite close. To be honest,
I’ve found the screen size is a bit too small for our purposes. And then comes the
issue of scrolling through the pages. Although a swipe will turn the page, it’s not
as simple as turning a piece of paper, and, also, the actor can’t read ahead to the
next sentence, as she could by holding two pages of paper. For me, perhaps 
the biggest drawback with using electronics for script reading comes with marking
the script. Very often, the actor will mark the script where he wants to place emphasis,
take a breath, pause for a beat, speed up, and so on. I always put two sharpened
pencils on the music stand at the beginning of every session for this purpose, and
I know some actors who also carry colored pencils with them to color code certain
things on the script. All of this information is very important to the actor, and there
are frequently times when the wording of the script changes during the session.
“Replace this phrase with this” or “Delete that word,” and so on. All of this marking
is vastly easier to do with pencil and paper than with software. And, speaking of
software, we should mention that most scripts are written with Microsoft Word. The
Apple iPad uses Apple’s Pages software, and the two are not interchangeable, and
so, before the session, the script must be opened and then resaved in the appropriate
software. Because of all these reasons, I would recommend against using an iPad
or equivalent for script use for the time being, although many actors make daily use
of them.
Whether you opt for paper or electronics, we should be cognizant that the copy
stand is the actor’s workstation, and it should be sturdy and adjustable to be a
comfortable ﬁt for anyone who walks into our studio. Because space in a voiceover
booth is often limited, the script stand should ﬁt efﬁciently in the room and not take
up undue space, but, at the same time, be ﬂexible enough to be usable over a long
period of time and in a wide variety of situations.
SEATED OR STANDING?
Most voice actors (as well as singers and musicians) prefer to perform while standing.
This allows unimpeded ﬂow of air from the diaphragm up through the mouth, and
94
CHAPTER 6 The Studio

the artist can get a more open and resonant sound, as well as being able to move
more naturally during the performance. It is recommended that you plan for the
talents to be standing when they come into your studio, as the majority of these
people prefer that. However, there will be times when a sitting posture is required,
for a number of reasons. For instance, if you are recording a long script, standing
for the entire time might unreasonably tire the actor, and sitting becomes a requirement.
If it is determined that sitting is what is needed, some thought should be put into
the type of chair. My ﬁrst suggestion would be to provide a tall stool, adjustable
for a number of differing heights and noise-free. This last point goes without saying:
If the seat makes creaking or rubbing sounds, the microphone will pick that up and
ruin your recording. For this reason, I don’t recommend bar stools, especially wooden
ones. They are simply not sturdy enough to be used without creating noise. One of
the advantages of using the adjustable stool is that the talent can be more or less
“half standing.” She is not in a completely seated position that cuts off the ﬂow of
air, but is not completely standing, either. Thus, she gets the beneﬁts of both positions,
without any of the compromises of being fully seated. Also, if this type of seating
is provided in the studio, the actor can stand during takes and then take a half step
back and relax during the direction from the control room. Because the seat is only
a half step behind them, they don’t lose their position at the microphone, and all
takes will be consistent for editing purposes.
If it is determined that being seated at a table is required, there are some things
that you should consider. Remember that the tabletop is highly reﬂective, and you
will be getting some sound bounce from that source back into the microphone. Just
as with the script easel, some sound absorption should be provided on the tabletop.
Carpet, foam, or some other such material should be used to cover the entire top of
the table. The BBC uses an interesting idea for people seated at a table: The tabletop
itself is constructed from a thin, perforated material that allows a large amount of
the sound to pass directly through the top itself, thus avoiding the reﬂection problem.
If you decide to try this method using perf-board (available in most hardware stores
and home centers), be sure to put a big sign on the table that says “Do Not Sit.” A
piece of half-inch perf-board will not, under any circumstances, hold the weight of
even a small individual! And, just as if the actor were standing, we need somewhere
to place and hold the script. A script easel should be provided in this circumstance
as well, and everything we said about the easel when the talent is standing holds
true if the talent is seated: It should be tilted to avoid reﬂections, padded to be more
absorptive, and so on.
MONITORING
It’s essential for the voice actor to be able to communicate clearly with those in the
control room during the session, and so we need two-way communication. First, the
talent needs to hear direction, and for that we provide a talkback, or cue, system.
Second, they need to hear playback of a previous take so that they can adjust their
The Studio
95

performance accordingly. There are two methods available for these purposes. When
I started in the industry, the preferred method was to place a loudspeaker in the
studio, and all communication and playback were heard in this manner. Times change,
and it seems that most voiceover actors are comfortable working with headphones,
and through them they hear the talkback from the control room and any playback.
You should note that some actors prefer not to wear headphones, because they want
to hear their own voice as it sounds in the room (much as musicians like to hear
the natural sound of the instrument). These folks will keep the headphones close by
and slip them on to hear directions from the producer or engineer and then remove
them to perform the next take. The downside of this method is that you can get
“bleed” from the headphones into the mic, and the small difference in timing of the
audio signals from the actor’s mouth and from the headphones can possibly cause
phase errors being introduced into the audio signal. Also, if the talent is reading
against a prerecorded music track, they must wear headphones.
The upside to having all communication and playback coming through a
loudspeaker is that the talent can judge the performance in an acoustical environment
and monitor the read in much the same manner as those in the control room. Of
course, the engineer must dim or mute the mic signal during playbacks, or feedback
will result, and, if there is one thing that will alienate the talent faster than anything
else, it’s blasting feedback into his ears. Because most actors are accustomed to
working with headphones today, it seems that having monitor speakers in the studio
can probably be done away with, except in cases such as recording radio dramas
and the like, as well as in primarily music studios.
When headphones are used in the studio, an important tool to consider is a
headphone mixer for the talent. Yes, we can provide a headphone mix from the
console or controller and adjust the overall volume that is going to the talent, but
people would like to hear different things while they’re performing, and providing
a mixer box is a wonderful solution. Imagine that you are recording two actors at
once, performing a dialogue piece, with a musical jingle that has vocals coming in
at the end. Each of the performers might want to hear the music at a different level
in their headphones as they read, and thus individual mixer stations provide a very
efﬁcient solution. The stations are available in conﬁgurations from mono (volume
control only) to eight or more channels (useful for recording musicians, who each
might want their own mix of instruments as they perform). The choice of how many
channels you decide on is up to you, depending on the type of work done in the
studio, but it is recommended that you investigate this monitoring option and give
it some serious consideration.
As for the headphones themselves, there are too many options of manufacturer
and price point to recommend any one of the myriad models available on the market
to you, but I can provide these thoughts: The headphones that you choose for your
studio should be comfortable to wear for prolonged periods. Each of us has a different
idea of what makes for a “comfortable” set of headphones, and it is very much a
matter of personal preference, but please keep comfort in mind when considering
what type of headphones to purchase. Also, they should be of the “closed-ear” design
96
CHAPTER 6 The Studio

The Studio
97
FIGURE 6.5 
PreSonus Headphone Splitter
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by Bryen Hensley
FIGURE 6.6 
Furman Headphone Splitter
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by the author

and not “open-air.” The open-air type, although lighter and thus probably more
comfortable, allows for a large amount of sound to leak out of the headphones and
into the room (and, therefore, the mics), as well as allowing outside sounds to distract
the talent. A well-sealed pair is much, much better. The headphones should provide
a sense of solidity and heft when worn, without being too cumbersome or heavy.
Don’t use DJ-type headphones; they have an artiﬁcial bass-boost built into them,
and the talent won’t be able accurately to judge what their voice is sounding like.
And, when considering headphones for purchase, always keep in mind the durability
and ruggedness of the design. These headphones are going to be in constant use,
day in and day out, and so durability is a major purchasing criterion. Also take a
good look at the ease of repair for the headphones that you choose; repairing
headphones is difﬁcult at best, because the wires are so tiny, and some sets of
headphones are virtually impossible to repair because of their design. The easier it
is to make repairs when necessary, the longer the set will last, and this obviously
cuts down on studio expenses.
When thinking about what gear to purchase for your studio, one thing that has
always worked for me is to simply ask your user base, that is, the actors, what they
prefer. It has always confounded me that manufacturers don’t ask their users what
would be of use to the ﬁnal customer, whether that be the design of a new piece 
of software or where to put certain controls in an automobile. For some reason, 
the manufacturer thinks that it has all the answers and will dictate to its users 
how they will use the product. It makes more sense to me to ask the actual users
what they prefer and then, if possible, provide that. Of course, your actors (users)
may come up with something much too expensive or somehow inappropriate, but,
as they are the ones that will be living with your decision, let’s get them involved
in the process. As I have stressed throughout this section, anything that we, as
engineers, can do to help provide for the actor’s comfort and performance, the better
the result of the session; adequate and comfortable monitoring is certainly one of
the things that we can control.
VIDEO MONITORING
There will be times when it will be essential for the actor to see video during the
session; as mentioned above, ADR and Foley sessions demand video playback in
order for the artists to perform directly to picture. In addition, many television
commercials will need video monitoring in order for the VO talent to time their
delivery of lines properly. There are currently two methods of displaying video in
the studio: One method is to split the video feed, so that it is displayed on both
control-room and video monitors at once. The other method displays the DAW’s
session, which includes the video ﬁle. This way of displaying the picture requires
either a software or hardware installation, but has a couple of advantages: Some
audio workstations have an option to display a larger than normal time counter,
which some VO talents ﬁnd very useful in spotting when to begin delivering their
98
CHAPTER 6 The Studio

The Studio
99
lines and also to give them an idea of whether their read is running too long or too
short. Also, the actor can see what the engineer is doing in the control room, and
this improves communication if the actor suddenly hears some type of editing taking
place and doesn’t know what’s going on (although you should always explain what
is happening in the control room—remember, being alone in the studio can be an
isolating experience). Whichever method you choose, be sure to turn the volume of
the video monitor off, so that the microphone doesn’t pick any program audio that
is played into the studio.
The monitor should be placed slightly below eye level for an average-height
person and be situated in such a way that, when facing the monitor, the microphone
is in one of the best places in the studio for recording audio (remember the “sweet
spot” from Chapter 3?). Be aware that the monitor is going to reﬂect sound, so place
the mic appropriately to avoid early reﬂections coloring your sound. I suggest
placing the monitor slightly below eye level so that the talent can move her eyes
from the script to the screen with the smallest amount of motion, helping her to
keep her place in the script. The ideal placement would enable the talent to see the
FIGURE 6.7 
Video Monitoring
Source: Courtesy of Resolution Digital Studios; photo by the author

monitor just over the top of the music or script stand, but this is not possible for
all people, because everyone is a different height. A workable compromise for the
height of the monitor will have to be found, unless, of course, the monitor is placed
on an adjustable stand of some sort. I have made quite useful stands for small
monitors by taking the boom off of a mic stand and, in its place, putting a homemade
shelf that is bolted to the tilt control that holds the boom to the stand. This solution
allows you to tilt the monitor front to back, to avoid glare and to suit individual
tastes, and also to adjust the height of the monitor, just as you would a mic boom
on the stand. An hour or so in the workshop, some 3⁄4-inch plywood or particleboard,
and a mic stand that you don’t need at the moment are all you need. This solution
won’t hold larger monitors, but, if the screen is close enough to the talent, it’s very
usable and portable, allowing you to wheel it out of the way when not needed, just
as you would with any other mic stand. To repeat, the goal is to have the screen
situated in such a way that allows for the smallest amount of eye movement to go
from script to screen.
The size of the video monitor will depend on the size of the studio, distance of
the actor from the screen, and your budget. For critical work such as ADR and
Foley, where we are concerned with frame accuracy, the larger the better is a good
rule to follow. For simple timing purposes, a smaller monitor will work ﬁne. And
one word on getting the picture to the screen: If you are considering using a projection
system for your setup, give some serious thought to isolation for the projector. Those
things can introduce some nasty fan noise into the recording unless dealt with
properly, and, in trying to isolate the projector, you may be subjecting it to heat
problems, which will shorten the life of both the projector lamp and the projector’s
electronics. I don’t see any inherent downside to projection, as long as you take the
isolation question into account and deal with it accordingly.
KEEP IT ORGANIZED
Remember my admonition to other engineers that I’ve supervised—“No one notices
a clean studio, but everyone notices a cluttered one”? This means, not just the control
room, but the studio as well. During the session, there are a lot of cables lying
around—mic cables, headphone cords, headphone mixer box cables, AC cables, and
more. Keep these out of the way of where people will be walking and standing.
Instead of having the mic cable just snaking across the ﬂoor to the input on the wall,
trace it in a neat manner and keep the extra length coiled and out of the way. The
same with AC cables and extension cords. And be extra sure that the audio lines
and the AC lines aren’t running parallel or coiled on top of each other. AC power
can transmit into the audio cables and induce a buzz into the audio signal, and so,
if they do have to cross each other, make sure that they only cross at 90° angles.
Don’t leave miscellaneous gear strewn around the studio; it’s a pain trying to
navigate a maze or an obstacle course on the way to the mic. Put unused mic and
copy stands neatly against a far wall, hang up the (neatly coiled) mic cables so that
100
CHAPTER 6 The Studio

they’re easy to get to if you need another one, hang up unused headphones (or put
them on a shelf), and so on. The appearance of your studio is important and it speaks
to your professionalism and the respect you show the actors and others who come
into your studio. Remember the old adage: “A place for everything, and everything
in its place.”
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
Besides the tools of the trade that are in the studio (microphones, headphones, cables,
and so forth), there are some other items that should be placed in the studio for the
session. Sharpened pencils (with erasers) should be made available for the inevitable
script changes; pens don’t cut it in the studio, because, if the need arises for multiple
corrections to the script, the ink can’t easily be erased and changed. Although a
freshly sharpened pencil can easily punch a hole in the page when writing on a piece
of carpet that is padding the script stand, it is still much preferred to a worn and
stubby pencil. Is there a better way?
Also provide room-temperature bottled water next to the mic and copy stand for
the actor. Although an icy drink of water sounds tempting, the cold temperature can
cause mouth noise that you’ll just have to edit out later, and most VO talents that
I know much prefer room temperature when they’re on mic. Have plenty of it on
hand. As a nice added touch, you can also provide lemon juice next to the water.
Nothing cuts through the problems of mouth noise like a quick sip of lemon water,
and it’s great for the throat. Lemon juice in the water helps to reduce lip-smacking
and other mouth noise. Avoid hot beverages: Coffee and tea dry out the voice, and
dairy products contribute to the production of phlegm. Another aid that a number
of voice actors that I know swear by is apple slices. Be sure to keep these fresh
(they turn brown very quickly), and, if providing apple or fresh lemon slices, be
sure that you wash them thoroughly before setting them out for the talent. We don’t
want anyone getting sick from being in our studio! A nice amenity would be a
container of throat-lubricating spray (available in music stores or online). Although
this is a nice addition, I don’t know of a lot of actors who use it during a session.
But it’s a nice, thoughtful touch.
And please, keep the ﬂoor vacuumed and swept; if someone takes snacks into
the booth, the crumbs can be unsightly and can contribute to problems with insects
and other little critters. Yuck. Once again, no one will notice if you keep everything
vacuumed, but everyone will know if you don’t, and it will only reﬂect on your
attention to detail (or lack of) if you leave the ﬂoor dirty.
The Studio
101

This page intentionally left blank

Now, it’s time for the session. You’ve arrived early and have made sure everything
is set up and your signal chain is working properly. The coffee has been made, and
there’s plenty of bottled water (and maybe some fresh lemon slices) available. I like
to have a box of breath mints set out in the control room, as well as some little
snacks such as protein bars and/or hard candy. Because I know the producer is going
to have to sit through my editing, I usually will have the day’s newspaper on hand
to give the producer something to do (and to keep them out of my hair) while I’m
working. Oh yes, and I also have made sure that the studio and the control room
have been tidied up.
7
The Session
CHAPTER

104
CHAPTER 7 The Session
Once the producer and the VO talent arrive, there’s usually a short conversation
while they go over the script. Make sure you are a part of this conversation. Quite
often, at this point, some small changes in wording of the script take place, or
perhaps a typo or grammatical error is caught and corrected. You have to make sure
that you are working from an accurate script. Your copy of the script will become
the master script for the session and must properly reﬂect any and all changes in
wording, as well as pauses and so on that are required. Once the recording commences,
INSIGHT: Bryen Hensley, Sound Designer/Mixer, Resolution
Digital Studios, Chicago, IL
There are a few qualities that I think a good VO engineer must have, patience
being the ﬁrst. A VO engineer has to work with a lot of personalities: VO talent,
copywriters, producers, directors, account managers, etc. All of these people are
looking for different things in a VO session. Rarely have I ever had them be all
on the same page. The engineer’s job is to help guide the clients and VO talent
to a successful end where we have a track that everyone loves. Second, the
engineer must have an understanding of grammar and sentence construction and
word pronunciation. What is written on paper doesn’t always translate to the spoken
word. And a good engineer should be able to change a word or move a sentence
around on a moment’s notice, to help the VO talent with the script. Last, the
engineer must be technically sound. You never, ever want the equipment to get
in the way of a good session, and so knowing your gear inside and out is critical.
I think where engineers get into trouble is when they try to impose too much of their
own opinion on a voiceover session. We work for the client; they know what they
want—it’s our job to help capture that, and trying to put our own creative spin on
it just doesn’t ﬂy. I’m not saying we have to be totally without opinion, but we have
to pick our moments and try to enhance what the client is looking for.
I believe the relationship between the engineer and talent is really undervalued
these days. I think a lot of times the engineer is just seen as a button-pusher,
when the truth is just the opposite. An engineer and talent who have worked
together a lot form one of the best teams you’ll see. I, as an engineer, know exactly
what that talent is capable of. A good team will have a shorthand with each other
that brings a lot to the session. A good engineer will know how to “translate” what
a client is asking for to the talent. The talent will be relaxed with an engineer
he/she is comfortable with, knowing that the engineer will be capturing/editing
that talent and making them look as good as possible. A good team will know
when to push for another take, or perhaps take a break to ﬁnd another approach.

you will take on the additional role of co-producer, and the actor will rely on you
to keep them on track. Having an accurate script is a key component of performing
this task. Your partnership with the talent is one of the strengths of the session.
We’ll have more to say on the partnership with the voice actor later in the chapter,
but it’s worth remembering that this relationship is one of the most valuable that
you can foster.
DOCUMENTATION AND NOTES
Perhaps nothing sets one engineer apart from another more than the quality and
quantity of notes that are taken during the course of the session. A careful marking
of the script for preferred takes will make your life unimaginably easier and will
lead to a smoother-running session. Without accurate session notes and a good take
log, the editing process quickly turns into a frustrating and time-consuming experience.
You basically have to relive the entire session just to ﬁnd the proper takes to edit
together. Believe me, I’ve been there, and it’s no fun to operate in this way. Also,
the producer will think that you are the best because you always have the called-
for take at hand within a split second and have comments on what the producer,
writer, or whoever else is at the session thought of it at the time of reading. Even
if the client doesn’t notice you taking notes as the session progresses, he or she will
appreciate your efforts (and I have to say that taking good notes and keeping track
of take numbers don’t involve much effort, especially once you get into the habit).
I claim that I can’t run a session without a pencil in my hand, and this isn’t much
of an exaggeration. There are many studios that employ a second engineer or assistant
to help the lead engineer in setting up, getting fresh coffee, and so on, and these
assistants are often called upon to keep the accurate logs. For a short read such as
a radio or television commercial, the notes can be kept on a computer, laptop, or
tablet. Other engineers, myself included, prefer to take the notes themselves.
Whichever method you prefer, keep in mind that this is an essential component of
the session, and so we must be diligent in keeping accurate records. So what kinds
of note are we talking about? Figures 7.1 and 7.2 show what I mean.
Each take during a session should be voice slated (the number of the take called
out) and recorded as part of the recording, along with the talent’s reads. Through
voice slating, the producer can keep track of his or her preferred takes and keep
their own notes on the session; the talent knows that everything is ready to go, and
you are recording; you can refer to these recorded numbers when editing. It’s important
to get in the habit of voice slating all takes—simply saying “Rolling” or “Go ahead”
is not nearly enough. If you are recording your own voice, voice slate each read
and keep notes of the takes on your script or a proper log form. This will help you
keep track of things, and, when you send your ﬁles and the take sheet or a copy of
the marked script to the producer or director, they have a good way to reference the
various takes as well. (See Chapter 9, Recording for Commercials, for an explanation
on setting up a voice slate system in a digital workstation.)
The Session
105

106
CHAPTER 7 The Session
FIGURE 7.1 
30-Second Radio Commercial
WRENCHMASTER 
"Summer Sale: :30 Radio 
Hl 9L5430R 
SUMMER MUSIC UNDER 
NARR(:25l: 
hi 
O-ll.d 
1\.jAt's that time again for summer vacation with the fami l~ trips to 
Grandma's house, aR<ta~s at tbe ~s 
your car ready for 
summer? Come in now for Wrenchmaster's Summer Sale and get a five-
point brake inspection for free, plus 20% off pads and rotors. And don't 
forget a summer oil change - with a new filter for only $22.95. 
Make sure tha~yo 
mer travels are safe and problem free - only at 
/3}3 
Wrenchmaster. 
' 
mertime- relax! 
TAG 1:05): 
@ale prices good June 15th through July 201h Not good with other 
offers or sales. Not valid in Arizona or Louisiana. 

The Session
107
FIGURE 7.2 
Take Sheet
Title___________  
Take No. Time 
Status 
Comments__________________
~.f-£ur 
/______ 7 - T ~_______ _____________________________________
7  
2-___£is:_______________________
________________________________ 3-________________________________________________________
------------------------------------------------it—
,___________________________
________________________________ - T  
tud
 
 
 
Cs. 
s~r /
___________________________________
________________________________2 ______C~, tO ~ ( y i  r\ <ri .-------------- ------------------------
______________________________ d p ____^
______ ^ ______ Q < ts 4
TZc'di/ - .£>& u q  I — L------- 7 ------------ ------------------------------------------------------------
J  
J  
?  
a  7. y ________________________________________
________________________________ 2  
a  7.e>________________________________________
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------
_________________________________s= 
z r -v __________________________ f____________
------------------------------------------------ 6 ----------2*33--------------------- C p£u 
—
_________________________________2 _____ Z/tG _____________C rZ h  /I*- fae.
________________________________ & 
2SG1 
,_________________________________
 
 
, —  ^r:ft  
.. 3.<4-B.___________  S — Z _  
_________
tudz ia^A^LMM. 
Z3- 
A  Z ? <- ______________________________________
------------------------------------------------j(g p <: ----------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
—  
 
 
 
A ^ c :-----------------------------------------------------------
Client_ 
Studio_
Job Title 
J /'# /) cfa/7% < C^- /  - J ^ /T/g/ 
Producer 
£>tl
Date 
________________  
Engineer A 3  5 ___________
Studio Mstr. # / Z L / % 2-  
Client Job # //A ^ A
Time Code : 
^ 7  fps/ D g J jp T  Sample Rate: ^ 3 9  
M ic#l T Z /lA /n ^ t #2 
"—

Figure 7.2 is an example of a log for a radio commercial. Each take is numbered,
and its time length is noted. There are also comments on the various takes, such as
which are the preferred takes, where the wording was changed to help get the read
into the allotted time (30 seconds), and other comments as needed. (Again, refer to
Chapter 9, Recording for Commercials, for additional comments on auto-numbering
your recordings in a digital workstation to help with quickly navigating to the take(s)
that the producer may request.) But it all starts here, with a good take sheet. You
can easily create a very usable take sheet and customize it to match your needs
using any number of software programs, and, if you customize your own, it will
become even more valuable and useful to you, as it will reﬂect those items that are
of the most concern to you and your way of working.
From this take sheet, we can see that a total of fourteen individual reads were
performed of the body of the spot, and there were eight takes of the tag. The
preferred base read is take number 10. The base read is that take on which the
majority of the performance will be based. Then, from take 7, we would like to grab
the ﬁrst sentence, “It’s that time again for summer vacation with the family and
trips to Grandma’s house,” and insert that into take 10. Now, on takes 12–14, the
actor did what is known as a “series of three” for the ending line of “It’s summertime—
relax.” Each of these series of three reads is slated together on one take, and the
notes read, “A, B, C.” The preferred read is number 13B, and this will also be edited
into the base take of number 10. Without these notes on the take sheet, we would
never remember which of the takes are to be edited together for our ﬁnal product.
Some producers will record read after read, looking for that “golden take.” Others,
with the skill and input from a knowledgeable engineer, have the ability to stitch
together the best parts of multiple takes to form a coherent and powerful whole. We
see a bit of that process with this commercial.
There is space to note a number of other things besides take notes on this log
sheet. Look carefully at what else is documented on this form. Especially for
commercial work, but equally important for any kind of voice recording, we should
ﬁrst of all note what microphone was used for the session. Also, in a multiroom
facility, we have to know in which room the session took place. Quite often with
commercial production there are redos and inserts done after the fact, and, if we
expect a proper match of recording tonality, these parameters must be known and
matched. The easy automating of session parameters such as EQ and compression
in a digital workstation simpliﬁes this matching considerably, but still these notes
are vital to ensure consistency. The number of “ﬁx” sessions that accompany
commercial production often bewilders the novice or outsider, but, with this type
of production, there is often a considerable amount of money at stake, and the
producers go to great lengths to ensure that everything is exactly right. And, of
course, we should note the producer’s name, the date of the session, and the session
code number for reference purposes later on. I will have more to say on the importance
of proper naming and session code numbers later on in this chapter.
This type of form works well for those projects that are timed and relatively
short, but, for a longer form of read, it doesn’t meet our needs. If you have a script
108
CHAPTER 7 The Session

The Session
109
FIGURE 7.3 
Long-Form Script
Source: Courtesy of InterPark Corp.
InterPark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 1 of 6 
Customer Service   
 
 
 
 
 
 
5/11/05 
“Best Practices”   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft G 
 
 
SCENE 
 
 
 
ANNCR: 
 
1.  
The demand for parking in urban centers is outstripping the supply of 
spaces. And that’s the forecast for the foreseeable future. 
 
2. 
Because even as new parking facilities are developed, America has 
changed the kind of demand it has for parking. 
 
3.  
Urban growth creates more high-rises and a higher density of 
population. This congestion creates more customer demand for 
parking. 
 
4.  
Today’s cities are multi-use environments that combine work, 
shopping, tourism, entertainment and residences. 
 
5.  
And city parkers today having a growing need for parking 24 hours a 
day, 365 days a year. 
 
6.  
Today, InterPark leads the industry in parking innovations and 
customer service. This video will share our best practices to make 
your job as smooth and successful as can be. 
 
GORDON HALMEYER INTERVIEW 
 
7.  
From experience, we know that success depends on executing every 
day. This execution is grounded in our pledge to provide a clean, safe, 
courteous and efficient parking experience to every parker. 
 
ANNCR 
 
8. 
So, where do we start? First, remember that your customers won’t 
know that we operate more than 300 parking facilities nationwide . . . 
that we manage over 135,000 parking spaces across the country or 
that our garages process more than 2.5 million transactions a month. 
With that many transactions, you have to be ready for anything. 

110
CHAPTER 7 The Session
FIGURE 7.4 
Script with Edit Markings
Source: Courtesy of InterPark Corp.
lnterPark 
Customer Service 
"Best Practices" 
Page I of6 
5/ 11/05 
DraftG 
The demand for parking in urban centers is outstripping the supply of spaces. And that's the 
forecast for the foreseeab le future. 
Because even as new parking facilities are developed, America has changed the kind of demand it 
has for parking. 
3. 
Urban growth creates more high-rises and a higher density of population. This congestion creates 
L 
more customer demand for parking. 
4. f~oday's c;t;es are mult;-use env;ronments that comb;ne work, shopp;ng, tour; sm. entena;nment 
and residences. 
~ 
f/?'!fjl/@5. 
~ 
And city parkers today having a growing need for parking 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. 
{p 
6. 
Today, lnterPark leads the industry in parking innovations and customer service. This video will 
I_ 
share our best practices to make your job as smooth and successfu l as can be. 
GORDON HALMEYER INTERVIEW 
--
7. 
From ex<pp;,eri<;e:OncC<e;:-, w.-t= ....... l>at.SLIC:==~~~~~~~~~:= 
So, where do we start? First, remember that your customers won't know that we operate more than 
300 parking facilities nationwide ... that we manage over 135,000 parking spaces across the 
Ct>u/lT''j-

that runs to multiple pages, trying to use a take sheet to keep accurate records of
where each take begins and ends becomes almost useless. Take a look at a single
page from a long-form script—in this case, a training video for new employees on
the business practices of a corporation—in Figure 7.3.
With this type of project, it is not practical to try to keep track of the beginning
and end of the good takes with a take sheet. In this case, we make notes directly
on the script. With a commercial script, such as in Figure 7.1, although we could
simply make notes on the script, it is much more efﬁcient to use the take sheet, as
we can keep accurate comments on each take as we go along. If we try to keep
track of the reads directly on the script, we don’t have adequate space to make
comments and note word changes, and so on. However, with a long-form script,
marking the script directly makes more sense and is much easier to make sense of.
Figure 7.4 shows the same script marked for proper takes after the session.
Here, you can easily see which are the preferred takes and which might also be
usable. This is one of my scripts, and I have developed my own shorthand for
marking scripts that is very logical to me, but can also be picked up easily by anyone
that I might pass this recording on to for editing. Here are some explanations:
•
A take number that is crossed out is an unusable take, for whatever reason.
•
If it’s a good take, but not the preferred take, there is no marking on the number.
•
If I ﬁnd something I like in the take, I underline the number.
•
The preferred take number is circled, and a line is drawn to indicate how far it
runs.
•
“FS” before a line indicates a false start, but not a new slate number.
•
The squiggle line at the bottom of the page indicates there is some sort of noise
that must be edited out (perhaps the sound of paper shufﬂing or a throat clear).
•
The double lines between paragraphs indicate a long pause that must be tight-
ened up.
Also note that, after the actor had read all the way through the script, we went
back and rerecorded an insert line for a change in emphasis or pronunciation that
we picked up after the initial read through. Furthermore, because the end of the ﬁnal
line on this page continued onto the next page, for ease of reading the line is written
in full on the bottom of the ﬁrst page. All of this is clearly marked and gives the
editor (whether yourself or someone else) a road map to follow to put everything
together. You can begin to understand the problematic nature of attempting to
efﬁciently edit this all together without adequate notes having been taken.
So, we see that these simple shorthand markings all mean something to the editor
and help in the process of putting together a complete read. I’ve developed these
markings over the course of my recording and editing career, and there is certainly
nothing magical about them. Feel free to come up with your own shorthand, but it
should be consistent with everything you record and easily understood by anyone
who picks up the script and is going to perform the editing. Anyone who has worked
with me for more than about an hour knows immediately what I am attempting to
convey with these markings and can quickly and efﬁciently complete the edit.
The Session
111

THE CO-PRODUCER ROLE
In running the session, you will ﬁnd yourself in the role of co-producer. This can
be a delicate political dance for you, the engineer, because oftentimes the producer
thinks that he or she has all the answers and doesn’t appreciate your input. Remember
that this is not your project; you are here to help all parties arrive at the outcome
that they want. Don’t ever attempt to take over the session. With experience, you
will develop a sense of when to speak up and how to do it in an inoffensive manner.
It’s true that some producers only want a button-pusher; if this is the case, accept
it and push the buttons. However, those producers who are truly after the best possible
product will come to appreciate your concern for their work and, with time, come
to depend on you for your insights and suggestions. If you are working with a
producer with whom you are not familiar (and who hasn’t worked with you very
often), you can couch your suggestions in non-threatening language, such as, “Just
thinking out loud here, but what would it sound like if we said . . .?” This is much
easier for a fragile ego to take, rather than a ﬁrm declaration that you have a much
better idea than the producer or writer. Again, this is part of developing the sense
of when and how to speak up, in a collaborative spirit, rather than seeming like you
are trying to take over their session.
OK, remember my comments on multitasking earlier in this book? This is where
we ﬁnd out how good at multitasking we really are. We are, of course, paying
attention to all of the technical issues that are ﬂowing past us, but we are also
listening very closely to how the performance sounds. I once heard a well-respected
engineer describe sitting in a session this way (and I’m paraphrasing here):
When doing a session, you have to pay attention to the minutiae of what is
happening; you have thousands of pieces of information ﬂowing past you every
second, in real time, and you have to be aware of each of them. But you can’t
lose sight of the macro. What is the big picture? How do all of these little
bits ﬁt into that?
I ﬁnd this distinction between the micro and the macro very interesting and appropriate
for us to consider. Of course we are paying attention to all of the technical details
of recording, and, if you hear something technical that comes up, point it out and
make sure that it is corrected. After all, the technical issues are your main concern.
This includes anything in the talent’s read, such as popped Ps or extraneous noise
from jewelry or paper shufﬂing. Again, correct these immediately as need be (suggest
that the actor removes her jangly bracelet, make a small mic adjustment to avoid
the popping, etc.)—don’t let these types of thing linger take after take.
Pay attention to grammar and sentence structure—if it hits your ear as odd, speak
up. Watch for changes in tense, gender changes mid-paragraph, the proper use of
grammar, and any unclear writing you detect. If it sounds unclear to you, it will
probably be unclear to the listener, as well. After all, you have a script in front of
you, and the audience doesn’t. Oftentimes, writers write for the page (the eye) and
112
CHAPTER 7 The Session

not for the ear; be very sure that, in following along on the script, you keep your
ears open and make sure that everything is making sense.
Something else to pay attention to as the reading continues is how everything is
going to be able to be edited together once the actor ﬁnishes. Be aware of tempo
and voice timbre especially. As part of looking ahead to the editing process, don’t
change your levels or EQ settings mid session. This is what the process of setting
up and getting initial levels and settings is for. Of course, there will always be times
when you have to adjust the recording volume during the session, but, if you do,
try and make as slight a change as you can get away with, or at least be aware that,
in editing and mixing, you’ll have to make adjustments.
All of this is part of the co-producer role, and there is much more to it that you
should be aware of. For instance, the producer may request a certain piece of music
or a sound effect; if you have a better idea, don’t hesitate to bring it up, but do so
in a respectful manner and offer it as an alternative suggestion—something that your
producer hadn’t thought about. Your idea may get shot down, but don’t take it
personally. After all, everyone is working toward the same end, and that is a great
product.
WORKING WITH THE VOICE TALENT
When making comments and suggestions to the talent, be as speciﬁc and as brief
as you possibly can. The worst direction any actor can receive is, “No, that’s not
right. Try it again.” What is the actor suppose to do? Are you asking them to try
endless variations until they stumble across something that works? Ask yourself,
“Why isn’t this read working?” What suggestions can be made to move the read
closer to what you should be hearing? Be speciﬁc. You don’t have to give a seminar
on the subject; go directly to the point. The same goes when discussing the read
with the producer: Be speciﬁc and be brief. Directing is a special skill, and it can
take a long time to develop, but keep at it; you’ll ﬁnd that you get better at it, and
the actors might give you some pointers about it if you ask. After all, they appreciate
good direction more than anyone, and anything they can do to help the process
they’ll be glad to do. Now, there will be times when you, the engineer, and the
producer will be discussing things in the control room that aren’t directly being
addressed to the talent. Perhaps you are discussing whether the grammar in a sentence
is correct, or if a word should be changed to help the clarity of the message. Here’s
a tip that I’ve found actors really like: When these types of discussion occur, I
casually rest my hand on the talkback button and let the talent hear what’s being
discussed. Sitting in a glassed-in room all by oneself can be a lonely experience,
and actors are by nature an insecure lot. If you leave them out of the loop on these
discussions, they often jump to the conclusion that you and the producer are talking
about them and what a terrible job they’re doing with this read. Most actors are
astute enough not to let on that they are eavesdropping on the conversation, but, if
they are aware of what is being discussed, they will feel much better about the
The Session
113

114
CHAPTER 7 The Session
INSIGHT: Harlan Hogan, Voice Actor, Chicago, IL
When I’m booked at a professional recording studio, I have rarely been asked if
there was a particular microphone I’d prefer, and I’d never suggest one unless
asked. That said, I like the popular Sennheiser 416 for—and only for—in-your-
face broadcast or promo announcements (i.e., political attack ads, movie trailers,
TV bumpers, etc.). The 416 requires very disciplined mic technique and it’s usually
not ﬂattering to female voices. For long form, it’s hard to beat a U87 or one of
a number of less expensive mics modeled after the 87’s sound.
Aside from recording chops (a given), a successful engineer will possess great
people skills and the ability to guide and manage a session, all the while working
with clients who possess everything from very little to vast experience and with
voice talents with similar ranges of experience.
To help us give our best performance as actors, allow a few minutes for us to
become acquainted with the producers and their expectations for the project before
shuttling us off to the recording booth. We all appreciate a clean, brightly lit room,
individual headphone gain control, perhaps a glass of water or a cup of coffee, a
highlighter and a couple of pencils on the copy stand, and a box of tissues nearby.
That’s about it, and we’re ready to go.
The best engineers know how to work with the writers, producers, and clients and
contribute positive ideas to the session, without becoming the producer. Over the
years, I’ve seen that happen several times. Once, the engineer started arguing with
the writer over the reads. Another time, as I was leaving a session, I overheard a
relatively new engineer tell a client he could ﬁx my reading in post. Later, I called
him and—though seething—explained that the time to ﬁx a talent’s reading is
during the session, and that his remark cast doubt on my performance and my
professionalism. Truth is it was equally insulting to the client, who had been very
pleased with the recordings until the engineer crossed the line and became a
“producer.”
I love it when all the parties involved—including talent—collaborate during a session,
but that is totally up to the clients. If asked, I’ll contribute my two-cents’ worth,
but, otherwise, I stick to reading the script as directed. I also appreciate the engineers
who are aware of how easy it is for a performer to get a bit paranoid, watching through
the glass as the creative team is engaged in an obviously heated conversation. “Is
that about me?” is a natural reaction. So the engineer simply opens up the control-
room mic. “Whew, they’re discussing how awful the script is, not how awful I am.”
Talent of course, should never reveal that little collaborative secret.
As for preparation and helping the voice actor feel at home, there’s nothing nicer
than a supportive engineer who’s got the mic at “Harlan Height” when I walk in

The Session
115
situation. And, by having my ﬁnger on the talkback button the whole time, if
something comes up in the conversation that I don’t want the talent to hear, I can
unobtrusively let up on the button, and the producer has no idea what I’m doing.
Nice pointers, Harlan. And Harlan brings up another interesting subject—that of
nonverbal communication. Back in the old days, communication systems weren’t
as sophisticated as now, and, in live radio, to have someone suddenly talking into
your ear while you were reading could really ruin the concentration. So, a system
of hand signals came into being, and these hand signals are just as useful today. A
number of voice actors I’ve worked with have a series of signals to communicate
with the engineer, sometimes based on the old radio method and sometimes completely
new and original. Pulling your hands apart is a universal sign for “Stretch,” i.e., we
have more time to ﬁll. Rotating your hands in a circular motion around each other
means, “Wrap it up,” or we’re running out of time. The ﬁnger across the throat
means, “Cut,” and there are plenty of others that I’ve seen. One actor has a signal
where he taps his wrist with his ﬁnger. The meaning is, “What’s this guy’s name?”
In this case, I’ll direct a comment to the producer and make sure that I include his
name in the comment: “Uh, Bill—what did you think of that last read?” Of course,
my ﬁnger is on the talkback button when I say this, and the talent is reminded of
the producer’s name, which he had forgotten. By the way, if someone comes into
the studio that I’m unfamiliar with, I’ll write their name on my copy of the script,
because I am not particularly good at remembering names. This comes in especially
handy if there is a group of three or four people who come in. I’ll write their names
in the order that they are sitting in the room, and this way I can address each 
by name (and remind the talent as well). There are many more hand signals, some
subtle, some not, that can be used during the course of a session, and working in
this way really speeds up the communication process and keeps everyone involved
in the loop. By the way, I once worked on a ﬁlm set where a number of the crew
members knew, and utilized, American sign language. Great for when the camera’s
rolling, and conversation between the crew members can’t be tolerated, and especially
the door. The great ones subtly work with the talent when they need some help
on direction or pronunciation. I’ll never forget the day I went into your booth,
looked at the script, and saw a name of a candidate running for state senator that
I’d never heard of, much less knew how to pronounce. I didn’t want our producer
to know, so I drew my index ﬁnger across my throat—the universal sign between
talent and engineer to “kill” the microphone. You cheerily came in to the booth
and pretended to adjust the mic’s height, even though it was already at Harlan
Height. “What’s up Harlan?” “Tom, how the hell do I pronounce this guy’s name?”
“Oh, it’s Bah Rock—Bah Rock Oh Bahma.” “Thanks!” “Yeah, he was in here
again last week; pretty cool guy, word is he might run for President someday.”
“With that name? That’ll be the day . . .”

effective across long distances, where a whisper wouldn’t be heard. It’s a really
good idea, and one that I would recommend to anyone working in this particular
ﬁeld to consider.
Communicating on the talkback, hand signals, whatever you have to do to keep
a clear communication path between all parties, all of these and more are keys to
the successful session. One other thing to remember is to keep the talent in the loop
at all times, and let them know what you are doing at each step. Nothing is more
disconcerting than waiting to hear the next bit of direction and suddenly hearing
some editing going on or one of your reads playing over and over in the headphones.
If you, as the engineer, want to check one of the takes for some reason, simply open
up the talkback and announce, “Playback of your last take, Sam.” Or, “Hang on—
I want to try an edit; relax for a minute.” You can even invite the actor to take a
short break and come out of the booth and stretch a bit. Above all else, please let
them know what you’re doing, just as you did when you opened up the talkback
mic so that they could hear the conversation between you and the producer. No one
likes being kept in the dark, and a simple explanation is the best way to keep the
team running smoothly. And something that shouldn’t be overlooked: The vocal
booth can be a lonely place with only one actor in it. Let the talent know that you
are still out there!
You should develop the skill of turning the pages of a script silently, just as the
actor does. One of the things you should be listening closely for is the sound of
paper being shufﬂed—this is totally unacceptable in a ﬁnished recording. However,
if you turn the page and make a lot of noise doing it, you won’t notice that the
talent also made some noise in turning her page and you will miss correcting it,
either by cutting it out or having the actor read the line again. Once they leave the
studio, it’s too late to correct.
If you have information to pass to the talent that you don’t want the producer to
hear, announce to the producer that you have to make an adjustment to the microphone
(they won’t know why and generally won’t care—this just shows your attention to
detail and how good an engineer you are). You can then mute the mic, go into the
studio, and pretend to make an adjustment while giving the information. I’ve had
situations where the producer was notoriously difﬁcult to work for (for a number
of reasons), and, if the talent hadn’t worked for this particular client in the past,
they wouldn’t be prepared for what was about to transpire. I might see the actor
becoming ﬂustered or frustrated, so into the booth I would go, and tell them that
this client was extremely loyal to the people he worked with, but often made what
seemed like unreasonable demands for doing things over or changing the wording
in a script all day long. If the talent has this information, they can relax, because
they’ll realize that it isn’t their fault that the session is going the way it is, and it’s
just the standard operating procedure of the producer in question. Just be doubly
sure that you have turned the microphone off before you have this short conversation!
Now for a touchy situation: What do you do if the producer realizes that the 
actor who’s in the booth and reading is the wrong choice for the project, and they
have to ﬁre them? Well, ideally, this should be part of the producer’s responsibility.
116
CHAPTER 7 The Session

The Session
117
But I’ve been thrust into the situation of having to go into the studio and inform
the talent that they are just not working out, and the producer is going to have to
ﬁnd someone else. Tough place to be in, isn’t it? The better your relationship with
the talent, the less uncomfortable this becomes, but it’s never an easy task. Usually,
this happens because the client picked the wrong talent to begin with, and it’s not
an issue of the actor being incompetent. In this case, the straight, simple truth is the
best, and a professional will accept the news, take their session fee, and go on with
their life and career. In other words, they don’t take it personally. It happens to
everyone at some point. Trying to cover up the situation by saying, “OK, great
read—we’ve got what we need; good work. See you around.” rarely works, because
the actor almost always ﬁnds out the real story sooner or later, especially if the
project is a commercial job, and they hear someone else doing the spot on the air.
Just explain that a mistake in casting was made, and, no matter how good the actor
is, they’re just not what the producer is looking for. Maybe the actor is female, and,
in hearing some reads, the producer comes to realize that a male would work better.
Or maybe someone younger, or older, or a lower voice, or . . . on and on it could
go, but you get the general idea. Last word on this subject: Tell everyone the truth
and you’ll avoid hard feelings in the future that could jeopardize relationships.
Remember, these relationships are your lifeblood as an engineer.
INSIGHT: Doug James, Voice Actor, Chicago, IL
As for microphone choices, I have a couple of favorites; I’ve always liked the
Sennheiser 416, and the other is the Neumann U87.
The engineer should have great people skills and, obviously, a ﬁrm grasp of the
digital medium. If the engineer isn’t a musician, they should have a musician’s
sense of timing, ﬂow, and dynamics at the very least. The engineer should be
attentive all the time. Know that sarcasm doesn’t work with most talent unless
you are their close friend, and sometimes that doesn’t work, either. The engineer
will make sure the room temperature is comfortable, and always have plenty of
room-temperature water available. And, if the engineer is providing copies of the
script, please make sure that the copy is double-spaced!
In the session, we’re all a team trying to get the right pacing and delivery. Any
help that we can give each other is great. I always appreciated the engineer
allowing the client and the talent to keep an open dialogue; it’s much easier to
get the direction from the source. And, if the talent wants to do a “series of three,”
let them. The talent should also be willing to reread a paragraph to help the
engineer keep editing to a minimum.

SOME TIPS AND TRICKS
Sure, I believe in rules . . . sure I do. If there weren’t
any rules, how could you break them?
(Leo Durocher, baseball player and 
manager; Hall of Fame, 1994)
DAW software comes with a wide variety of processing programs—plug-ins. There
are also many more available from third-party suppliers, such as Waves. They can
be automated and recalled at any time. The plug-ins make available to us a large
number of effects, and, by combining different effects together, we can achieve some
truly amazing-sounding audio; from the voice of an alien creature to an explosion
created from the sound of a pop-top can, plug-ins are incredibly adaptable to a wide
range of applications. But what happens if you still need a sound that is unique and
can’t be arrived at with plug-ins, no matter how you try to tweak them? It may be
time for a little do-it-yourself processing.
There’s a huge choice of objects that change the tonal characteristic of a voice
in unexpected ways that you might experiment with. Have someone speak into one
end of a cardboard or PVC tube and place the mic at the other end. Variations on
this are almost endless: Try tubes of different diameters and lengths; with cardboard,
try putting a 45° or 90° bend in the tube; place a small microphone (perhaps a
lavalier mic) part way into the tube and try moving it closer to or further from the
actor’s mouth—this can also be done by cutting a narrow slit in the tube and
suspending the mic from its cable, down inside the tube. Roll up a piece of cardboard
into a megaphone. Record while the performer speaks into a bullhorn from across
the studio. Try using two mics to record someone speaking while wearing a full-
face motorcycle helmet with the face shield closed—a lavalier inside the helmet and
another mic outside, pointing toward the face shield—and then combine the two
signals by varying amounts until you get to the sound you’re after.
It may look strange, but have the person talk across the mouth of an empty ﬁve-
gallon water bottle. Or drop a small mic down inside. Try varying the distance from
the mouth to the jug’s opening.
If you have access to a studio with an electric organ (such as a Hammond B3),
send the voice signal through its Leslie speaker cabinet. The spinning speaker can
work wonders on the voice—John Lennon and George Martin used this effect on a
couple of Beatle’s songs.
Electronic Musician magazine and others occasionally run articles on strange
recording techniques (aimed at the music recording audience, but they work equally
well on the spoken word). The Internet also has a number of sites devoted to off-
the-wall ideas.
Think outside the box and experiment. You can never tell what it is that will
give you what you’re hearing in your head. Some other ideas to consider and play
with are:
118
CHAPTER 7 The Session

•
Tape a contact mic or PZM to the studio glass.
•
Record under water: Use an underwater speaker (a hydrophone) and a waterproofed
mic (you can tightly tape a condom around the mic body—just make sure that
this is a mic that you don’t mind getting wet, if the waterprooﬁng fails)—and
not a tube microphone, as these could produce a lethal electric shock!
•
Try out truly terrible-sounding mics—visit a vintage toy store or eBay and latch
onto a “Mr. Microphone” toy.
•
Record the voice coming through a blown speaker.
•
Use guitar effects pedals (“stomp boxes”).
These are only a small selection of things that you might want to try out. Your
imagination will take you to places that I can’t even imagine, so have fun!
Often, we might want an effect on the voice that can’t be duplicated in the mixing
stage—the sound of someone walking into a room while speaking or sounding like
they’re wrestling with someone, or things of that nature. In this case, we can direct
the actor to simulate these situations by a variety of means. One thing to keep in
mind, however, is to keep these effects to a minimum, or you risk distracting the
audience by having them pay more attention to the effect than the content that they
are supposed to be listening to. Most of these techniques were developed in old-
time radio and have been around seemingly forever, but it’s amazing how few of
them are used these days. For some reason, it’s as if we have forgotten the easy
ways to do things, as the technology has become more sophisticated. But here are
some things that you might want to consider and experiment with.
Let’s say that a character is supposed to be walking into a room as they deliver
a line. You could pull down the level in the mix and then increase it as they get
closer, but this approach fails to give the full illusion of them walking in. There are
two ways of simulating this effect. One is to have the actor simply turn their head
90° as they begin to deliver the line, and then gradually (over the course of the line)
turn back to face the mic full on. Not only will there be a change in volume as they
turn into the mic, but the EQ will naturally shift as well, which is what happens
when someone is at a distance from you and then gets closer. There is a drop-off
in high frequencies at a distance, and this will be replicated as the actor moves from
an off-axis position at the microphone to a more on-axis one. Another way of
creating this effect is to have the actor back away from the microphone at the
beginning of the line and then gradually move closer to the mic. No more than three
or four steps will give a nice “walk-on” effect. With a bit of reverb added for the
distance portion of the line, and then decreasing reverb as the actor gets closer to
the microphone, this technique creates a very convincing illusion of space and
movement. As with any audio effect, a touch of reverb here goes a long way: No
need to overdo it. One thing to be careful of when having the actor do this is the
actor getting too far off mic. The sound of being off mic is very distracting to the
listener and most times is interpreted as a mistake. Audio perspective (distance
effects) is a ﬁne line, and your judgment will determine how far to push this technique.
Most times, a small amount of change from off axis to on axis sells the idea of
The Session
119

perspective, and you won’t have to go to extreme lengths. Also, don’t use this for
an extended amount of time, as, again, this can be heard as a mistake.
If a character is supposed to sound out of breath when speaking a line, try having
the talent run in place for a short period of time before you drop into record. There
is no way to fake being out of breath and have it sound convincing, and this
technique is very effective. Just make sure that the actor doesn’t go overboard and
unduly tire him- or herself. If there is supposed to be a struggle going on in the
script, have the actor move about a bit as they read the lines. The quick on-and-off-
axis sound that you get is quite natural sounding, and the actor’s breathing also
becomes faster, which is also natural sounding in a real struggle. These methods of
achieving a “real-world” sound are very effective if done at the right time and in
moderation and have been time tested over the years. There’s no rule that says that
a voice actor has to stand perfectly still in front of the microphone at all times, and,
if the script calls for movement of some sort, experiment with having the talent
actually move. Along these lines, I’ve occasionally resorted to location audio recording
techniques in the studio. If called for, I’ll set up a shotgun microphone on a boom
pole and follow the actor around the studio, as they move about and act things out
physically. Just be careful of overhead lights when using a boom pole indoors! If
this is done, the actor has the freedom to move as much as they need to give the
right performance; the downside is that editing a number of takes together can become
problematic because of differing mic perspectives on the talent, as well as the sound
of footsteps, if they become audible.
If one side of a conversation takes place on a telephone, you could ﬁlter the
recording while mixing. However, I once worked at a studio where the chief technical
engineer took a real telephone, removed the earpiece, and then wired the output of
the phone mouthpiece to an XLR cable that could be plugged into the recording
console. Presto—a convincing-sounding telephone that also gives the actor the feel
of really talking on a telephone. The downside of this method is that the sound that
you get is the sound that you get—it doesn’t vary if you need a different-sounding
telephone, but, if that’s the case, you can always revert to ﬁltering the voice after
the fact, having recorded the lines ﬂat. By recording the actor with a conventionally
placed microphone at the same time, it is possible to adjust the amount of telephone
sound versus “natural” sound, and this has worked out very well in a number of
situations.
What do you do if a script has to be read in a limited amount of time—for
instance, when recording a 30-second commercial—but the talent is having a problem
ﬁtting all of the words into the allotted time? In most instances, the talent is going
to feel rushed and begin pushing harder and harder to get the words in, often raising
their voice in the process. Have the actor relax and give a softer reading. Surprisingly,
many times, this will result in being able to ﬁt more words into the time window.
The more we strain and the louder we speak, the slower our speech becomes. So,
before starting to cut words, try pulling back on the delivery.
If the script calls for a dialogue between two or more characters, try and have
all of the actors in the studio at the same time. They can play off of each other,
120
CHAPTER 7 The Session

instead of having to imagine the other half of the conversation, and the resulting
performance will be much better. Also, if both actors are reading at the same time,
it drastically cuts down on the amount of editing that you’ll have to do to put
everything in the proper order, but the most important reason by far is the performance
that will be given. This is especially true for comedy scripts, but dramatic content
also beneﬁts from the talent actually acting together as a team. After all, they’re
actors, and this is what actors do.
If the script contains proper names or unfamiliar words, request that things are
spelled out phonetically. Now, not all names need be spelled out; for instance, Smith
or Brown or Jones is already about as phonetic as it is ever going to be. But place
names or the names of unfamiliar products and procedures can be confusing and
can cause headaches for even the most accomplished actor. This is especially true
for medical or pharmaceutical scripts, where we’re dealing with the names of drugs,
parts of the body, or specialized procedures that those who practice certain professions
are familiar with, but the general public is not. Even when spelled out phonetically,
the talent will probably slow down signiﬁcantly to ﬁgure out how to pronounce the
word for the ﬁrst couple of reads, until they become more and more familiar with
saying it, but this is better than repeating the pronunciation over and over for the
actor using the talkback. This is one of many good reasons to have the script printed
double-spaced, by the way. It gives the talent room to make notes on the pronunciation
directly above the word in question and saves them having to search the margins
of the page for a note when they need it.
When recording a long-form script, if the actor makes a mistake and has to reread
a line or start a paragraph over again, suggest that they begin a sentence or two
back in the script and take a “running start” at the edit point. This will result in a
much smoother edit, because the read will be in rhythm and won’t jump nearly as
much in volume compared with the line immediately preceding it. This “read-in”
technique is also useful for dialogue scripts: Have the ﬁrst actor deliver their previous
line, so that the second actor has something to react to, instead of delivering the
line cold. It just sounds much more natural. Be sure to mark your script accordingly,
to avoid including repeated words in the completed edit.
There are many, many more of these types of tricks and techniques in use, and
every engineer has their own favorites. Learn as much as you can by observing,
listening, and speaking to other engineers. The more ways we know about to get
that great performance, the better and more creative our work will become.
DOCUMENTATION (PART II)
Once the session has ﬁnished and the talent and producer have left the studio, your
tasks are not ﬁnished. There is further documentation that must be accomplished.
This is a vital element that keeps the studio business functioning and greatly reduces
the chances of mistakes being made that could adversely affect your professional
future. The ﬁrst of these tasks should be documenting the time it took to do the
The Session
121

session, which is the basis on which most billing to the client will be done. Recording
work can be billed either by the hour or on a “bid” arrangement, whereby I agree
to do the work required for “X” amount of dollars, no matter how long the work
might take. Either way, an accurate time record is essential for the records. Every
facility and each independent contractor has their own preferred method for this
documentation, but, whatever system you might devise and use, make sure that what
you are reporting is accurate, honest, and fair. The easiest way in the world to lose
a client is to try and charge them more for the job than was actually done. They
know how long they were at the studio and how long your editing and mixing of
their project should take, and they won’t hesitate to call you on it if you overbill
something. So, make sure that the records you keep and report are accurate. Also,
if you did this project “on bid,” you can look back at past projects to project how
much you should be charging on the next one.
Then comes the process of archiving and logging all materials that were used in
the session. Regardless if you are recording on analog tape, digital ﬁles in a
workstation, or engraving the words in stone, all materials must be archived (also
known as backing up your ﬁles and materials) and properly logged, so that, at any
time in the future, you can see exactly what you did and can, in a reasonably short
period of time, put your hands on everything having to do with the session. The
goal is to be able to recreate this session years later if need be, and accurate archiving
of all materials and notes can save you if any controversy (not to mention legal
action) ever comes up in the future. I can’t stress this aspect of the session process
strongly enough.
The key to the entire process of archiving and documenting is the session number,
also known as the vault number, tracking number, and many other names. And the
secret of the numbering system is to make it consistent and understandable. There
are probably as many different systems as there are studios and independents, but
here are a couple of simple and easy ideas. One good way of keeping track of things
is just a consecutive numbering method: For instance, start at 0001 for the ﬁrst
session you do and increment the numbers up for every session. Although this method
certainly keeps track of things, it doesn’t tell us much about the individual session.
We could use a dating and numbering system; if the session is done in June of 2014,
we could start our session number with the year, month, and then the individual
number. So, in this case, our session number might be 1406001. Here, we can see
the year and month the session was done and have a unique number for each of the
sessions done that month. You begin to get the idea. The session materials are then
put into the library and ﬁled under this number, all billing refers to this number,
and all client correspondence asks that the client refer to this number when inquiring
about a past project. We’ll get to what goes into the library in a minute. If you set
up a searchable database to keep track of your jobs, you can search for information
on the session by client name, date, session name, and session number. I have had
instances where a client calls and says, “I did a session for this particular product
about two years ago—can’t remember the exact date—and we used a piece of music
on that spot. I want to use is again; can you dig it up and send it over to me?” Well,
122
CHAPTER 7 The Session

where to start? With a good archiving system, this search should be relatively painless
and the piece of music found quickly. Once again, it shows that you are on top of
your game, and the client works with you for this reason.
All session logs and notes should be saved into the library, along with your
original tapes or digital backups and archives. In the old days, we were dealing with
10-inch reels of 2-inch tape, sometimes multiple reels for a big project, and those
things were a bear to store. They took up so much room and were very heavy.
Nowadays, we can slip a DVD of a session backup into the archives much more
easily and be done with it (see Chapter 14, That’s a Wrap, for a further discussion
of this part of the process). Storage becomes a lot easier! I’ve seen many ideas on
how to store all of the materials—backups, scripts, logs, notes, delivery information,
and so on—and there are many possible solutions that might work for you. Some
facilities use standard-sized cardboard boxes, others use accordion manila folders,
but, into the container goes everything that was generated during the session. This
includes the script, take sheets, music licensing forms, lists of what sound effects
were used, delivery notes, and receipts—in other words, everything that documents
what happened in the studio during that session. If the client comes back two years
later and wants to make a revision (not as uncommon as you might think), you
should be able to put your hands on everything that you will need. The session code
number goes on the container, along with the client and product and the date of the
session; if there are so many materials that they don’t ﬁt into one container (not an
unusual situation for a long or complicated project), the box, folder, or whatever
you’re using for storage should be clearly marked “1 of 3,” “2 of 3,” and so on.
For instance, the script for a video game can run to hundreds of pages and will
obviously take a lot of room to store.
The message here is: Keep everything! In my ﬁles, not only do I have the more
obvious materials, but also little notes on how many copies of the mix and in what
format were sent to what people and by what method of delivery, and anything 
else that I can pull out and use for documentation at a later date if needed. It’s
amazing how often a client will lose something that I have sent over to them and
then claim that I didn’t send it. By going back into the session archive ﬁle, I can
show them that, yes indeed, that item was sent and on that day. A simple matter to
cover your butt!
Try and get all of the paperwork and ﬁling away into the archives ﬁnished as
soon as possible after the session ends. I say this for two reasons: First, so that you
remember everything and can log it correctly, and, second, so that you aren’t faced
with having to do a large number of sessions all at once because of the backlog
piling up around your ears. That’s never any fun, and it isn’t how we like to use
our time creatively. Better to get it done and out of the way as soon as possible.
Now, it’s on to the edit and mix, and you know that your recorded performance
is the best it was possible to get. To repeat, running a session is a major test of your
multitasking abilities and your people skills. However, some things are just out of
your control; I’d like to share of couple of experiences with you.
The Session
123

STUDIO WEIRDNESS
The studio can be a bizarre place to hang out and work in; you’ll see some of the
strangest things. Shouting matches, temper tantrums, and egos run amok are par for
the course in the world of sessions. This is deﬁnitely not a part of the normal world
that the majority of people know and live in. One day, we were recording a script
for a training ﬁlm for a pharmaceutical manufacturer. The producer was off site and
directing the recording via telephone (not an uncommon procedure). The talent
pronounced a chemical name without hesitation; the producer corrected him, “No,
it’s pronounced this way.” “I beg to differ,” replied our hero, “It’s this.” “Well, that
may be, but at our company, we call it this.” “Look,” said Mr. Voice Talent, “I
have a minor in chemistry from when I was in college, and I know for a fact that
I’m right on this. If I’m going to pronounce the name of this chemical, I’m going
to pronounce it the right way!” And away the two of them went, back and forth,
and with the talent never understanding that it didn’t make any difference—just say
it the way the client wants it said and go to your next session. But no, tempers
continued to escalate, and the voice talent ended up yanking off his headphones and
slamming them into the control-room glass, shattering an otherwise good pair of
phones. He stormed out of the studio. I picked up the phone and said, as calmly as
I could, considering I had just lost an expensive pair of headphones, “Um, he just
stepped out to get a cup of coffee . . . we’ll be with you in a minute.” I went into
the lobby, and there was no one there. “Where did he go?” “I don’t have the slightest
idea,” says the receptionist, “He just put on his coat and left.” Which left me looking
at the telephone, trying to come up with what I could tell the client. Mr. Ego had
struck again.
One time, we were recording a math textbook (ah yes, show biz is glamorous,
isn’t it?) in a studio that had a “blind” booth. That is, you couldn’t see into the
booth from the control room because it was down the hallway, which normally
didn’t present much of a problem, although I prefer to have line of sight into the
booth. The talent was seated at a table, and we were on our third day of recording
the entire book—examples, equations, and all. Sometimes, it took a while to ﬁgure
out how to describe an equation, and there was a time when the talent quit speaking
and was silent for well over a minute. “Have you got it ﬁgured out, Charlie?” “Have
what ﬁgured out?” “The equation,” I said. “What are you talking about? I was reading
along and all of a sudden you interrupt me. Why did you do that?” Son of a gun—
he had read himself to sleep! Dozed right off in the middle of a sentence and didn’t
even know it. Time for a break.
I’ve done a lot of recording of campaign advertising for national political 
ﬁgures, and I had one client who was notorious for agonizing over every syllable
of every word of one of his scripts. He was not only the producer, but the writer as
well, and would often revise the script many times during the course of the session.
The talent and I were used to it and usually didn’t mind, because, while he sweated
over his masterworks, the clock was running, and we were both billing by the 
hour. For one session, we were recording a 30-second radio ad; we had started at
124
CHAPTER 7 The Session

1:00 P.M., and it was now 6:30 P.M.. Around and around the producer went with
his copy, changing ﬁrst this word and then that one. He suddenly looked at his
watch, jumped up, and announced he was going to the Bruce Springsteen concert
and would be back around 11:30 P.M. or midnight. We were to wait for him to
come back, and then we would ﬁnish up. The talent walked out of the booth, put
on his coat, and calmly said, “I quit.” “What? You can’t quit, we’re in the middle
of a spot!”, replied the producer. “Tom, what do you think? Tell him he can’t quit.”
“Well,” I said, “just turn out the lights on your way out the door.” Realizing that
he had a full-blown mutiny on his hands, he asked for a playback of the last take
that we had recorded (about a half-hour previously). “Yep, sounds perfect—have it
on the air by seven tomorrow morning.” Yikes.
I’ve had people throw full cups of coffee at one another, one time a laptop sailed
across the room during an argument (luckily missing the intended victim), and various
threats have been made. There have been practical jokes too numerous to name.
(One of my all-time favorites involves a documentary project that we did. We had
been working on it for over a week, and working with a producer from out of town
who drove everyone to distraction by virtue of his pompous, obnoxious manner.
This included the local director, who was also a very good visual artist as well. The
client went to lunch (nothing for us, of course—typical for this guy), and the director
pulled out a piece of lead foil ﬁlm bag of the type used to ship ﬁlm, so that the X-
rays don’t expose the ﬁlm, and calmly traced the outline of an automatic handgun
on it, cut it out with a razor blade, open the client’s briefcase, and glued the outline
under the lining of the briefcase. He closed the lid, and not a word was said. The
client came back from lunch, picked up the briefcase and other belongings, and left
for the airport. We could only imagine the scene as the airport security folks saw
those X-rays and began the search for the invisible gun. Hope the producer caught
his plane.)
All this and more are everyday occurrences in the studio. I don’t believe I’ve
ever laughed so hard or felt so inspired, while at the same time making some of the
most lasting and deepest friendships, as I have by spending my life in the studio.
Your job is to keep things moving along smoothly and not get caught up in all of
the craziness breaking out around you. Have fun, but realize that your job is to give
the client the best interpretation of their vision that you possibly can. Don’t let
anything interrupt your concentration on the job at hand. Above all, the vibe is king!
As the poet Rudyard Kipling wrote,
If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
But make allowance for their doubting too;
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise.
The Session
125

This page intentionally left blank

As we move more deeply into the twenty-ﬁrst century, it is becoming more and
more common for individuals, both engineers and voice talent, to have their own
spaces for recording and production. However, if we could peer back through the
dark mists of time, we could see a time when the only way to record and produce
voiceover was to travel to a commercially available recording studio, there to be
surrounded by incredibly complex and expensive equipment and gaze at the lord of
his domain—the recording engineer. Master of the mysterious buttons and knobs,
basking in the gentle glow of lights from the massive recording console, and
performing tasks at once miraculous and yet comforting: Massaging raw voice tracks
into a perfect ﬁnal product. Now fast-forward to the modern age, where anyone with
a basic grasp of how a word processor operates can far surpass our Merlin of that
8
Your Personal Recording
Space
CHAPTER

previous age. A long time ago, I began to notice more and more voiceover
professionals asking my advice on various technical aspects of recording and editing.
It slowly dawned on me that this early group of pioneers was seriously considering
setting up their own studios! My initial reaction, naturally, was to withhold as much
information as possible, while still remaining on speaking terms with them; after
all, if their ambitions were successful, they were going to put me out of business.
But, the longer I considered it, the more I came to realize that they were going ahead
with their plans, with or without my help. It was a matter of either helping them or
ﬁghting them (a losing proposition, considering the number of actors seeking free
advice). Well, I’m still in business and happily coexisting with the voice actors, the
majority of whom now record in their homes in their personal recording spaces.
This chapter will give both actors and engineers an overview of what should be
considered in taking the steps toward joining those who are already spending their
time recording and producing from home, instead of facing the long commutes to
run all over town for auditions and sessions. Always keep in mind that everything
that has been said previously in this book still applies, whether that be relating to
how acoustics work, or microphone choice and operation, or the importance of proper
documentation and archiving of materials. The chapter is organized into four main
sections, which should break the process down and remove some of the mystery
about what has to be done to get up and running in your own home studio:
•
The Space
•
Hardware
•
Software
•
Delivery.
But ﬁrst, some basic advice and suggestions.
THE BASICS
I am a professional studio engineer; as I’ve stressed throughout this book, I don’t
think the talent–producer–engineer team can be topped when it comes to turning
out the best product, no matter how appealing working in your bathrobe might seem.
Many people would like the convenience of having an in-house recording space—
you don’t have to travel to a commercial studio and you can be located virtually
anywhere in the world where there is a fast Internet connection. Scripts can be
emailed to you, and you can communicate with a producer or director located in a
remote location, such as his or her ofﬁce or car, in a distant city. You can deliver
your completed work to the producer via the same Internet that delivered the scripts
to you. Does this mean that you have to be an accomplished recording engineer?
No, but you do have to have a very good understanding of the technical tools you
will be using, especially your recording software of choice and computer operating
systems. But my guess is that you already have a pretty good grasp of how a computer
operates and how to create, name, and save ﬁles.
128
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space

A word of caution for the professional engineer: By all means, help your friends
out with the technical aspects if they ask. But remember that, when their personal
studio is up and running, you won’t see them much anymore. You’ll be losing
business! Consider a consulting fee to help them set up their space. I think that this
is a fair arrangement, and the voice talent shouldn’t have a problem with the idea.
You can also suggest that they use your engineering services if they have a project
that is complex or will need extensive editing and mixing. And, of course, more
and more engineers are putting in their own home spaces, also. So, those among
you of the engineering persuasion might want to pay attention to this chapter and
think about some of the ideas presented.
Before we dive too deeply into this subject, I have to take a minute to remind
you that, for the most part, this book deals with only recording the human voice
and doesn’t get into what happens in the control room (editing and mixing). However,
for this chapter, I think that we have to address some of the basics, as the voice
talent setting up her own space must perform those tasks as well as simply recording
the narration. So, we will be dipping our toes into those subjects, although not in
great depth. Also, keep in mind that I am not recommending speciﬁc pieces of gear
in this chapter; those that I do mention are for illustration only. Each of us has our
own preferences, our own likes and dislikes—what works for me and is a piece of
“must have” equipment may not appeal to you at all. That’s all right—and don’t be
intimidated by it. Never let anyone say to you, “Oh, you shouldn’t be using that.”
If you like it, and it works for you, ﬁne (as long as it sounds good and delivers the
goods). My favorite loudspeakers may sound awful to you, but somehow I keep
cranking out good-sounding work on them. Difference is what makes the world go
around—and keeps the equipment manufacturers in business! Do your research;
listen; evaluate; ask questions; try things out. What works for you, works for you.
These are the types of question that the voice actors were asking me all those years
ago—“Tell me why you’re using that particular thingy and how does it work?” So,
having said that, here we go.
Building your own space is not for beginners—you need a steady income to
support it, unless you consider this a hobby and not a career. If you set up a personal
studio, you are now a studio business, and you have to understand the tax implications,
legal issues, and liabilities. Also, you will have to do marketing to get your voice
and your projects out there. Remember, the goal is still a high-level, professional
recording, and to get that is going to cost some money. Keep in mind that upgrades
will be needed over time (software, etc.), but much of your investment will be a
one-time, up-front expense (mics, preamps, acoustics, etc.), and so you don’t want
to shortchange yourself on these. Remember to take into consideration the hidden
costs—cabling, lighting, maintenance, and so on. More on that a little later. When
you go to a commercial studio, part of the studio fee goes to legal advice, marketing,
maintaining equipment and new purchases, accounting, staff salaries, printers,
telephones, and so on—the infrastructure. You will now be responsible for these
additional ofﬁce expenses as part of your home-studio business, so plan accordingly.
And be aware that you are going to have to put in the time to understand the
Your Personal Recording Space
129

technological aspects of recording; this is what an engineer does, and you are now
the engineer, besides being an actor.
I haven’t made any mention of voice acting technique, developing characters,
working the microphone, and so on; these things you already know by the time you
get to this point in your career as a voice professional. Always keep in mind that
this is a big step, and that you will now be running a business. Have a well-thought-
out plan for keeping track of your time, as well as your invoicing and the monies
received, and be aware of the tax liabilities that come with dedicating a portion of
your home to your business. But today, it’s almost a necessity if you are going to
be successful as a voice actor or independent engineer, and the beneﬁts of working
in your own custom-designed space and in the comfort of your own home far
outweigh the downsides of running a home business. Being able to record to your
heart’s content, without worrying about the constraints of a commercial studio’s
hourly rate, and being able to record at any hour, day or night, is a huge beneﬁt to
you and your product. OK, so you’ve decided to take the step and set up your own
personal recording space; now, where do we begin?
THE SPACE
It’s possible to record anywhere—and I do mean anywhere. However, the results
that you will get are going to vary drastically. Sure, I could just set up a mic in my
living room and begin recording my voice; the problem is that it will sound like I
recorded it in my living room! Outside trafﬁc sounds, airplanes overhead, the furnace
and refrigerator running, and the neighbor’s barking dog are all going to make their
way into the recording. Not to mention the reverberation found in most living spaces.
You’re going to be after that tight, clean, “studio” sound. At this point, refer back
to Chapter 3, Acoustics. Most home environments are reverberant and allow far too
much noise from the outside to leak into our recordings, and these are the things
that we try to control. In a pinch, you could try to put the mic in a closet ﬁlled with
clothes—those make excellent absorbers. The problem with this solution is that it
will sound like you’re in a closet ﬁlled with clothes! And the lighting probably isn’t
ideal, and where do you stand? So, let’s get a bit more reﬁned and look at some
options. Basically, you have three choices (well, actually four, if you consider either
standing in a closet or recording in your living room to be acceptable):
1. Modify an existing space in your home or ofﬁce.
2. Construct a custom recording room.
3. Purchase a prefabricated voice booth.
So, which to go with? What are the pros and cons of these three choices? By the
way, option 4, do nothing and hope it all turns out sounding good, we won’t consider
for the professional voice actor or engineer. Do your research, and then do some
more. Before buying a prefab booth or beginning construction, explore what other
options you have in your existing space and be very clear in your end goals.
130
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space

If you want to modify an existing space in your home, you can expect this
solution to be the least expensive. Materials are relatively affordable and offer the
advantage of being portable, which means that you can take them with you if you
move. This solution probably won’t permanently alter your home, which can be an
attractive beneﬁt if you ever sell the house or if you are renting. The setup and
construction are usually easily done (with a little understanding of acoustics and
what you’re trying to achieve), and, by rearranging the wall- and ﬂoor-mounted
treatments, you can change the acoustical signature of the room.
You could design and custom build a recording area in your home. This is probably
the most expensive way to go. The upside is that you can design exactly the space
that you desire and that suits your needs, with no compromise, except for your
budget. The downside is that you will be permanently altering the space, and you’ll
in all likelihood have to either demolish your booth or leave it behind if you move.
And, of course, landlords really don’t appreciate this option. Building an isolated
room within a room is not for the faint-hearted, and you’ll have a lot of research to
look forward to, in terms of both acoustics and building techniques. This is not a
project for the weekend hammer-swinger—most likely, you’ll need professional
builders for the construction. And the problem with professional builders is that they
usually don’t have an understanding of the specialized needs of a recording space,
and your ﬁnished room may be compromised.
This brings us to our third choice—purchasing a prefabricated voice booth. 
Usually less expensive than full-scale construction and modiﬁcation of your home,
but probably a bit more than modifying your existing space, this is the route that
most home-recording folks travel. As mentioned in previous chapters, there are a
couple of well-known designers and builders of prefabricated booths (such as
WhisperRoom, VocalBooth, and StudioBox—see the Resources section at the end
of this book for web-site information) that offer a great balance of price, conﬁguration,
and options for the home voice studio. Mind you, these pre-made booths can still
run to several thousand dollars, but they offer the advantage of good soundprooﬁng,
design by a professional, solid construction, and the ability to add most anything
you would ever want through the myriad options that are offered. Although it may
not be the easiest task in the world to break one of them down in the event of a
move, it is possible, and these prefabs don’t permanently alter the building in which
they’re placed.
Modifying an Existing Space
Setting up a recording area in your home or ofﬁce needn’t be a huge project, if you
pay attention to a couple of basic principles. You’ll remember that the two biggest
enemies of a clean, strong voice track are noise and reverberation. When modifying
your existing space for recording use, reverberation is the easiest to control. Noise,
generated both from outside the space and from inside, is much more difﬁcult to
control. Unless you absolutely soundproof the room, your neighbor’s lawnmower is
Your Personal Recording Space
131

likely to intrude. And soundprooﬁng can only be done with options 2 or 3, not just
by altering the acoustic signature of your room. So, when considering this option,
start by choosing the quietest place in your home or ofﬁce. It probably won’t be the
kitchen, nor is it likely to be a living room facing the street. If your space is suitably
quiet to begin with (such as if you are lucky enough to live in the middle of nowhere,
with no one else around for miles), you’re halfway home. Now we can concentrate
on tuning the room to get rid of unwanted acoustic artifacts. This needn’t be as
complicated as you might ﬁrst think. If you recall, reverberation is the bouncing
around of the soundwaves within the space, and also the microphone has a deﬁnite
pickup pattern. If your mic is a cardioid or hyper-cardioid type, the majority of the
sound that the mic is picking up will come from the front. Rather than treating the
entire room, it is possible to enclose the mic in an acoustic space by placing two
panels treated with acoustic foam in a V shape and the mic (and, therefore, you)
facing in toward the middle of the V. If you’re still hearing some bounce from the
room, take a third panel and put a ceiling on your construction. (No, this doesn’t
have to be permanently attached: Just throw it up there. Now you can put the whole
thing away when company comes to visit.) A carpet on the ﬂoor will help reduce
any reverberation from that direction, and voilà, a perfectly suitable acoustic space
for the cost of three pieces of acoustic foam, some plywood to mount them on, and
that’s it. Not bad.
The downside, of course, is that you can’t move around much, being surrounded
by all of these panels. So, assuming the room is quiet enough to begin with, we can
start to expand our workable space. This will take some experimentation to ﬁnd the
optimum placement of the acoustical treatments, but this is how most professional
control rooms are built. You want to get rid of as much reverberation as you 
can to avoid a “live” sound—you are after that tight, robust, professional sound.
Start by treating the front wall (the one you’re facing) and the side walls. Then
address what is bouncing back to you from the rear. If you notice a boxy, bass-
heavy sound in your test recording, you’ll most likely want to treat the rear corners
of the room with bass traps. A diffuser on the rear wall can make a huge difference
in the sound of your recording, so keep that in mind. The ceiling is also a place 
that you will probably have to treat, at least directly in front of and above the mic.
And, once again, please carpet the ﬂoor with a not-too-thin carpet or rug. It not 
only improves your sound, it’s much more comfortable to stand on for extended
periods, and it gives your cat a nice place to curl up and nap. Check out some of
the hundreds of books and online resources for building your home recording studio
for more information. Sorry, but I did mention that you’re going to have to do some
research?
Custom Designing a Studio
The ﬁrst thing I want to mention is: Why do you think that studio designers cost
so much? Yep, we’re talking some serious money if you want to custom build a
132
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space

dedicated recording area in your home. To begin with, you want to make it soundproof,
and that means isolating the space from outside sound. The only way to truly
accomplish this is to build a room within a room and detach the space from the rest
of the building structure. This is also known as “ﬂoating” the room. Besides
eliminating noise from the outside, there is also noise being generated inside the
home, as well. This is usually in the form of heating and air conditioning running,
and, to get rid of the sound of air movement and the motors that move the air,
specialized duct work is required. Possible? Yes. Affordable for the average person?
Not so much. This option is going to take much more research and, in all likelihood,
the use of a professional contractor and builders, and, as I mentioned above, they
may not be knowledgeable about the intricacies of studio construction. Some things
that you specify in your plans may not make sense to them, and, thus, they may
assume that you simply don’t know anything about construction. So, they might
“help” you out by altering the design to match standard residential construction
practices, and you are left with a substandard performing room after all your hard
work.
The take-away from all of this is that, yes, custom designing a recording space
in your home or ofﬁce is possible; in fact, many musicians have their own private
project studios that compare quite favorably with any commercial facility (and
sometimes surpass the room performance of the commercial studio), but you have
to have the space, time, and money to do this right. The vast majority of voiceover
professionals don’t need this type of space in which to record and produce their
narrations.
Prefabricated Voice Booths
I’ve discussed this subject in Chapter 3, Acoustics, and so won’t belabor the point
here, but purchasing a prefabricated voice booth is, to me, the ideal compromise for
the actor wanting to get into recording at home. As mentioned above, the price is
reasonable, it doesn’t permanently alter the building, and the quality of these booths
can be outstanding. You can choose exactly the space that suits your needs in terms
of size and comfort, and you end up with a room within a room for soundprooﬁng
purposes. By choosing to go with a prefabricated room, you end up with the best
of both worlds for a modest investment, and it will serve you for years to come,
just like your microphone collection. You can adjust the size of the booth to ﬁt the
space available to set it up in, and there are ports that allow you to run cabling in
and out of the booth to control headphone volume, your microphone cables, AC
power, and so on. In short, it is a recording studio in a box (well, on a pallet, but
that’s a minor point). If you regularly record more than one person at a time, there
are models available in various sizes, and you can custom order something not found
off the shelf by one of the manufacturers.
Your Personal Recording Space
133

134
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space
HARDWARE
Assuming you now have the problem of where to record solved, it’s time to move
on to how to record your voice. You’re going to have to take a short trip into tech
land at this point, and there’s no better time than now to ﬁnd out what you’ll need
to get pro-sounding results. The ﬁrst and most obvious is a microphone (covered in
detail in Chapter 4, Microphones). Because this topic has already been covered, let’s
move on to the next link in the chain.
You are going to be constructing a “signal path” for your voice to get from your
mouth to the computer and then out to the speakers. A simpliﬁed signal chain looks
like Figure 8.1.
FIGURE 8.1 
Simpliﬁed Signal Chain
Your ﬁnal recording is only going to sound as good as the worst-sounding link
in this chain. So, if you have a wonderful mic, but your mic preamp is a piece of
worthless junk, don’t expect to come out sounding like James Earl Jones. You don’t
have to spend a fortune building your signal path, and the price of quality components
is falling all the time, but you have to pay attention to what you choose to record
through. As you can see, after the microphone, the signal ﬁrst goes to a microphone
preampliﬁer, which raises the electrical signal put out by the mic to a level that
other equipment is able to work with. This is a critical component, and, like
microphones, all mic preamps have their own distinctive sound. You can ﬁnd mic
preamps with built-in compression and equalization, which although useful, aren’t
strictly necessary for a good sounding preamp. Do not rely on the mic preamp that
is inside your computer: as with all of the audio goodies packed inside the computer,
you are going to get what you pay for, and, in this case, the mic preamp is worth
about twelve cents. At best, they sound terrible. So ﬁnd yourself a good, solid mic
preamp that comes with good recommendations from industry pros who record voice
and know what they’re talking about. It’s tempting to think that your computer has
all the essential hardware for recording that you’ll need already inside it, but those
components that make up the signal path are just not of sufﬁcient quality to deliver
air-quality, professional-sounding recordings.
Microphone preamps come in mono, single-channel versions up through multiple
microphone inputs. As with the options of compression and equalization, they usually
come with 48-V phantom power for use with condenser microphones also. They
may or not have a headphone jack on them, but that is usually redundant with other
equipment you will be using. Choose the version that best ﬁts your needs and evaluate
its sound and features before making the purchase.
Sound
Source
Mic
Mic
PreAmp
A/D
Converter
Computer
D/A
Converter
Speakers

Next in line is the A/D converter. Once again, the sound is going to change (but
not nearly as much as with a mic or a mic preamp) from one model to another, and
the choices seem endless. Remember that a microphone is known as a “transducer”—
something that changes one type of energy into another? Well, the converter (or A
to D or ADC) does the same thing: It takes the electrical signal from the mic preamp
and converts it into the language that a computer understands, 0s and 1s. You can’t
get into your computer without one. Yes, the computer already has an ADC built
into it on its sound card—well, enough said about that. Go ﬁnd a good-quality ADC
in the price range that suits you. Be sure that the model you select has the sample
rate and bit depth that will work best for you; in this day and age, that will probably
be 96 kHz at 24 bits. As with the mic preamp, converters come in a range of options
as to the number of inputs, and most of them also function as digital-to-analog
converters (DAC), to get back out of the digital realm and into your speakers.
Your Personal Recording Space
135
FIGURE 8.2 
SSL AlphaLink SX Converter
Source: Courtesy of Solid State Logic
The converter connects with your computer via the USB ports, and magically
you have now entered the digital domain. Whether you choose to work on a Mac
or a PC is entirely up to you and the type of software that you prefer to run; both
work equally well for audio projects, and there is no real difference between laptops
and desktop computers. Assuming that your machine has the speed and storage
capacity to handle high-quality audio, you should be ﬁne. If you have a question
about the machine you should have or should buy, check with a (knowledgeable)
salesperson at the nearest computer outlet. You may want to take along a copy of
the speciﬁcations for the software that you plan on running—it will list operating-
system requirements, speed and storage specs, and more that can guide you in the
right direction. Although dealing with digital audio takes a certain amount of
horsepower, it’s not as much as working in digital full-motion video or demanding
graphics applications, and so the computer you choose doesn’t have to be the highest
of the high end. You just don’t want it to bog down or crash when you’re working
with your audio.
There is one other piece of hardware that I cannot recommend highly enough:
An external hard drive. The computer has a hard drive in it already—it could be an
HDD (hard disk drive) or, if it’s a newer model, perhaps an SSD (solid-state drive
that works on ﬂash memory). Some models have a combo drive that combines the

136
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space
best of both worlds. Owing to the phenomenon of old dogs learning new tricks, I
still refer to any of these as the “hard drive”—sorry for any misconception. The
purpose of the computer’s internal drive is to handle the operating system and
generate the graphic visuals that we see on the screen. Some of the internal drives
are pretty big these days, but software requirements are constantly growing. I
remember the ﬁrst computer I worked on that had a 1-gigabyte drive—I laughed
myself silly thinking that anyone would ever need that much space! But, like I said,
the computer’s internal drive is busy dealing with all of the computer housekeeping
that allows us the speed and ﬂexibility we demand from our machines, and it’s best
to have an external drive for your audio needs. As can be seen from Table 8.1, audio
ﬁle sizes increase at an amazing rate as sample rate and bit depth are increased, and
so the need for an external drive becomes apparent.
Keep in mind that the ﬁle size relates to the total amount of audio recorded, and
not just the ﬁnished mix. It’s likely that, for a 30-second spot, you will record much
more than 10–15 minutes of material.
Also, when shopping for an external drive, be sure to get a drive with a fast
access speed; 7,200 rpm is what you should be looking for. Any slower and your
audio software is going to run either extremely slow or not at all. For this reason,
thumb drives (those cute little USB sticks) cannot be used for recording and editing
purposes. They’re ﬁne for quick storage and transportation of your sessions (assuming
that the drive size is sufﬁcient to store the size of your project), but you will not be
able to actually work directly from the thumb drive. You’ll have to download from
the USB drive to your computer and into the audio software.
An intermediate step between the external hard drive and the thumb drive is the
portable hard drive. Usually operating on ﬂash memory (meaning no moving parts
such as a spinning disk and read/write heads), the portable drives can be an inexpensive
alternative to the stand-alone external drive. I recently purchased a portable drive
with 500 gigabytes of storage, which is fast enough to run Pro Tools without a
hiccup, for under $40, and there are terabyte portable drives available now for under
$80. These little gems are great for moving your session materials from one computer
Table 8.1 Stereo Audio File Size (in megabytes)
File Size
1 Min.
10 Min.
30 Min.
60 Min.
44.1 kHz/16
10.09
100.94
302.81
605.62
44.1 kHz/24
15.14
151.41
454.22
908.43
48.0 kHz/16
10.99
109.86
329.59
659.18
48.0 kHz/24
16.48
164.79
494.38
988.77
96.0 kHz/16
21.97
219.73
659.18
1,318.36
96.0 kHz/24
32.96
329.59
988.77
1,977.54
192.0 kHz/16
43.95
439.45
1,318.36
2,636.72
192.0 kHz/24
65.92
659.18
1,977.54
3,955.08

to another and for storage of your archives. They are, for the most part, robust and
trouble-free, offering good performance at a terriﬁc price point. They’re rugged,
small enough to ﬁt into a pocket or briefcase, and in many cases the perfect solution
to your drive requirements. As a reminder, be sure to check the speed of the individual
drive you are considering if you expect to be able to run recording software directly
from it (rather than using it only for storage). Keep that 7,200 rpm number in mind.
We’ll return to the subject of drives and storage in the last chapter of this book,
“That’s a Wrap,” but, for now, know that the external drive you choose is essential
to the smooth operation of your audio software and the conﬁdence that comes with
knowing that your work has been adequately protected and archived.
The Audio Interface
So, now we know that, from the mic, we have to go into a mic preamp, followed
by an A/D converter, to get the audio signals into the computer so that we can work
with them. Many audio pros take this modular approach, choosing each component
Your Personal Recording Space
137
FIGURE 8.3 
500-GB Portable Drive
Source: Photo by the author

for the particular and unique sound that the various makes and models give them.
However, there is another way to consider, and one that is both convenient and
affordable. This is the audio interface. The beauty of the audio interface is that it
combines all of the functions that you’re going to need in one unit; mic preamp,
converter, USB connection to your computer, headphone ampliﬁer and level control,
and speaker connections to hook up your monitor speakers. Available from a single
microphone input to eight or more inputs, you can choose the model that best suits
your needs and requirements. As you will be recording yourself in your home studio,
you probably won’t need an interface with more than one or two mic inputs. However,
consider your needs and what you might be recording; if you record music as well
as voiceover, you may want a unit with more inputs.
The interface will contain everything that you need to record quality voice tracks—
the mic preamp, the A/D converter, as well as a DAC and 48-V phantom power for
your condenser microphone, and most often in a unit with a small footprint, so that
it doesn’t take up nearly as much desk space as individual units would. It’s a perfect
all-in-one solution to your voiceover recording needs, and many units come with
audio software included (such as Avid’s MBox line, which ships with Pro Tools
Express software as part of the purchase price).
138
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space
FIGURE 8.4 
Avid MBox Pro (Front Panel)
Source: Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author
FIGURE 8.5 
Avid MBox Pro (Rear Panel)
Source: Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author
Audio interfaces are available from a wide selection of manufacturers and come
in various price points to ﬁt most budgets, and most sound amazingly good,
considering their cost. As with anything else when putting together your home
studio, do your research, ask questions, and try out anything that you’re considering
purchasing before making your ﬁnal decision.

Your Personal Recording Space
139
SOFTWARE
As with anything else in the world, there are numerous choices when it comes to
what software you are going to work with for your audio recordings. Known as
“platforms,” these various programs range from the free and extremely easy to use
to quite costly and complex. In making your decision on which platform to go with,
your main criterion is going to be the number of tracks that you are likely to need.
Many programs are stereo programs, which limit you to working with only two
tracks of audio at a time.
Easy to use, intuitive, and high quality, Audacity gives you good performance
and some interesting features (and you can’t beat the price). These types of program
are great for recording, editing, and some very basic processing of your ﬁnished
edits. However, if you are going to be adding music and/or sound effects and doing
the mixing of all of the elements, you’re going to need more than just two tracks,
and, here, we move from the two-channel edit programs into multitrack platforms.
There are numerous software programs to choose from when considering a
multitrack editor, but the main thing to keep in mind is that they all do basically
the same thing; they just have different controls and terminology. Over the years, I
have had experience with a wide range of software, and, if you work with a number
of programs, you come to realize that, in the end, they’re just boxes. Once you learn
one, it’s a fairly simple matter of learning another set of keystrokes, and moving to
FIGURE 8.6 
Pro Tools Edit Screen
Source: Photo by the author

140
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space
another isn’t a huge deal. The main advantages of using a multitrack editor over a
two-track editor are a larger feature set and access to a larger number of tracks for
layering and mixing sound. The choices of processors (equalizers, compressors,
reverbs, time compression and expansion, and so on) are greatly enhanced, and the
world of third-party developers for these processors (also known as “plug-ins”) is
at your disposal. There are a large number of developers who put out plug-in packages,
and the variety that these give you far exceeds the plug-ins that ship with the
software you purchase. And, of course, the most obvious advantage to a multitrack
editor is the large number of tracks available for you to work with.
Figure 8.6 gives an example of a Pro Tools session, and, besides what we see
on the screen, you can add more tracks, name the tracks, perform volume, pan, and
mute automation, and add place markers for editing reference points. Figure 8.7
shows another Pro Tools screen, this time showing a virtual mixing console.
With a virtual console, you can add and rearrange tracks, as well as doing
complex signal routing, much as you would using a patch bay in the “real” world.
Setting up sends, mixing stems, setting up headphone mixes, and so on, is a snap
with a virtual console, as is controlling the levels of any given track by simply
clicking on and dragging the fader up and down.
Many of the multitrack editors were developed with the music professional in
mind and will have features (which you are paying for) that you will never need.
In fact, nearly all of these software programs are loaded with all kinds of bells and
FIGURE 8.7 
Pro Tools Mix Screen
Source: Photo by the author

whistles, of which you will probably only use a small handful. They are extremely
powerful and deep; if you need the tracks, I suggest learning those parts of them
that you need to work and ignore the rest. There may come a day when you’ll need
to dive back into the manual to learn how to perform some function or other, but,
for the time being, just learn what you need to use on a daily basis.
Whether you choose two-track or multitrack software as your main audio
production tool is up to you and your needs. It’s easy to start off with something
like Audacity, which is no-cost, and work your way up to more complex software
as your needs expand and your digital audio chops improve. There’s really no need
to start off at the top of the line, especially if you are only going to be recording
and performing some simple edits on your voice.
One other quick word on software before we move on: Besides your editing
software, for your home studio you should have Microsoft Word. It’s the industry
standard word-processing software for business and is used by nearly all those
producing documents such as scripts. Also, Microsoft’s Excel is the standard
spreadsheet software and should be included on your computer if you are running
a home business. Both are available bundled in the Microsoft Ofﬁce suite of software
programs. For keeping track of invoices, money in and money out, and the like, I
am partial to Intuit’s Quicken line of data tracking for the economics side of things.
With Quicken, I can set up speciﬁc codes for each client, each type of equipment
that I purchase, and much, much more. Very simple to use and powerful, this is
how I send my data to my accountant for tax purposes and keep track of how my
business is doing at any point during the year (including how it stacks up against
previous years and months). Recently, Google came out with a competing line of
software programs that do these types of function, and Apple also has its own
versions. No matter which you choose to go with, no home business should be
running today without these types of software.
DELIVERY—THE REMOTE SESSION
It should go without saying that the main advantage of creating your own home
studio is that you now don’t have to travel all over town to do recording sessions.
You can stay at home and let the world come to you. How does the world get there?
Welcome to the telephone session. Many producers and directors love the convenience
of directing the VO talent from the comfort of their ofﬁce, not to mention the time
savings of not having to travel to the studio. For them, it’s a simple matter to pick
up the telephone, dial the studio’s number, and be connected to the narrator in the
booth and the engineer at the console.
However, on our end, there’s some technology that comes into play. Oh yes, you
could just hold the telephone handset (or your cell phone) up to your ear, and the
director would hear you reading the copy and then be able to give you direction for
the next take, but that method is a bit clunky, to say the least. If you could do away
with the phone altogether, simply speak into the microphone, and then hear the
Your Personal Recording Space
141

direction in your headphones as you would if they were in the studio with you, life
would become much easier for all concerned. And, as an added beneﬁt, your 
hands would be free as you spoke the lines and you could turn the pages of the
script with ease.
To get to this point, we have some alternatives. The ﬁrst is also the oldest, the
easiest to set up, and the lowest-tech alternative. This is known as the telephone
interface, or telephone hybrid. The hybrid is a lovely box that connects the telephone
line to the console, allowing the director’s voice to be fed into your headphones,
and the console’s output (the mic channel and the talkback) to be connected to the
telephone, so that the director can hear you clearly. The process couldn’t be easier:
The telephone rings, you answer, and then push a button on the front of the hybrid.
All of the interconnections between what is happening in the studio and what the
producer is saying on the phone are instantly connected. Just like that!
The beauty of this type of system is that you can hear the director and she can
hear you, as well as anything that you might play back during the session, such as
the last take or an edit of previous takes. Most importantly, you are not recording
their voice. It remains separated from what is being fed to the recorder (this is
assuming that you set up the console correctly), and there is no feedback. One thing
to obviously keep in mind is to keep the director’s volume in your headphone down,
so that you don’t get bleed from the headphones into the mic, but you shouldn’t
have a problem. Telephone hybrids are convenient to use and affordable. No further
technology is required (well, aside from the telephone and phone company’s lines),
and they are remarkably easy to use. There are a number of hybrids now available
that work equally well with cell phones. Getting all of the connections made can
be a bit of a challenge, but most hybrids come with good manuals, and the connection
points on the unit are well labeled. The downside of using a telephone hybrid is
that you are dealing with telephone-quality audio (not the best on a good day).
Although ﬁne for a reference and for the producer to judge the accurate delivery of
the lines, the audio is not broadcast quality and can be affected by all of the usual
audio issues of a standard telephone connection, such as static, clicks, and hums.
However, even though the director can hear you (we assume) clearly, and you
receive her direction and make the adjustments in your delivery, there is one major
problem with this system. You still have to ﬁgure out some way to get the material
to the client. In the old days, this was by FedEx or a messenger delivery service.
Today, of course, we can email ﬁles or place them in a dropbox system via the
computer for the client to download. But, even with this relatively fast delivery
method, there is still time involved at both ends. What would happen if you could
eliminate that extra step of delivering the goods? And, to repeat, what is going down
the phone line is not of broadcast quality.
The telephone hybrid works with the analog telephone line, which is limited in
bandwidth, and thus the frequency and dynamic range are limited with this type of
system. The unit acts as a transformer that changes the electrical signal of the
telephone line and boosts it to line level for you to work with in your mixer, and
then back again from line level to telephone level. Handy, yes, but not optimal sound
142
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space

quality. For this, we need something in the digital realm—the ISDN (integrated
services digital network) line.
So, let’s take a step up and get some real audio happening in this telephone
session. Welcome to the world of ISDN. This marvelous technology allows you to
transmit broadcast-quality audio in real time, solving the delivery delay problem
and allowing the director to hear what you’re reading as clearly as if they were
sitting in the control room on the other side of the glass from you. But, as with
anything else in the world, there are also some downsides. ISDN is the preferred
delivery service today and has been for quite a while now, although IP solutions
such as Source Connect are making inroads, even in professional studios. Many,
many sessions are done this way, and the talent can be located virtually anywhere
in the world. Your market is now the entire globe—and your competition is now
anyone with a home studio and access to an ISDN line. Your competition is no
longer the other voice actors in your town, but every voice actor anywhere in the
world. For the voice talent today, it is becoming imperative to go this route.
However, before jumping into this, be aware of some basic facts. First of all,
ISDN can be quite expensive. You are going to need a dedicated hardware unit
(known as a codec, or coder/decoder) and the knowledge to connect the unit. You
are going to have to have the telephone company install special, dedicated lines into
your home, and the cost of the digital line required for ISDN is quite hefty. You’ll
need two in order to be able to transmit the bandwidth necessary for broadcast-
quality audio. So, you’ll be facing not only the installation charges from the phone
company, but also a monthly fee for their use. Second, the person with whom you
wish to do the session must have a matching unit; not any old ISDN unit will do.
Because of the encoding and decoding into and out of the digital domain that must
take place, the two units must be from the same manufacturer. Third, owing to the
cost of using ISDN, most producers or directors will not have one lying around in
their ofﬁce, and so an additional studio charge is going to have to be paid to rent
a studio with ISDN technology.
Alright, now that the downsides have been covered and it sounds like I’m trying
to discourage you from getting into the world of ISDN, how does it work?
Once the installation is complete, from the front of the unit you use the numeric
keypad to dial the number you wish to connect with. You’ll notice from Figure 8.8
that there are two windows displayed on the unit; this is because you have to dial
two numbers to make the connection (remember I mentioned you are going to need
two digital phone lines?). The unit checks the connection, and, from this point, the
operation is very similar to using a telephone hybrid. The output of your codec is
fed to the console, so that you can hear the incoming direction from your producer,
and your voice is fed from the console into the codec for transmission down the
lines. Really, that’s about all there is to it. The trick is in installing the phone lines
(and being able to pay for them), purchasing the unit, and making all of the necessary
connections. Once these things are taken care of, just push the “connect” button and
start talking. At least, it’s close to being that simple. Both the sending and receiving
units have to be set to the same data settings, but that’s pretty easy (there’s a “select”
Your Personal Recording Space
143

button on the face of the unit to make your choice); if everything is set up right,
it’s fairly straightforward. You have now arrived at being able to send and receive
full-bandwidth digital audio directly from your own studio. Using an ISDN isn’t
rocket science, but it is a major step to take in your home studio, because of the
associated cost involved.
Is it possible that there is a desirable method of conducting a remote session that
combines the ease of use and affordability of the telephone hybrid with the full-
bandwidth digital audio capability of ISDN? The answer is: Kind of, at least as
things stand now. Internet audio is constantly improving, and it won’t be long before
all of the telephone-based technologies are a thing of the distant past. When the
Internet ﬁrst started delivering audio, the audio was pretty terrible. Very low sampling
rates and bit depth and excessive latency were the standard owing to very slow
connection speeds and limited storage capacity. With today’s high-speed broadband
connections in most every home and ofﬁce, things are changing rapidly. Internet-
based solutions for the remote session are constantly getting better and only look
to continue to improve. Software programs such as Source Connect are gaining
traction and continue to gain regular users who, at one time, only had ISDN as a
delivery method for their material.
With these types of program, there is still the limited drawback of both parties
having to have the same software (just as with ISDN codecs), but the cost and ease
144
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space
FIGURE 8.8 
Telos Zephyr XS (Front Panel)
Source: Courtesy of Telos Systems/The Telos Alliance
FIGURE 8.9 
Telos Zephyr XS (Back Panel)
Source: Courtesy of Telos Systems/The Telos Alliance

of use of this software can’t be beaten. Now, instead of having to have a dedicated
piece of hardware to interface with the phone line and the audio console, your
computer becomes the hub. Source Connect is a plug-in and works with Pro Tools
and many other audio programs. There is also Audio TX; although more expensive
than Source Connect, it is able to interface directly with ISDN and could be a nice
bridging technology. Google is rapidly expanding its services into the media realm,
and I fully expect that it will enter this arena soon, as well. Internet and VoIP
technologies are constantly improving, as is the Internet’s ability to stream artifact-
and glitch-free audio, so this method of conducting the remote session is only to
grow in the future.
ADDITIONAL COSTS
Now that you have made the decision to set up your personal home studio and you
think you have the budget all ﬁgured out, you should take a careful look at hidden
or additional costs that you will incur in making this happen. As I mentioned at the
beginning of this chapter, I don’t want to discourage you from taking this step, but
you should be aware of the realities of what you’re about to embark on. You’ve
done your research and have a good handle on how much it’s going to cost for
whichever of the three options you decide is best for you and your space; you’ve
chosen your mics, mic preamp, A/D converter and mixer. You’re about all set, right?
Let me tell you about a studio owner I worked for a while back: If one of the
engineers came to him and said, “We really should have this thing—all the clients
are asking for it, it will make our work more efﬁcient, and it’s only $700,” his
common reply would be, “How much is this $700 going to cost me?” His point was
that there are always hidden costs that should be taken into account. Cabling, paying
someone to integrate the new equipment into the patch bays, specialized mounting,
and so on, all add to the cost of purchasing whatever you want to add. So, in thinking
about your personal studio, don’t forget to add in the cost of mic cables, USB cables,
mic stands, copy stands, lighting, a good printer (for scripts and invoicing, as well
as a myriad of other things), pop ﬁlter, headphones, possibly a headphone extension
cable, and on and on. You probably won’t think of everything until you actually
begin setting your studio up, but think long and hard about what else you’re going
to need, beyond the obvious basics. All of these additional pieces can add up pretty
quickly and add signiﬁcant cost to your project. Don’t scrimp on the quality of all
of these pieces, either; you’re going to have to live with many of them for a long
time, and you don’t want them to be constantly needing repair, nor do you want to
buy the same thing once a year, when the old one wears out. As I said earlier, do
your research, and then do some more. Ask established engineers or other voice
talent who have already taken this step what you should take into account and listen
to their answers.
One other key element of setting up your personal studio is going to be your
choice of monitor speakers. What? I can’t just do all of my editing and mixing on
Your Personal Recording Space
145

the same headphones that I used to record? No, no, no. Editing and mixing on
headphones will not allow you to judge the ﬁnished product accurately, and wearing
headphones for extended periods is just plain uncomfortable. Like everything else
that goes into your studio setup, consider monitor speakers carefully and listen to
as many different models as you can to judge what’s right for you and your room.
Rule number one is: You are not going to use the same speakers that are currently
hooked up to your stereo system! Speakers made for your home stereo or surround-
sound system are designed for that purpose and are optimized to give good results
in a living-room type of environment. They usually are “colored” to optimize their
sound, and, for a stereo setup, this is what you want. However, studio speakers,
known as “monitor speakers,” are designed to deliver a ﬂat frequency response and
should have no discernible “signature sound” of their own. Of course, all monitors
have their own personality, which is why I prefer one set of monitors, and another
engineer likes another. Some, I ﬁnd, induce ear fatigue rather quickly, whereas, with
others, I can listen for extended periods at relatively loud levels and never tire.
Because each monitor speaker has its own personality, you will very often ﬁnd
multiple sets of speakers in a professional control room, and this gives the engineer
a more accurate view of the sound he is creating.
When selecting your monitors, the ﬁrst thing to remember is that the cute little
speakers that came with your computer are worthless. Like pretty much everything
else that comes included with a computer that is used for sound, these speakers just
don’t have a high enough level of quality for you to accurately judge the sound that
you’re working with. So, you are going to have to move into the world of professional
monitor speakers. The monitors come in two basic ﬂavors—passive and active.
Passive speakers require a separate power ampliﬁer to deliver the power that runs
them, whereas active monitors have the ampliﬁer built into the speaker cabinet itself.
This increases the price of the monitor, obviously, but, on the other hand, you’re
not purchasing additional amps. Manufacturers love the active design because they
can optimize the amp for the individual speaker design, and, thus, you end up with
a better sound (at least in theory). Which direction you decide to go in is up to you,
and either passive or active can deliver high-quality, accurate sound. Oh, and just
to complicate matters a bit more, the sound of a monitor speaker can change drastically
with the room in which it’s placed or according to where in the room you set it up.
Once again, try as many monitor pairs as you can get your hands on and critically
compare the results.
Once you set up your personal studio, chances are you’ll turn into a gear head
(just like the rest of us audio geeks). There’s always more equipment out there that
you just have to have, that you can’t live without. You’ll ﬁnd things that would be
nice to have or that are just plain cool. When it comes to equipment purchases, I
always stop and ask myself, “How will this make me money and pay for itself?”
Sure, not every single thing you buy has to ﬁt into this question—like I said, some
stuff is just cool to have—but the majority of what you decide to purchase should
pass this scrutiny. Otherwise, you’ll be supporting your studio instead of the studio
supporting and working for you.
146
CHAPTER 8 Your Personal Recording Space

THE MATTER OF TRUST
If you recall, we had quite a conversation in an earlier chapter on the matter of
building and keeping trust. This is a vital aspect of your business and should always
be kept in mind. When you get into setting up your own studio and begin recording
from home, you are taking on the responsibility of running the entire session yourself
and guaranteeing that you will deliver optimal audio to the client. When you go to
a commercial studio, you are dependent on its mic choices, and those choices may
not be the best for your individual voice. With your home studio, you are the ultimate
arbiter of what mic you are going to use. You can custom choose your own mic
and signal chain that best show off the true quality of your voice. The same goes
for all of the other pieces of equipment that go into your studio. The client is
counting on you to deliver the highest-quality ﬁnal product that there is, on time
and on budget. You are responsible for the quality of your recording, so give plenty
of thought to the signal chain: Mic, preamp, interface, and storage. How much are
you willing to spend?
You will be the actor, the engineer, and the producer’s ears in your session, and
you are going to have to get all of the roles correct. If you’re technologically
challenged and don’t know a sample rate from a Studebaker, you may want to
rethink your home-studio dreams. You are responsible for recording, editing, mixing,
and delivering air-quality audio to the client in the format that matches their delivery
speciﬁcations. This is all your responsibility, and all it takes is messing it up once
or twice and that will be the end of that client. They will no longer trust that you
are going to deliver what you promise to deliver, and they will ﬁnd someone 
else who can give them what they expect from a professional recording studio. As
I’ve mentioned previously, at the end of the day, all you have is your good name, 
and you should do all you can to protect it, so that you are known as someone who
can be relied on to deliver the goods and who can be trusted.
Your Personal Recording Space
147

This page intentionally left blank

For sheer volume of voiceover recording being done, perhaps no other single category
takes as much of our time as commercials. (I say this without any hard statistical
evidence to back me up, but it has been my experience in the markets that I have
worked in that commercial recording far outpaces everything else that we do.) It is
not unusual for an advertising campaign to produce thirty, forty, or more individual
commercials in a package. Obviously, this volume of work demands that we have
a ﬁrm grasp of the intention of the campaign and a well thought-out game plan
going into the recording sessions.
Many times, we may have three or four “base” commercials, and each of those
will have variations in location and date, or other particulars that change, according
to where the commercial will be broadcast or when a special sale is being announced.
If we have a grasp of the intention of the commercial producers before beginning
the recording, all of these individual variations can be planned and executed in an
orderly, logical way. In this chapter, we will examine how to implement the process
9
Recording for
Commercials
CHAPTER

to arrive at an effective end product in a reasonable amount of time. Keeping the
session(s) running smoothly and on time is one of your major responsibilities, and
hopefully this chapter will give you an idea of some ways to do that. I’ll return to
this subject at the end of the chapter, but now is a good time to remind you that
doing commercial recording is a great way to sharpen all of your skills in the studio,
whether you are reading or engineering. Just the sheer repetition of doing this work
makes you faster and sharper.
Note: This book concerns itself with the act of recording voiceovers and doesn’t
get into the editing and mixing processes much. There are some very good tutorials
on these subjects, both in book form and online, that are easily found, and these
skills are outside the scope of this text. However, in discussing speciﬁc recording
situations, some mention of editing, processing, and mixing must be made, and in
this chapter I will give you some speciﬁc ideas on these matters.
Recording commercials on a regular basis is great training to become very fast
and efﬁcient in everything you do. Your studio setup time becomes faster, and so
do your editing, mixing, and overall decision-making. What I’ve learned in years
of commercial recording pays great dividends in working in ﬁlm and television.
This is also true in the music world, by the way. Because advertising music sessions
operate at the same speed and intensity as the voice-recording sessions, music
engineers become used to the short setup time and tracking that they have to do.
There is simply no time to take two days to get the perfect drum sound; the engineer
must know exactly what he is going for and know how to achieve it in a very short
amount of time, live with the results, and move along tracking other instru-
ments. This translates into a really sharp engineer when it comes time to do album
work. In the voice world, the same skills apply: Choose your microphone, set it up,
record, edit, and go to the next session. You’ll be amazed at the depth of your
experience in a short amount of time—if you are attentive to what you are doing
and work at it.
We have more than a hundred years of experience with advertising theory that
has been developed, and, if you learn a little about this, you’ll begin to understand
why things are done the way that they are. What initially may look arbitrary and/or
counterintuitive becomes a bit clearer, and you’ll come to see that there is probably
a very well-thought-out reason for some of the decisions that are made. The basis
of all advertising theory comes down to “problem/solution.” That is, in all likeli-
hood, the commercial will state a problem—“Say, are your clothes looking dingy
and gray?”—and a solution—“Well then, try new and improved Sudso.” Pretty basic
stuff, but this is how most commercials are constructed. There are also legal
implications to the advertisement, mainly relating to meeting various federal rulings
on truth in advertising (that is, you cannot claim something that is not demonstrably
true, such as saying that this product is far superior in taste to the competitor) and
on clearly stating various restrictions, side effects, annual percentage rates, and many
other things. Knowing all of this will go a long way in clearing up any confusion
you may have about the structure and intent of the advertising.
150
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials

Commercials can be produced for local, regional, national, or international use.
Your approach to recording and how you do it doesn’t change, but the stress level
does; there is much more money at stake for airtime, union talent, music licensing
fees, and so on, as we reach a broader audience. There are also varying pay categories,
for international usage, for what is termed “all-use” (including Internet) that
encompasses any and all uses of the commercial, and for a one-time fee to use the
material in perpetuity (what is known as a “buy-out”). Becoming familiar with these
categories and their associated costs should be a part of your education in the ﬁeld
of commercial recording. In the United States, commercial recording is governed
by union agreements between the VO artists and the producers of the commercials:
there are pay schedules that have been bargained for between the producers and the
members of the SAG/AFTRA union (a merger of the Screen Actors’ Guild and 
the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists). Part of the agreement is
the paying of royalties (also known as “residuals”) to the actor over a speciﬁed
period of time, for every time the commercial (the actor’s work) is broadcast.
Unfortunately, recording engineers are not covered by union agreements of this sort,
and so we don’t receive any ongoing remuneration for our work, after the session
is completed.
Apart from radio and television commercials that advertise a product or service,
there is a category of spots known as public service announcements, or PSAs. All
of the same strictures apply that we know from commercial announcements. The
PSA informs the public about any number of issues, from warnings against texting
while driving to reminders to set your clocks ahead at the next time change for
Daylight Saving Time. The cost for airtime and the talent rates are usually discounted
for the PSA spot, but the all-important time factor still comes into play.
THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE CLOCK
Commercials are also known as “spots,” short for “spot announcement,” and I will
use both “commercials” and “spots” interchangeably throughout this discussion. The
major difference between recording for most other forms of medium and recording
spots is, of course, the commercial has a time limit that must be adhered to.
Commercials most typically are recorded in 15-, 30-, or 60-second increments, and
this is a function of the airtime that broadcasters make available for advertising
messages during their programming. There are 10- or 120-second blocks available,
but they are not as common as the 15-, 30-, or 60-second spots. Regardless of the
time limit of the individual commercial that you are recording, these times must be
rigorously adhered to. One-tenth of a second too long, and your ﬁnished work will
be cut off on the air, and too short is equally bad. It all comes down to broadcasting
schedules: If a number of spots run short, by the end of an hour, the broadcaster
has time on its hands that it hadn’t planned on, and no way to ﬁll it. With a live
host (a DJ, for instance), the host can ad-lib and ﬁll the time, but, with television
Recording for Commercials
151

programs where everything is prerecorded (both the program and the spots, as well
as promos, bumpers, and so on), there is no way to kill this extra time except for
dead air (that is, nothing being broadcast). And dead air is the broadcaster’s worst
nightmare.
As I mentioned, keeping the session running smoothly and on time is one of your
responsibilities, and this is often a struggle. I’ve had six commercial sessions booked
back to back in a day, and, if one runs long, everything in the schedule starts to slip
behind. You have to learn how to say, “Sorry, you’re out of time—we’ll have to
pick this back up again in three hours.” There are a couple of problems if this
situation happens: The airtime may have already been bought, and what you are
recording has to be on the air immediately. Second, if the voice talent has to return
to the studio at a later time, he may now cost more than was budgeted, or the actor
may not be available at the later time. So keep things moving! This is where your
experience comes into play—you have to keep in mind how long the editing, sound-
effect selection, and mixing are going to take and factor that into the session schedule.
And, once all that is completed, you will still have to prepare materials for delivery
to either the producer or to the broadcasting stations.
You can see that we have two problems with commercial recording: First, the
spot has to be the exact length; and second, the individual recording session 
must not go over its scheduled allotted time. We’ll take a look at some strategies
to get the spot to proper timing; session timing is up to you. Because time is of 
the essence, have a game plan going into the session. As mentioned in Chapter 5,
you should have already taken a look at the script(s) and timed yourself reading 
it. You probably have an idea of what sound effects you’ll need and what style of
music you might have to ﬁnd, if the commercial isn’t using a prerecorded piece 
of music. Of course, you should have a game plan for any session, but, because
commercial sessions can be quite short, you’ll have to have a good mental roadmap
of where you are going before you begin the session.
As for your session management, my only advice is to keep a close eye on the
clock and know when to begin moving things along—remember that you will probably
need time for more than just the recording (editing, SFX selection, mixing, duplicating,
and so on). For each individual read of the script, it’s essential to have a stopwatch
in hand so that you can give an accurate reporting of the time of the read to the VO
talent and the producer immediately. Don’t slow the session down by having to stop
and then measure the length of the read in your DAW program. By using a stopwatch,
you can call out the timing in tenths of a second, and not frame counts; it’s much
easier for most people to understand, “that’s three-tenths too long,” as opposed to,
“that’s ten frames too long.” An important skill to master is accurately timing the
read; you can’t be sloppy with your stopwatch and you have to start and stop it
exactly with the talent’s performance. If the actor takes an unusually long breath or
pauses during the read, you should be prepared to stop and then start your clock
accordingly. Most experienced voice actors, as well as producers and engineers,
have a clock running in their head and can tell when 30 seconds is about to expire
and make adjustments in the read.
152
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials

An important consideration in choosing a stopwatch is that it doesn’t make an
electronic beep when activated. This is especially true if you are going to be the
one recording your voice—the mic will pick up the sound of the beep, and you
wouldn’t want that in your recording. For this reason, many voice talents choose a
watch with a sweep hand—that’s right, the old-fashioned analog stopwatch. Smart
phones almost always have a stopwatch function, either counting up or counting
down, and the audio of the phone can be muted to silence the activation beep. I
think that another thing to consider is for the watch to have a “split time” function.
With this function, you can time individual sections of a read, as well as get an
overall timing of the whole read. This can come in handy for recording television
spots, which at times are to be added to an already edited picture. This would be
the case if we were not watching the picture while we recorded the voiceover. 
In this case, instead of simply making sure that the read comes in at 30 seconds,
we want to have each section of the read match an existing timing from the picture.
So, sentence 1 might be 5.5 seconds, lines 2 and 3 together might be 8.7 seconds,
and so on. To ensure that the timing of the read matches the picture, we need to
know the timing of each of these sections, and this is where the split times come
in handy.
An alternative to the hand-held stopwatch is the studio timer. Studio timers are
manufactured by a number of companies, but most have the same features: Large
numeric displays, the option to count up or count down, and a remote function, so
that the person operating the clock doesn’t have to be right next to it (at the recording
console, for instance). The timer can be mounted on the studio wall, and the voice
talent gets an immediate readout of how many seconds remain for her to ﬁnish the
reading. Most studio timers do not have split-time functions.
HOW LONG IS TOO LONG?
If we have a 30-second commercial to record, how much of those 30 seconds should
the voiceover be? Figure 9.1 shows a typical radio commercial script. You’ll notice
that it is broken into two parts: The portion for the narrator (marked NARR) and
the portion marked TAG. Quite often, but not always, these two sections are voiced
by two different people. So, the question becomes, if the total length of the spot is
30 seconds (or :30), how long does each of the sections have to be? And how do
we arrive at our determination?
The most efﬁcient way to record this situation is to record the tag ﬁrst, and then
the body of the copy. Because the body of the copy is longer, it will be easier to
make adjustments to the timing of the read. Also, tags are often dictated by legal
considerations, and the wording must not change, whereas the body copy can lose
or gain a word or two, usually without getting the legal department involved. Also,
it is much more efﬁcient, during the session, to have each of the VO talent record
their lines individually, instead of having both in the studio at once, with one actor
waiting to record his 5 seconds of copy for the tag while the other actor struggles
Recording for Commercials
153

154
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials
FIGURE 9.1 
Radio Commercial Script
WRENCHMASTER 
“Summer Sale: :30 Radio 
H19L5430R 
 
SUMMER MUSIC UNDER 
NARR (:25): 
 
It’s that time again for summer vacation with the family, trips to  
Grandma’s house, and afternoons at the water park. But is your car ready for 
summer? Come in now for Wrenchmaster’s Summer Sale and get a five-
point brake inspection for free, plus 20% off pads and rotors. And don’t 
forget a summer oil change – with a  new filter for only $22.95.  
Make sure that your summer travels are safe and problem free – only at  
Wrenchmaster! It’s summertime – relax! 
 
TAG (:05): 
 
Sale prices good June 15th through July 20th.  Not good with other 
offers or sales. Not valid in Arizona or Louisiana. 

to read through the opening 25 seconds of the spot. Remember, union voice talent
is expensive, and to pay someone to stand around to say just a few lines is not a
good use of the budget. Also, the studio setup becomes faster owing to using only
a single microphone instead of setting up two, two sets of headphones, two cue
mixers, and so on. Once again, we’re striving for maximum efﬁciency in the session.
There are times when a number of spots will be produced that are all identical
except for one line that changes; for instance, “Sale starts Sunday/Monday/Tuesday/
Wednesday,” and so on. The best way to ensure that the spot comes in on time is
as follows: It is recommended that you record the longest variation ﬁrst (in the above
example, record “Sale starts Saturday” ﬁrst) and use that as your base spot to cut
all the other variations into. In this example, the days of the week are all of the
same relative length, but there will be times when the variable element is much
longer or shorter in time. If we were to record a commercial that would include the
names of the cities Boston and San Bernardino, you can see that the timing would
change signiﬁcantly, and you must make allowance for this. By recording the longest
variable ﬁrst, you can much better make sure that you are not squeezed for time.
It’s much easier to slow down on an insert line than to try to read it in an unreasonably
short amount of time.
Many times, the tag will be a legal disclaimer—ads for insurance, auto companies,
pharmaceuticals, investments, and the like will have legal copy that must be included
with the commercial (annual interest rates, “Past performance is no guarantee of
future earnings,” warnings of possible side effects of medication, and so on, are
mandated by the federal government, but take away precious time from the body
of the spot (the “sell”), and so there are two approaches taken with this type of
copy: Either have the actor reading the tag read it as fast as humanly possible, or
have the engineer time compress the read to a point far faster than a person could
possibly get the words out of their mouth. The producer of the spot realizes that
this is legal wording that is required, but doesn’t particularly care if the audience
understands every word. Again, the goal is to get through this wording as quickly
as possible, and how an individual producer deals with it will vary. However, the
technique remains the same: Record and time the tag ﬁrst, and that will determine
how much time there is for the body of the commercial.
Commercials are often produced with music and sound effects, and these are
usually noted on the script. As the engineer, you must determine how long these
elements will play in the clear without having words spoken over them. Be sure to
take this into account when timing the script and the actual reading during the session.
If you are dealing with a 30-second script, and it calls for a piece of music to play
continuously underneath it, try to leave a beat of music at the top of the spot in the
clear, to establish the music, and a beat at the end as a “button,” ﬁnishing off the
spot. This might leave you :28.5 for the total read from the VO talent, and this must
be determined prior to starting recording takes. Again, for a smooth and trouble-
free session, preparation is the key, and getting these timings is part of that process.
This same technique is used for any sound effects that are called for during the
course of the spot. How long should a particular effect be heard in the clear during
Recording for Commercials
155

the read? If there are both effects and music playing during the spot, there is now
less time to speak the words. An experienced writer will take all of this into account
when constructing the spot, but, as either the engineer or the talent, you may have
to inform the producer that, by putting all the effects and music in, the ﬁnished spot
may run excessively long (and remember, a tenth of a second is too long!). The
more elaborate the effects, the more time it will take for them to play out. While
reading the copy, the narrator can just take a beat at the places where effects or
music are called for, and the timing of the pause can be adjusted later to match the
length of the effect being inserted. Just time the read carefully, starting and stopping
your timer as needed when the talent takes that beat.
Many commercials have a piece of music written for them that contains lyrics.
Known as a “jingle,” this music is intended to brand the product in a memorable
way and keep it in the mind of the listener. The vocals can come at the head, in the
middle, or at the end of the spot—it goes without mentioning that the length of the
vocals must be taken into account when ﬁguring out how much time the narrator
has for the body copy. You can record the voice while this music track is playing
in the performer’s headphones to help with the timing; just be wary of headphone
bleed from the music track leaking onto your voice recording.
What happens if the read consistently runs long and you can’t possibly cut any
words? There are a couple of ways of dealing with this situation, but they should
be done with a light hand. While reading, it’s obvious that the actor must breathe;
no one can give a believable performance for 30 seconds on one breath of air. If
your reads are consistently long, you could remove some of these breaths. However,
if you remove all of them, the resulting performance stands the chance of sounding
robotic and inhuman. I’ve found that a spot with all of the breaths removed makes
listeners feel very uncomfortable, but they don’t know why. Of course, if there is
a music bed playing throughout the spot, it will hide the fact that you have taken
out the breaths, which are much quieter than the words being spoken. The goal is
to keep the ﬁnished production sounding natural, and so you can’t remove breaths
at random; there are natural places where we expect a person to breathe while
speaking. Plan which and how many of the breaths you want (and need) to remove
to bring the read in on time, and do this editing judiciously. Our goal is to keep the
read sounding natural, and removing breaths can result in running the sentences
together in a way in which a person could not possibly speak. Having too short a
time between sentences sounds as bad as any other editing mistake, and this should
be avoided. Keep thinking, “Could a person actually speak like this? Does this sound
natural?” Consider removing only a portion of a breath in this case; you should
know that if you cut off the beginning or the ending of the breath it will sound
clipped off, so (carefully) remove the middle portion of the breath sound. A slight
cross-fade usually helps to hide the edit, and you are beginning to shorten the read
a few tenths of a second at a time. Keep this editing process in mind during the
course of recording, and it will help you to understand how much time you can
make up if the spot is running long with the read.
156
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials

In the digital age in which we live, we have the ability to speed up or slow down
the length of a reading without affecting the pitch of the voice. By using time-
compression and time-expansion tools found in nearly all digital recording software
products, this is an easy process: You can simply enter in the target time to which
you would like to adjust the total time, and the software does the calculations. Voilà,
a perfectly timed read. Not so fast. As with removing breaths, or with any editing
that you do, naturalism is our goal, and it is easy to overprocess the voice using
time compression/expansion. If the voice is overprocessed, digital artifacts in the
form of “glitches” or “stuttering” begin to be heard, and this can’t be allowed to
happen in our ﬁnished production. You may have to do a judicious amount of time
compression and breath removal to arrive at the natural sounding read that you’re
striving for.
One further word on timing the commercial reading: It may seem that the easiest
solution to the problem of too many words for the time allotted for the spot would
be to remove a few of the words. However, here’s the thing: There are a number
of very strict federal guidelines that govern what can and cannot be included in
commercials. Therefore, the wording of the commercial nearly always must pass
through the legal department of the advertising agency for approval of the language
contained in the script. A large number of people, from the client to the copywriter,
lawyers, and producer, have signed off on these words, which then are passed to
you for the session. The laws governing truth in advertising, liability, and many
other issues have been taken into consideration. If the copy is to be changed, it
should be done very, very carefully, and you must never take it upon yourself to
do so. What might seem to be an innocuous word change can have very large
implications. There are often forces at work of which you are probably unaware,
when it comes to working in commercial recording.
THE COMMERCIAL SESSION
For this and subsequent chapters in this book, refer back to Chapters 5–7 for speciﬁc
tips on the recording process for voiceovers; here, I’ll try and give you some
information on commercial recording and some techniques that might help you with
this recording situation.
Before the session begins, make sure you have some sharpened pencils, and 
have those take sheets handy. If you recall, you should have reviewed the script in
advance if possible, and read the script aloud to make sure that the spot comes 
in on time. Reviewing the script will alert you to how many mics you should have
set up and ready to go (along with sets of headphones and other equipment) and
what types of sound effect and music you might need, and you will be ready to
discuss any problem areas that you ﬁnd with the producer. When the VO talent
comes in, be sure to mark your copy of the script with any word changes that are
made in the initial conversation between the actor and the producer. Of course, you
Recording for Commercials
157

will have plenty of (room-temperature) bottled water on hand, as well as anything
else that you might anticipate the actor, producer, and any others sitting in on the
session might require.
The ﬁrst thing to determine is the number of actors that you will be recording at
the same time. For a single narrator, the process is pretty straightforward. Just keep
the actor on mic, provide a good cue send to her, and pay attention to documenting
and logging of takes. With two (or more) actors, you have to make sure that the
mics remain as separate as possible; if you are intercutting lines, you don’t want
bleed from one narrator getting into another actor’s mic and lessening your chances
of having a clean intercut. The best way to ensure a totally clean recording is to
mute one microphone when another actor is speaking, or, at the very least, lower
the fader for that mic signiﬁcantly. However, in practice, this can be tricky, especially
when the two actors have lines that come one after another very quickly, or when
there is an intentional overlap of lines. It is often more effective to handle this in
the editing process by muting one of the tracks when that person isn’t speaking.
Figure 9.3 shows a screenshot of this technique in a Pro Tools session.
In Figure 9.3, you can see that, by muting each track in turn, or “checkerboarding”
the tracks, the chance of off-mic audio and possible phase problems is avoided,
making it much easier to process and mix the two voices and achieve a consistent
sound between the two. This technique proves useful in any recording situation with
158
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials
FIGURE 9.2 
Voice Waveforms. We can see that, when Narrator #1 is speaking, we still observe the
waveform of that voice on Track 2—this is the off-mic bleed from Narrator #1 getting into
the other actor’s microphone

Recording for Commercials
159
FIGURE 9.3 
Track Muting
two or more voices, whether that be commercial recording, interviews, long-form
narration, or any other. It is fast to perform and will greatly increase the quality of
your ﬁnished production. A word of caution here, however: It may be tempting to
skip this editing function by having a noise gate in the signal chain for each mic
and attempting to automate this process. I’ve found that using a noise gate for this
purpose is quite often audible (that is, you hear it pumping), and the chance of
cutting off a soft beginning of a word (such as with an “h” or “f” sound) can become
a real issue. It’s much better to take a couple of minutes and checkerboard your
tracks with editing. If you do make a mistake and cut off part of a word, you can
easily restore the missing sound; if you use a noise gate during recording, you can’t
go back and grab the sound again. This is true with using any type of processing
during recording: If using a digital workstation plug-in, you can always adjust after
the fact if need be, but, if you’re using outboard processing equipment, you can
never go back again and change it. You have to think this through very carefully if
you choose to use processing on the recorded tracks and be prepared to live with
the consequences. I highly recommend recording everything “dry” and making the
processing decisions in the editing and mixing stages of production.
What type of microphone should we choose for commercial recording? As pointed
out in Chapter 4, Microphones, every individual is different, and the way a speciﬁc
mic will react to a person’s voice is going to vary. Let experience be your guide

when it comes to mic selection for the individual actor. You should also take into
consideration the ﬁnal playback form that your recording is going to have: Is this
commercial intended for television? Radio (AM or FM)? Is it intended to be played
in a movie theatre? Each of these has its own sonic requirements, and this may play
a part in which mic you choose to set up. For instance, in most cases, and for general
voice recording, I usually will put up a Neumann U87. However, if the producer
informs me that this is going to be a television spot, and that it should cut through
the other commercials on the air, I might instead go with an AKG414. Although
this particular mic is far from my favorite for voice recording, owing to its unique
frequency-response characteristics, it would be a good choice in this situation because
of its clarity and ability to stand out above a more rounded-sounding mic such as
the Neumann. For playback in a movie theatre, I could go with a Neumann U67,
which has a warmer sound and, in this environment, doesn’t have to compete with
other noise and program content, such as would be found in a home viewing situation
with television. Again, let experience be your guide—if you are unsure about your
choice, set up two microphones side by side, and, after processing and mixing, the
choice will start to become clearer to you. (Throughout this book, a number of the
guest contributors weigh in with their thoughts on microphone selection, either for
voice recording in general or for speciﬁc types of program material; consider what
they have to say on the subject of mic choice and put it to use in your thinking.)
There may be times when you reach for an unusual microphone for a speciﬁc
intended effect. If your character is supposed to sound like an old-time radio announcer
and you can put your hands on a vintage RCA mic, you’ll be way ahead of the
game as far as getting an authentic sound. There may be instances when you will
want to use a shotgun mic, especially the famous Sennheiser 416 (refer to some of
the “Insight” comments from contributors) or a Schoeps shotgun. I’ve recorded 
some commercials using an old, beat-up ElectroVoice 666—your choice of mic all
depends on your desired result. My advice is to keep experimenting and see where
it takes you.
As with any type of recording, documentation becomes very important during
the process, and this is especially true of commercial sessions. Owing to the large
number of takes that may be required to arrive at the desired performance, keeping
track of the takes is vital. A nicely designed take sheet, made speciﬁcally for recording
spots, is of immense value later when it comes to the editing stage of production.
Refer to Figure 7.2 for an example of a take sheet for commercials. You will note
that there is an individual take number, total time of the read, and any comments
that you may care to add to help in selecting the proper takes. Along with the take
sheet, the recording itself should have an audibly recorded slate from the engineer.
In a digital workstation environment, the talkback or slate microphone can be routed
to a separate track, and, on playback, we can identify which take we are listening
to by the take number that was announced during recording. In the days of analog
tape, when the “Slate” button was activated on the console, it enabled a low-frequency
tone (typically in the 40-Hz range) to be recorded along with the engineer’s voice.
On high-speed winding of the tape, the pitch of the tone was raised, and you could
160
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials

Recording for Commercials
161
hear the individual slates going by and count them by the sound of the “boop” that
the tone created. With digital workstations, we can let the software work for us with
a function known as “auto-numbering.” Each time the workstation is put into record,
the software amends the name of the recording with a number. In this way, the ﬁrst
recording might be called “VO-01” in the software, the next “VO-02,” and so on.
It now becomes a very easy task to identify and play back any take that you are
looking for, without having to go back and forth searching for that take, thus taking
extra time during the session. You now have both a visual reference to ﬁnd the take
you’re looking for and an audible conﬁrmation of the take number.
I found out about the importance of the voice slate in a strange manner one day.
My old friend, voiceover actor Herb Graham, was in our studio doing a commercial
session. At the end of recording, the producer asked if Herb could do a quick read
of a spot for IBM (this was back in the days of IBM being a major player in the
world of desktop computers). The producer wanted to play the read for IBM as an
example of the type of campaign that the agency might produce to promote the sale
and use of IBM computers. “Just read it down one time, Herb. No need to get too
fancy with this, it’s just a demo spot for them,” says the producer. So Herb read it
through once (I didn’t even bother to time it—this was only for the purpose of
demonstrating the type of spot that the agency was thinking of), and no one paid
much attention to what we were doing. You know, down and dirty. Herb read the
spot, I put it on an audiocassette (this was a while ago, wasn’t it?), and the producer
FIGURE 9.4 
Auto-numbering of Takes

was off, as I continued to duplicate the real spots we had done to later send out to
the radio stations. The next day, the producer called with a rather strange request.
He wanted me to record voice slates from “Take 1” to “Take 7,” then duplicate
Herb’s single read seven times, and put each voice slate before a copy of the read.
Not knowing what was going on, I just did as he asked me to do and sent the results
over to him. The following day, he came in all smiles and could hardly contain
himself:
Well, we played it for IBM, and they really liked it but wanted to hear the
other takes to see what options they might have in the delivery. I played them
the seven copies you sent, each with their own slate number, and after a lot
of deliberation, the IBM people decided that we had picked the right take,
although they thought the beginning of take 4 was a little stronger and that
take 6 was a bit too fast and thrown-away in the read.
Ah, the power of suggestion! Incidentally, Herb’s lone reading was produced as is
and ended up as a national commercial that ran for over six months.
INSERT LINES AND REDOS
We’ve talked about the strategy for recording spots with tags and how to avoid
timing issues in these spots. But what happens if you have to redo a line of copy
at a later date? It not only has to ﬁt into the original recording seamlessly soundwise,
it also has to match the original timing. Consider thinking about this situation in
terms of doing an ADR session. ADR is used in the ﬁlm world to replace lines of
dialogue recorded on location that cannot be used for one reason or another. Perhaps
there was a noise issue, such as an airplane ﬂying overhead during the performance.
Or maybe the director wants to change the emphasis on a word or alter the emotion
in the read. Sometimes, technical problems happen with the recording equipment.
In these cases, the actor is brought into the studio, and the picture is projected in a
loop of the line(s) to be rerecorded. The actor watches the ﬁlm for timing and lip-
sync, and the engineer and director are paying attention to performance while
guiding the actor toward the performance that is desired. In the world of commercial
recording, especially radio commercials, we generally don’t use the picture for a
timing guide, unless the actor is on camera, but instead play the original read in the
narrator’s headphones so that he can ﬁnd the correct timing. However, there’s just
a little bit more to it than that.
Having to redo a line of copy in a commercial is more common than you might
initially imagine. In fact, it’s quite common. There can be any number of reasons
for this: Something was mispronounced, the date of a special sale has changed, the
spot might need to be customized for a different city, and so on. I’ve had instances
where a spot has been revised many, many times over the course of a couple of
years or more, and the goal is to always make the new insert invisible for our
listeners, while keeping the original timing of the spot. If you run into this
162
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials

Recording for Commercials
163
circumstance, consider this technique for a good result: First, play the original read
for the actor, so that she can get a feel for overall tempo and voice. You may have
to play the original over a few times to get it into the narrator’s head. Then, while
listening to the original read, have the narrator read the new line out loud, to make
sure the new words ﬁt into the allotted time (this is all before recording, of course).
One good way to check for proper timing is to count the number of syllables in the
original and in the revised copy, to ensure that they are reasonably similar. If you
are recording into a DAW, you can recall your original processing plug-ins and
volume automation. Because you did a good job of documenting the original session,
you know what microphone you used, and you have that ready to go. Alright,
everything is sounding pretty good, and now it’s time to record some takes of the
new line. Do a “Save as” command, use today’s date to create a new session that
is a copy of the original, and open a new track to record on. Then, using your volume
automation, lower the line that is to be redone by about 20 dB or so; this will
probably vary depending on the talent’s preference for how much of the original
they want to hear in order to keep the timing the same.
You can now back up a couple of lines in the copy and begin to play across the
original reading for the talent. Have him read along to pick up the tempo and feel
of the original, and, when the new line comes up, punch into record. Once the line
has been recorded to everyone’s satisfaction, you can completely mute the original
and perform the mix of the new version. This technique is also used if there are to
FIGURE 9.5 
Pro Tools Volume Graph

164
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials
be multiple lines recorded to a base spot; as mentioned above, record the longest
variation ﬁrst and use that as the reference, adjusting the speed of the talent’s
delivery to match the hole into which the new line will go.
What happens if the line that is to be replaced comes at the very beginning of
the spot? If there is a music bed to the original spot, you can play that for the narrator
and let her know that she should begin reading on the third beat of music. Alternatively,
once again we can use an ADR technique. ADR is very often recorded using a series
of beeps to cue the actor as to when to begin delivering the line. Three beeps are
heard, and, where the fourth would be, the actor begins speaking.
Once again, lower the original line by around 20 dB and place the three beeps
so that, where the fourth one would fall, the ﬁrst line of copy is begun. It’s easy to
make a set of ADR beeps; use a 1-kHz tone cut to one frame for each beep, and
place four of them at twenty-frame intervals. Place the fourth beep directly over the
beginning of the ﬁrst word of copy and then mute or delete that beep. Of course,
you could also use this system at any time during the spot for cuing the new line
of copy, and some narrators may prefer that, rather than just hearing the original
read to cue by. You could make a set of ADR beeps and keep them in a folder for
use whenever you may need them, thus saving the time of having to make them
each time the need arises. On my DAW, I have a folder that I created and named
“Toolbox.” In it are a :30-commercial 1-kHz setup tone, a set of ADR beeps, room
tone of the studio recorded with my most commonly used mics, and the like.
FIGURE 9.6 
VO Session With ADR Cue Beeps

EDITING AND INTERCUTTING
It’s often been said that a movie is made in the editing suite. I think that the same
is true of commercials and other audio works. Fitting things to the proper time,
selecting the bits that will make for a smooth and effective ﬁnished product, and
knowing what can be left out are all important skills to develop. Why would we
record forty or more takes of a :30 commercial? Are we just hoping to get that
“golden” read, all in one magical take? Well, of course, everyone would like to nail
the performance in one take that couldn’t possibly be improved upon, but that is
rarely the case in the real world. Just as with a motion picture, the ﬁnal product is
most often a combination of many different takes, cut together into one complete,
ﬁnal edit and giving the illusion of a ﬂawless and powerful performance. And, as
with motion picture dialogue editing, we are often editing at the syllable level (or
less!) to make this illusion believable. A skilled producer knows what he or she is
listening for and marks the script accordingly, and a skilled engineer is able to stitch
all these disparate pieces into a coherent whole, to arrive at the producer’s vision,
ending with the “golden” take that is the goal. Both the producer and the engineer
must have a very clear idea of the process and what they are listening for to make
this technique work. Perhaps in no other form of voice recording do we do this more
than we do for commercials.
I’ve heard that, in the US, ﬁlm editors are called “cutters,” and in the UK they
are known as “joiners.” I think that this is a signiﬁcant philosophical distinction and
I urge you to think of yourself as a “joiner” in your audio work, that is, putting
various pieces together to reach the end product, instead of cutting out what you
don’t want. By keeping very close track of what you are recording, by keeping your
ears open to what will go with another piece or not, and by constantly reminding
yourself of the time limitations of the spot, this process becomes a creative task on
which you can pride yourself.
Figure 9.7 is a copy of a script from a radio commercial with notations for which
takes to put together to create the whole read (again, refer to Figure 7.2 for the take
sheet from this session). You may ﬁnd that a particular edit may not work exactly
where you have it marked; try moving the edit point a word or a syllable backward
or forward and try the edit there, to see if that might smooth things out.
During the recording of the spot, many times either the talent or the producer
might call for reading a particular line a number of times, with slightly different
emphasis on each. The most common way to do this is known as “three in a row.”
On each individual take number (slate number), the talent will read the line three
times, and the take sheet will be notated as “A, B, C.” You can see on our sample
script in Figure 9.7 that the last line of the script was recorded a number of times
(slates 12–14), and each read was performed three times (A, B, C). The preferred
read comes from Take 13B. Intercutting this line into the ﬁnal product is fairly
simple: Just make sure that levels and energy match with what precedes this insert,
and the edit becomes invisible to the listener. This, of course, is the goal of all
Recording for Commercials
165

166
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials
FIGURE 9.7 
Scan of Commercial Script With Takes Noted for Various Pieces
WRENCHMASTER 
"Summer Sale: :30 Radio 
f l p j  fb ~hf.0 
- f l S ~  
- 
H19LS430R 
" 
~ h f k  
k w/~ncLmo~k/ 
SUMMER MUSIC UNDER 
NARR (:25): 
a-fld 
@tVs 
that time again for summer vacation with the family tnps to 
Grandma's house, &a & 
your car ready for 
summer? Come in now for Wrenchmaster's Summer Sale and get a five- 
point brake inspection for free, plus 20% off pads and rotors. And don't 
forget a summer oil change - with a new filter for only $22.95. 
Make sure that yo 
mer travels are safe and problem free - only at 
Wrenchmaster. 
a e r t i m e  - ?elm! 
TAG (:05): 
@ ? S a l e  prices good June 15' through July 20'. 
Not good with other 
offers or sales. Not valid in Arizona or Louisiana. 

editing—the invisible hand of the engineer creating the “perfect” read from a series
of individual performances.
A special case should be mentioned when discussing editing the commercial: The
comedy spot. As any comedian will tell you, comedy depends on timing, and
performers work for years to develop this particular skill. As editors, we must be
aware of the timing of the delivery and how it affects the comedic performance of
the spot. Comedy spots almost always run long initially for this reason, and, as the
editor, you should be aware of this. Not only is the ﬁnal performance in your hands,
so is the total length of the ﬁnished edit, and, with commercials, we cannot end up
too long. I’m reminded of the old Jack Benny routine: Jack was known as a notorious
tightwad when it came to his money. He’s confronted by an armed man who demands,
“Your money or your life!” Jack pauses . . . and pauses . . . and pauses some more,
without a response. The robber again demands, “I said, your money or your life!”
Jack comes back with, “I’m thinking—I’m thinking.” The longer the pause goes on,
the funnier the bit becomes. If this routine was in a commercial, the pause alone
could take a third of the total time. As the editor, what would you do in this situation?
Cut the pause down too much, and the comedy isn’t as strong; let it play out, and
your :30 spot now becomes 38 seconds long. This is one of the reasons that writing
for comedy spots is so challenging, and why many of these types of commercial
don’t work so well. As the editor, you must be aware of the goal of the performer
and the goal of the advertiser at the same time—a very challenging task for you to
master.
There was an instance that I ran into a number of years ago that put all of my
skills to the test, and it was an exercise in comedic editing. The advertising agency
for the Chicago Tribune hired the famed Second City comedy troop to improvise
on the subject of the various sections of the newspaper and why they read each of
those sections. Three or four cast members would show up for the session, the
producer would announce, “Take off on sports sections in newspapers,” and I would
roll tape. The cast members then improvised their hearts out for 40 or 50 minutes
at a time, ﬁnished their coffee, and left the studio. The producer and I then had the
interesting job of pulling a number of 30-second commercials out of everything that
had been performed. Gathering this line and that, we would put together a number
of test edits to see what worked and what didn’t, and then, if we liked the direction
one of the edits was going, try to ﬁgure out how to cut it down to the desired time
frame. Sometimes, the test edit started out being 60 seconds or longer. What to keep
and what to lose? How to keep the comedic timing so essential to the original
delivery? Can I cut out a few words and still have meaning and clarity in the sentence?
Do I have room to lengthen a pause slightly for effect? Entertaining? Yes. A nice
relaxed editing session? Not so much. This particular campaign lasted a full year,
and we recorded new material once every two weeks or so; after a time, we began
to ﬁnd our rhythm, and the editing went more smoothly, but the editing sessions
were always full of drama and long discussions about what was funny and why, as
well as what individual lines suited the newspaper’s message. Not only did I have
to pay close attention to the overall length of the ﬁnal spots, but also to what lines
Recording for Commercials
167

I could intercut with others to make a smooth ﬁnished product. Because the actors
were improvising, there were no take sheets to reference, only a rough approximation
of the time in the recording a favored line might be found. But I have to say, I’ve
rarely laughed so hard during recording sessions!
AFTER THE SESSION
So, now the commercial has been recorded, the sound effects and music have been
mixed in, and the producers and clients are all happy. Time to move on to the next
session? Not so fast: There is still plenty to do to make this job complete. I’ve
mentioned many times the importance of proper documentation, and it’s particularly
vital with producing commercials. You never can tell when something is going to
be redone or something about the original spot will change. There are many legalities
that have to be met so that everyone involved gets properly paid (including you).
Any music that you’ve used must be licensed with the proper entities and reported
correctly concerning the total number of spots in a package, length, where they will
air, and the proper code number of that piece of music. The actors must have a
report ﬁled with the union on session length and the numbers and titles of the spots
recorded. The ﬁnished commercials must somehow be distributed to the broadcast
outlets that will air them, and all of the internal paperwork for use by the studio (or
for your records) must be completed and ﬁled.
Commercials are assigned code numbers by the producers, and all communication
with the broadcast outlets about the individual commercial uses this code number.
Your ﬁnished spot’s audio ﬁle should be named with the code in its title. A mistake
in this naming convention can not only cause great confusion in the advertising
agency and the station, but also possibly result in the spot not running in the time
that has been purchased by the agency. Each spot is assigned an individual, unique
number, and it can be thought of as the serial number for that individual commercial.
It can’t be emphasized strongly enough that any records of the spot and how it is
archived contain this code number. If the agency must communicate with you to
pull up an old commercial to revise, or to make further copies of it, in most instances
they will refer to the code number so that you pull the correct spot. Also, in reporting
music usage, you are required to provide this code, and the actor’s union keeps track
of where and when the commercial was aired (for residual payments) by the same
number. Pay strict attention to keeping track of this code number for each commercial
that you are involved with. This number is the birth certiﬁcate of the spot and will
follow it for the rest of its life. Copies of all paperwork should be stored and
available at the studio or in your personal ﬁles.
When it comes to providing copies of the spot, there are many formats that might
be requested. These various copies are provided to the client for approval, to the
station for use on the air, and possibly to the voiceover actor for his demo reel.
Become familiar with common audio ﬁle formats and be prepared to provide any
format that might be requested. It is quite possible that you will be asked to make
168
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials

copies in varying formats, depending on to whom you are delivering the copy. We
might email an MP3 ﬁle to the agency for clearance by the legal department, provide
a full-bandwidth .wav ﬁle to the station for air, and send a CD to the talent for their
use. By the way, it should be pointed out that, even though you recorded and mixed
this spot, it is not yours to make copies of for individual use (such as on a talent’s
demo reel); it is the property of the client, and you must have their approval—
preferably in writing—before you can distribute it.
It is much preferred that the copies provided for air not be compressed in any
way, although more and more stations are regularly broadcasting MP3 ﬁles of
commercials. If you can avoid data-compressed audio, by all means do so. Full-
bandwidth ﬁles are usually uploaded to an FTP site for the stations to access and
then place in their rotation. If it is a television spot, know what frame rate the station
is requesting, and be aware of the proper speciﬁcations for the layout of the bars
and tones and visual slate and countdown at the head of the ﬁle. For radio, it is
highly recommended that you provide a voice slate before the spot begins, stating
the title, code number, length, and producer (agency) of the spot. For instance, record
yourself saying, “30-second radio, Spot Number L-149–67B-18, First National 
Bank, Acme Advertising,” and place this at the head of your ﬁle. This way, the
station knows that it has the correct spot to air: The agency has already purchased
a 30-second block of time and reserved it for L-149–67B-18.
ONE FINAL WORD
Recording commercials is an interesting exercise in diplomacy on your part. There
are often a large number of people in the studio during a commercial session, and
you might begin asking yourself, who are all of these people? Why are they all
here? The producer, the writer, and account executive, the client, someone’s
receptionist, the lawyer—how do we sort them all out? They each have an opinion
about what they’re hearing and in which direction the next read should go. Some
may like your choice of a sound effect, and some may not. What to do? The trick
in this situation is to ﬁgure out who is in charge (I would select the producer above
all others)—this can often prove to be quite a challenge, but it is essential that the
direction in the session has one, and only one, voice. This is your session, and it is
your job to make sure that it runs as smoothly as possible. This can be a big challenge
for you, both emotionally and politically, but it is absolutely vital that this single
voice comes through. Make sure that all direction to the talent runs through only
one person; if the talent is receiving conﬂicting directions on how to change the
delivery, it creates so much confusion that she will never know what is wanted.
Also, you can direct any comments or questions that you may have to this one
person for clariﬁcation. Make sure that this session has a leader! I was in a session
recently where there were seven people, besides me, in the control room. They soon
discovered that not only was there a talkback button on the console, but there were
two remote talkback buttons on the producer’s desk. Very shortly into the session
Recording for Commercials
169

we arrived at the situation where someone would press the button and say, “Hey
Pete, try another read like this”; someone else would immediately press another
button and say, “No, no, not like that, try it like this,” and so on—each one convinced
that their idea was the best and talking over everyone else in the room. The session
was quickly descending into chaos! Before I could say anything, Pete, the voiceover,
calmly announced, “Hey guys, I’m going to step out for a cup of coffee. While I’m
gone, hold an election and vote on who I’m going to talk to.”
Remember our previous Kipling quote? If you can keep your head when all about
you are losing theirs . . .?
There’s an old saying in the advertising business: “There’s a reason you never
see a statue of a committee in the city park.” Keep the session running along smoothly
and on time; this is your job, your challenge, and your talent.
170
CHAPTER 9 Recording for Commercials

Although much of the general public thinks of voiceover recording as having to do
with radio and television commercials, there is a large amount of production being
done that requires some particular skills and that can provide a great deal of work
for those involved. This is the world of long-form narration. Long form can be
considered narrative in nature and is not aimed at selling a product or service (at
least, not directly, for the most part). The long-form narration is quite often informa -
tional in its intent and aimed at a more select audience than the broadcast commercial.
Long-form narration can be classiﬁed as corporate (also known as “industrial
narration”) or documentary. Any type of voice recording that is longer than about
60 seconds can be termed long form.
10
Recording Long-Form
Narration
CHAPTER

Corporate (industrial) jobs can include:
•
training videos (a very large category);
•
material to be used by sales staff to educate potential consumers about a product;
•
sales meeting announcements and programming;
•
point-of-purchase displays;
•
corporate messages (such as a message from the company president).
Documentaries can include:
•
ﬁlm and television narrations;
•
radio narrations (such as longer news stories and more);
•
use on the Internet that does not fall under the heading of “Corporate.”
You should be aware that this type of recording is still telling a story—whatever
that story may be. We should always be mindful of the pacing and ﬂow of the
narration, so that our audience remains interested in what we are telling them, however
dry and boring that information may be. Imagine the skill it takes to read a 15-
minute piece on a new dermatological drug and sound interested and excited about
this new product, all the while effortlessly tossing off Latin medical terminology as
if you spoke this way every day! Telling the story to hold your audience and having
them stay interested and excited about what you have to say is what this type of
voiceover is all about.
Everything that’s been brought up in this book till this point still applies: Working
with the talent and client, your microphone choices, and so on, are no less important
when doing long-form sessions or any other type of recording. Developing a
relationship with the people you will be working with is very important and goes a
long way to developing the trust that is paramount in having a long and satisfying
career. As I’ve mentioned previously, it is from sessions like these that I’ve made
and kept lifelong friends, and these relationships often go beyond life in the studio
and become part of the social fabric of our lives. But it all starts with your
professionalism and aptitude for handling your job effortlessly and with a sense of
humor.
Some years ago, I worked with a director on many occasions, and the director
always used the same voice talent for all of his jobs. The director was originally
from Germany, and both he and the actor were getting along in years. It was obvious
that the two were very close personal friends, besides having a working relationship,
and the warmth between the two men showed through in all they did. After working
with the two of them for a year or so, I happened one day to ask how they met and
formed such a close bond. It turned out that both were World War II veterans, and,
when they discovered this, they began discussing where they had served during the
war. It turned out that not only had both fought in the Battle of the Bulge (on
opposing sides), but that they had both been trying to defend and take a particular
village—they had been in the same battle, on the same day, and had been shooting
at each other! On learning this, they realized the folly of war and became lifelong
friends. So, out of narration sessions, relationships are made and kept.
172
CHAPTER 10 Recording Long-Form Narration

Long form is usually not done by advertising agencies (who do the commercials).
There are companies and producers who specialize in this type of work and are very
familiar with the intricacies of the long form. Many times, the production is done
by the company whose product or service is being talked about itself, either using
in-house writers and producers or utilizing freelance talent or one of the specialized
companies for these services. There is a difference in approach that must be taken
into account when writing for a :30 spot versus a long training video: The approach
to language and how we address the audience changes. We have a longer time frame
in which to get our idea or our message across, and we’re not selling anything (per
se). Once again, the content is more informational.
You will ﬁnd that the session pace is more relaxed, not because what you’re
recording is any less important, but because the budgets and time considerations,
both for the ﬁnished production and for a drop-dead deadline (time to air), are not
as stringent and ﬁlled with anxiety. The work has a more relaxed ﬂow to it.
It’s been my experience that a company doing one type of work (advertising or
corporate) usually has little understanding of the other world, because both are so
specialized. There are, of course, exceptions, and, in smaller markets, companies
have to do both to survive. However, in larger market areas, you will usually ﬁnd
an either/or situation as to what type of work a company does. Also, generally
speaking, the corporate-communication ﬁrms tend to be smaller businesses with
fewer employees.
One of the beneﬁts of doing corporate long form that I’ve enjoyed over the years
is learning some interesting (if not entirely practical) information: Through these
sessions, I’ve learned how spark plugs are manufactured, how to properly insulate
a house, the history of one of America’s largest beer breweries, how to correctly
cook the French fries in a fast-food establishment, why earthworms don’t like the
light, how Afghan rugs are hand woven, and so much more. If you want to know
about the migratory habits of the American bison before the white settlers, or what
Thomas Jefferson has to do with the way our education system is structured, I’m
your guy. As you might imagine, I’m always ready to talk about the most obscure
subject with anyone at a party! Like I said—interesting, but not particularly useful
in day-to-day life. Folks involved in long-form work are veritable fonts of useless
information.
Many people not involved with the corporate, or industrial, type of work look
down on it because it isn’t sexy and exciting. Consider this, however: We once were
tasked with producing a video piece that played at a sales conference for an auto-
parts supplier. The video was to announce the prize for the top sales person in each
region the supplier did business in, and the grand prize was—two weeks in Monte
Carlo! Well then—the producer put together a ﬁlm crew and they spent ten days in
Monaco and the Riviera, tooling around in a brand-new Ferrari and sampling all of
the great food and hotels available in order to illustrate the lifestyle of this glamorous
location. Hmmm—not an exciting way to make a living? I’ll let you be the judge
of that. By the way, the video was a success, and the client was so pleased it came
back to that producer for years to put together all of its trade-show, sales-conference,
Recording Long-Form Narration
173

and point-of-purchase materials. Although this may be an unusual job, opportunities
do exist to get out of the studio and travel when working in this particular industry.
We have to shoot footage wherever our client might be doing business, so it’s time
to pack up the location gear and hit the road.
Unlike the commercial session, in long-form narration, we have more latitude in
changing the wording of a sentence to make the meaning or ﬂow clearer. Yes, there
will be legal issues that must be taken into account, but, for the most part, we can
change word order or substitute one phrase for another, if it helps the audience better
grasp the message. Because of this, engineers and voice talent involved in the long
form learn to be very good editors (even if they are not writers); having someone
who is hearing the wording for the ﬁrst time in the session is very useful to the
writer of the script, and these people can usually point out unclear or cluttered
sentences. Just as the audience will be hearing this for the ﬁrst time, so are those
in the session who are not familiar with the script beforehand. This is one of your
main jobs in a long-form session, and you should know when it is permissible to
speak up and suggest a correction to the wording.
As has been pointed out earlier, diplomacy is an important skill to develop to
survive life in the studio, and this is but one example of the importance of it. Knowing
when to speak up and who is accepting of advice is an intuitive thing to learn, but
remember that the writer or producer is there for the same reason that you are, and
that is to arrive at the best possible production, and so they are usually open to your
suggestions. I’ve found that the producers of long-form narrations usually don’t have
quite the egos that commercial producers have. I think that this may be attributable
to their not being under as much pressure from time and budget as their advertising-
agency counterparts, and so the sessions tend to be more relaxed in feel. Be very
aware, however, that the ﬁnished product is still important, and that no one involved
takes this lightly.
One thing that’s nice about the long-form narration is that, in most instances,
there aren’t the time worries that come with commercial recording. Whether a piece
runs 32 or 41 seconds is usually not an issue. It takes as long as it takes to come
to a clear understanding of the content of the script, and, if a longer pause or a few
additional words are inserted to help get there, most times it is of no consequence.
The exception to this would be if the picture has already been edited and the new
narration must ﬁt into the time frame of the picture edit. If this is the case, the script
will probably be marked with the timing of the paragraphs or sentences, so have
your stopwatch handy and make sure that the narrator doesn’t run long. However,
once again, if the read is too long, there is the latitude to choose different wording
to help bring it in on time, while still maintaining the overall meaning.
Because the scripts are longer than for a commercial, the session length is longer,
as well. You must pay particular attention to the possibility of talent fatigue, and,
if you sense that the narrator is losing focus, or that the voice is becoming a bit
frayed, call for a break to give them a chance to recover. Some long-form sessions
can run half a day or more, so this is a real concern. Also, know your own limits
if you are engineering; you are being counted on to stay on top of things, and, if
174
CHAPTER 10 Recording Long-Form Narration

you ﬁnd your own concentration wavering or if you ﬁnd yourself starting to turn
up the monitor speakers, by all means request a break. Generally, everyone will
welcome a short time to stand up, stretch, make a phone call, grab a cup of coffee,
and so on, and the result clearly shows when it’s time to resume recording. It should
be pointed out that ear fatigue is real, for both the engineer and the talent monitoring
on earphones: Playback levels tend to creep up and up, and the frequency response
of your ears begins to lessen. Know what this symptom is and be mindful of it in
the studio. Besides being an issue for your long-term hearing health, the ﬁnal product
can be degraded if those involved push themselves too hard. Breaks can be an
incredible beneﬁt to the overall outcome of the job; just be sure to keep your
concentration sharp during and after the break and keep the energy level up in the
studio.
THE LONG-FORM SESSION
So now then, what is our approach to recording? We still want to address the audience
one to one, unless we are providing announcements at a sales conference, for instance.
Microphone choice is still important, as is consideration of the ﬁnal playback situation.
This is something that you should always be aware of—it can vary greatly, and you
should assume nothing. Your choice of mic should not be compromised for doing
this type of work: Give it the same amount of thought that you would any other 
type of recording situation. Having two actors in the studio at once is not uncommon,
and they will trade paragraphs, or perhaps one voice is a character voice of some
sort. A pairing of a male and a female voice is common for the variety it provides.
For both the engineer and the voice actor, long form provides a chance to stretch
out a bit more than with commercial production. You are not constrained by a strict
time limit, and the longer script gives you more room to play.
As has been pointed out previously, the script should be prepared with phonetic
spellings of unfamiliar words and proper names, which is especially important when
doing a medical-type reading. Some medications and procedures are virtually
impossible to pronounce unless you have been to medical school, and breaking the
word down into simple syllables is a great beneﬁt, not only to the narrator, but to
the engineer as well. Imagine reading a script cold (that is, without having prac-
ticed it)—not an unusual thing to happen for a corporate or documentary session—
and running across “Hydrochlorothiazide”! The poor announcer is making his salary
today! However, if you substitute “Hi-dro-clor-o-thigh-a-zide,” the word becomes
much easier on the eye and is easier to pronounce. This is one of the reasons it’s
also important to have the script double-spaced—it allows room on the page for the
talent to make notes on pronunciation and emphasis. Even with the phonetic spelling,
it will probably take a few readings for the narrator to roll across this word effortlessly,
but not nearly as many as it would without the phonetic guide. Remember, your
audience is going to be familiar with the word, and so the narrator must sound 
as if he is also, just as if he uses this word all the time in normal conversation.
Recording Long-Form Narration
175

The same is true for people’s names: You should be able to say names as if they
are your best friends. For instance, most people pronounce my last name as “Black-
more” when they ﬁrst encounter it, as this is a more common last name, but the
proper pronunciation is “Blake-more,” and you wouldn’t want to end up announcing
the president of a company and mispronouncing his or her name. So, please, give
a phonetic guide to help everyone along. The goal of the long-form narration is to
sound as if you are the authority on the subject at hand, and proper pronunciation
and not stumbling over words are a big part of that.
Double-spacing of the script has another beneﬁt for the narrator: Most announcers
“read ahead,” that is, their eyes are a sentence or so ahead of the words coming out
of their mouth. By doing this, the announcer can anticipate where the sentence is
heading and make better sense of it. If the script is double-spaced and doesn’t have
everything in capital letters, it becomes much easier on the eye and makes it easier
for the narrator to navigate his way through the script. Reading ahead allows the
narrator to anticipate upcoming problem areas, or perhaps spot a word that may
need additional emphasis. You’ll be doing the announcer a big favor if the script is
formatted properly in this manner. And, while we’re on the subject of formatting
scripts, it is of the utmost importance that, if at all possible, you don’t have a
sentence beginning on one page and continuing on to the next. This makes it very
difﬁcult for the announcer to read ahead and is also an invitation for noise to creep
into the session in the form of paper-shufﬂing sounds. If the narrator has to turn the
page, she can pause between sentences, turn the page (allowing you a clean edit
point to get rid of the noise), and then continue reading.
Most experienced voice actors have developed a skill for turning the pages of
the script silently as they read. It often involves lifting off a page, reading it, and
then, when they are almost at the bottom of that page, lifting the next page and
either dropping the ﬁrst to the ﬂoor or placing it silently on the copy stand. This
technique has a couple of beneﬁts for us: The ﬁrst and most obvious is the lack of
paper noise being made, and the second is that it allows the actor to hold the script
at eye height or just slightly below while they are reading. This keeps the head fairly
straight and forward facing, and the narrator isn’t reading down (and, thus, away
from the microphone). If the script is left on the stand, by the time the actor is at
the bottom of a page, the angle of the head becomes such that the mouth is nearly
90° off mic. As the copy is read, the head is moving up and down, and the resulting
mic position becomes very apparent. When it comes to silent page turning, you, as
the engineer, should become proﬁcient at it as well, as mentioned previously: If you
are making a lot of paper noise in the control room, you will mask the noise coming
from the studio and you may well miss marking a spot where you have to make an
edit to clean up the paper shufﬂing by the actor.
Another strategy often seen has the narrator folding the top of the script over the
copy stand, so that it is more in line with the eyes and not sitting on the shelf of
the stand. This does alleviate some of the head movement and is a much more
comfortable angle for the actor.
176
CHAPTER 10 Recording Long-Form Narration

As discussed in Chapter 7, The Session, there is a question concerning the talent’s
comfort that revolves around whether he should be seated or standing. Owing to the
longer length of this type of recording, a stool should be provided, so that the talent
has the chance to get off her feet at least for a little while during the session. The
longer the script, the more obvious the need to give her the choice of remaining
seated for the entire read. However, be careful that the airﬂow from the diaphragm
and up through the mouth isn’t constricted. For this reason, I’m not a fan of having
the actor seated at a table, although many narrators prefer this. In the end, I’ll leave
the choice to them, but, if they choose the table, I’ll listen very closely for a pinched
or choked delivery and remind them to sit up very straight (once again, we’re facing
the question of your diplomacy—you don’t want to sound like their mother, always
telling them not to slouch and to sit up straight!).
DOCUMENTATION
Once again, as with all types of recording, we come to documentation and the keeping
of effective notes. As with commercial recording (or any type of recording, for that
matter), you should note the type of mic and any processing that you have engaged
for the recording. Because of the length of the script and the overall length of the
ﬁnished product, using a take sheet just isn’t very effective. Making notes directly
on the script provides the clearest and easiest way to keep track of the takes and
any other notes that you need to make. Refer to Chapter 7, The Session, for an
example of a long-form script and its associated marked copy. If you are doing
pickups or insert lines, it is much easier to mark them directly on the script itself
and much more effective when it comes to the editing portion of the session. Proper
documentation is critical in the event that you will have to do any voiceover recording
after the initial session, which could be the next day or even years in the future. For
instance, back in the days when cable television was just starting to make inroads
into American homes, each community would grant a legal monopoly to one or 
two cable companies to operate in their town. As part of the licensing procedure, 
a number of cable companies would appear before the city council and give a
presentation on why their particular service and pricing would be the best for the
community. I did a lot of work for a company whose client was one of the national
cable providers, and we put together an audio-visual presentation to show to the city
fathers. This presentation was structured in such a way that roughly three-quarters
of it never changed—we recorded it once, and that was that. However, in the middle
section was a portion customized to each locality: city name, a few interesting facts
about the town, pricing options based on population, and so on. The beauty of this
presentation was that each city thought that we had put it together just for them—
a lot of work to go to just for a preliminary pitch to the council. In order for our
illusion to work, it couldn’t sound as if the narration had been done in two different
months in two totally dissimilar rooms. This required very careful matching of the
Recording Long-Form Narration
177

narrator’s reading and recording, and it was the original documentation that was the
key to pulling this off. This particular project went on for over four years and was
very successful. Imagine recording someone three years after the original session
and having your match make or break the presentation. Such is life in the long-form
world.
Part of your documentation should, of course, be a listing of all music and sound
effects used and the proper ﬁling of licensing materials with the copyright holders.
Quite a bit of long-form work is done as a one-time use (unlike a commercial, for
instance), and there is the temptation to avoid paying licensing fees. After all, the
presentation will show once, and no one will ever know what music you used, right?
You would be surprised how often representatives of the American Society of
Composers, Authors and Publishers or Broadcast Music, Inc. attend events looking
for just such violations of the copyright code. You only have to get caught once to
put your company out of business, such are the ﬁnes that the courts can impose. So,
be on the safe side and do your licensing, please. One last word on this subject:
These licensing fees pay the royalties to the composers and artists who provide your
music, and it’s how they make their living. You expect to be paid for your work,
and these folks do as well. Any company that provides music for stock usage will
easily provide you with its payment schedules, so there should be no surprises if
you are honest about what you want to use its music for.
As with commercials, there is a standard union rate structure for the voice talent
through SAG/AFTRA. You, or a studio representative, are responsible for keeping
accurate records of session length and date(s), in order for the actor to be paid fairly.
The good news on this front is that the hourly minimum charge is less for long-
form work (again, termed corporate or industrial work) than it is for commercials,
even though the session length is generally expected to be longer.
Needless to say, proper documentation of all session elements and their proper
storage is key to having this process work smoothly and efﬁciently. You should
have or develop a system and stick with it for all future ﬁling and documentation.
It was through this documentation process that we kept a project on track and
running smoothly for a period of years. We had put together a ﬁlm that was shown
to tour groups at the beginning of the tour of Miller Brewing in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Over time, its product line changed, or it came out with a seasonal brew, or perhaps
simply wanted to update the ﬁlm. We revised and revised so many times that I lost
track of the number of versions, but the new sections always cut into the original
seamlessly. In fact, the biggest problem we had was that the narrator was getting
older, and his voice started to change! The Miller folks ﬁnally pulled the ﬁlm from
their tour, partly because the narrator was now starting to sound like an old man.
RECORDING TO PICTURE
In any type of voiceover recording situation, you may be called upon to have a
video reference to record to. Usually done for timing purposes for an already edited
178
CHAPTER 10 Recording Long-Form Narration

picture, recording to picture can introduce its own set of challenges, but also can
be a terriﬁc tool in the session process. Whether commercial or long form, recording
to picture ensures that your timings are correct; it takes the stopwatch out of your
hand and allows you to more fully concentrate on the performance. However, there
are a couple of things that we should be aware of. To begin with, recording to a
visual reference is something that the voice actor must practice to be skilled at. The
ﬁrst couple of times a narrator attempts to keep one eye on the script and the other
on a video monitor, you can expect some missteps. However, as time goes on, the
process becomes more natural, and the sessions begin to ﬂow more smoothly.
In setting up for a session involving picture playback, make sure that your visual
playback chain is as clean as your audio signal path. It becomes quite distracting to
have an image that ﬂickers, becomes pixelated, or drops out when you are trying
to record, but, believe it or not, it doesn’t really matter if the picture is black-and-
white or color or if the resolution isn’t full HD quality. Those things aren’t the
point—the timing is what it’s all about. Walter Murch tells the story of mixing
Apocalypse Now to a reference video on 3⁄4-inch tape and in black-and-white. The
ﬁrst time he saw the ﬁlm in color was at the premier! In the days of ﬁlm, processing
was costly, and color processing even more so; to provide a black-and-white work
tape to the audio department made all the sense in the world and didn’t slow anyone
down. Today, in the age of computer production and Quicktime movies, this process
becomes faster and more cost-effective, and there simply isn’t any reason not to
have a quality picture to work from.
You should always give the picture editor (or whoever is providing the visual
materials to you) a list of speciﬁcations that you’ll need to do your job. This is part
of the communication and documentation process essential to an effective workﬂow.
Your specs should include ﬁle type—and size. Too large a video ﬁle can slow down
and even crash audio workstations, and so we most times request something less
than full resolution if it’s a long project. Of course, audio layout should be discussed;
for instance, is the picture department going to be providing you with a separate
OMF or AAF ﬁle with existing audio, or will a stereo track be sufﬁcient for your
needs? If they are providing more than two tracks of audio, do you have a preference
as to layout? How about track names? Give these issues some thought when request-
ing what you are going to need for a smooth, trouble-free session. Then, when 
you receive the materials, take a moment and check them against your specs—send
them back to be redone if they are not correct (don’t hesitate to send them back if
need be; after all, others will do the same with your materials if you get it wrong).
There’s a bit of a controversy these days on whether or not you should include a
time-code burn window on the picture. A time-code window shows running time-
code, usually located in the bottom quarter of the image, to use as a visual reference
for sync and timing.
One school of thought has it that we just don’t need it anymore, because we have
a continual code readout on our digital workstation’s main record window. True, I
suppose, but I always request a burn-in for multiple reasons. The ﬁrst is that you
can easily check sync by matching the time-code number you see on the screen with
Recording Long-Form Narration
179

180
CHAPTER 10 Recording Long-Form Narration
the number on your workstation’s display. The second is that a visual indication of
the time, ﬂowing across the screen, gives an actor (or Foley artist) a cue point for
when to begin delivering a line or performing an effect. It’s a “count down,” if you
will. It also allows the actor a reference on how long they have to complete the line.
I’ve worked with narrators so accomplished at recording to picture that, once
everything was lined up in my workstation, we would drop into record, the actor
would look to see at what time-code number his ﬁrst line was to be delivered, and
away we would go, working our way through the script, with his lines delivered
exactly where they were supposed to be. If a mistake was made, or if the timing
needed to be adjusted, we could back up, roll into that point, punch into record, and
redo the line. At the end of the script, all of the lines were in place, and no editing
needed to be done! Talk about time-efﬁcient. Of course, the script had to be pre-
pared in advance, with all of the time-code numbers clearly noted for the actor to
begin in the right place, but this time spent was more than made up for by the time
saved in the session itself, recording and editing. My advice to you is always, always,
always request a time-code window with your picture and have the picture ﬁle remade
if it’s not done correctly.
FIGURE 10.1 
Time-Code Window Burn
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

On the subject of delivery specs, just a quick word about one other thing that
you should always request be included, and that is a sync pop. Also known as a
two pop, sync bloop, and other names, this is an aural cue as to proper synchronization
between picture and audio. Placed exactly 2 seconds before the ﬁrst frame of picture
and lasting for exactly one frame, the pop lines up with the 2-second mark in a
visual countdown on the picture. By visually lining up the waveform of the pop
with the “2” frame of the countdown, we know that both picture and audio elements
are properly aligned. Coming from the old ﬁlm tradition, the sync pop is still a
useful tool today. With long-form projects, you might also request an end pop, 2
seconds after last frame of the picture, but this is usually done only in the ﬁlm world
and not necessarily for commercial or long-form narrations. However, it’s a nice
reference to have and gives you peace of mind that your sync hasn’t drifted during
the course of the program material. Utilizing the end pop, if a question of sync
comes up later, you can always prove that everything was in sync when it left your
hands.
As mentioned in an earlier chapter, you have to make sure that your actor can
see the video monitor clearly; you don’t want it blocked by the microphone or the
copy stand. This may take some repositioning of the microphone on your part, or
possibly moving the actor a bit in the studio. Remember that our number one goal
is to capture a clean signal, and the microphone positioning can’t be compromised,
but please give the narrator a ﬁghting chance of seeing the monitor. Also keep in
mind that, besides looking at the monitor, she will be reading from her script, so
that has to be positioned correctly as well. Although getting everything situated in
the studio correctly certainly isn’t difﬁcult, you have to keep these things in mind.
Remember our motto here: The talent’s comfort is paramount to getting a good
performance.
You should check with the talent as to not only the preferred headphone level
that you are sending, but also the balance between his own voice and the track
coming from the video. Ask beforehand if the talent prefers a single earphone or
the more common pair, open or closed design, or if no headphones at all is the
preferred style of working. Again, it all comes back to the talent’s comfort and your
doing anything in your power to achieve it.
FURTHER THOUGHTS ON LONG-FORM NARRATION
As with any other type of recording, you should always consider your ultimate
playback situation when recording long form. Unlike commercials, which usually
are played either on the radio or television, long-form narration can be played in an
endless number of scenarios. From acoustically designed and perfect theatres, to
reverberant hotel ballrooms, to the tiny speakers on a laptop computer, each must
be designed into your sound. For instance, to give a little “oomph” to the VO, I
sometimes will add just a touch of reverb to the voice. However, if I know that this
will be played back in a reverberant venue, I can’t afford to do this, because the
Recording Long-Form Narration
181

182
CHAPTER 10 Recording Long-Form Narration
natural bounce in the room will be added to the reverb that I have added, and I
stand the chance of losing clarity in the narration. The same is true if I know
beforehand that the piece will be played primarily on laptops or other portable
devices: I can’t add in a lot of extra low-frequency information, or the voice will
become muddy. Finding out the intended use of what you are recording is vital in
any recording situation, and the long form is no different. Make getting this
information ahead of time one of your priorities. Learning to recognize and avoid
these potential problem areas is one of your jobs, as is learning how your particular
audio monitors will translate into a number of playback situations. If possible, it’s
recommended that you have a number of different monitors connected, to check
how things are going to sound in the real world.
When it comes time to edit your raw voice tracks, there is the trap of having so
much material before you and so many takes that wading through it all becomes a
real chore. This can test your powers of concentration. You may have to move a
lot of information around because it was recorded out of order (pickups at the end
of the session, for instance), and it’s easy to make mistakes. Also, owing to the large
amount of information that you are dealing with, it’s possible that your concentration
FIGURE 10.2 
Time-Code Window Burn
Source: Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

can wander. You certainly don’t want a repeated sentence or deleted word to pop
up in the ﬁnal, released version. I have a couple of recommendations that might
help you out in these times. If you recall, in the chapter on commercial recording,
we talked about letting your workstation work for you with its auto-numbering system
to help you ﬁnd individual takes. The same is true with long-form narration. If you
carefully note your takes, and are careful with the auto-numbering function of the
workstation, it is relatively easy to ﬁnd the correct takes and edit them into the
proper order. Just be sure to check your edits as you make them, to ensure that you
haven’t clipped off part of a breath or included a double breath, and that the words
are in the proper order. Then, when your editing is completed, listen back to the
entire narration while reading the script at the same time. Although this may be
time-consuming, the ﬁnal quality assurance is what separates the casual engineer
from the exceptional. Remember, editing is part of the session also, so give it the
attention to detail that it deserves.
The world of long form has been my bread and butter for many years and has
served me well, both in terms of income and in terms of personal relationships. The
chance to work in a relatively low-key atmosphere, while learning about the most
esoteric subjects, isn’t my idea of work. It’s not sexy, but it is a hell of a lot of fun!
Recording Long-Form Narration
183

This page intentionally left blank

Most of the recording situations that we’ve discussed so far are quite similar in
strategy and technique; whether recording for commercials or long-form projects,
the only real difference comes with the approach to documentation and the length
of the session. However, when we begin recording for the worlds of game audio
and animation, the terrain shifts, and we have to start thinking about new ways to
go about our task. There are a couple of major differences that we must consider.
I have included both game and animation voice recording in this single chapter, for
the simple reason that both of these forms are animated. As well, they share certain
key recording-technique features. However, in reality, there is an underlying and
fundamental difference in philosophy of the two types of voice recording, and this
should be kept in mind as you go through this chapter. Also, recording for games
and animation generally takes longer than recording a straight narration: When the
11
Recording for Games
and Animation
CHAPTER

talent walks in, the question for a narration might be, “Would you like this read
seriously or a little lighter in tone?” For games and animation, considerable time
can be spent in trying to ﬁnd the right character for the voice, and ﬁne-tuning the
performance can be time consuming. Plan for extra time in your session for this
process. Also, for both types of recording, we most times will want to have multiple
approaches to any given line of script, and this, of course, also takes extra time.
GAME VOICE RECORDING
This section is not intended to be an overview of the entire game creation process,
which is multifaceted and involves a large number of people and disciplines; there
are many good books and other resources on the subject that you can easily ﬁnd. I
might point you to a brief, but highly detailed, discussion by veteran game audio
professional Rich Carle, in his contribution to David Lewis Yewdall’s Practical Art
of Motion Picture Sound (4th edition, 2012, by Focal Press, Waltham, MA). Recording
dialogue for games and animation is a unique combination of production sound
recording and the post-production process. Almost always, the voice is recorded in
the studio, unlike motion picture audio. Because the voice is recorded in studio, a
dead-quiet room, free of reﬂections, is a must for this type of work. Refer to a brief
discussion of an alternative method later in this chapter, when I discuss the dialogue
recording for the animated feature ﬁlm Rango.
Although I may be accused of stating the obvious (and rightfully so), it should
always be kept in mind that the underlying principle of the gaming world is
“randomness.” Games, by their very nature, are based on the concept of nonlinearity
and random access; this brings about a new way of thinking about recording the
dialogue for this discipline, and it is fundamentally different than recording for linear
media (ﬁlms, commercials, etc.). During game play, we can never predict, as game
makers, what choices the player is apt to make, and, as a result, we must prepare
for all (or at any rate a great deal of) eventualities. It is the very random nature of
the experience that gives game playing its appeal. As a result, the strategy that we
must develop to record the lines of dialogue is quite different than any other type
of voice recording. Let me set up a very simple scenario: There is a character
(Character A) standing beneath a balcony. On the railing of the balcony sits a
ﬂowerpot. The wind begins to blow the ﬂowerpot closer to the edge of the railing,
and it’s about to fall off and onto the head of Character A. Another character
(Character B) sees the situation and calls, “Look out!” To record this little scene
for an animation (or a ﬁlm, commercial, or virtually anything else), we would have
both of the character actors in the studio at the same time, interacting in real time.
However, in the game universe, it is quite possible that the player never chooses to
have the character stand under the balcony at all, or chooses to move the character
there 10 minutes from now. In the animation, we can record, edit, time, and mix
the dialogue exchange, and the animator will draw the action to our timings. In the
game world, we must have the “Look out!” available if the need arises, but no one
186
CHAPTER 11 Recording for Games and Animation

can know with any degree of certainty when, or if, that line of dialogue will ever
be needed. So how to record our dialogue?
Within the game, there are times of story or character development that do not
include game play. These are known as “cinematics” or “cut scenes,” and they play
out like a short ﬁlm. They are linear and they are not random. For these instances,
the dialogue can be recorded just as if it were to be included in a ﬁlm or animated
piece. The key word here is “linear.” The remainder of the game is controlled in a
random-access manner by the player. For dialogue to be included in these other
portions of the game, we must, because of the nature of the experience, alter how
we would go about capturing this dialogue. Because we cannot predict when (or if)
any of the lines we record will be used, each line of the script must be recorded in
a stand-alone manner, without any connection to another line of the script. Because
of this, we must pay particular attention to our documentation process (remember
that from an earlier chapter?) and to the script. We will record only one character
at a time, instead of having real-time interaction between the actors. Once we have
worked our way through the script and recorded all of the dialogue lines from one
character, all of the takes are named according to a predetermined protocol established
by the game programmer, and each of these individual lines is then passed on to
the game developers for implementation into the ﬁnal product.
In our example of the ﬂowerpot above, we can imagine that Character B could
give a reading of the “Look out!” line in a number of different ways. The emotion
could be one of dire warning. It could be that Character B actually wants the ﬂowerpot
to hit A on the head and delivers the line in a singsong, taunting manner. Character
B could be stumbling toward Character A and trying to catch the ﬂowerpot before
it strikes. Each of these eventualities will want to be covered so that the game
programmer has a choice of the proper way for the scene to play out, and that
requires a large number of takes, each of which must be carefully noted to allow
the programmer to ﬁnd the reading and emotion he or she prefers. You can begin
to appreciate the complexity for the engineer when it comes to recording and keeping
track of all this material. As I mentioned above, all of this may be stating the
obvious, but you should be prepared for this type of situation as you go into the
session to begin recording the dialogue.
Generally speaking, when recording dialogue for game use, we would record
each of the characters individually (that is, having only one actor in the studio at a
time). Because this does not allow for a natural interaction with another actor, 
we have to pay particular attention to the tone of the reading, as, in the game play,
the lines we record are probably going to be in response to lines from another
character, whether that be in a conversation or some other vocal interaction. This
attention to the tone and consistency of the reading is paramount, and it is as much
the responsibility of the engineer as that of the director to make sure that all of the
individual line readings will come together into a uniﬁed whole during game play.
Also, we should be paying particular attention to the naturalness of the delivery
by the actor. When we are recording a narration for a training video, for example,
we would want the reading to be well enunciated, clear, and spoken in an almost
Recording for Games and Animation
187

188
CHAPTER 11 Recording for Games and Animation
INSIGHT: D.B. Cooper, Voice Talent, Casting and 
Directing
Voice actors are, for the most part, eager to please. They’re one of the ﬁnal conduits
for the work of so many—the writer, the director, the producer. They are entrusted
with the job of breathing life into characters who populate a virtual world; it’s a
heady mix of challenge and responsibility and pleasure. And actors want to do a
great job, not only to please the folks in the studio at the time of the session,
but to be called upon again.
Veteran game VOs know that games need to be recorded fast—there’s so much
script and so little time. Game scripts can have hundreds, if not thousands, of
lines. Time and budgets drive the need to get the work done with hyper-efﬁciency,
and your actors will be looking to help speed the plow.
Because actors are keen to help get the work done quickly, they’ll often approach
lines of script as elements that need to be rendered whole. Trouble is, a script
can sound stilted when lines are read as lines. Even an excellent actor risks
sounding odd when delivering lines that are spoken clearly all the way through;
the only places we are liable to ﬁnd ﬂuency in all exchanges are movies and plays.
For the most part, people tend to speak in phrases or fragmented parts of sentences.
We breathe, we think, we change our minds mid-sentence. We start, stop, and
correct ourselves. We use vocal crutches, such as “y’know” and “uh.” So, if you
don’t want your game script to sound like a performance, allow mistakes and
corrections and pauses—as well as ﬂuency.
Players can tell when lines are being “read,” and it sunders the suspension of
disbelief. No director wants this. Directors strive for authenticity, reality, honesty.
You want compelling dialogue that sounds like a real conversation, even though
the different sides were recorded days apart. As you begin to explore the script
together, assure your actors there is time:
•
to ﬁnd authentic pauses:
“Great. Now we look incompetent.”
becomes
“Great. [sigh] Now [inhales through nose] we look incompetent.”
•
to self-interrupt:
“Sorry guys, I know you’re just coming off a case but I’m afraid we’re going
to have to make a detour.”

Recording for Games and Animation
189
becomes
“Sorry guys, we’ve got to—look, [exhale] I know you’re just coming off a
case but I’m afraid we’re going to have to make a detour.”
•
to say “uh . . .” now and then, like real people do:
“Jesus—he looked . . . uh . . . pretty mad.”
Engage in character building with short lines from the script, so you and the actor
can ﬁnd where the character “lives” vocally. Allow time for a newer actor to get
the feel for different intensities with the new character voice. Creating the character
and stretching it out at the start of the session will reduce the likelihood of needing
to stop to rejigger the character for whispers or shouts. This keeps the ﬂow going
and also keeps your actor’s composure smooth and conﬁdence high.
Keeping your actors on track with their characterizations and accents is totally in
your court as director. Your actors will be relying on you to be “the ears” during
a session. Experienced actors need shepherding a lot less than neophytes, but it’s
a source of security for everyone behind the mic. Knowing the director is keeping
on top of the intricacies of the performance allows the actor the freedom to act
and not self-censor.
If you do hear the actor lose their way with an accent, or give a line a read that
sounds totally wrong, you may feel the urge to stop them in their tracks. Interrupting
the actor may seem like a time-saver, but what it really does is alarm them and
undermine their conﬁdence—which can lose you a strong performance, or it will
irritate the actor and make them less likely to be receptive. Just be patient! Wait
till the end of the line. There are few large paragraphs in video-game dialogue
scripts.
Let the actor know, at the beginning of the session, that it’s OK to ask what you
mean. You probably use a set of terms that make perfect sense to you, but someone
who’s never encountered them in a recording environment may be in the dark. If
you aren’t hearing what you want, you need to take the initiative and explain your
direction. And, if the actor is totally stumped about how to give you the line the
way you need it, that’s when a line read is appropriate. You can offer the line the
way you hear it in your mind. If it’s presented with a spirit of genuine collaboration,
it’s more freeing than limiting.
Taking time to help your actors to break out of the “good-dog” mode of getting a
job done—to relax and settle into their place as actors—gives them the freedom
to step fully into their characters and creates a richer recording experience, and
everyone ends up with great audio.
For more information, contact: DBCooperVo.com

formal reading voice. However, game audio more closely approximates our casual,
less-formal speech, full of “umm”s, awkward pauses, and other vocal tics that would
be out of place in a narration piece. The question now becomes how to keep the
actor sounding natural, instead of stilted and “theatrical” in the reading. We could
allow the actor to imagine the other half of a conversation and respond accordingly,
but this is often an unsatisfactory solution to achieving a natural back and forth
between the two characters. A useful thing for the actor is to have a “reader” in the
studio with him, reading the other character’s lines to help with the reaction and
inﬂection in the lines of dialogue, but this is simply not the same as interacting with
another actor.
Because our actors will, for the most part, be speaking in a “character” voice and
not their own normal speaking voice, keep in mind that this can put quite a bit of
stress on the throat and vocal cords. To have an actor continually speaking in an
unnaturally low and gravelly voice, or prolonged periods of very loud delivery of
lines, or maybe a high and squeaky voice can fatigue the talent in a very short period
of time. I’ve actually done sessions in which the actor put such a strain on the voice
that he could barely speak at all the following day! These people rely on their voice
for their living, and you don’t want them to destroy their instrument, even for a
short amount of time. Remember that one of your jobs as an engineer is to keep
everyone comfortable, and this situation is a prime example of that.
It’s easy for us, as listeners to a performance, to want to keep forging ahead, but
this is one instance where taking frequent breaks can actually lead to a more productive
session. Pay attention to your actor; if you know the person and their nonverbal
communication (another great reason to take the time before the session for an
informal conversation about anything at all), you will easily pick up on when he or
she is becoming voice-fatigued and needs to take a minute and allow the vocal cords
to calm down. Once again, your documentation of the takes and lines should be
such that you can easily ﬁnd where you left off before the break, and it’s vital that,
once recording resumes, you should take a minute a play back the last few lines
that were recorded before the break, so that he or she can ﬁnd that character again.
This way, all of the individual performances will match, and the character will remain
consistent. Also, take into account the mental aspect of the talent’s job: Trying to
maintain a consistent character while also paying attention to delivering a good
performance and keeping track of the larger goal of the game or animation piece
can put strain on more than the voice. Besides resting the throat, these breaks can
also help in keeping the actor’s energy up because of the mental break that they
give. It’s easy to miss the big picture in all of the little details of the session, but,
in game and animation work, the consistency of the character is paramount.
In the world of game audio, resources (CPU, bandwidth, disk space, RAM) are
limited, and the content providers must always keep in mind that the game has
demands other than the audio; art, level design, cinematic videos, programming
instructions, and more, are competing for ﬁnite space. And yet, as audio providers,
we must be prepared to cover all eventualities that the player may encounter during
190
CHAPTER 11 Recording for Games and Animation

game play. To make the gaming experience as rich as possible, we have to avoid
redundant sound cues as much as we can, and, to this end, the dialogue recording
process can become quite complex. Often, the same line of dialogue is given to
multiple characters to cover the possibility of a commonly occurring action, so that
each time this event happens, the player hears a line of warning (for instance) coming
from a different character than the last time the line was spoken. Also, there may
be times when we want to use the same dialogue line but process it somewhat
differently, to give a feeling of distance or of the ambient characteristic of the space
the player ﬁnds himself in. Often, these changes in environment can be accomplished
by the game engine introducing a random effect factor into the game audio, but
there will be times that these changes will be mixed into the sound ﬁles before
delivery into the game. You can begin to imagine the large number of sound ﬁles
that can be generated for a game—oftentimes over 20,000 lines of dialogue alone!
Now you can begin to appreciate my taking the time to discuss documentation and
proper script marking for the proper takes earlier in this book. The naming-convention
process is vital to the proper functioning of the game, as well. Attention to detail
in this world will test your skills as an engineer, but working in game audio can be
very satisfying.
RECORDING FOR ANIMATION
Recording the voice for animation is similar to the process for games, but there can
be some signiﬁcant differences. Unlike with games, we have the luxury of recording
more than one actor at a time, which can liberate the performance. It stands to reason
that an actor will give a much better performance when she is reacting to another
actor in the studio, rather than having to imagine the other side of a conversation.
Many times we will have a “reader” in the studio with the actor to deliver the other
lines, which gives our actor something to react to; often this will be the director, or
the sound or dialogue supervisor, or some other such person. However, actors like
to act with other actors, and, when we can get two or more into the studio at the
same time, the level of acting increases at a huge rate. An actor in the studio all by
herself can become very lonely, and, although the ultimate performance will be ﬁne
(after all, these folks take pride in their work), it’s simply not the same as having
someone else to bounce the lines off, and the experience gives all of the actors a
sense of participating in a real conversation and a real experience.
If you are going to try to record multiple talent at the same time, there are a
couple of things that you should be cognizant of: First of all, try to keep the two
(or more) microphones as isolated as possible, in case you have to intercut another
take into the performance. You don’t want bleed from the second actor’s mic from
the original recording to be heard under the new line, and a part of avoiding this is
to listen for overlapping dialogue very carefully. Know when you can allow the
overlap and when it might become problematic. Second, because things are going
Recording for Games and Animation
191

to ﬂow naturally with multiple talents in the studio at the same time, it’s easy to
get away from the scripted lines. You should always record the script as is at least
once, and preferably numerous times, so that you have coverage. Then, and only
then, allow the actors to begin to improvise. Again, always get the written lines ﬁrst,
and then invite the actors to begin bringing themselves into the role. By doing this,
you can save yourself endless headaches in the future, when it comes to editing and
client approvals.
Recording dialogue for animation can test your skill at session management, as
well: As the actors begin to get into their roles, the energy level often rises very
quickly in the studio, and the performers will start to take off into creating this new
world. Know when you have to step up and rein the actors in, to keep them on track
and to keep the session running along smoothly. Both Jonathan Winters and Robin
Williams were famous for cutting loose in the studio, and they would improvise for
hours before anyone could get a word in and remind them to read the script! This
is not an uncommon occurrence in the world of animation recording; actors love to
improvise and try and crack each other up. This can be a lot of fun for everyone
connected with the session, but, as the engineer, you have to keep in mind that this
is your show, and that the session has to keep moving along at a set pace. Diplomacy
is vitally important in this regard—you don’t want to come off as being a Scrooge
and someone who is killing everyone else’s fun, but, at the same time, the session
has to ﬁnish up sometime before the sun goes down! The longer you let the
improvisation continue, the more of the client’s money is being spent, so watch the
clock and make sure that everything gets accomplished. All too often, in the high-
energy atmosphere, lines go missing, and redos are necessary. Keep an eye on that
script!
WATCH YOUR LEVELS!
In any type of voice recording that we do, one of the cardinal rules is, “never distort
the recording.” When recording for games and animation, this can sometimes become
very difﬁcult; in the space of a single line, our character can go from a whisper to
a scream, and even the best of mixers can’t react fast enough to pull down the fader
in time to avoid clipping and distortion. A compressor/limiter can help you, but
quite often you can hear it working, and that’s not a satisfactory solution, either.
So, what to do?
If we set our fader and microphone preamp for the loudest sound, the whisper
can be lost in the noise ﬂoor of the room and the signal chain. Likewise, setting for
the quietest means instant distortion if the actor screams. Finding a nice balance,
somewhere in-between for the fader or the mic preamp, gives us a good compromise,
but keep in mind that you are a human, and you are a mixer. Keep your ﬁngers on
the faders and be constantly adjusting; in essence, you are a human limiter! However,
there is still a chance of distortion on a very loud line of dialogue, because, no
192
CHAPTER 11 Recording for Games and Animation

Recording for Games and Animation
193
matter how fast you are with a fader adjustment, the mic preamp will be clipped,
or possibly the mic itself will distort. The best way out of this is to use two
microphones, set up either side by side or with one about 4–6 inches back from the
front mic. This second mic is set up as follows: Making sure that the two mics 
are complementary in sound and capable of being intercut in the edit, but that the
secondary mic has a good deal of headroom before the onset of distortion, set the
mic preamp 8 dB or so less than the “main” microphone. Now, if an extremely loud
line of dialogue catches you off guard, you can cut in the line from the second 
(or “yell”) mic, match EQ and level with the ﬁrst, and voilà—you have avoided the
distortion on your primary mic. This technique has been perfected by the folks at
Disney and at Pixar, and, if they are using an outside studio to record an actor, this
is what they specify for their recordings. Of course, it is possible that the second
mic could distort as well if the line is delivered strongly enough, but this extra
headroom pad almost always solves the problem.
This dual-microphone technique is very useful if you are recording yourself and
you can’t pay 100 percent attention to your metering and mixing during the read.
It not only can protect you from clipping, but it gives you a nice conﬁdence while
recording that your tracks won’t be distorted. You can stop worrying about whether
you are clipping and instead give more concentration to the performance. You should
be aware that it will take some experimentation to ﬁnd the ideal mic preamp settings,
and this experimentation should be done prior to the recording itself. Set the signal
chain for a normally spoken script, and then set the second mic and its signal chain
while really belting it out. If everything is set correctly, you should have full conﬁdence
in the tracks you deliver. Of course, this will take some editing to put it all together,
but that should be a part of your delivery anyway.
INSIGHT: Vince Caro, Chief Recording Engineer/Sound Designer,
Pixar Animation, Emeryville, CA
It’s been my experience that every successful recording session begins with one
thing, preparation. It doesn’t matter if I’m recording an eighty-ﬁve-piece orchestra,
a jazz big band, a string quartet, a rock power trio, or a single voice. The one
common denominator is preparation.
For me, preparation begins immediately when I’m contracted for the job. I try to
gather as many details about the session as early as possible, so I can begin to
mentally prepare and plan. Here’s part of my mental checklist:
1. In what recording studio will it take place?
(a)
Am I familiar with that room?
(b) Are the management and staff competent?

194
CHAPTER 11 Recording for Games and Animation
(c)
Is it technically buttoned up?
(d) Who will my assistant be, and am I conﬁdent in their abilities?
2. How many musicians?
3. What is the instrumentation?
4. And this one is always difﬁcult to obtain, but it’s always immensely helpful
when you can ask the artist or producer, “What are you attempting artistically?”
The reason number 4 is so important is that it’s really the best “early opportunity”
for the engineer to build into the recording session the best technical solutions
that will best facilitate the artist’s vision. The engineer can prepare to design the
room setup with proper sight lines, points of rejection for the microphones, the
choice of microphones, mic preamps, and recording medium. All of those seemingly
minute considerations often have immense ramiﬁcations later on. For example, if
you were asked to record music for a documentary that took place in the 1940s,
would you plan to record it using vintage equipment? Would you have all the
musicians in the room playing live together? In my experience, almost every decision
you make when you assume what someone else wants is wrong, so it always best
to get as much information as early as possible. But one word of caution, please
do so without making yourself an annoying pest! Being ﬂexible and easy to work
with is also very important in developing successful relationships.
If I’m ever in that unenviable position of heading into a session not knowing what
the artist or producer is looking to achieve, I overdo my setup. I go into “prepare
for any request” mode. I’ll have my “best guess” setup ready to go, and I’ll have
other mics and preamps standing by (usually the most strategic, based on which
will probably make the most difference). If I don’t know if isolation booths will
be needed or wanted, I will at least have them cleared and standing by, and I
might have some mics set up for what I think might go in there. Of course, I often
guess wrong, but sometimes “happy accidents” occur because of this kind of
preparedness, or, worst case, a quick and easy change can occur, and we can
move on quickly before the inspiration dies. I ﬁnd that, if I’m at least prepared
mentally, and as technically prepared as possible, I can then truly roll with the
punches. I have found that, in many cases, true artistic magic has happened
because I was prepared for anything, and “anything” happened.
I apply that same philosophy of being prepared and ready for any request with
regard to recording dialogue at my studio at Pixar Animation. True, I may only
have two, four, or eight microphones to worry about, and not thirty or forty, as I
might have on a scoring session, but, as is often the case, requests are made at
the last minute, and the thing you never want to have happen is to miss a take,
or for the “creative” to lose their moment of inspiration waiting for you to set
something up, or ﬁx something that’s not working. I start recording the moment
the talent walks in the door, and I don’t stop until they walk out the door. And

Recording for Games and Animation
195
the only way to ensure that happens is to have the studio set up, tested not twice
but three times, and ready to record. The room should be neat, clean, well lit,
and inviting for every person who walks in, right down to fresh pads of paper and
sharpened pencils. There should be bottles of water for both the acting talent and
everyone else in the room, mints, cough drops, throat sprays, and anything you
can think of to make the talent—all the talent—happy and comfortable. And, of
course, the thing that makes everyone the most comfortable is to know that the
engineer is not just competent, but totally in control of everything technical in
that studio. They need to know that, no matter what happens, they will walk out
with a great sounding recording.
I approach dialogue recording the same way I approach music recording with
regards to artistic vision (i.e., number 4 from my checklist above). If I’ve had a
chance to talk to the director or editor about “anything particular I should know
beforehand,” I often ﬁnd out that they haven’t really thought about the “sonics”
of what they might want to achieve. But often, once I hear what the scene is
about, I can suggest and easily help them design the sound as I am recording it.
Truth be told, most often the direction is to get the dialogue recorded clean and
totally unaffected, but, every once in a while, there are opportunities to design
the raw recorded sound. Here are some examples: For one ﬁlm, I was told that
we would be recording a 1930s or 1940s newsreel-type voiceover. So I broke out
my vintage RCA 44 microphone and RCA OP6 mic preamp, which totally nailed
that vintage sound. Sometimes, I’m asked to record something that might sound
like an NPR interview, or a television commentator. I’ll have another microphone
set up, maybe an EV RE20, or a Shure SM7, or just quickly put one of those big
foam ball pop screens over the main dialogue mic (Neumann U87) and have the
talent get right on the mic, “FM-radio-like,” and compress and equalize accord-
ingly. For a TV commentator, sometimes a lavalier on the lapel or shotgun above
the head is the way to go. There have been times when I’ve had to mimic the
sound of someone with poor mic technique, like someone talking on a podium at
school assembly. Break out the SM57 or 58 and have them let the plosives 
(P pops and Bs) ﬂy! I’ve also had some great results having talent speak their
lines into cardboard boxes, through cardboard tubes, into giant galvanized or
plastic garbage pails, or ﬁve-gallon water bottles, to achieve certain sounds you
just can’t get with a plug-in. In all of those “instant sound design” moments, I
almost always (when possible) simultaneously record the voice clean. Obviously,
when your talent’s head is inside a metal garbage pail, that reverberant sound
goes everywhere, and so you’ll need to do separate clean, unaffected reads, if your
director is not sure that it is the exact sound they want. It’s always best to cover
it both ways.
As far as my normal setup for dialogue recording goes, my main microphone is a
Neumann U87. My backup, or “scream mic,” is a Brauner VMA. Sometimes, I’ll
have a Schoeps CMIT5 or another longer shotgun set up, if we’re anticipating a

196
CHAPTER 11 Recording for Games and Animation
more distant POV. I do like the U87 for dialogue; it’s an excellent all-around mic
and has served me very well over the years. Of course, there are many other
excellent microphones that I could use as my main dialogue mic (the Brauner
VMA, for example), but practically speaking there are few better choices than the
U87, simply because it is the one truly great microphone that is also ubiquitous.
Every professional recording studio worth its salt has at least one, and most have
a half-dozen or more. And, as Pixar and Disney travel around the world to record
the voices for their animated features, consistency is a major factor. All Disney
and Pixar animated features take about four to six years to make, and you have
to have consistent-sounding dialogue. It’s not unheard of to have part of a line
living next to another part that was recorded four years earlier or later, and every
point in-between. So, not creating headaches for the editors and the mixer doing
the ﬁnal ﬁlm mix is of the utmost importance.
There have been occasions when I used a microphone other than a U87 to record
certain voices in an animated feature. For example, I used a Telefunken 251 to
record Paige O’Hara as Belle, in Beauty and the Beast. That choice was a carryover
from the soundtrack/song recordings. Her voice sounded wonderful while singing
into that 251, so we used it for her speaking lines as well. For James Earl Jones
as Mufasa in The Lion King, I used a vintage RCA KU3A. I believe Doc Kane, the
other dialogue recording engineer/ADR mixer who I worked with on this ﬁlm, made
that suggestion. But these kinds of decision are not made lightly. As I said before,
consistency is very important. In both of those cases, I maintained the availability
of those mics for the entire project.
The next item in the recording chain is the mic preamp. Again, we also like to
keep a certain amount of consistency for our standard dialogue recordings. I prefer
the Focusrite Red 7 for both our U87 and VMA. I always travel with my pair of
7s, which are from the earliest manufacturing run and were built with those huge
Lundahl transformers that sound so “fat.” I think I’m responsible for about a
hundred other studios around the world buying them, after they’d heard my work
with them. They are standard in the recording studios here at Pixar. The Focusrite
Red 7 offers tons of headroom and has some built-in essentials, such as a lovely
high-pass ﬁlter, for studios with pesky air-conditioning rumble, and a very ﬂexible
compressor. I try to not compress our dialogue, and so I set a very high threshold
that is there simply as a safety net. For recording screams and super-loud lines,
I almost always take the compressor out of the chain and go “commando,” relying
upon my skill not to allow distortion. Few things sound worse to my ears than a
compressed scream; I prefer “unaffected amplitude”—it just sounds better—but
you have to be good to get it right!
For the unexpected scream or yell, which almost invariably saturates the microphone
capsule, I always have the aforementioned scream mic, the trusty Brauner VMA.
For many years, my scream mic was a Neumann TLM170, set to hyper-cardioid.

Recording for Games and Animation
197
As I recall, the TLM170r has about 17 dB more headroom at the capsule than a
standard U87 Ai, and so it fulﬁlled that job perfectly over the years—I never lost
a take! But, simply put, the Brauner VMA just sounds more open, and it has about
the same headroom as the TLM170, or more. That said, few studios have Brauners
(they are very expensive), and so we still rely upon the TLM170 for most recordings
outside Pixar’s or Disney’s studios. Another bit of information is that I always set
my scream mic about 4 inches further back from the talent than the U87. That
added distance and the added headroom of the Brauner or TLM have aided me
with those unexpected screams, or in the odd happenstance when the director has
asked for a whisper, and the talent screams. It happens, and there’s not much
you can do, which is why preparedness is key.
As for pop screens, I prefer the Stedman PS101. It’s a plastic-covered metal
screen that is super-transparent compared with the foam ball or the more standard
“pantyhose” pop screens, which often give you a tearing sound when air passes
through. I did make one modiﬁcation to my original Stedman pop screens, and
Mike Stedman has since adopted this modiﬁcation for some of his newer models.
I found that, when they were hit with just the right level and frequency, they would
“ring.” So, I applied a rubber tubing grommet to the outer edge of the screen,
which solved the problem. I alerted Mike to this issue, and he has since modiﬁed
his welding technique and now offers the option of his screen with a rubber outer
ring. The other beneﬁt to the Stedman is that we often record video of our talent,
so that the animators have the option to observe facial expressions that the actors
might make when they are acting. Other pop screens block the face too much,
but the Stedman is also the most transparent visually—a real bonus!
My preferred A/D converters are made by Daniel Weiss, but I also like the Lynx
Aurora. They both have been reliable and sound great. Currently, we record to Pro
Tools, and I run a separate backup recorder in the event there is a crash. That
backup machine is a Fostex DV824, which can record to both an internal hard
drive and a rewritable DVD. It can record up to eight tracks of up to 24 bit/96
kHz. It simply shows up as an additional hard drive over the network. It’s a handy
little machine!
AN EXPERIMENT IN VOICE RECORDING
Although the vast majority of voice recording for animation work is done in the
controlled environment of the studio, it’s worth noting that there have been some
interesting experiments with recording voice lines for feature-ﬁlm animation on
location, as if the ﬁlm were shot live-action. This manner of recording lies somewhat
outside the scope of this book, but it is worthwhile to discuss this technique brieﬂy.

In 2011, the director Gore Verbinski released the animated feature ﬁlm, Rango.
For this project, he wanted a more natural performance from his cast, and so the
decision was made to get out of the studio and allow for a more naturalistic experience
for those involved. To this end, the dialogue was recorded using the techniques
normally associated with live-action ﬁlming—all of the cast interacting together,
instead of one or two actors in the studio at a time, and having the ability to move
around and physically act out a scene. He assembled the cast on a sound stage, with
a limited number of props and costumes, and, after a good deal of rehearsal, began,
not only recording the script, but also ﬁlming the actors as they performed. Character
actor Abigail Breslin is quoted as observing:
We ﬁlmed it like a play and we were all together. If an actor you’re working
with changes the way they do something, you tend to change the way you do
something. It’s a lot more fun than standing in a recording studio, talking into
a microphone.1
The dialogue was captured using standard ﬁlm production equipment (shotgun
microphones on boom poles and miniature lavalier microphones), and this allowed
the actors freedom of movement during the scenes. If one of the characters was
supposed to be riding a horse, they would sit on a saddle mounted on a wooden
stand. If gunshots were called for during a scene, all of the actors were provided
with earplugs to protect their hearing, as blanks were ﬁred on set. The entire production
crew raved about the resulting performances, and the actors were convinced that
this method of recording for an animated feature was the most liberating experience
they had had when doing animated voices.
It should be noted that Rango was not the ﬁrst animated feature to be captured
in this way. Wes Anderson used a similar technique in creating Fantastic Mr. Fox
(2009), and the technique (as is so often the case in animation) was ﬁrst used by
Walt Disney with Alice in Wonderland (1951) and Peter Pan (1953). The combination
of live-action performance capture and an animated story line can result in a powerful
end performance, and, if you have the resources to experiment with the technique,
it is well worth the effort.
The aesthetic philosophy behind these experiments can be summarized as the
ﬁlmmakers wanting to capture the ambience and perspective in a natural way and
not to try and emulate these in post-production. Can these techniques be brought to
other types of voice recording—commercials, for instance? In the late 1980s, I did
experiment with recording a few radio commercials on location, if the script demanded
an external scene, and the results were mixed. On the one hand, the ambient sounds
were very convincing, and there was no need to recreate them in the studio using
sound effects. On the other, intercutting various takes to achieve a good ﬁnal mix
198
CHAPTER 11 Recording for Games and Animation
1 KRCR News: krcr.com/programming/entertainment/ at-the-movies/making-rango-a-group-effort-
for-stars/115670

was problematic, at best. I do believe that further experimentation along these lines
would prove fruitful, and I hope that some of you attempt this technique and pass
your ﬁndings along to others in the industry. At present, I am unaware of this
technique being used for game audio, but, for certain “cut scenes,” it might be useful
for gaining a feel of the real world and convincing perspective. Again, further
experimentation should be undertaken.
Recording for Games and Animation
199

This page intentionally left blank

Although not strictly voiceover recording, an area that we should explore and one
that you may ﬁnd yourself asked to do, is the recording of interviews and roundtable
discussions. This is a skill that lies somewhere in the middle of studio voiceover
recording and recording dialogue for ﬁlm and video on location (known as “production
recording” or “location recording”). Production recording is outside the scope of
this book, and there are many ﬁne sources of information on the subject; however,
it is something that you may want to explore, as it gives you a new skill and another
chance to become employable and have another income stream, which, after all, is
what we all strive for. For recording interviews in the ﬁeld, we often use the same
equipment that is used for production recording and many of the same skills; therefore,
12
Recording Interviews
and Roundtable
Discussions
CHAPTER

we will take a look at the gear and techniques that are essential to recording in the
ﬁeld.
There are times when you will be asked to record an interview that is conducted
by someone else, and there might be times when you will be the interviewer as well
as the person recording the interview. This chapter will address both of these situations,
as well as strategies to effectively record roundtable-type discussions.
Interviews are conducted in a wide range of environments, one of which is the
studio setting that we are all used to and comfortable in. Often, however, we have
to get out of the studio and go into the wider world to do our work. Recording on
the street, in a shopping mall, grocery store, farm ﬁeld, sporting event, ofﬁce, con -
ference room, home, airport, or other unlikely place certainly will test your knowledge
of microphones and acoustics, as well as your ability to think on your feet and
improvise. Also, you will have to have an intimate understanding of portable recording
equipment: If you are fumbling with the controls and having problems getting things
up and running in a short period of time, your subject will never give the best that
they are capable of. When it comes to the gear, you should be able to operate it in
the dark. If you are interviewing the “man on the street,” the more you are unsure
of what you are doing, the more nervous your subject will become, and you will
not capture the best possible product for your client.
Now, having said that, I want to tell you a little story about one of the best
interviewers that the world has ever known. His name was Studs Terkel, and he was
one of the most decorated writers of the twentieth century, winning the Pulitzer Prize
in 1985 for his book, The Good War: An Oral History of World War II. His work
was, for the most part, oral histories on various topics, such as Hard Times: An Oral
History of the Great Depression (1970) and Working (1974). Although he had
interviewed literally thousands of people over the years, he had a trick that he pulled
time and time again: When sitting down with a subject and putting his tape recorder
on the table, he would pretend that he didn’t understand technology and he could never
ﬁgure out how to work the machine. The interview subject was immediately put at
ease, because, for the most part, they don’t understand recording technology either,
and before they knew it they were deep in conversation with Studs and didn’t even
realize the tape was rolling. So, ﬁguring out how to put a subject at ease is one of the
little tricks that will make or break the interview, and one that you will have to learn
with experience. No one technique is going to work for everyone, and so being able
to read people is of the utmost importance for this type of work.
Remember, everything that we talked about in the ﬁrst part of this book still
applies, and you should be aware of acoustics, signal ﬂow, documentation, and so
on. You might want to review the chapter on microphone types and polar patterns
and start thinking now about what type of microphone you might consider using on
location, instead of a large-diaphragm condenser that we would use in the controlled
environment of the studio. The recording of interviews is an exercise in overcoming
conditions that are not ideal, and so, the more knowledge you can bring to the job,
the better off you will be, and you will arrive at a surprisingly high-level, consistent
product.
202
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables

INTERVIEWS
Unless you’re conducting the interview in a studio, the location sound for the interview
is going to be unpredictable. For instance, if it’s on the street, the time of day it is
being conducted will have an impact on the amount of trafﬁc noise that you’ll be
contending with. So, one of the ﬁrst things that must be done when you arrive 
at the location is listening. Of anything you do in audio, nothing is as important as
to just stand still and listen, and doing location recording of any kind is no exception.
Then, of course, you must decide what to do with what you hear. Let’s go back to
the example of recording on the street: If you are using any kind of directional
microphone, is there an advantage in facing one direction or another to help minimize
the trafﬁc noise? Is there a better time of day to conduct the interview, because of
the schedule of airplanes overhead or trains passing by? If the interview is taking
place indoors, are there noisemakers that you can quiet? Let’s say you’re recording
in a home, and the noise from the refrigerator is bothering you. Well, how about
turning off the refrigerator for the duration of the interview? (Hint: If you are going
to take this route, put your car keys in the fridge. That way, you remember to turn
it back on before you can possibly leave.) If there is possibly anything you can do
to lessen or eliminate background noise, do it. Recording in an ofﬁce, and canned
music is an issue? See if you can get it turned off for the duration of the interview.
If not, ﬁnd another location—background music will make it impossible to edit the
interview into anything coherent without having disturbing jumps in the music. Being
aware of any noise source prior to turning on your recorder will help to make your
interview a success.
The reasons for conducting interviews are as varied as you can possibly imagine.
Interviews can be used as on-air testimonials for commercials or in podcasts; they
can be transcribed for use in print advertising, for web content, corporate training,
and more. All of these are reasons to conduct interviews, and each has its own
problems and limitations. Of course, you should ask the client if the interview is to
be audio only or on camera; the answer to this question may drive your choice of
microphone and method of working. All of these questions will impact the way in
which you approach the interview and the equipment you might choose to do the
job.
Let’s start this discussion with the assumption that you will be both interviewing
and recording your subject. Obviously, you want to keep the amount of equipment
to a minimum and be fairly lightweight and portable; lugging around a heavy recorder
all day can really tire you out. Usually, in an interview situation, you will be talking
to only one person at a time, and so the need for multichannel recorders and elaborate
mixers won’t be an issue. There are many excellent portable mixers and recorders
made today, and they get more compact every year. Recorders are available in
conﬁgurations from two-track stereo to eight channels, and so every location
possibility is covered. I’ve had very good success using a stereo audiocassette recorder
and a quality microphone in years past, as well as the latest generation of handheld
Recording Interviews and Roundtables
203

204
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables
digital recorders. You’re limited only by your budget and what you’re trying to
achieve. At present, one of the very good digital recorders is made by Zoom and
includes built-in stereo condenser microphones that are quite good, as well as the
ability to record up to six independent channels using mics of your choice. These
recorders allow you to choose your ﬁle format (.wav, .aiff, MP3) and sample and
bit depth, and many come with expandable memory in the form of SD cards. The
Zoom H4n is one of the most used pieces of gear for collecting sounds on the market
today, and recently the H6 was released, featuring interchangeable capsules and
giving a wide range of options, including a shotgun microphone attachment and the
ability to record up to six channels of audio from external microphones. As well,
there are digital recorders from Sony, Tascam, Olympus, Nagra, and many more;
again, your choice will depend on features and your budget. Lightweight and fairly
rugged, these recorders are a great option for an engineer on the move and can be
put into the pocket of a jacket or clipped onto a belt to keep them out of the way.
The recorders have quality microphone preamps built in and do a surprisingly good
job, considering the size and price point.
Not too long ago, the recorder of choice was the DAT recorder, and it did a very
good job. The format was short-lived, however, acting as a bridge between the
analog days and the coming of full digital, and the tapes were expensive and not
very robust. Also, in years past, a number of people got very good results using the
FIGURE 12.1 
Zoom H4n Handy Recorder
Source: Photo by the author

mini-disk recorder, but these have also faded in popularity as the handheld digital
recorders came on the scene. The handheld recorders have the advantage of connecting
to your computer via USB cable and appearing as an external drive to the computer;
you simply drag and drop the ﬁles onto the computer, import them into digital editing
software, and you’re ready to edit and mix. They have a surprising amount of memory
(expandable in some models) for the price, so that long sessions and backups are
not an issue.
Of course, you can also record to a laptop using software such as Pro Tools,
Logic, or any number of other programs, but you’re forced to carry around both the
computer and an external interface to a good-quality mic preamp and monitoring,
so I don’t consider this a very good solution for recording in the ﬁeld. Also, I
wouldn’t recommend carrying your laptop around if it’s raining, snowy, or dusty,
and so this isn’t a good option. However, as we begin talking about doing roundtable
discussions (as these are usually done indoors), we’ll see that the laptop is a good
alternative for recording purposes.
Other options include using one of the many types of portable ﬁeld recorders and
mixers on the market, from manufacturers such as Sound Devices, Zaxcom, Sony,
Tascam, and others. Intended for the ﬁlm and television sound industry, they were
designed with the expectation of their being used outdoors, in a wide range of
conditions. A quick web search will reveal a large variety of products, in various
price ranges and with various features, available in models that include time code
(if you’re recording to picture) and with a choice of number of inputs. One of the
Recording Interviews and Roundtables
205
FIGURE 12.2  
Sound Devices 744t
Source: Courtesy of Strapko Recorders; photo by the author

more common to ﬁnd in the ﬁeld would be the Sound Devices 744, with four inputs
and a full range of features, including 48-V phantom power for condenser mics, a
bass rolloff switch, limiters, and independent control of input levels (for time code,
use the 744t). Again, like the handheld units, these models allow for a choice of
audio ﬁle formats and sample rates to match any requirement.
As with anything audio, you should carefully consider your needs and budget
and try a number of units to make sure which is right for you. And, as always,
purchase equipment with an eye to building your personal collection for the long
term. You want to be able to live with your decision for quite a while.
Before we take a look at some microphones that are commonly used for this type
of work, I should remind you that mic choices are highly personal, and we all have
our own preferences and needs. What I might think sounds wonderful in a given
application may not be what you want to hear, and vice versa, so once again I will
point out the need to experiment and carefully listen and evaluate, whatever equipment
you are considering.
As for the microphones commonly used for recording interviews, much of the
decision will depend on whether you are recording audio only, or if the interview
is being ﬁlmed. Doing a one-on-one interview most often is done using a handheld
mic; it’s easy to handle, highly portable, and can be used to prompt the subject to
complete a thought or give a more in-depth answer. Whatever your choice of
microphone, always have a windscreen on the mic: Many times, the interview will
be done outdoors, and wind noise creates an unacceptable sound that you must avoid.
If you are recording indoors, the windscreen will minimize popping on the mic,
another distraction that you shouldn’t allow. If you are the one conducting the
interview, you’ll probably want to avoid wearing headphones, because you want to
have a conversation with the subject, and most people feel a little odd speaking with
someone who is both pointing a microphone at their mouth and isolating himself
with headphones, and so it won’t be apparent if your mic is popping; the use of a
good windscreen is a very effective insurance policy.
You’ll also want to minimize handling sounds from the mic body; many
microphones are very susceptible to handling noise. In general, dynamic mics are
better at minimizing this than condensers, but you should both experiment with the
mic before purchase to test for handling noise and also practice using the mic quietly
and smoothly. Like anything else, there is a skill involved. One way to avoid handling
noise is to use a shock mount, such as a pistol-grip mount with a shock mount as
part of its design. They are very effective, but they force you to point the mic ahead
of you, rather than up at the interview subject’s mouth, and trying to point it at your
own mouth to record the question is very problematic.
For most interview situations in the ﬁeld, I prefer a dynamic microphone, for a
number of reasons: As stated, they inherently have less handling noise; they are
generally more rugged than a condenser and can take traveling better; they don’t
require phantom power; and they are less expensive to purchase in most instances.
This last point shouldn’t be overlooked. If you happen to get caught in a rainstorm,
or your equipment bag gets misplaced or stolen, you’re out less, and your favorite
206
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables

Recording Interviews and Roundtables
207
condenser studio mic stays safe and dry. There are some very good-sounding dynamic
mics on the market, and more are coming along almost every day it seems. One of
my favorites for doing both interviews and roundtables is the Beyerdynamic M201.
It’s a hyper-cardioid pattern and is very smooth and clear sounding, without much
artiﬁcial boost across its frequency spectrum.
The mic has a very low proﬁle, is comfortable to hold, and functions well as a
general-purpose mic for both speech and instruments. It’s also surprisingly affordable
for such a rugged little mic.
Some people prefer a microphone with an elongated body, because they are easy
to maneuver, and you can get very close to the subject’s mouth. One of these would
be the Shure SM63L (the “L” in the model number designates the long body style).
This mic is omnidirectional and was speciﬁcally designed for interviews and
newsgathering. As with most of the Shure dynamic line, it is extremely rugged and
dependable, but I ﬁnd the sound a bit on the thin side. You decide for yourself.
Many people prefer the omnidirectional pattern for interview work, in case the subject
suddenly turns his head; with a cardioid or hyper-cardioid, the voice would dip in
volume and produce an off-mic sound as the subject moves off axis. The
omnidirectional mic will help with both these and increase your chance of success.
It also allows for recording both the interviewer and subject without as much mic
movement, for both the questions and answers. I would recommend doing some
online searches for various microphones and reviews, as well as talking to a
representative from any pro audio retailer for help in choosing a mic.
A good, all-purpose microphone for voice work is the Sennheiser MKH416 that
we mentioned in the chapter on microphone types (see Figure 4.19). This short
shotgun mic is highly versatile and can be used in a wide range of circumstances.
FIGURE 12.3 
Beyerdynamic M201
Source: Courtesy of Strapko Recorders; photo by the
author
FIGURE 12.4 
Shure SM63L
Source: Courtesy of Shure, Inc.

208
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables
INSIGHT: Ray Van Steen, Interviewer and Voice Actor, 
Dallas, TX
I got into interviewing kind of by accident: It started with me being asked to do
man-on-the-street TV interview commercials. One day I got a call to ad lib some
television interview spots for Camay. The camera was behind me, shooting over
my shoulder, ﬁlming the comments as I questioned a number of young women
who used Camay. It was tougher than I thought it would be. I discovered that
merely asking memorized questions didn’t work. An actual conversation had to
take place. I had to ask questions that couldn’t be answered “yes” and “no.” It
was a matter of getting them talking.
Interviewing real people for use on radio or TV testimonial commercials is completely
different from the interviews that talk-show hosts do with their guests, because,
on commercials, the question part of the conversation is almost never heard, and
the interviewer is rarely seen. The answers provided by the interviewee must be
able to stand completely alone. Don’t pose questions that can be answered “yes”
or “no.”
One of the best ways to avoid getting a “yes” or “no” answer is to never actually
ask a question. For example, don’t ask, “Do you like the taste of this new Betty’s
Butterscotch Pudding?” Instead, say, “Tell me about the taste of this pudding.”
“Tell me about” or “Talk to me about” are great ways to elicit statements that
are not simply “yes” or “no.”
The interviewee may reply, “It’s great.” Of course, we need something more complete
than “It’s great.” The interviewer then says, “What’s great?” Usually, the response
comes back, “Betty’s Butterscotch Pudding.” Well, that can’t stand alone, so the
interviewer then says, “Put that all together for me.” Ideally, the interviewee then
comes up with what’s desired: “Betty’s Butterscotch Pudding tastes great.”
This isn’t prompting or leading, it’s simply asking the interviewee to rephrase
what’s already been stated. After a few go-rounds like this, the interviewee will
have “learned” to answer in complete statements.
Of course, sometimes it’s necessary to ask a “yes/no” type question, just to get
the interviewee talking, or to introduce a topic. If the situation is such that you
must ask a question that requires a “yes” or “no” response, use a follow-up to
get a more complete statement. For example:
“Do you like the taste of . . .?”
“Yes.”
“Expand on that for me.” 

Recording Interviews and Roundtables
209
Or, 
“Really? Tell me why.”
There are legal and ethical considerations when using real people in testimonial
commercials. The interviewer must take care not to put words in their mouths,
nor to lead them. There is a difference between “prompting” and “leading.” Let
me give you a good example: If I ask, “Does it taste good?”, there are only two
possible answers: “Yes” and “No.” Very dull material for a commercial. But, if I
say, “Tell me about the taste,” a wide range of comments is possible. I never lead
anyone. Being aware of the tricky legal ramiﬁcations in testimonial advertising is
important.
An inexperienced interviewer could make a mistake in the middle of an interview
that could completely disqualify, on legal grounds, an otherwise great testimonial.
Legal opinions vary on what actually comprises leading, or prompting, but I’ve
found that there’s no problem in suggesting areas for an interviewee to explore.
Here are a few ways to do this:
“We’ve had some people tell us that Betty’s Butterscotch Pudding is creamier
than some others. What do you think?” Or, “Y’know, the folks at Betty’s say that
they’ve gone an extra step in making their pudding creamier.” Just let the
statement—not a question—hang there as you look expectantly at your subject.
Most people will make a comment.
There are two main difﬁculties that you run into when interviewing “real people”:
answers that are too short, and those that wander on and on. The exact opposite
of answers that are too terse are answers that ramble. Some folks just have trouble
packaging their thoughts into short, pointed statements, which is what’s needed
for use in testimonials. Following such a rambling answer, the interviewer might
say, “Gee, that’s a lot of great info, but can you put all that in a shorter statement?”
When interviewees are asked to repeat in this manner, they tend to leave out
needless details. If they don’t, they can be told speciﬁcally. “Okay, can you tell
me that again, but leave out the part about what time of day it was, and don’t
go into all that detail about the people who were present when you ﬁrst tasted
Betty’s Pudding.”
Another of the difﬁculties encountered is extraneous noise that you know will ruin
an otherwise great comment. For example, when doing man-on-the-street interviews,
there are often horns honking, brakes squealing, etc. When something like this
happens during a usable interviewee statement, I usually roll my eyes in reaction
to the noise, and say, “Wow, that was a great thought, but the horn honked just
as you were saying it. Could you repeat that remark about telling your neighbor
about Betty’s Pudding?” Be aware of the “liftable” comments and be aware of
other sound sources during the interview. I sort of edit in my mind. If I hear an
absolutely beautiful comment, I instantly think of it as “liftable” or not. Maybe

210
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables
It is a condenser and it is a hyper-cardioid, but its usefulness in a range of applications
makes it a good mic to have in your collection.
Besides the equipment used for the one-on-one interview, there is also the technique
of conducting the interview. By far, the number one thing to keep in mind is that
you want to have a conversation with the subject, and not just read off a list of
questions. 
VIDEO INTERVIEWS
To this point we have been discussing one-on-one interviews, with a handheld
microphone, for audio-only recording. Video or ﬁlm interviews are a bit different,
and the fact that there is a camera rolling may change your choice of equipment.
Even if you are doing an audio-only recording, but someone else is doing the
interviewing, your equipment will probably change. As for the recorder, not much
changes, with two possible exceptions:
First, you might want to send your audio directly to the camera. That way, all
of the media remain in one place (on the videotape or card that the camera is recording
to), and you can’t get caught in the mismatched-time-code scenario. If the video
and the audio are at differing frame rates, things will never sync up properly, and
there was a car horn in the background, or perhaps the person slurred a word or
something. If the remark isn’t perfectly liftable, I try to get it repeated. I pretend
I didn’t hear correctly by saying, “Pardon?” Or I’ll wait until later in the interview,
and try to steer the person back to the same subject area. Also, can the statement
stand alone, without an explanation from an announcer? I like the trick of pretending
that you didn’t hear something, so that the subject repeats the statement. “What
was that? Could you repeat that, please?”
Being brought into the process at an early stage certainly helps the overall product.
Sometimes, I’m the ﬁrst person the ad agency calls. They tell me what they want
and turn me loose. I grab my tape recorder and take care of virtually everything,
including supervising the editing and production of the ﬁnished audio tracks. For
most television projects, I’m usually called in by the ﬁlm company that has been
hired by the ad agency to produce the commercials. In most of those cases, I
function just as the interviewer. The agency or ﬁlm-company people handle the
logistics, selection of people to be interviewed, and other details. Sometimes, early
in the planning, the people I work for will hand me a list of questions that they
want me to ask. I hang onto them for reference, but I always tell them that I’d
much rather have a list of the kinds of answer or statement they want from the
interviewees. Based on that, I can ﬁgure out the best way to elicit them.

all kinds of problem will arise. Recording directly to the camera is called “single
system” recording, because there is only one recording device.
Second, you could use a stand-alone recorder (this is known as “dual system”
recording). In this case, you should seriously consider a recorder that has time-code
availability. Although it is certainly possible to record without the use of time code
(with the digital recorders—this would never work with an analog tape recorder,
owing to speed ﬂuctuations inherent in analog equipment), syncing and editing are
greatly aided if everything has matching code. In either case, you should do both
an aural and visual sync match at the beginning of the take, either with the use of
a slate (clapper) or by standing in front of the camera while both it and the audio
recorder are recording and clapping your hands together. This will give both the
video editor and the audio editor a mark to sync to, rather than trying to match
mouth movements to sounds. The handclap only lasts one video frame, so the sync
will be much tighter.
BOOM AND SHOTGUN MIC TECHNIQUES
There are times when you will be recording someone else who is doing the
interviewing, either for an audio-only interview or as part of a ﬁlm crew that is taping
the interview for future use. In this case, you would most often use a shotgun mic on
a boom pole or a lavalier mic placed on the interviewee. These techniques are most
often not used in the studio (although there are exceptions, of course), and you have
to be aware of the different microphone types and their uses. The shotgun mic is a
hyper-cardioid-patterned mic, which means that it’s highly directional. This is great
for helping to reduce unwanted background sounds, but this also means that you have
to pay close attention to keeping it pointed directly at the subject’s mouth: Even a
slight variation is apparent and is very difﬁcult to ﬁx in editing. The same thing can
happen if the subject suddenly turns his or her head, and so part of your job in this
instance is paying very close attention to proper positioning of the microphone.
Shotgun microphones come in varying lengths; the longer the mic body, the
greater the “reach” the mic will allow. A short, 8-inch microphone has a working
distance of between 3 and about 6–8 feet from the subject. Obviously, closer is
better, because you will be capturing more direct sound and will avoid unwanted
background sounds and ambiences, but, if you get too close, the mic will be overdriven
and will distort. The microphones are designed with a number of slots on the body;
these are known as “rejection” ports and are what allow the mic to have its highly
directional character. The longer the microphone body, the more rejection ports, and
this allows for a longer “reach,” or workable distance. Shotgun mics should never
be handheld, because they are extremely sensitive to handling sounds. Always place
a shotgun mic on a shock-mount system.
A shotgun mounted on a boom is a versatile tool and allows for freedom of
movement for the subject (as would be the case in recording dialogue for a ﬁlm or
television production), but there are certain skills that have to be practiced. When
Recording Interviews and Roundtables
211

212
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables
it comes to holding the boom, make sure that you are coming at the subject from
above, and not holding the boom pole in a position where the mic is pointed up at
the person. If you come from below, you will be getting much more chest sound,
which is boomy and very bass heavy. Also, by pointing the mic upwards, you will
be capturing more ambience; after all, where is the noise in our world? Point a
shotgun mic up and you will pick up more sounds of wind, birds, airplanes, and 
so on. Now point it at the ground: Not much down there, is there? Also, by coming
at the subject from above, you can easily rotate the pole in your hand to capture
both the interviewer and the interviewee effortlessly.
When using a shotgun mic on a boom, wind protection is extremely important.
A shotgun mic is highly susceptible to wind sound, and a foam windscreen won’t
be adequate to protect the mic. There are a couple of types of windscreen available
that work well: One is the furry-looking “softie.”
This product is made from a synthetic material and can provide up to 20 dB of
wind-noise protection. The mic slips up inside the windscreen and is ﬁrmly attached
to the shock-mount system. If you are using a product such as this, care must be
taken not to get it wet, because the “fur” will matt down, reducing the amount of
noise suppression. Also, be careful when working around lights: If you get too close,
the synthetic material will melt, resulting in permanent damage to the windscreen.
There is also a hard-shell windscreen that is very effective. This has the advantage
of not matting if it gets a little wet, and these products can offer up to 30 dB of
noise reduction. Here, the windscreen attaches directly to the shock mount, the mic
is placed inside in another shock mount, and then a back cover is placed on, so that
the mic is completely surrounded by the windscreen. These windscreens come in a
variety of sizes, so that you can use longer or shorter shotgun mics, as the situation
dictates.
FIGURE 12.5 
Sennheiser MKH60
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo
by the author
FIGURE 12.6 
Rycote Windjammer Windscreen (Softie)
Source: Courtesy of Strapko Recorders; photo by the
author

Recording Interviews and Roundtables
213
One other caution when using a shotgun and boom pole combination: Whether
the microphone cable runs from the mic and is held in the hand outside the boom
pole, or the pole is the type with internal coiled mic cable, be very aware that you
can get noise coming from the cable hitting the boom pole, no matter if it is internal
or external. When making moves with the boom pole, your move should be smooth
and slow, to reduce the possibility of the cable hitting the pole and creating unwanted
noise.
To this point, we have considered the handheld microphone and the shotgun
mounted on a ﬁshpole. There is another option that is often used, and that is the
lavalier microphone. Lavalier mics are small-bodied mics that either operate wired
to the recording device or can be part of a wireless system. These mics are often
omnidirectional, and care should be taken to adequately shield the mics from wind
noise, to which they are highly susceptible. Another concern with the use of lavalier
microphones is the sound of clothing rustle. Because they are mounted on the body
of the talent and are often hidden in the clothing to avoid detection by the camera,
this possibility should be investigated thoroughly, and adequate measures should be
taken to avoid this problem. A search of online materials will yield a number of
videos that show proper mounting techniques to avoid clothing rustle. Also, be aware
that the fabric on which you are mounting the mic will make a huge difference in
the amount of clothing noise created. By all means, avoid polyester, nylon, and
rough cotton.
As stated at the beginning of this chapter, this isn’t meant to be a comprehensive
guide to location audio equipment and techniques; there are a number of excellent
tutorials online, as well as many books on this subject that go into much greater
detail, and, if you ﬁnd yourself doing this type of work, these are well worth the
time to explore.
FIGURE 12.7 
Rycote Windshield Windscreen
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo
by the author
FIGURE 12.8 
Sanken COS11xBP Lavalier Microphone
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo
by the author

RECORDING ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSIONS
Recording roundtable-type discussions and interviews, as well as panel discussions,
will stretch your abilities in ways that one-on-one interviews don’t. With roundtables,
we have two main problems to overcome: keeping all of the participants on axis in
relation to their microphones and avoiding excessive noise from having multiple
microphones open at the same time. For example, say we have four people at a
table—three guests and one moderator. Usually, two people in conversation will be
pretty routine—two mics, and we’re all set—but, as soon as there are three or more
participants, things begin to get more difﬁcult. By all means, try to avoid really
large groups (I’m thinking of six or more people). In this case, the added noise ﬂoor
can get very problematic, and the chances of phase cancellation become much
higher. For this situation, thought should be given to a special type of microphone,
known as the boundary mic, which is discussed below. So, for these reasons, let’s
assume four people are to be recorded.
The ﬁrst problem that we encounter in this situation is keeping everyone on axis
when they are speaking. If there are only two people, situate them directly across
from each other, so that they are looking straight at each other, with a microphone
in front of each of them. When they speak, they will be speaking directly into the
mic. However, with the example of four people, there will be someone who is sitting
to the side of each participant. If we position the mic so that our subject directly
faces the moderator, she will be on mic when addressing the moderator, but, if she
wants to make a point to another panel member, her head will turn, and she will go
off axis. I’ve battled this situation for years and have tried a number of possible
solu tions: I have used lavalier microphones on the participants, but this only exag -
gerates the problem, even though a lavalier microphone is usually omnidirectional.
The change in perspective is quite noticeable, as is a shift in EQ as the head turns.
With a body-mounted mic, there is always the chance of fabric noise as the mic
rubs on the shirt or coat when the participant moves about, and so proper positioning
is paramount in this case. Another problem with using a lavalier in this setting is
that the participants all too often forget that they’re wearing it and will stand up at
the end of the session, and either the mic ends up on the ﬂoor or it pulls the person
back to the table. Most lavalier mics have the option of either being hard-wired with
the mic cable or running wireless—be cognizant of radio-frequency interference if
you’re running a wireless system; it can cause big problems, especially in an urban
setting.
One thing that you should be aware of when recording roundtable discussions
and interviews is phase cancellation owing to a number of microphones being live
at the same time and the effect of direct to reﬂected sound arriving at any one
microphone from various surfaces. When speakers are seated at a table, the mic not
only picks up a direct sound from the speaker, but also a slightly delayed reﬂection
from the tabletop, and then, slightly later still, a reﬂection from the walls, ﬂoor, and
ceiling of the room. One of the best strategies that you can employ is to deaden 
the early reﬂection from the tabletop as best you can. Certainly, any kind of cloth
214
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables

Recording Interviews and Roundtables
215
covering will help (and will help mufﬂe the sounds of pens being set down, papers
being shufﬂed, coffee cups being moved, and so on), but even more sound absorption
can easily be achieved by using carpet, instead of a tablecloth, or better yet, a table
pad like many people use on their dining-room tables. Any kind of absorption that
you can introduce to avoid the early reﬂections, as well as mufﬂe any sounds of
humans moving, will help you arrive at a clean, usable recording.
The problem of phase cancellation and sound colorization is one of the areas that
we have to spend some time solving when doing roundtables. As I just mentioned,
the time differential between direct sound and reﬂected sound can cause a very
unnatural sound in the recording, and avoiding this can present quite a challenge.
One option that I’ve had good results with in certain situations is the boundary or
pressure-zone microphone (PZM). The design of this specialty mic produces a smooth
pickup, regardless of the source distance from the mic—no off-mic sound, just a
change in level. Integral to the microphone’s design is a ﬁxed plate, above which
the microphone capsule sits at a predetermined and ﬁxed distance. Because sound
strikes the mounting plate and then reﬂects back into the microphone capsule, the
distance of reﬂected sound remains the same in all circumstances, and there is no
colorization of the sound due to phase cancellation. Because of this design, the mic
only picks up reﬂected sound from a set distance, and so there can be no off-axis
sound in the recording. Although, in theory, this sounds like a wonderful solution,
I’ve found that the sound of a well-positioned condenser microphone is preferable,
if at all possible. However, for those times when we are faced with a large number
of people at the table, or the requirement for a very unobtrusive microphone presence,
the boundary mic can be an option worth investigating.
FIGURE 12.9 
Crown Soundgrabber PZM
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

This type of microphone is available in cardioid, hyper-cardioid, omni, and stereo
conﬁgurations. Although not ideal for critical recording situations, where the
discussion or interview will be used for ﬁnal release, I’ve had very good luck with
these mics in a variety of situations, such as a large number of people sitting around
the table or in the room, where individual microphones would be impractical. Also,
I have participated in recording focus groups for a number of products, where the
recording equipment (both video and audio) should be as invisible as possible, to
bring out honest comments from the participants. In this case, I would place a couple
of PZMs on the walls, ceiling, or ﬂoor, as the occasion warranted, and the participants
were not aware that audio recording equipment was present. The comments could
then be clearly heard and transcribed as needed.
Using a table-mounted omnidirectional mic helps with some of these problems,
but I feel that it picks up too much of the room, as well as other participants’ speech.
A cardioid is a nice balance and a good compromise. Earlier in this chapter, I
discussed the Beyerdynamic M201, and I have had good success with that mic in
this setting, even though it is a hyper-cardioid. I would recommend this only for
those participants who are knowledgeable and experienced in the process of the
multiperson interview or discussion, owing to the extremely tight pickup pattern of
the microphone. In most instances, I recommend a cardioid pattern on a large-
diaphragm condenser mic for these situations. Because the roundtable is taking place
in a controlled environment, instead of on a street or some other random place (such
as would be the case with the one-on-one interview), a good-quality studio microphone
would be appropriate in this situation and yields superior results. And don’t forget
to use pop guards or windscreens to keep those nasty pops at bay!
Another problem often encountered in recording roundtable discussions is one of
a participant striking the table as he makes a point. This is a very natural thing that
most people do, but it can be extremely distracting when one listens to the recording.
Along with those windscreens, make sure that the mics have proper and adequate
shock mounting and isolation.
In this type of discussion, the participants will often have notes with them, and
so paper rustle can be an issue. Here is a chance for you to practice your diplomacy
to constantly remind them to be very careful when moving paper (a little more on
this in a minute, as we talk about mixing strategies for roundtables). Also, if you
have a clear line of sight into the studio and can capture the attention of either the
offending individual or the moderator, you can use hand signals to warn of the noise
problem that you’re having. If you are in a studio situation when recording roundtable
discussions, you should consider setting up a cue feed to the moderator, so that you
can use the cue as a communications link to quietly mention the problem, and the
moderator can signal the offender. Setting up a cue feed for communication purposes
is always a good idea when doing this type of recording, so that you can alert the
moderator that you’re going to have to pause the recording in 5 minutes, or whatever
the case may be.
I think that the least intrusive method of placing the mics is to use desk stands.
Using mic stands and booms takes up too much room for four or more people, and
216
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables

they just get in the way; you want to make your amateur guests at ease, so avoid
large stands if you can. Also, you should be aware that a large-diaphragm condenser
mic can be quite heavy, so make sure that the desk stand that you select can support
the weight of the mic without tipping over.
LIVE MIXING OF ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSIONS
One of the biggest challenges of recording roundtable discussions is the excessive
amount of room sound that can be introduced into the recording as a result of having
a number of open microphones recording at once. One mic will capture the noise
ﬂoor of a room, and two mics will double the noise ﬂoor. If you have four or ﬁve
(or more) mics open at the same time, you can easily see how the noise will be
multiplied and lead to an unacceptable recording, not to mention the phase problems
that will be introduced with the spacing of the mics. There are a couple of strategies
that can be employed to help with this problem.
Doing this type of recording can be stressful and challenging, because you will
be performing a live mix of the balance of the microphones to help combat the
noise-ﬂoor issue. That is, when one person is speaking, the other microphones will
Recording Interviews and Roundtables
217
FIGURE 12.10 
Atlas Desk Stand Setup
Source: Courtesy of Tribeca Flashpoint Media AA; photo by the author

218
CHAPTER 12 Recording Interviews and Roundtables
be lowered in the mix, so that they don’t add to the problem. However, by lowering
the fader on the other mics, you stand the chance of missing the ﬁrst word or two
of someone who jumps into the conversation suddenly, and this will be very apparent
in the ﬁnal recording. You must be constantly on your toes and aware that any of
the other participants may join in at any time. Fortunately, in this situation, most
people will give visual cues that they are about to begin speaking: raising a ﬁnger,
taking a deep breath, leaning forward in the chair, and so on. If you are constantly
watching the participants closely, you can pick up on these visual cues and begin
(slowly and smoothly) opening that person’s mic. Then, of course, you would close
the mic of the person who just ﬁnished speaking. One mic that I prefer to leave
open most of the time would be the moderator’s, because the moderator is most
likely to jump in at any time, and we should always be cognizant of that.
One highly effective way to record these discussions is to record to multitrack
and put each mic on a separate channel. In the editing stage, we can then mute those
mics not being spoken into and thus avoid excess noise-ﬂoor issues. Care should
be taken when performing this editing that we don’t leave a gap (silence) between
the edits; the lack of room tone becomes very noticeable, and all of your edits should
be seamless to combat this situation. If you are multitracking the session, it’s a good
idea to place a different-color windscreen on each mic or to use colored mic cables,
so that you can easily grab the fader for whichever participant is speaking, thus
making your life much easier. The color-coding system is an invaluable technique
FIGURE 12.11 
Multitracked Interview with Track Muting

that can carry over into many other recording situations and help you keep everything
in the studio under control and running efﬁciently.
As you can see, interviews and roundtables have their own particular tricks and
techniques. As with any recording situation, these will only come with experience.
By mastering these skills, you put yourself in a position to be ﬁrst call for any of
this type of work and strengthen your professional portfolio.
Recording Interviews and Roundtables
219

This page intentionally left blank

Regardless if you are a recording engineer or a voice performer who records yourself
in your project studio, the fact remains that we all want a chance to practice our
craft and have a good amount of work. This can necessitate some out-of-the-box
thinking about what type of work might be available in the world of capturing the
human voice and recording voiceovers. Remember that the world is full of voice
messages of all types, and keep in mind that someone, somewhere, must provide
the material. Here is a short list of only some of the possibilities that you may
encounter.
13
More Voiceover
Opportunities
CHAPTER

VOICE RESPONSE
When you call an insurance company, a customer support number, your doctor, or
any number of other businesses and services, chances are you will be walked through
a menu of options to help get you to the right person to talk with. Recording all of
these voice messages can be a nice additional piece of business for you, and the
opportunities are limitless if you can capture the work. We’ve all heard this type of
recording before: “For software questions or problems, press 1,” and so forth. These
voice prompts are relied on by an increasing number of companies, both to reduce
the number of phone operators they must employ and to help manage the customer’s
requests and get them to the proper person, so that the customer can get the information
they need. For a number of years, I was involved with a company that provided
health insurance information to a large number of insurance customers, and, as part
of this service, we did voice prompts. The scripts were quite long and were constantly
changing, and the voiceover artist developed a critical skill in performing these
scripts. The lines of script were often of this type: “You have 10,719 dollars and
21 cents in your account.” As the customer would add to and withdraw from the
account, these ﬁgures would change. The trick in doing these voice response messages
was to keep things sounding as natural as possible; we’ve all heard terrible mismatches
when the ﬁgures are inserted, with the inﬂections all over the map. The amount of
concentration required from the performer to keep everything ﬂowing smoothly is
quite remarkable to witness. For the above line, the recording is accomplished by
ﬁrst reading “You have” as a stand-alone line, followed with recording “left in your
account.” “Dollars” and “cents” are recorded separately, as well. Now, the tricky
part: all of the numbers that are going to be inserted must be recorded individually,
and this requires recording counting from one to ten thousand—not the most exciting
of sessions, but one that kept us all on our toes. The performer had to ensure that
“ﬁve hundred and” would match up with “seventeen” (at which point “dollars”
would be inserted), to be followed with “and,” then “no” and “cents.” For an amount
higher than ten thousand, the system was programmed to pull “twenty” or “thirty”
or the appropriate number to insert into the sentence. As I said, this tested our
concentration, and the work was quite tiring as a result. This is certainly not a time
when the engineer, or the voice talent, can put everything on autopilot! When a
break was called for, it was essential to play back some of the previously recorded
lines, in order for the performer to ﬁnd the rhythm and tone again. If the talent
started to slip in the delivery and drift off from where she was 10 minutes before,
it was my job to catch this and make the necessary corrections, often by backing
up 10 or 15 minutes in the recording and playing that back for the voice artist.
With this type of work, as I mentioned, the most important criterion is concen -
tration. You must be keenly aware of each word as it is spoken and how it relates
to the other words that eventually will be joined together into a sentence for the
listener. Consistency is the main watchword.
As for microphone choices, try to match the frequency range of the telephone,
which by design has a narrow range. Either use a mic that has a good midrange
222
CHAPTER 13 More Voiceover Opportunities

emphasis or one that can easily be equalized into it. Avoid those microphones that
are very round and have a pronounced low-frequency sound to them; they will only
muddy the end result. I try to do a test recording, then patch that into the phone
system and listen to the result over the telephone’s earpiece. Alternatively, a laptop’s
speakers are not a bad representation of the sound the listener can expect to hear. I
would consider doing some fairly heavy compression on my ﬁnished audio to keep
my dynamics consistent and clear. Your work will be listened to by a wide variety
of people, with a large range of hearing acuity, so plan for this at the beginning of
the session.
PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS
Under this heading, I’ve included any number of voice recordings that are played
back to the public at large. If you think about all of the prerecorded announcements
you are likely to hear in airports, train stations, supermarkets, and so on, you can
begin to appreciate the opportunities for voice work in this general ﬁeld. In the city
I live in, the public transportation system utilizes announcements for each stop of
the bus or commuter rail train as the stop is being approached, as well as
announcements for delays and warnings against loitering, gambling, the playing of
loud music, and so forth. If you keep your ears open as you move around the area
where you live, you will become aware of all of these public announcements; with
a bit of research, you can ﬁnd what agency or other group is responsible for them
and can make an offer to help record and master these announcements.
Once again, keep the ﬁnal playback of your recordings in mind. Your audio will
be competing with a wide range of noise elements in the environment, so it has to
cut through all of the competition and be clearly heard and understood. As with
telephone prompts, your audience will have a wide range of hearing, and you want
to make sure that people of all ages and levels of hearing sensitivity are able to
understand your message clearly. Once again, I would choose a microphone that is
able to cut through the noise clutter, and also compress the dynamic range of the
voice ﬁles fairly heavily to keep the dynamics under control.
WEB CONTENT
It seems as if every web site that we visit these days has some sort of audio content,
and a number use voice to help get their message across. This could include, but is
not limited to, commercials, animations, product training tutorials, customer or
product announcements, and so on. The majority of automobile companies now
make the owner’s manual available as a DVD, and there a couple that are making
the manuals available on their Internet sites. Someone has to narrate these, right?
As with any other type of work, you have to do your research to ﬁnd the right people
to talk to in order to sell your voice or recording services, but this is an area that
More Voiceover Opportunities
223

is already very large and growing daily. As part of your research, try to ﬁnd as many
web sites as possible that include audio in their content and identify how voice
recording could beneﬁt the company; then make your pitch. I predict that this area
is only going to become more important in the future, so getting into the game and
making the right connections now will be a big beneﬁt.
Another type of web content that you can take part in is podcasting. These Internet-
distributed shows can be entertainment-based, interviews, walking tours of your
town, historical in nature, or any of countless other types of programming content.
To get an idea of the wide range of podcasts already being done on a regular basis,
go to the iTunes Store and search for “podcast.” By listening to some of the content
already out there, you can get an idea of the quality of the various shows, as well
as content ideas. As an engineer, you can record, edit, and produce this content; as
a voice artist, you can narrate as well. The one downside that I see with the podcasting
world is the lack of a way to monetize your work—you have to have a very sizable,
regular audience willing to subscribe to your channel in order to make a proﬁt doing
this programming, but it is fun and can offer an abundance of recording and editing
experience. Many podcasts are being produced using a USB microphone directly
connected to a laptop or desktop computer; although the result isn’t top studio quality,
most people are willing to accept the sound of the podcast, considering that the
playback medium is often computer speakers, ear buds, or in a moving automobile,
all of which are compromised as far as sound quality goes. Again, I would suggest
listening to a wide range of available content to judge the quality issue for yourself.
One word about the quality of web-based audio: In the early days of the Internet,
download speeds were painfully slow compared with today’s high-speed access, and
server sizes were small. Thus, the audio ﬁles delivered for web playback had to be
quite small, and it wasn’t unusual for the audio to be recorded at a sampling rate
of 11 kHz, with 8-bit depth. Frequency and dynamic ranges were limited, and the
audio was very poor. But, at least people could hear sound from the computer!
Compared with the full-spectrum audio of 44.1 or 48 kHz, with 24-bit depth, employed
today, it’s hard to believe that audio on the web ever took off at all. With modern,
high-speed Internet connections, we no longer have to compromise our product 
in the same way as earlier, and the days of 96-kHz audio are upon us. There is no
reason to compromise audio quality during the recording process, even if most web
sites use some sort of compression technology; now, we can make everything we
do broadcast quality and to the highest standards.
VOICE TALENT DEMOS
One type of work that you can ﬁnd, no matter where you might live, is offering a
service recording demo materials for voice actors. You already have the microphones
and the recording gear, and up-and-coming voice actors need to produce good-
sounding demo reels to promote themselves. This is a nice, win–win situation: They
end up with a top-quality product to distribute to producers and directors, while you
224
CHAPTER 13 More Voiceover Opportunities

pick up additional work and the opportunity to hone your voice-recording techniques.
You’ll probably want to locate a good source for background music and for sample
scripts for the performers to read, so that you can end up with a ﬁnished-sounding
product. Many communities have voice coaches or people who offer voiceover
lessons, and contacting these folks to offer your services can pay off nicely. If you
are a voiceover artist yourself, your knowledge can be passed on to the beginners
in your ﬁeld; if you are an engineer, use your experience with accomplished performers
to help guide the newcomer doing the demo to a better performance. Either way,
passing along our knowledge to others can be a source of real satisfaction in our
work.
Today, most of the casting sessions for ﬁnding the perfect voice for a project are
done online, and the voice talent competes on a global scale, thanks to the Internet.
Yet even with this reality, those actors still have need to record, edit, and produce
the demos that will be heard far and wide. For experienced actors who have done
a large number of voiceover projects, their demo piece must still be compiled from
examples of their previous work, and this is something that you might consider
offering to them. Just as with a music album (if that word is still even used anymore),
the various pieces must be “programmed” into just the right order, levels need to
be adjusted and evened out, and the ﬁnished demo needs a mastering pass to make
it into a coherent whole. Many voiceover artists are comfortable performing these
tasks themselves, and, with digital editing software, there really isn’t much mystery
to the task, but it is often beneﬁcial to have a disinterested third party (that would
be you) to bounce ideas off. An actor editing himself doesn’t have the necessary
distance to gain a good perspective of the work.
AUDIO BOOKS
A large market segment of the recording industry lies in what is commonly known
as “books on tape.” Even though today the vast majority of this product is released
on CD, DVD, or by digital delivery, the name is still with us as a reminder of the
days when audiocassettes were the norm for listening to this material. In this segment,
there are two broad categories of production: Either the author will read his or her
work, or a voiceover professional is hired to voice the book. There are some instances
of producing the book much like an audio play, with music, sound effects, and
multiple characters, but this is rare owing to cost constraints.
The market for books on tape is very large and hasn’t diminished over time; in
fact, with digital delivery, sales are up in this market and can be a good source of
additional revenue. Usually, the producer will be the publishing company of the
original, written work, and the largest of these publishers will have their own in-
house divisions set up speciﬁcally for overseeing the recorded versions of the books.
The content can be anything from ﬁction to poetry, autobiography to history, and
nearly anything else you can think of. Classics of literature have been recorded and
released, as have the very latest thrillers and romance titles.
More Voiceover Opportunities
225

The books-on-tape market has some requirements in the recording that nearly all
publishers demand: The studio should be very quiet and reﬂection free; a large-
diaphragm condenser microphone is almost always speciﬁed; and the editing must
be very, very precise. As you might imagine, just as with other types of recording
mentioned in this chapter, a keen ability to concentrate is demanded of the engineer
and the audio director, to ensure all of the words are pronounced correctly and
nothing is skipped over. Here, as in so many other instances of recording the spoken
word, proper note taking and documentation are of the utmost importance. It would
be rare, indeed, for all of the recording to be concluded in one session; often, the
completion of the recording is accomplished over a period of days, even weeks or
more, and matching of tone and pacing has to be precise and not left to chance.
Any unwanted sound, such as a page turn or an unusually large breath, must be
noted for the editor to cut out, and any stomach rumblings or mouth sounds must
be taken care of immediately by redoing the line or lines in question. One other
thing to keep in mind is that the reader will probably ﬁnd a comfortable rhythm to
fall into during the read, and you don’t want to interrupt that with too many starts
and stops. If something must be redone for any reason, it may be preferable to make
a note of it and then redo that section as a pickup, at a later time during the session
(perhaps at the end of the chapter being recorded).
THE WACKY WORLD OF TOYS
You will discover the spoken word in all manner of unlikely places, and one of the
places where you can have a good deal of fun is providing voice recordings for
toys. Closely allied with recording for animation because of the use of character
voices and sense of play, providing the voices of various toys can prove to be a
good long-term project. Dolls, locomotives, ﬁre trucks, board games, and more,
often come with speaking parts built into them, and, if you can locate a maker of
these products and a good character voice actor, this can be a nice addition to your
recording résumé. Obviously, you need access to a manufacturer of the toy in question,
but, if there are any in your area (or you can provide good audio ﬁles long distance,
via the Internet or ISDN capabilities), they are well worth cultivating. A clean signal
path and the ability to convert the audio into the ﬁle types speciﬁed by the manufacturer
are a necessity, as is ﬂexibility in your normal recording routine. As in recording
for animation, some amount of time will be required for the actor to ﬁnd the correct
character voice to match the toy, and this should be factored into your scheduling.
AUDIO TOURS
There is a large market in the world of audio tours for voiceover recording and
production. Walking tours, bus tours, driving tours, and more, all can be an opportunity
to practice our craft and provide production services. Most museums have audio
226
CHAPTER 13 More Voiceover Opportunities

tours that can enhance the viewing of the exhibits, usually in the form of either
rented headsets or telephone handset-like devices that the patrons hold to their ear.
Most often these days, the devices connect wirelessly to a server where the audio
is stored, and visitors can access the narration for any stop in the museum by entering
a number on a keypad. Likewise, walking and driving tours access the audio from
an external source (including the Internet or a cell-phone app), and the audio begins
when the appropriate location on the tour is reached. These types of tour can be
produced with or without music and sound effects, but the information that the
patron hears is, of course, paramount. To this end, the engineer must recognize the
fact that the listener will be hearing the material through headphones or a speaker
pressed to the ear; therefore, a clean and well-recorded program must be provided.
Also, take into account the fact that the location the audio is to be heard in may
very well be noisy: Driving noise, street trafﬁc and pedestrians, museum patrons,
and the like, all contribute to the noise ﬂoor of the space and compete for the listeners’
attention. Therefore, a clean recording is a must.
SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT
One of the more unusual requests that I have had for voice recording came in the
form of a telephone call one day. A gentleman from the county Board of Elections
wanted to know if I could talk with him about the feasibility of incorporating voice
into the new generation of voting machines that the county was about to purchase
for an upcoming election. The idea was to provide services for the sight-impaired
when they went to cast their vote: A voice prompt of the ofﬁce and who the candidates
were that were running for that seat. I met with the election representatives at their
ofﬁces to discuss the matter. I was shown a prototype of the new voting machine,
and I had come prepared with a selection of voice demos from both male and female
announcers. What I had imagined would be a pretty straightforward request began
to mushroom into a major piece of logistic planning and documentation. First, I had
to meet with a representative from the manufacturer to determine the audio ﬁle type
that the machines would accept (.wav, .aiff, MP3, or some other format) and then
learn the maximum ﬁle size that the machine would play back. Of course, how the
voice ﬁles would be imported into the machines also had to be discussed, as did
my delivery path of the ﬁles to the client (the county) for uploading into every voting
machine that the county would be using during the upcoming election. I did a series
of sample recordings and worked with the manufacturer to optimize the audio quality
and delivery path of the ﬁles.
These technical questions were just the beginning of the complications as it turned
out. Not only would the name of every candidate running for every ofﬁce in the
election have to be recorded and cataloged, but, because it was a general election,
all other ofﬁces (local, state, and national) would also have to be included. Because
this particular county is one of the largest in the United States, encompassing 128
municipalities, each of which has multiple elected ofﬁces, you can now begin to
More Voiceover Opportunities
227

imagine the scope of this project. The surprises didn’t end there: In my county,
ballots are printed in a variety of languages to accommodate the large foreign-
speaking population that makes up our electorate. Besides English, ballots are printed
in Spanish, Polish, and Chinese. Each candidate’s name, party afﬁliation, and ofﬁce
would have to be read four times, once for each language.
Owing to my previous work on many voice-prompting projects, I helped to ﬁgure
out the most efﬁcient path for recording all of this material. If the line of copy was
to read, “For County Dog Catcher, in the Independent Party, Thaddeus R.
Futzenhauser,” I knew that, no matter how many candidates were running for a
given ofﬁce, we would only have to record “For County Dog Catcher” one time,
and the same for the party name, which would save quite a bit of time and money.
It would also help to reduce the individual ﬁle sizes. Checking with the manufacturer
of the voting machines, I determined that the machines could perform this linking
function if properly programmed. Next, on top of ﬁguring out how long all of this
would take to complete, and how much it would all cost the county, I was now
tasked with arranging for native speakers of these other languages to be auditioned
and recorded. The script for this job resembled a large phone book!
I came to the conclusion that this was beyond the scope of my freelance engineering
business, and that there was no way I could accomplish all of this by myself, and
so I moved into the role of supervisor and spoke to a friend who is the audio director
at a large production company with multiple recording studios. We worked out a
plan for how we could meet the requirements of the contract and the time deadline
for the upcoming election. Needless to say, there were multiple engineers working
at once, with each language being handled in its own room, and with a couple of
assistant engineers checking for content, pronunciation, and editing precision, and
then naming and delivering the ﬁles. In the end, it all went off without a hitch, but
with a lot of late nights and weekends. Yet another example of voice-recording
opportunities coming at you from unexpected places.
IN CONCLUSION
All of these ideas and many more contribute to your potential base of voiceover
work. Your local community will determine the amount and types of content that
you can consider, but the important thing to remember is that there are many, many
more opportunities for voiceover than just commercials and corporate narrations.
Get out and explore what your community has to offer and be ﬁrst in line to make
a pitch for some of this business.
228
CHAPTER 13 More Voiceover Opportunities

One microphone, one actor, and one channel on the mixer. What could possibly be
simpler or more straightforward? That’s the question that I started this book with,
and by now we’ve seen that the act of recording a voiceover is anything but simple
and straightforward. Recording sound is a technical ﬁeld, and you have to know the
technical aspects of your job—that’s expected of you by the producers, directors,
and actors. After all, that’s why they hire you. But, as this book has shown, there’s
more to it than just the technical aspects. I think that, if you concentrate solely on
the technical issues, in the end you are a slave to that technology. I prefer to think
that the technology is here to serve you, and is nothing more than a useful tool that
helps you get to the place where you want to be with your creativity. I believe that
you should strive to reach that point where the technology disappears and you no
longer think about it; then and only then can you give full rein to your creative ideas
14
That’s a Wrap
CHAPTER

and let them ﬂow naturally, without worrying about which button to push or which
keyboard command performs the function you want. And, most people with whom
you work will have no idea of what you do and can’t speak the language to give
you direction; they hire you because of your creative acceptance of their ideas and
look to you to help make the project a success. You demonstrate your dedication
to making this happen all through the process and you build a sense of trust between
everyone involved; everyone involved works toward one goal—bringing the project
to a successful completion. The majority of them don’t care what technology you’re
using, or which version of software you are running; it doesn’t matter at all to them,
as long as you can bring their vision to a creative outcome, and a large part of that
success comes from things other than your facility with your tools. These people
are expecting your creative input and a solution to the problem at hand.
It’s my hope that the information that I’ve presented in this book will help you
with the skills needed to be a successful voiceover recording engineer. By following
some of the advice found in this book, you will grow your recording career and
expand your opportunities in the industry. Keep in mind that we all have our own
preferred method of working and our own ideas on how best to arrive at an outcome
that everyone involved sees as being the best that the project can be. What works
for me might not be how you would approach things, and that’s all right. If you
only accept some of the ideas I’ve presented here and ignore others, that’s ﬁne—
you still will have picked up some useful tips to make your voiceover recordings
more effective. These differences are what make the world an interesting place to
live in, and can be the source of endless conversation and thought. It is through our
thinking about the various ways we can approach the task at hand and talking about
it with others that learning takes place and our skill set evolves. Be open to learning
from everyone—keep your brain turned on and listen for subtle hints from the people
with whom you’re working. Don’t immediately discard ideas from others because
they’re not your ideas. Even though the person you’re working with doesn’t speak
the technical language and verbalizes an idea in abstract terms, take the time to
consider what she’s saying. Don’t be afraid to experiment, to try something off the
wall, and to accept some mistakes as brilliant creative solutions. Sometimes, some
of our best work comes about because of what we initially judge a mistake. If you
analyze your work critically, you might see that, although you meant to do one
thing, something else has happened, and this sometimes comes from a subconscious
artistic or creative impulse that you were unaware of in your conscious thought.
Once again, if you can get the technology out of the way of your thought processes,
these subconscious ideas can ﬂow out of your ﬁngers and into the session, without
your being aware of them.
BUILDING THE SENSE OF TRUST
Of course, the technical things matter a great deal; the more you know about acoustics
and room design, the better your choices will be on microphone placement. The
230
CHAPTER 14 That’s a Wrap

more you come to know about mic design, the better you will be able to choose
just the right mic for a particular individual. The better your editing skills, the more
the direction you give during a session will help you in the editing later. All of this
is very important and is the basis for your entire career. Some engineers are more
technical than others, but, for anyone, a good grounding in these topics is essential.
As I just mentioned, this technical understanding is why you were hired in the ﬁrst
place and is your primary function in the studio; anything else that you can bring
as an individual to the session is the reason the clients keep coming back to you.
Working on these skills at the same time as you are trying to develop all of the
other things we’ve talked about in this book can seem overwhelming, but it comes
with experience and time.
You should be aware that the most important equipment that you have in doing
the job at hand doesn’t involve computers, or software, or editing platforms. We all
possess this equipment, and I’ll remind you to always have it at the ready throughout
the session—your ears. Before you get all involved with ﬁguring out everything
else that has to be accomplished in the session, make very sure that you are critically
listening to what is going on, both what’s coming over the microphone and what
others in the control room are saying.
A large part of your technical knowledge revolves around the subject of release
formats. Of course, you have discussed what the release format is going to be before
the session started, as part of your initial conversations with the client. You should
be able to deliver whatever the client requests and know the difference between the
various formats, so that you can help guide the client toward the best solution for
his aims. Learn why there is a difference between 44.1-kHz and 96-kHz sampling
rates, between 8-bit and 24-bit audio, and in what situation you would choose one
over another. Can you quickly and efﬁciently change an audio ﬁle from a .wav
format to an .aiff one? Why do we not recommend ﬁnal delivery based on the MP3
format? What would you suggest instead? All of these questions are why the client
comes to you and trusts you to give her the best solution for her needs, and this is
all part of your job as an audio professional.
As I’ve mentioned often throughout this book, the main thing that you bring to
the table is a sense of trust, and that trust must be earned every day. If someone
asks you if you can get this project mixed and delivered by noon tomorrow, the
answer is either yes or no. If you answer yes, be sure you can do it (even if you
have to stay up all night to ﬁnish), and then make sure that you actually do it. If
the honest answer is no, explain why and ask if there is any possibility of an extension.
Either way, be up front and honest with your answer. If what they are asking can’t
be done, offer possible solutions—once again, this shows your dedication and concern
for their project and demonstrates that you have their interests in mind; you are
interested in helping them solve the problem. You are building that sense of trust.
A few years back, I was approached about doing the audio post for a 60-minute
documentary. In the initial conversation with the client, I discovered that he wanted
it completed in ﬁve days! I could have told him he was out of his mind to expect
that kind of turnaround and walked away; after all, working by myself, a ﬁlm of
That’s a Wrap
231

that length would usually take three weeks, at a minimum, to complete the amount
of work that it called for. I asked for an extension and was told that there was a
ﬁrm deadline on this ﬁlm, and that was all the time available to ﬁnish it. I was
honest with the client and explained why I would only have time for a basic sound
job, with no bells and whistles and very little creative sound design, but said that,
yes, I could give him something resembling a ﬁnished ﬁlm in that time frame. Well,
in the end, it took me six extremely long days (the delivery was on a Monday, so
that helped with the extra day), and the client was quite pleased with the result—
as was I, as it turned out. Sure, there were many places that, to this day, I want to
revisit and sweeten, but the ﬁlm ended up winning a number of prestigious awards,
and the client has come back with other projects, and some of them actually have
reasonable time frames. Through my being honest about what could be accomplished
and not leaving the impression that a more creative and fuller soundtrack could be
accomplished, the client had trust in me to give him what I had described, and, in
the end, everyone was satisﬁed.
As we have seen, a large part of the success of a project comes down to your
project-management skills. The better you are at this, the better an audio practitioner
you will be. By keeping on top of all the myriad details of the job—your documenta -
tion, microphone selection, archiving, and more—you will simplify your life, even
if it might not seem like it at the time. After all, these various tasks take time, and
it’s easy to fall into the habit of skipping some of the steps in your project management.
Don’t get lazy! If you don’t take the time to keep good notes on the take sheet
during recording, your editing time will increase. If you fail to archive your materials
properly, you will spend a huge amount of time ﬁnding the right pieces if you have
to revise the project. Each of the steps is important and should be performed with
due diligence. I don’t mean to sound like I’m harping on this just because I might
be obsessive–compulsive—I’m speaking from experience. Over the course of my
career, I’ve missed something, only to have it come back and bite me later. The
more attention to detail you bring to the job, the easier it becomes, and, before you
know it, all of this attention to taking care of the small things becomes habit, and
you don’t have to think about them much, you just do them.
In this section, I’ve talked a bit about building a sense of trust with the people
that you work with, and there’s one other thing that I want to add. We all know
that some strange things can happen during a session, and some extremely funny
things as well. Be very, very careful about sharing some of these with others. Never
post outtakes of a session without permission from those involved, no matter how
funny you think they may be. Don’t do anything that might be seen as embarrassing
another person. Avoid water-cooler gossip about the people you work with, and
don’t bad-mouth other audio professionals to make yourself look better. If you do
tell a story about someone, leave their name out of it—the story will have just as
much impact, but you won’t demean the parties involved. If you become known 
as a person who “tells stories out of school,” no one will be able to trust that 
you won’t soon be talking about them. And, never, never, never discuss one client’s
work with another client. At one point, I was doing commercial work for three
232
CHAPTER 14 That’s a Wrap

competing banks, and everyone knew it, but I would never have dreamed of saying,
“You should hear what Acme Bank is going to come out with next.” How could
my clients from the competing institutions trust that I wouldn’t soon be talking about
their upcoming campaigns? They trusted that I would keep my mouth shut about
their business, and that’s as it should be. Beyond trust, this also earns respect. At
the end of the day, we only have one thing, and that is our good name—protect
yours jealously. Once you violate trust, it is nearly impossible to regain.
One ﬁnal point on this topic: We have to recognize that we’re all human, and
we all have days that are better or worse than others. There’s nothing we can do
about that, but what we can do is accept that everyone goes through this. What
makes a true professional is the ability to work through the difﬁcult times and still
give it our best. If you sense when someone else may be struggling, for whatever
reason, and then give them support, recognize them as being human, it helps to build
this sense of trust. When others can tell that you are trying to help them and be
supportive, the bond of trust is strengthened and gives everyone the conﬁdence to
do the best that they can.
YOUR INSURANCE POLICY
I have spent some time in this text discussing the importance of proper archiving
of your work, as revisions of voiceover projects happen so frequently. You should
get into the habit of archiving often—I suggest at least once a day for those projects
that you’ve worked on during that day. If you do this and something were to happen
to your hard drive, the most work that you would lose is one day’s worth, and that’s
not the end of the world. The ultimate disaster is when the client calls to revise
something, and you no longer have it! Trust me, it’s happened.
Because we now live and work in a digital environment, there’s another curve
ball that just got thrown at us. In the old days of analog tape, once you had recorded
and ﬁnished a project, all you had to do was ﬁle the master tapes away and you
could retrieve them years later. Now, everything we do is software-based and software-
dependent. This presents a real problem for the archive: If I were called upon to
restore or revise an analog project, even if that particular format no longer existed
and there were no machines left on the planet to play the tapes, it wouldn’t be the
hardest thing in the world to reverse engineer how a tape machine or a ﬁlm projector
works and come up with a way to play the old materials. However, now that everything
is software-based, if you archive a project today, can you be certain that the necessary
computers and software are going to exist a hundred years from now that would
allow you to work with the materials? The answer, of course, is no. So, now we’re
faced with the task of transferring our materials from one format to another as new
formats come along, to ensure that, at some point in the future, we can still access
them if need be. We never can predict when we might need to work with them
again. So, you have to carefully consider your archiving strategy to ensure that, in
the future, all of these materials will be accessible.
That’s a Wrap
233

One further word on the topic of archives and backup copies: As my friend Jeff is
fond of saying, “If it only exists in one place, it doesn’t exist.” In fact, he goes so far
as to say, “If it only exists in three places, it doesn’t exist.” Things have a habit of
disappearing at just the wrong time, and, if you rely only on your hard drive to store
your work, it’s almost guaranteed that the hard drive will crash, and none of the data
will be able to be recovered. This has happened at one point or another to almost
everyone, and, if it hasn’t yet, it will. Get in the habit of doing multiple backups. A
little prevention can pay huge dividends. This book, for example, was written primarily
on my laptop computer, but I had a continuous backup drive running while I was
working on it, and, at the end of every writing session, I would connect a portable
hard drive and copy my day’s work over to that, and then ﬁnish off the writing session
by also archiving to a dedicated thumb (or ﬂash) drive. I put aside time in my day’s
schedule to complete these tasks and performed them diligently. Each of these portable
devices was stored in a separate location, so that, if my ofﬁce were to go up in ﬂames,
I had conﬁdence that the book wouldn’t perish. You should have the same level of
backup protection for your audio work ﬁles. All it takes is one disaster to convince
you of the importance of your backup copies. Don’t be that guy who has to explain
to the client that the project is no more. Storage is cheap; losing a client isn’t.
To this point, I’ve talked about archiving your audio ﬁles, but, keep in mind that
you also need to archive all of the relevant paperwork associated with each session;
scripts, take sheets, delivery specs, telephone numbers of the key players, any video
materials that you may have used, music licensing forms, lists of sound effects used,
who you delivered to and on what date (and which delivery method you used), and
many, many more items. As stated earlier, the goal is to be able to resurrect the
entire session at any point in the future, without skipping a beat. It goes without
saying that, the better you are at properly labeling and storing all of this material,
the more trust the client is going to have in you.
We all work in physical spaces that have ﬁnite amounts of storage room, and, at
some point, you will be faced with culling your archives of those jobs that were
done some time ago and that, in all probability, won’t need to be redone. You should
have a return policy thought out and presented to the client in the initial contract
for the work. At a number of facilities that I’ve worked at, the policy was that we
would store these materials for a speciﬁed period of time (for about three years,
generally), and they then would be returned to the client. If the client requested that
we continue to hold on to them, we would then charge a yearly storage fee (usually
nominal). Remember that the client paid for all of the materials, and they belong to
the client—there is no way that you can simply dispose of them whenever you would
like to. The storage is a service for the client, and the materials should be treated
as belonging to someone other than your studio. Knowing which materials are due
to be returned is one of the reasons that we spent some time talking about proper
storage methods, with a database to track the items and a clear marking of the
individual session date and tracking number on the materials themselves. Once
again, attention to detail at the time of the session makes your life much easier in
the end.
234
CHAPTER 14 That’s a Wrap

A PASSION FOR VOICE
I started this book by telling you about the time I was about seven or eight years
old and the day that I discovered the magic in the human voice. To this day, I can
vividly recall listening to that radio play of A Christmas Carol and how I felt as 
I discovered the storytelling ability of just the voice, unencumbered by pictures. I
didn’t realize it at the time, of course, but that day started me on a path to a life in
the studio, recording and producing all manner of voice items, and it is out of these
experiences in the studio that this book was created. As we have seen, there are
many, many types of voiceover recording to be done, and each requires your thought-
ful attention. By honing your skills and working on them in every session, you 
will begin to be seen as a person who cares about each individual project that is
presented to you, and you’ll begin to earn the trust and respect of the people you
work with in this highly collaborative ﬁeld. From that, you may form long-
lasting personal relationships that enrich your life in many unexpected ways. The
ﬁrst day that I showed up for work, at the very ﬁrst studio that took a chance on
me as a wannabe engineer, I observed the owner of the studio recording a voice-
over session. Both the producer and the voice talent from that very ﬁrst session
remain friends to this day, and, over a period of years, we spent untold hours of
creative exploration together. Respect was gained on both sides, and we still retain
that respect to this day. Both are by now long retired from the industry, but we still
communicate and let each other know how we are doing and the paths that our lives
have taken.
By developing your skills in voiceover recording, by understanding your clients’
needs and projects, by coming to understand how actors work and are motivated,
and by not treating a voice session as just something that has to be endured while
waiting for your next dream session; by giving proper attention to what you are
doing at all times and by not setting up a rock-and-roll vocal microphone and having
the attitude that it’s good enough—you will become known as the expert on voice
recording in your market and will see your business and personal relationships grow
and prosper. Be that person—understand the importance of human-to-human
communication and the humanity in everyone you work with, and your world will
expand beyond measure.
Once you come to realize the subtleties and the art of voice recording, you can
become the person—the only person—that your clients and actors want to work
with. You are the one who seriously gives thoughtful and creative attention to what
they are trying to accomplish.
In any ﬁeld of endeavor, the one trait that all successful people have in common
is a passion for what they do. That passion is your key to success. Develop it, nurture
it, and come to understand that communicating with other human beings is the highest
form of our existence. To this end, know that there is no small or insigniﬁcant
session; every day, every session you do is the most important thing you’ve ever
done. I’ll leave you with some wisdom from a very talented and caring man, a studio
That’s a Wrap
235

owner who worked in the ﬁlm sound business, by the name of Ric Coken.
Unfortunately, Ric passed away just a few years ago, but I will never forget what
he once told me: “When people ask what is the best session I ever worked on, my
answer is always the same—the one I’m working on right now.”
236
CHAPTER 14 That’s a Wrap

Resources
The following list of books and web sites may prove useful to those looking for
more information on the subject of voiceover recording as covered in this text.
Although this listing contains many sources of this information, there are many 
more to be discovered with your own research, and I would appreciate hearing 
from you on others that you ﬁnd relevant and helpful, so that I might share them
with others.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
These books were among those that I found particularly helpful while doing the
research to put this text together:
Alten, Stanley R., Audio in Media. Boston, MA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning,
2011.
Benade, Arthur H., Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics, 2nd, revised edn. New
York: Dover Publications, 1990.
Davis, Gary and Jones, Ralph, Sound Reinforcement Handbook. Milwaukee, WI:
Hal Leonard, 1989.
Everest, F. Alton and Pohlman, Ken C., Master Handbook of Acoustics, 5th edn.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Gallagher, Mitch and Mandell, Jim, The Studio Business Book, 3rd edn. Boston,
MA: Cengage Learning, 2006.
Gertner, Jon, The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation.
New York: Penguin Press, 2012.
Hampton, Dave, The Business of Audio Engineering. New York: Hal Leonard Books,
2008.
Hogan, Harlan and Fisher, Jeffrey P., Voice Actor’s Guide to Recording at Home
and on the Road. Boston, MA, Cengage Learning, 2009.
Holman, Tomlinson, Sound for Film and Television, 3rd edn. New York: Focal
Press, 2010.
Huber, David M. and Runstein, Robert E., Modern Recording Techniques, 8th edn.
New York: Focal Press, 2014.
Nisbett, Alec, The Sound Studio, 7th Edition. Burlington, MA: Focal Press, 2003.
Wright, Jean Ann and Lallo, M.J., Voice-Over for Animation. Boston, MA: Focal
Press, 2009.
Yewdall, David Lewis, Practical Art of Motion Picture Sound, 4th edn. Waltham,
MA: Focal Press, 2012.

USEFUL WEB SITES
These web sites may prove to be useful for you in ﬁnding more information on the
subject of voiceover recording. Note that I am not including addresses for most
individual manufacturers: You can search Google.com to ﬁnd their home pages.
Also, be aware that this is only a suggested listing of web sites: There are many
others waiting for you to discover, depending on your individual needs. I have
organized these sites according to subject for easy reference:
Acoustic Materials
•
Acoustic Sciences Corporation—www.acousticsciences.com
•
Auralex Acoustics—www.auralex.com
•
Sonex Acoustical Products—www.sonex.com
Audiobook Publishers
•
Book Business—www.bookbusinessmag.com
•
Audio Publishers Association—www.audiopub.org 
This address is the home site of the Audio Publishers Association and is a very
useful place to ﬁnd information on this subject, as well as links to other writing
on the audiobooks business. Other addresses for audiobook publishers can be
found by searching for individual publisher’s web sites. Note that not all publishers
of printed material create audiobooks, but, by searching out individual publishers,
you will be able to ﬁnd many that do. Also, you can search Amazon.com or
Google.com for an idea of which publishers are involved with audiobooks.
Building a Booth
Here are a few articles that provide useful information on the construction of a
voice-recording booth:
•
http://scottreyns.com/building-a-vocal-booth.php
•
www.backstage.com/advice-for-actors/voiceover/how-build-your-own-recording-
booth
•
www.primacoustic.com/app-vocal-booth.htm
•
www.soundonsound.com/sos/mar06/articles/studiosos.htm
•
http://thevoiceoverguide.com/tools-necessary-for-working-professional-online-
voice-talent/chapter-1–5-sound-booth
•
http://voiceoveraudio.blogspot.com/2011/07/voice-over-booth-build.html
•
www.peterdrewvo.com/html/setting_up_an_affordable_home_.html
238
Resources

Copy Stands and Lighting
•
Manhassett Specialty Co.—www.manhasset-specialty.com
Ear Training Sites
•
www.8notes.com/games
•
http://c-allen.co.uk/cart/index.php?route=product/category&path=60
•
http://harmanhowtolisten.blogspot.com
Prefab Booth Manufacturers
If you would rather purchase a prefabricated recording space, these manufacturers
give you all of the necassary information on their web sites:
•
Porta-Booth Pro—http://voiceoveressentials.com
•
StudioBox GmbH—www.acousticbooth-studiobox.com
•
VocalBooth, Inc.—www.vocalbooth.com
•
WhisperRoom, Inc.—www.whisperroom.com
Recording Equipment
•
B&H Photo/Video/Pro Audio—www.bhphotovideo.com
•
Full Compass Systems, Ltd.—www.fullcompass.com
•
Guitar Center Pro—www.guitarcenter.com/GC-Pro-Home-g27135t0.gc
•
Sweetwater Sound, Inc.—www.sweetwater.com
•
Voiceover Essentials, Inc.—www.voiceoveressentials.com
Telephone Interfaces
If you are looking for information on manufacturers who provide telephone interfaces
for remote sessions, check here:
•
Audio TX—www.audiotx.com
•
Source Elements, LLC—http://source-elements.com/source-connect
•
Telos Alliance—www.telos-systems.com
Further Exploration
This listing of web sites may be of use to you in gathering further information on
the techniques of recording and performing voiceover:
•
Designing Sound—www.designingsound.org 
This site has a large amount of information on the subject of sound design and
is updated as often as four times a week. Although much of the information on
the site does not pertain to voiceover directly, there are many articles and postings
Resources
239

on the subject, including an ongoing series of articles on game audio and voice
recording. I highly recommend becoming familiar with this site.
•
SAG/AFTRA—www.sagaftra.org 
The homepage of SAG/AFTRA and very useful for information on the main
voiceover union. From this page you can search for local chapters in your area.
•
Voices.com—www.voices.com 
This is a resource that has thousands of voice talent demos and is also a clearing-
house site that has job listings available for voice actors. This is one of many
online casting sites that you can list your demo on. As with any enterprise, you
will ﬁnd that some sites are more productive and useful than others, so let the
buyer beware. Also, search for talent agencies in your area.
•
Voiceover Info—www.voiceoverinfo.com 
A producer of voice demos for actors looking to break into the voiceover business.
The homepage of Sound Advice, Inc., here you will ﬁnd information and coaching
services available either in person or via Skype.
•
Voiceover Times—www.voiceovertimes.com 
A useful listing of news updates on the voiceover business, aimed at the working
actor.
These are only a very small sample of web sites that you can ﬁnd with a browser
search. Depending on your area of expertise (engineer, video game actor, character
actor, and so on), a more speciﬁc search will yield a large number of places for you
to explore in the world of the voiceover.
240
Resources

absorber panels 30
absorption 29–30, 31–2, 34
acoustics: design 31–43; personal studios
130–3; psychoacoustics 17–20; rooms
27–43; symmetry 33; web sites 238
active speakers 146
A/D converters 135, 197
ADR sessions 162, 164
AES42 signals 67
AKGC414 microphones 55, 62, 63
angle of incidence 28–9
angle of reﬂection 28–9
animation 185–6, 191–9; experiments
197–9; level monitoring 192–7
Apple 141
archives 112–13, 233–4
Audacity 139, 141
audio books 225–6, 238
audio interfaces 137–8
Audio Technica 4040/4050 microphones 63,
64
audio tours 226–7
auto numbering takes 161
Avid MBox Pro 138
backup copies 112–13, 233–4
bafﬂing 36–7
bass roll-off switches 55–6
bass traps 29, 34–6, 42
Bell, Alexander Graham 10–11
Bell Labs 10–15
Beyerdynamic M201 microphones 207, 216
bidirectional polar response curves 51, 54
bit depths 14
Blue microphones 63, 64, 65, 68
“books on tape” market 225–6
boom mic techniques 211–13
booths 36–7, 41–3, 131, 133, 238, 239
boundary microphones 214, 215–16
breath counting 156
building booths 238
building trust 78–9, 147, 230–3
burn-in 179–80
cardioid polar response curves 51, 52–3
Caro, Vince 193–7
checkerboarding 158–9
cinematics 187
cleanliness 88, 100–1
code breaking 10, 13
collaboration 71–2
colorization 54, 215
comedy 167–8
commercials 106, 149–70; editing 165–8;
insert lines 162–5; intercutting 165–8;
microphones 159–60; post-session work
168–9; redos 162–5; sessions 152–3,
157–62, 168–9; time considerations
151–7, 167–8
communication: commercials 160–1, 
168–9; engineer’s roles 71–2; session
considerations 104–11, 113–23; 
studios 95–100
condenser microphones 49–50, 55, 56, 
61–5
converter circuits 135
Cooper, D.B. 188–9
co-producer’s roles 112–13
copy provision 168–9
copy stands 90–4, 176, 239
corporate jobs 172
costs 129, 145–6
Crown Soundgrabber PZM 215
cryptology 10, 13
cue beeps 164
custom designing studios 131, 132–3
cut scenes 187
cutting 165–8, 198–9
delivery speciﬁcations 141–5, 181
demo material recordings 224–5
design, acoustics 31–43
Index

diaphragms 50
diffuser panes 30, 34
diffusion 29–30, 31–2, 34
digital audio history 13–17
digital displays 93–4
digital microphones 50, 65–8
dimmer lights 90
diplomacy 113–21, 169–70, 174, 232–3
disembodied voice 21–3
displays 93–4
distortion 192–3
documentaries 172
documentation: commercials 160–1, 168–9;
importance of 233–4; long-form
narration 177–8; session considerations
105–11, 121–3
double spaced scripts 175–6
dual microphones 193
dynamic microphones 49, 58–61, 206–7
ear training sites 239
easels 92–4, 176
EBU signals 67
Edison, Thomas Alva 10
editing 165–8, 182–3
edit marked scripts 110, 111
ElectroVoice RE20 dynamic microphones
60–1
engineer’s roles 69–85; collaboration 71–2;
communication 71–2; knowledge skills
81; multitasking 72–8; people skills
72–85; preparation skills 79–83;
responsibility 71–2; teamwork 83–5;
trust building 78–9
experiments: animation 197–9; microphones
56–9
exterior noise sources 38–40
external hard drives 135–6
ﬁeld recorders 203–6
ﬂat frequency response 54–5
ﬂats 35
Fletcher–Munson curves 18
ﬂuorescent lights 38, 89, 90
foreign languages 23–5
frequency: microphones 48–9, 54–6;
psychoacoustics 18–20; rates 14
Furman headphone splitters 97
games 185–91
gobos 35
handling noise 206
hand signals 116
hard drives 135–7
hardware 134–7
headphones 96–8
Hensley, Bryen 104
historical overviews 10–17
Hogan, Harlan 114–15
home recording studios 127–47
human voice fundamentals 46–8
hyper-cardioid polar response curves 51, 53
incandescent lights 89, 90
industrial jobs 172
information theory 10–12
insert lines 162–5
insurance policies 233–4
integrated services digital networks (ISDN)
143–5
intercutting 165–8, 198–9
interfaces 137–8, 239
interior noise sources 38–9
Internet 223–4, 238–40
interviews 201–13; microphones 204–7,
211–13; video interviews 210–11
ISDN (integrated services digital networks)
143–5
iso booths 41–3
isolation 33
James, Doug 117
jingles 156
joiners 165–8
Kipling, Rudyard 125
knowledge skills 81
language skills 23–5, 113–21
Lavalier microphones 213, 214
layout considerations 27–43
LED see light-emitting diode
level monitoring 192–7
light-emitting diode (LED) lighting 89–90,
92, 93
lighting 88–92, 93, 239
242
Index

light interference 38
live mixing of roundtable discussions
217–19
localization 20
location sound 203
log keeping 105–8, 112–13
long-form narration 109, 111, 171–83
loudness versus frequency 18
Manhasset light and stand models 90–2, 239
Marshall MXL M3B microphones 63
Marshall MXL V88 microphones 62–3
microphones: animation 193, 195–7; boom
mic techniques 211–13; commercials
159–60; condenser mics 49–50, 55, 56,
61–5; design types 49–50; digital
microphones 50, 65–8; dynamic mics
49, 58–61, 206–7; experiments 56–9;
frequency response 48–9, 54–6;
interviews 204–7, 211–13; long-form
narration 175; personal studios 132,
134–5; polar pattern/response 50–4;
preamps 134; roundtable discussions
214–18; sessions 114, 117; shotgun
mics 53, 64, 211–13; types and choices
45–68; USB microphones 50, 67–8
Microsoft 141
mixers 140
mixing roundtable discussions 217–19
modifying existing spaces 131–2
monitoring methods 95–100, 192–7
monitors 145–6, 181
Morse code 13–14
multitasking 72–8
multitrack editors 140–1
multitrack recording 218–19
music effects 155–6
muting tracks 158–9, 218–19
narration, long-form 109, 111, 171–83
NC (noise criteria) levels 38–9, 41–2, 48
Neumann TLM103 microphones 62, 63
Neumann TLM170 microphones 195
Neumann U47 microphones 61–2
Neumann U87 microphones 58–9, 61–2,
117, 195–6
noise 16, 28, 38–43, 48, 206
noise criteria (NC) levels 38–9, 41–2, 48
notes/documentation 105–11, 177–8
Nyquist, Harry 14
Nyquist theorem 14
omnidirectional polar response curves 51–2
organization skills 100–1
output streams 66
pad switches 56
passive speakers 146
pay rates 178
PCM (pulse code modulation) 215–16
people skills 72–85, 113–21
perception versus frequency 18–20
personal studios 127–47; acoustics 130–3;
audio interfaces 137–8; costs 129,
145–6; custom designs 131, 132–3;
delivery/remote sessions 141–5;
hardware 134–7; interface
considerations 137–8; ISDN lines
143–5; modifying existing spaces
131–2; monitor speakers 145–6;
prefabricated voice booths 131, 133;
remote sessions 141–5; software
139–41, 144–5; soundprooﬁng 131–2;
speakers 145–6; telephone sessions
141–5; trust building 147
personal voice method 21–3
phantom power 49–50, 56
phase cancellation 215
phonemes 47–8
phonetic spellings 175–6
Pickard, Charlie 76–7
pictures 178–81
plug-ins 118
podcasting 224
polar pattern/response 50–4
pop ﬁlters 46–8, 50, 197
portable hard drives 136–7
Porta-Booth™ 36–7
Porter, Daniel 33–4
post-session work 168–9
preampliﬁers 66–7, 134, 196
prefabricated voice booths 131, 133, 239
preparation skills 79–83, 175–6, 193–5
PreSonus headphone splitters 97
pressure-zone microphones (PZM) 215–16
pronunciation 175–6
Index
243

Pro tools 3; commercials 158–9, 161, 163;
interviews 205; personal studios
139–40, 145
proximity effects 52–3
psychoacoustics 17–20
public announcements 223
pulse code modulation (PCM) 14–15
PZM (pressure-zone microphones) 
215–16
Quicken 141
recorders 204–6
redos 162–5
reﬂections 31–5, 214–15
refreshments 101
rejection ports 53
relative sound pressure levels 41–2
remote sessions 141–5, 239
responsibilities of engineers 71–2
reverberation 20–1, 31–2, 34–5, 42
RGB bulbs 90
ribbon mics 50
roles: co-producer’s roles 112–13; engineer’s
roles 69–85
room acoustics 27–43; see also acoustics
room-to-room sound leakage 33
roundtable discussions 201–2, 214–19; 
live mixing 217–19; microphones
214–18
RT60 target values 32, 34, 42
Rycote windscreens 212–13
sampling frequency/rates 14
Sanken COS11xBP Lavalier microphone
213
Schedeler, Terry 74–6
scripts: commercials 153–5; easels 92–4,
176; illumination 90–1; long-form
narration 175–6; notes/documentation
105–11; preparation 80–1; stands 90–4,
176, 239
seating arrangements 94–5, 177
Sennheiser MKH60 microphones 212
Sennheiser MKH416 microphones 64, 65,
114, 117, 207
sensitivity switches 55–6
session numbers 122–3
sessions 103–25; animation 192, 194–5;
commercials 152–3, 157–62, 168–9;
communication 104–11, 113–23; co-
producer’s roles 112–13; diplomacy
113–21; documentation 105–11, 121–3;
language skills 113–21; long-form
narration 174, 175–7;
notes/documentation 105–11; people
skills 113–21; studio weirdness 124–5;
weirdness effects of studios 124–5
Shannon, Claude E. 10–15.17
shotgun microphones 53, 64, 211–13
Shure KSM32 microphones 63
Shure SM5B microphone 58
Shure SM57/SM58 dynamic microphones
59–61
Shure SM63L microphone 207
sibilance 48
skill sets/“bedside manners” 6–7
softies (windscreens) 46–8, 212–13
software 118, 139–41, 144–5, 205–6
sound colorization 54, 215
Sound Devices 788t 67, 205
sound effects 155–6
sound pressure levels (SPL) 18, 41–2, 50
soundprooﬁng 36–7, 41–3, 131–2, 133, 238,
239
sound waves 28–30
Source Connect 144, 145
speakers 145–6
splitters 97
SPL (sound pressure levels) 18, 41–2, 50
spots (spot announcements) 149–70
SSL AlphaLink SX Converter 135
standard union pay rates 178
standing arrangements 94–5, 177
standing waves 31–2
stands 90–4, 176, 239
Van Steen, Ray 208–10
stereo audio ﬁle sizes 136
stopwatch usage 153
Storyk, John 40–3, 90
studios 87–101; communication 95–100;
environment 87–101; home recording
space 127–47; layout considerations
27–43; lighting 88–92; monitoring
methods 95–100; organization skills
100–1; personal studios 127–47;
244
Index

refreshments 101; script easels 92–4;
seating arrangements 94–5; standing
arrangements 94–5; stands 90–4; video
monitoring 98–100; weirdness effects
of 124–5
studio timers 153
super-cardioid polar response curves 51, 
53
switches 55–6
symmetry, acoustics 33
take sheets 107–8
teamwork, engineer’s roles 83–5
telegraphy 13–15
telephone history 10–11, 15
telephone interfaces 239
telephone sessions 141–5, 239
television broadcasting 16
Telos Zephyr XS 144
thumb drives 136–7
time-code window burn 180, 182
time considerations 120–1, 151–7, 167–8,
174
tonal characteristic changes 118–19
tour material 226–7
toy markets 226
tracking numbers 122–3
track muting 158–9, 218–19
transducers 49, 66
trust building 78–9, 147, 230–3
tube traps 36
unidirectional polar response curves 51,
52–3
USB microphones 50, 67–8
USB ports 135
Van Steen, Ray 208–10
vault numbers 122–3
ventilation considerations 38
video interviews 210–11
video monitors 98–100, 181
video recording 178–81
virtual consoles 139–41
voice effect changes 118–20
voice response 222–3
voice slating 105, 161–2
voice talent demos 224–5
voice waveforms 158
volume graphs 163
voting machines 227–8
Waves 118
web content 223–4
web sites 238–40
weirdness effects of studios 124–5
WhisperRoom™ 36–7, 38
windscreen/pop ﬁlters 46–8, 50, 212–13
Wolfe, Linda 82–4
XLR cables 67
Zoom H4n recorders 204
Index
245

• ...!.___ 
eBooks 
~ 
Taylor& 
Francis 
eBooks 
from Taylor & Francis 
Helping you to choose the right eBooks for your Library 
Add to your library's digital 
collection today with 
Taylor & Francis eBooks. 
We have over 50,000 eBooks 
in the Humanities, Social 
Sciences, Behavioural Sciences, 
Built Environment and Law, 
from leading imprints, including 
Routledge, Focal Press and 
Psychology Press. 
Free Trials 
Available 
We offer free trials to qualifying academic, 
corporate and government customers. 
eCollections 
Choose from 20 different subject 
eCollections, including: 
Asian Studies 
,\\ 
.~~-
\' 
_., 
~-
Choose from a range of subject 
packages or create your own! 
Benefits for you 
• 
Free MARC records 
• 
COUNTER-compliant usage statistics 
• 
Flexible purchase and pricing options 
• 
70% approx of our eBooks are now 
DRM-free. 
Benefits for your user 
• 
Off-site, anytime access via Athens 
or referring URL 
• 
Print or copy pages or chapters 
• 
Full content search 
• 
Bookmark, highlight and annotate 
text 
• 
Access to thousands of pages of 
quality research at the click of a 
button. 
efocus 
We have 16 cutting-edge interdisciplinary 
collections, including: 
Development Studies 
_.:: ~ _: :i_ ' 
Korea 
• 
Urban Studies 
_ 
_)§ :1 
, 
! ~ 
•• ·~) 
..... 
For more information, pricing enquiries or to order a free trial, 
please contact your local sales team: 
UK/Rest of World: online.sales@tandf.co.uk 
USA/Canada/Latin America: e-reference@taylorandfrancis.com 
East/Southeast Asia: martin.jack@tandf.com.sg 
India: journalsales@tandfindia.com 
www.tandfebooks.com ••••• • ••••• • ••• 
• • ••• 
Development 
Development 
Development 
Development 
Development 
Development 
Studies 
Studies 

