Welcome to our guide to how to remove a central heating 
radiator quickly and easily, this tutorial is for when you need 
to remove a radiator temporarily, for instance, to paint or 
decorate. If you are looking to replace a radiator then please 
see the appropriate section on the previous menu.  
 
 
To complete this task you will need the following items: 
• 
2 Adjustable Spanners  
• 
1 Radiator key (Bleed Key)  
• 
Old sheets/towels or equivalent for water spillage  
• 
A bowl (small enough to fit under the radiator)  
• 
A Bucket  
 
 
 
First let's take a look at the 
radiator. 
There are three points of interest: 
• 
The Bleed Valve  
• 
The Lockshield Valve  
• 
The Manual Control 
Valve.  
The Bleed Valve is what you use 
to release any trapped air within 
the radiator. 
 
The Manual Control Valve is the
valve you use to control the 
temperature of the radiator. 
 
The Lockshield Valve has a 
removable plastic cover over the 
top.  
 
 
 
Removing a Radiator 
1. First of all turn (using your hand) the Manual Control Valve clockwise until 
tight to close the valve. 
2. Next remove the plastic cap off the Lockshield Valve and turn the spindle 
clockwise (with an adjustable spanner), make a note of how many turns it 
takes to close so you can open it later to the same setting. 
3. Now pull the floor covering (if any) away from the radiator and place old 
sheets/towels on the floor around the Manual Control Valve and place a 
small bowl directly underneath the Manual Control Valve to catch the water. 
4. Next using the Radiator key (bleed key) loosen off the Bleed Valve this will 

allow the water to exit. 
5. Now take both adjustable spanners and place one on the Manual Control 
Valve to stop it moving, use the other spanner to loosen the cap nut that holds 
the Manual Control Valve onto the radiator. As the nut is loosened water will 
escape so be ready with your bowl, when the bowl is full tighten the cap nut 
again to stop the water flow, empty your bowl and then loosen the cap nut 
again, repeat until the water flow has stopped. 
6. Now undo the other cap nut that holds the Lockshield Valve onto the 
radiator, use both spanners as before. 
7. Now carefully lift the radiator off its supports and empty the remaining water 
into a large bucket. 
8. If you are going to paint/decorate then it is advisable to cover the exposed 
pipes, with for instance, a plastic carrier bag.  
 
 
 
Putting the Radiator back 
1. Carefully place the radiator back onto its supporting brackets, making sure the 
valves line up with the radiator. 
2. Tighten both cap nuts to reconnect the valves to the radiator. 
3. Next using the Radiator key (bleed key) close the Bleed valve fully. 
4. Using an adjustable spanner turn the Lockshield Valve spindle using the 
same amount of turns as before only anti-clockwise. 
5. Now turn the Manual Control Valve anti-clockwise to open the valve. 
6. As the radiator fills up use the radiator key (bleed key) to release any trapped 
air by opening the Bleed Valve.  
 

