 
RENEWABLE AND 
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY 
RESOURCES
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Campaign and Election Reform, Glenn H. Utter and 
Ruth Ann Strickland
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and
Katrina D. Taylor
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital is-
sues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly writ-
ten, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, ac-
tivists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, anno-
tated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need to have a better understanding of
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing
the world today.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
RENEWABLE AND 
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
RESOURCES
A Reference Handbook
Zachary A. Smith and Katrina D. Taylor
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Copyright © 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Smith, Zachary A. (Zachary Alden), 1953–
Renewable and alternative energy resources : a reference handbook /
Zachary A. Smith and Katrina D. Taylor.
p.
cm. — (ABC-CLIO‘s contemporary world issues series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-089-6 (hard copy : alk. paper) 
ISBN 978-1-59884-090-2 (ebook)
1. Renewable energy sources—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Taylor,
Katrina D.
II. Title. 
TJ808.3.S65
2008
333.79‘4—dc22
2008016625
12  11  10  09  08    1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper I
Manufactured in the United States of America
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
This book is dedicated 
to the many family members 
and friends who provide me 
with continuing support, 
encouragement, 
and hope for the future. 
You know who you are.
—K. D. T.
For posterity. 
Who hasn’t done a thing for me.
—Z. A. S.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
Definitions and Distinctions of Energy Sources, 2
Energy Conversions, 2
Roles and Transitions of Energy Sources, 3
History of Renewable Energy Policy in the United
States, 5
Current Energy Sources, 8
Projected Outlook for Worldwide Energy Demand and
Consumption, 9
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies, 11
Solar, 12
Wind, 15
Biomass, 16
Geothermal, 20
Hydro, 22
Ocean Energy: Wave, Tidal, and Ocean Thermal 
Energy Conversion, 23
Alternative Energy, 26
Nuclear Fission, 26
Fusion, 28
Energy Conservation, 30
Hydrogen, 31
Conclusion, 31
References, 32
ix
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
2  Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 37
Introduction, 37
Problems, 37
The Energy Debate, 38
Controversies, 47
Controversy: Viability of Renewable and Alternative
Energy Technologies, 47
Controversy: Nuclear Power, 54
Controversy: Energy Conservation, 57
Controversy: Oil Topping Point, 58
Controversy: Global Warming, 59
Controversy: Economic and Political Problems, 60
Solutions, 61
Broad Advantages of Renewable and Alternative
Energy, 61
Technical Solutions, 63
Policy Solutions, 64
Global Perspectives, 75
Conclusion, 77
References, 78
3  Worldwide Perspective, 83
Introduction, 83
Europe, 84
EU Renewable and Alternative Energy Policies, 85
Germany, 86
France, 88
United Kingdom, 89
Other Notable Policies of EU Member States, 90
Asia and Oceania, 92
China, 93
India, 96
Japan, 99
Australia, 102
Other Notable Issues in Asia, 104
Africa and the Middle East, 106
South Africa, 108
Middle East, 108
North America, 109
Canada, 110
Mexico, 112
Central America, 113
x
Contents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
South America, 114
Brazil, 115
Other Issues in South America, 117
Conclusion, 118
References, 119
4  Chronology, 125
References, 152
5  Biographical Sketches, 155
William Grylls Adams, 155
Svante Arrhenius, 156
Jacques-Arsène d’Arsonval, 157
Alexandre-Edmond Becquerel, 157
Elliott Berman, 158
Homi Jehangir Bhabha, 158
Frank Bridgers, 158
Gro Harlem Brundtland, 159
Jimmy Carter, 159
Georges Claude, 160
Arthur Compton, 160
Georges Jean Marie Darrieus, 161
Rudolph Diesel, 161
Thomas Alva Edison, 162
John Ericsson, 162
Michael Faraday, 163
Enrico Fermi, 163
Benoit Fourneyron, 164
Charles Fritts, 164
Arnold J. Goldman, 164
Albert A. Gore Jr., 165
William R. Grove, 166
Subhendu Guha, 167
John Burden Sanderson Haldane, 168
James E. Hansen, 168
William Heronemus, 169
M. King Hubbert, 170
Jeremy Leggett, 171
Amory Bloch Lovins, 171
Auguste Mouchout, 172
Willie Nelson, 173
Roger Revelle, 173
Contents
xi
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Frank Shuman, 174
Lyman Spitzer Jr., 175
Robert Stirling, 175
Alexander T. B. Stuart, 176
Hans Eduard Suess, 177
Leo Szilard, 177
Tom Udall, 178
6  Data and Documents, 179
Worldwide Data, 180
U.S. Data, 240
Environmental Impacts, 245
Reference, 253
7  Directory of Organizations, 255
Nongovernmental Organizations, 255
Research Institutes, 259
Associations, 264
U.S. Government Agencies, 275
International Agencies, 277
8  Resources, 283
Print Resources, 283
Books and Articles, 283
Journals and Magazines, 288
Nonprint Resources, 289
DVDs, 289
Internet Resources, 291
Databases and CD-Roms, 296
Glossary, 301
Index, 307
About the Author, 323
xii
Contents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Preface
W
ith a focus on renewable and alternative energy, this book
addresses issues that are vital for the question on the minds
of scholars, policy makers, and society at large: What en-
ergy source will meet the growing needs of an expanding popu-
lation with the least negative consequences for the environment
and the economy? The purpose of this book is to provide the
foundational information necessary to address this question and
for readers to:
•
Identify the array of renewable and alternative energy
technologies available and under development;
•
Become familiar with the scholarly and political
arguments for and against the worldwide adoption of
these technologies; and
•
Understand the current debate for how best to make
widespread adoption possible, including an
understanding of different policy mechanisms for
encouraging renewable energy production and use. 
The first chapter provides an overview of energy sources
used throughout the world. It documents the unquestionable
dominance of fossil fuels in the energy market and contains the
most up-to-date estimates of current and future worldwide en-
ergy use. The main purpose of the chapter is to furnish readers
with detailed descriptions of the various renewable and alterna-
tive energy technologies that are available and in development.
Each type of renewable and alternative energy is explained
under the subheadings of History and Uses, Process of Utiliza-
tion, Advantages, and Prospects for Meeting World Energy
xiii
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Needs. Additionally, the theory of technological development is
discussed to help readers better understand the nature of the re-
newable energy market.
The second chapter focuses on the problems, controver-
sies, and solutions for renewable and alternative energy
sources and technologies. The sides of the debate over the expi-
ration of fossil fuels are reviewed. Additionally, the chapter ad-
dresses the environmental issues associated with continued
fossil fuel use and the associated controversy. The estimated
prospects for renewable and alternative energy use as the main
energy source in the United States are presented. Within this
discussion, the advantages and disadvantages of renewable
and alternative energy sources are addressed. Furthermore,
current U.S. energy policies, particularly those pertinent to re-
newable and alternative energy, are examined. Finally, policy
suggestions for the increased use of renewable and alternative
energy are reviewed.
Chapter 3 presents new data about the potential for renew-
able energy use in various countries. This chapter focuses on the
regions of Europe, Asia/Oceania, North and Central America,
and South America. Particular attention is given to the European
Union, including England, France, and Germany; India, China,
Japan, and Australia; and Canada and Brazil. We examine these
countries’ current policies that encourage the use of renewable
and alternative energy. Furthermore, we look at policy sugges-
tions for the increased use of renewable and alternative energy in
the international context.
Chapter 4 is a chronology that provides a comprehensive
list of the events that have had an impact on world energy issues.
Included in the chronology of important energy-related events
are technological breakthroughs and scientific discoveries, en-
ergy crises, and other political issues. In particular, the focus is on
events related to renewable and alternative energy. It is shown
that the use of energy allowed humans to create the sophisticated
and complex civilization of today. Ironically, energy may end up
being the cause of the downfall of the society it helped to build.
What is most intriguing is the long history of development of re-
newable energy and alternative energy technologies alongside
the concurrent growth of the fossil fuel industry. Over 100 years
ago, engineers and scientists of the day questioned the viability
of an economy based on nonrenewable energy and worried that
the fossil fuel supply would be exhausted in the near future,
xiv
Preface
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
causing untold hardships on nations that relied on them as a pri-
mary energy source.
Chapter 5 provides the profiles of people who have had an
impact on the field of alternative and renewable energy. They
have been chosen for their contributions as scientists, inventors,
scholars, advocates, and entrepreneurs in the field of alternative
and renewable energy. Many of the scientists, inventors, and
scholars have laid the groundwork for later developments in al-
ternative and renewable energy technology. Their work is ex-
tremely important for making alternative and renewable energy
a viable source of power. Others have made the discoveries that
highlight the need for diversifying our energy economy, such as
the occurrence of global warming and its causes. The advocates
and entrepreneurs are responsible for raising awareness of the
need for alternative and renewable energy and its possibility for
meeting our energy needs. Some disseminate information about
the effect of energy use on our environment and health, and they
encourage the adoption of responsible policies that take these
facts into account.
Chapter 6 is an overview of important facts, data, and docu-
ments related to renewable and alternative energy issues. Recent
data on energy and renewable energy use throughout the world
and in the United States is provided, along with geographical
and organizational definitions. An energy conversion table is also
provided as a point of reference for comparing various estimates
of energy use. The tables include data on the numbers for total
world energy consumption, world energy consumption by fuel,
and world energy consumption by country. The same is done for
the United States, providing an overall look at U.S. renewable en-
ergy use and consumption of energy by individual states. In-
cluded in this chapter is data on global carbon emissions.
Chapter 7 offers a directory of organizations involved in re-
newable and alternative energy matters. In this chapter, the organi-
zations’ contact information, Web page, and purpose are provided. 
Chapter 8 presents print and nonprint resources for readers
wishing to investigate the topic further. 
A glossary is provided at the end of the book for a clearer
understanding of some of the concepts and terms associated with
renewable energy.
Zachary A. Smith and Katrina D. Taylor
Preface
xv
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1
1
Background and History
Introduction
This chapter provides information on the background and his-
tory of renewable and alternative energy issues. It begins by
distinguishing between traditional energy sources and renew-
able and alternative energy sources; included in this first sec-
tion are definitions of both types of energy. To enhance
understanding of energy issues and data, a section on energy
conversions has been included. Also provided is a general dis-
cussion of the role of energy in society and of the transitions to
various energy sources made throughout history. Following
this section is the history of renewable energy policy in the
United States, which summarizes the federal government’s role
in the effort to adopt more renewable energy sources. The
chapter then describes the dominant energy sources that the
United States and the rest of the world currently rely on, fol-
lowed by a section on the prospect for worldwide energy de-
mand and consumption. The topic of energy conservation is
addressed next. A key component for understanding the re-
newable energy issues is a thorough explanation of the various
renewable and alternative energy technologies, which com-
prises the last section and the bulk of this chapter. Each type of
renewable and alternative energy is explained under the fol-
lowing subheadings: History and Uses, Process of Utilization,
Advantages, and Prospects for Meeting World Energy Needs.
The disadvantages of these technologies are discussed in detail
in Chapter 2.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
2
Background and History
Definitions and Distinctions of Energy Sources
Fossil Fuels
Hydrocarbon-based fuels are also known as fossil fuels because
they are derived from the centuries-old remains of decayed
plants and animals that were captured in geological deposits.
These fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas. They are considered
nonrenewable energy sources because they take millions of years
to form and cannot be easily replenished after use. As fossil fuels
became the dominant source of energy, less and less attention
was paid to the energy sources of the past: wood, the sun, water,
and wind. Developed countries came to rely on fossil fuels for
electricity production, for commercial and industrial processes,
and eventually for fuel in the transportation sector.
Alternative and Renewable Energy 
Renewable energy technologies are those that harness energy
from an inexhaustible source. Such sources include the sun, wind,
falling water, waves, tides, biomass, or heat generated beneath the
surface of the Earth. Most renewable energy sources, except geot-
hermal, are derived from the sun. Solar energy comes directly
from the thermal energy given off by the sun. Sources like wind,
hydropower (hydro), waves, and tides are the result of solar en-
ergy. Wind is created from the differential heating of the Earth’s
surface by the sun, wind creates waves, and tides are the result of
the gravitational pull of the moon and the sun on the Earth. Bio-
mass is actually chemical energy stored in plants that was con-
verted from solar energy through the process of photosynthesis.
Renewable energy technologies include solar, wind, hydro, geo -
thermal, biomass, and ocean, which includes tidal and wave
power. Many different types of technologies have been fully de-
veloped within these categories, and many more are under devel-
opment. Alternative energy technologies include those that are
not derived from fossil fuels but that are also considered nonre-
newable. Nuclear power and energy stored in hydrogen are the
main alternative energy sources that are examined in this book.
Energy Conversions
To better understand discussions on energy consumption and
production, it is important to have an idea of what energy is and
how it is measured. Before defining energy physically, two types
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
of energy have to be distinguished: kinetic and potential. Kinetic
energy is energy in motion and includes energy types like electri-
cal and thermal (heat). Most renewable energies—like most types
of solar, including wind and hydro, and geothermal—fall into
this category. Potential energy is energy that is stored in objects
and must be released through combustion or chemical conver-
sion. Potential energy can be found in all fossil fuels, biomass, hy-
drogen, and uranium, the essential chemical for nuclear energy
production.
Energy itself can be difficult to define because it has many
meanings in different contexts. The widely agreed-on physical
definition of energy is the capacity of specific forces to do work.
Understanding the elements of work and force in the definition
of energy is essential for a full comprehension of energy.
Many forces are capable of doing work, such as electromag-
netic and gravitational forces. These forces cause energy to take
many forms (thermal, electric, gravitational, etc.). Mathemati-
cally, force can be depicted as:
Force = Mass × Acceleration
This means that force is the product of an object’s mass and
acceleration. Force causes an object to alter its motion by chang-
ing either its speed or its direction. Force is an essential compo-
nent in the equation for determining work, which is given by the
formula:
Work = Force × Distance
The product of this equation is the amount of energy
needed to move the object a certain distance. That energy is mea-
sured in joules (J). Joules have replaced British thermal units
(Btu) as the main measurement for energy. Although these units
are the essential units of measurement for energy, other units of
measurements are used for specific forms of energy. For instance,
thermal (heat) energy can be expressed as calories or watts. Table
6.2 shows conversions for the most common energy measure-
ments and is helpful in gaining a full comprehension of the en-
ergy measurements presented throughout the book.
Roles and Transitions of Energy Sources 
Human civilization and the use of energy are intricately con-
nected. The advancement of civilization and technology was
Introduction
3
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
made possible by the ability of early humans to harness the
power of fire and to utilize solar, water, and wind energies with-
out the use of advanced technology. By generating heat and
light and transforming it to mechanical and later to electrical
energy, hunter-gatherer societies were soon able to shift into
agrarian and then into industrial societies. Wind and water
were used to power sailing ships and to turn water wheels and
windmills for grinding and for other mechanical needs. Fuel
wood was the most significant energy source in advanced civi-
lizations like the United States and Europe until the 1800s, and
it is still one of the most significant sources of energy in the de-
veloping world today. Historically, wood has been used for
heating, cooking, and generating steam to run engines until the
advent of the Industrial Revolution (Melosi 1985, 19–24).
The intense energy requirements for industrial production
of the Industrial Revolution created a need to find a fuel to re-
place wood. The search led to the discovery of the first hydrocar-
bon-based fuel: coal. The combustion of coal created the massive
energy input needed for the industrial applications that would
not have been possible otherwise. Such applications include the
production of coke, a coal derivative used for the mass produc-
tion of iron and steel and for powering steam locomotives,
steamboats, and other machinery. Coal also began to replace fuel
wood as a source of heat in homes and businesses. Coal main-
tained its position as the dominant energy source well into the
1800s until oil was discovered in 1859 in Titusville, Pennsylva-
nia. Oil secured its place as the energy source of the 20th century
when it was credited for the allied victories in World Wars I and
II. The discovery of natural gas soon followed. Energy sources
became seemingly abundant, and they could undoubtedly be
used for a variety of applications (Melosi 1985, 3). With the dis-
covery of these hydrocarbon-based fuels, industrialized capital-
ist economies and economies of scale emerged, leading to
significant growth in production, population, and wealth. The
growth in these latter areas contributed to a stepped-up growth
in energy use and consumption.
It has been argued that, for standards of living to increase,
the consumption of energy must also increase. Although there
appears to be no direct connection between energy consumption
and economic output (or quality of life), this point is often de-
bated (Smil 2003, 97–105). There is little doubt among scholars,
however, that energy consumption cannot be reduced signifi-
4
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
cantly, much less completely, if the Earth’s population continues
to increase. Growing populations and development in Third
World countries ensure a rising demand for energy. It is also
highly unlikely that developed countries will cease energy-
 intensive operations in the future. While energy-efficient tech-
nologies can make the most of current energy usage, human
civilization will always require the input of some sort of energy,
and overall energy demand will continue to grow even while
per-capita energy consumption decreases due to increased effi-
ciency or conservation.
Two major issues are related to these inevitable facts about
energy. The first concerns the relationship between energy and
the economy. This intricate connection means that energy is nec-
essary to continue economic development and growth. Scarcity
of this economic input would create devastating shocks to and
possibly the collapse of the world economy. At the same time, the
abundant sources of energy, like renewable and alternative, are
too expensive for economical development. The initial invest-
ment in these energies is high and creates short-term losses for
the economy, although the investment pays off in the long run.
The second issue, discussed in the next chapter, has gained
significant attention over the last few decades. Current levels of
energy consumption have been associated with environmental
degradation and the potential for even greater harms to the
health of the natural and human world. The question then be-
comes how can we meet the growing energy needs of an increas-
ing population with the least negative consequences for the
environment and the economy? While this book leaves it to the
reader to decide the answer to this controversial question, the in-
tention is to provide enough information for someone to come to
an intelligent conclusion. To begin answering this question, it is
important to understand the different energy sources that are
being used and that are available for use, but first we need a de-
scription of the history of renewable and alternative energy poli-
cies in the United States.
History of Renewable Energy Policy 
in the United States
The history of energy policy in the United States reflects not only
a lack of planning for energy needs on the part of the federal and
Introduction
5
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
state governments, but also a perception of energy as plentiful.
Thus, long-term planning seemed unnecessary in a time when
energy scarcity was a rare phenomenon. Concerns over long-
term energy planning were not serious until the last part of the
20th century.
World War I marked the first time that the United States had
to address the issue of energy resource scarcity. Federal manage-
ment of energy production was all-encompassing during both
World War I and World War II, though policies and programs
guiding these activities were quickly dismantled once the wars
were over. The result through much of the 20th century was that
actual energy planning was done in a way that Martin V. Melosi
refers to as “crisis management,” indicating that such planning
had only short-term objectives (Melosi 1985, 11). Other energy
policies during this era focused more on maintaining a low price
of energy supplies for consumers. Through policies that pro-
moted competition, encouraged or discouraged production, and
set price controls, the federal government focused more on piece-
meal solutions than on a grand plan for a long-term, viable en-
ergy economy.
So energy consumption in the United States grew, and even-
tually its own energy supply became inadequate to meet the
needs of its citizens. As a result, it began importing oil, its domi-
nant source of energy, from politically unstable regions like the
Middle East. This dependence on foreign oil set the stage for a
crisis in 1973. At this time, the Organization of Petroleum Export-
ing Countries (OPEC) established itself as the dominant world oil
cartel after Arab members saw the opportunity to use OPEC’s
control of oil prices as diplomatic leverage with the West. By col-
laborating with each other, OPEC members were able to almost
double the price of oil. Further adding to the economic challenge
that increases in the price of oil caused for the United States, an
embargo was placed against the United States by many of the
Arab OPEC members in response to U.S. support of Israel in the
Arab-Israeli War that was unfolding at the time. While the em-
bargo lasted for no longer than six months, the effects of it are
still felt today. During those six months, oil prices in the United
States tripled. OPEC established itself as a powerful force with
the ability to shake up the world economy for political reasons
unrelated to the supply and demand of oil. Factions in the United
States have been battling ever since over the need to develop a
more reliable energy plan.
6
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The first attempt at creating an encompassing energy policy
was President Jimmy Carter’s National Energy Plan of 1977. For
the first time, the federal government was attempting to aid in
the purposeful transition from one energy source to another.
Prior to this period, the private market drove energy transitions
from wood to coal and then from coal to oil. Economic interests
motivated these transitions, not scarcity. The country was not out
of wood when it transitioned to coal, nor was it out of coal when
oil became the dominant source. More complex economic issues
were now driving a government-supported transition from oil
and coal to a more stable and sustainable energy source, one that
did not have to be imported from abroad. The National Energy
Plan focused on reducing oil dependence by reducing energy
consumption, improving energy efficiency, increasing utilization
of coal by two-thirds, and expediting the use of more solar en-
ergy. Within the plan was the Public Utility Regulatory Policies
Act (PURPA), which sought to increase renewable energy specifi-
cally by creating a market for nonutility electric power producers
and by mandating that utility companies buy the power pro-
duced by them at a so-called avoided cost rate. Avoided cost is
the amount the electric utility would pay to get the energy from
another source.
Although Carter’s National Energy Plan passed through
Congress and the Senate, albeit with significant alterations, it was
ultimately abandoned in 1983 when President Ronald Reagan an-
nounced his own National Energy Policy Plan. The goal of the
National Energy Policy Plan was to maintain energy supply in
the most economical way possible, even if that meant importing
from OPEC. There was little in the plan to address environmental
issues associated with energy use that had begun surfacing in the
1970s. A decline in support for nuclear power and coal because of
these environmental concerns conflicted with a desire for cheap
and abundant energy to maintain the comfortable American cul-
ture and lifestyle. The results of these conflicting values were the
continued use of fossil fuels into the 1990s and a slow and ineffec-
tive effort to develop sustainable energy.
The two most recent federal efforts to establish a national
energy strategy, the Energy Act of 1992 and the Energy Act of
2005, have done nothing to mandate an energy transition and
have done little to address rampant concerns about global warm-
ing. While many programs and policies are in place to encourage
the development of renewable and alternative energy technology,
Introduction
7
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
their progress has been slow, and the rate of adoption is not ex-
pected to reduce greenhouse gas (ghg) emissions enough to
prevent climate change. Although the efforts of the federal gov-
ernment to promote a timely and smooth transition are inade-
quate, it is helpful to examine the programs and policies that
are in place. The specifics of these policies are discussed in
Chapter 2. The next section discusses the energy sources cur-
rently used throughout the world.
Current Energy Sources
The major source of energy used worldwide is derived from fossil
fuels. Oil is presently the main fossil fuel used and hence the most
used energy source in the world. The main applications of energy
from oil are for transportation, heating, industry, and inputs for
industrial production. Energy received from coal is the second
most utilized source of energy in the world, mainly for electricity
production. Natural gas is the third most used source. Although it
is derived from oil deposits, it is not included in data on oil use.
Natural gas is used for heating, transportation, and electricity pro-
duction (Energy Information Administration 2007, 298).
All three of these fossil fuels, naturally stored underground,
must be extracted to be used for energy generation, and their ex-
traction methods vary. Oil, most commonly, is extracted by
drilling into the earth. Most oil deposits are liquefied and have
built up their own pressure, making it easy for them to find their
way to the surface once an outlet is created by drilling. In some
cases, enhanced recovery is used to create pressure in wells
where the oil is too heavy to flow. Enhanced recovery involves
drilling a second hole and injecting steam into it to thin the oil
and push it through the first hole. Coal deposits, on the other
hand, are found only in solid form. The most common extraction
method for coal is mining, which can occur in deep underground
mines or on the surface in open-pit mines on flat land or moun-
taintops. Surface mining on mountaintops is known as moun-
taintop mining and is very controversial. Natural gas, as its name
implies, is found in gaseous form. It is extracted in almost exactly
the same way as oil: by drilling. Natural gas is then stored in and
transported through pipelines.
Oil use accounts for a little more than one-third of total
worldwide energy use (Energy Information Administration 2007,
8
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
298). The majority of oil use is in the transportation sector in in-
ternal combustion engines, the primary technology used for
transport, which run on oil or products derived from oil, such as
gasoline. Oil is the source for just under 7 percent of worldwide
electricity production. Coal is the source of about 25 percent of
the energy used worldwide and almost 40 percent of electricity
production. Natural gas is the source for about 21 percent of total
worldwide energy use and just under 20 percent of electricity
use. Nuclear is the next most used form of energy, making up
about 6 percent of total worldwide energy used and over 15 per-
cent of electricity used. Finally, renewable energies are the source
of 13 percent of total worldwide energy consumption and 2 per-
cent of electricity generation, not including hydropower, which
provides over 16 percent of worldwide electricity production (In-
ternational Energy Agency 2006, 24). Of the various types of re-
newable energies used worldwide, biomass is used the most,
comprising just over 10 percent of total worldwide energy use,
leaving hydro to make up 2.2 percent of total energy use and all
other renewable energy 0.5 percent of total energy use (Interna-
tional Energy Agency 2006, 6). This amount varies by country.
Canada, for instance, derives almost 60 percent of its electricity
from hydropower (International Energy Agency 2006, 19). France
derives almost 55 percent of its electricity from nuclear power
(European Commission 2005, 2.4.1). (See Figure 1.1.)
Projected Outlook for Worldwide 
Energy Demand and Consumption
In 2006, a study on the world energy outlook by the International
Energy Agency (IEA), “an intergovernmental body committed to
advancing security of energy supply, economic growth and envi-
ronmental sustainability through energy policy co-operation,”
found that, if current trends continue, world primary energy de-
mand will increase as much as 60 percent by 2030 (International
Energy Agency 2006, 46). Average annual growth in energy de-
mand is predicted to be less than 2 percent, though in developing
countries, especially those in Asia, it is predicted to be much
higher (International Energy Agency 2006, 47). The demand for
energy in China alone is expected to more than double. In many
developing countries, where a fraction of society does not have
Projected Outlook for Worldwide Energy Demand and Consumption
9
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
electricity, energy demand is expected to increase dramatically as
these economies and their need for energy and electricity grow
(International Energy Agency 2006, 1). Although groups like the
IEA and others agree on these world energy outlooks and even
though their data is used and trusted by academics and indus-
tries alike, the reliability of the forecasts has been questioned.
This is discussed in further detail in Chapter 2 in the section on
controversies surrounding the oil topping point. The next section
addresses the various renewable and alternative energy technolo-
gies available for use.
10
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Renewable and Alternative 
Energy Technologies
The purpose of this section is to provide a thorough review of the
various renewable and alternative energy technologies that are at
differing stages of development. Before looking at these technolo-
gies, however, it is important to understand the widely accepted
theory of technology development, which holds that develop-
ment occurs in stages. 
In this context, the various stages of technological devel-
opment can be related to renewable energy technology. The 
earliest stage of technology development is known as the con-
ceptualization stage. During this stage, the idea for the technol-
ogy is conceived. The proof of concept stage follows. In this
stage, an idea is taken beyond the conceptualization stage, is con-
verted into an actual model, often on a small scale, and is then
tested on a large scale until it is fully operational. The next stage
involves tweaking the design until it is ready for market pene-
tration. This stage is where bugs are worked out and the tech-
nology is fine-tuned and tested until it has reached optimum
performance. Once the technology is ready to meet the user’s
needs, it can then enter the final stage of market penetration.
Market penetration involves the commercial development of a
technology that can be used on a mass scale so that it becomes
available for widespread usage. While many technologies may
be ready for market penetration, several factors can hinder their
actual commercial success. These factors include but are not
limited to a lack of economic incentive to produce technology
on a large scale to be available for commercial use and policy
impediments, such as a lack of governmental support for re-
newable energies and/or the continued support, in the form of
subsidies, for fossil fuels, making them more economical than
cleaner technologies (Komor 2004, 13).
Many renewable energy technologies have reached the mar-
ket penetration stage and are ready for widespread usage, but
they cannot fully penetrate the market due to several hindering
factors, which are discussed in Chapter 2. Other renewable en-
ergy technologies are still in the early stages, but they are ex-
pected to reach the market penetration stage in the near future.
Other alternative energy technologies are in various stages with
some, like nuclear fission, already commercially used on a mass
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
11
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
scale. Regardless of a technology’s stage, the future potential of
all of them to contribute to the energy supply is great.
Solar
History and Uses
Solar energy is simply the capture of heat energy from sunshine.
Solar energy has been used domestically for heating and cooking
since the dawn of human civilization. Ancient societies used
methods of passive solar capture to heat dwellings. It is therefore
difficult to pinpoint exactly when it was first used. The first mod-
ern solar technology can be traced back to the late 1700s when
Antoine Lavoisier, a Frenchman, developed the first solar fur-
nace. Solar was used in the 1880s in India for cooking. Simple
steam engines have been powered by solar since 1878. In 1913,
Egypt developed a solar-powered water pump for irrigation.
And solar hot water heaters have been popular in the United
States since the 1930s. The first photovoltaic (PV) cells, used to
produce electricity, were developed in the late 1950s and were
used to provide electrical power for satellites orbiting the Earth.
Improvements to PV technologies in the 1970s helped to reduce
their costs and allowed for their penetration into more applica-
tions, all of which met low-power needs. After the energy crisis in
of the 1970s, PV power systems with utility grid–connected ap-
plications emerged worldwide, and solar power began to be seen
as a viable energy source.
Solar energy is converted to thermal energy or electrical en-
ergy. People and countries around the world heat their homes
and water, cook, and generate electricity using solar energy. At
the start of the 21st century, the four most important markets for
solar energy use were communication industries, recreational
uses, home solar systems (including the generation of power in
villages in low-income countries), and water pumping (European
Commission 2001, 7).
Process of Utilization
Solar power is utilized through one of three methods. The first is
solar thermal systems in buildings, which capture solar energy in
two ways: actively or passively. For passive solar heating, build-
ings are designed in a way that captures heat and transmits day-
light. Basically, this method requires the strategic placement of
windows in building design so that the maximum solar energy
12
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
potential is captured. Active solar heating is essentially the cap-
ture of solar energy using collectors in which the thermal energy
is usually transmitted through a liquid medium. This type of
solar energy is generally used for hot water heaters and for space
heating and cooling (Tester et al. 2005, 557–559).
The second method of utilization is through photovoltaics.
Photovoltaics are solid-state semiconductor devices that convert
sunlight directly into electricity, which can then be used for sev-
eral types of applications. Photovoltaics require no moving parts
or fluids, and they are made of one of three types of silicon or
come in the form of a thin film made from other semiconductor
materials. PV systems can be stand-alone, roof mounted, or de-
veloped as roof shingles. The world’s largest photovoltaic solar
power plant is in Pocking, Germany, which produces 10
megawatts at its peak. An even larger plant is being constructed
in Portugal and is expected to produce 11 megawatts at its peak
(PowerLight 2006).
The third method of utilization is a technology called a cen-
tral solar power (CSP) system, also known as a concentrating sys-
tem. Sunlight is focused or concentrated to generate steam, which
is then used to run turbogenerators. There are three types of CSP
systems. (1) Parabolic trough systems use concentrators that
focus sunlight into a tube that runs the length of the trough. (2)
Towers collect sunlight using fields of sun-tracking mirrors
known as heliostats and concentrate the heat onto a centrally lo-
cated tower-mounted receiver where it heats a liquid, which is
constantly circulated. (3) Parabolic dishes, or dish-engine sys-
tems, concentrate sunlight onto a focal point in the middle of a
dish, where the heat is then transferred to an engine and con-
verted to mechanical energy. All of these technologies can be
used to heat and cool air or water and to generate electricity (Na-
tional Renewable Energy Laboratory 2001, 1–3).
All of these technologies have reached the final stages of de-
velopment and are ready for market penetration. Many other
solar technologies have yet to make it out of the proof of concept
stage. Lunar solar power (LSP) systems, which would capture
solar energy on the moon and transmit it to the Earth via mi-
crowaves, are currently being developed (Criswell 1997, 24–26).
Also on the drawing board are space-based solar power satellites
that would capture solar energy while in orbit around the Earth
and transmit it through the atmosphere to the ground as mi-
crowaves; there the microwaves could be converted into energy.
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
13
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Solar sails use sunlight as wind is used on Earth to power vessels
using large lightweight mirrors as sails (McInnes 1999, 17). Given
current economic and policy trends, such technologies are
decades from reaching the final stage of market penetration.
Advantages of Solar Power
Experts and environmentalists alike have touted the many ad-
vantages of solar power. One of the main advantages is that it is
an inexhaustible resource, which, of course, is true of most re-
newable energy sources. More importantly for the case of global
warming and air pollution, it is a comparatively clean renewable
energy and has very low ghg emissions. Environmental impacts,
like pollution, would be negligible except during the manufac-
ture and transport of the technology. The development of thin-
film photovoltaics seeks to remedy this problem by requiring
even less energy and toxic materials in the manufacturing
process. The technology is flexible and can be used for a broad
array of applications. Like many other renewable energies, it has
a modular characteristic; that is, the site of development does not
have to be permanent, reducing the likelihood that the technol-
ogy will be locked in geographically. Furthermore, large-scale
solar power technologies require much less land than other en-
ergy sources, such as large-scale hydro (dams), biomass, and coal
technologies to produce the same amount of energy.
Solar Potential to Meet World Energy Demands
Worldwide solar energy potential is several times the amount of
global energy consumed annually by humans (World Energy
Council 2001), and there is little doubt that it could be used at
least to offset dependence on fossil fuels. CSP systems have es-
pecially high potential for energy production in arid, desert re-
gions like the American Southwest with the possibility of
transmitting excess energy to other regions. Scientific calcula-
tions have been made indicating that installing CSP technology
on less than 1 percent of the world’s hottest deserts could pro-
vide for the world’s electricity needs (Seager 2006). The integra-
tion of photovoltaic technology in new building designs can
lessen the need for land while increasing the potential for small-
scale energy production and fulfillment. When integrated into
building structures as such, a solar power system has the poten-
tial to provide for all the energy that building needs to operate.
Although photovoltaics are still relatively inefficient in convert-
14
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ing energy compared to other technologies, large gains in effi-
ciency are achieved every year as the technology develops
(Green et al. 2004, 369). The solar potential for the transporta-
tion industry rests on the development of technology to store
energy derived from solar power, an issue that is discussed fur-
ther in Chapter 2.
Wind
History and Uses
Wind is the result of the differential heating of the Earth’s surface.
Differential heat is the difference between how much heat is ab-
sorbed by land and how much is absorbed by water surfaces.
Wind energy is captured via a turbine, which turns as the wind
blows. The turbine generates mechanical or electrical energy,
which can then be used for a variety of applications. Wind was
used for centuries to power ship sails. The earliest documenta-
tion of windmills can be found in the writings of an Islamist geo-
grapher who recorded the use of vertical axis windmills in Persia
in 9 CE (Hassan and Hill 1986, 54). Windmills have been used in
Europe since the 12th century, and their use has been docu-
mented in China since the 13th century. The first commercial
wind turbine that produced electricity was built in Vermont in
1939. Currently, the primary use for wind power is electricity
generation.
Process of Utilization
Unlike solar power, wind power is captured with essentially only
one type of technology: turbines. Large-scale turbines are made
up of two rotors consisting of two or three propeller-like blades
attached to a nacelle (the housing containing the electric genera-
tor, gear box, and brake), which is held up by a support tower.
Small-scale turbines are similar to the large-scale types, but the
rotor powers the electric generator directly without a gear box,
and they tend to be only 25 to 30 feet high. Horizontal axis wind
turbines (HAWT) are much more common than vertical axis
wind turbines (VAWT). HAWTs are similar to propellers,
whereas VAWTs look exactly like eggbeaters. Also, VAWTs tend
not to be as efficient as HAWT units, which is why all grid-
 connected commercial wind turbines are horizontal. Wind tur-
bines are usually grouped together within the same area of land.
These groupings, called wind farms, generate bulk electric power
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
15
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
to be fed into the grid like traditional forms of energy (Herbert et
al. 2007, 1117).
Advantages of Wind Power
The benefits of wind are arguably greater than those of any
other renewable energy technology. Like solar, wind is virtually
inexhaustible, and it produces almost no ghg emissions. In fact,
it is touted as having the lowest environmental impact of any
renewable energy technology on the market (Herbert et al. 2007,
1118). The production of wind technology is low energy–
intensive. It is the most economically viable of all renewable en-
ergy technologies with the most potential to compete in a fossil
fuel–dominated market.
Prospects for Meeting World Energy Needs
If wind energy technology continues at its current rate of adop-
tion, it will likely meet 10 to 20 percent of the world’s electrical
needs by 2050. Exploiting the wind potential in North and
South Dakota alone would provide for almost half of the cur-
rent electricity needs of the United States. Worldwide offshore
wind potential is large enough to provide for the current elec-
tricity needs of the entire planet. Recent studies show that, if
even 20 percent of potential wind energy sites were exploited,
they could produce enough energy for the world’s needs
(Archer and Jacobson 2005).
Biomass
History and Current Uses
Biomass consists of virtually any living plant material as well as
organic wastes from sources such as humans and plants. The
storage of solar power through photosynthesis creates products
with a high-energy content, like carbohydrates, which can be
used as an energy source when combusted. The ability to gener-
ate large quantities of biomass on a short timescale makes it pos-
sible for continued human use of them. Hence, they are
considered a renewable energy. 
According to Mehrdad Arshadi et al. (2004, 108), biomass
takes one of four different forms:
1.
Biogas: Methane is the most commonly used biogas and
is emitted through the decomposition of organic waste.
16
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
2.
Solid biofuels: These can be derived from agricultural
crops, forests, organic waste, and hay.
3.
Liquid biofuels: Biodiesel and ethanol are the most
common liquid biofuels and have received a
considerable amount of attention in the media over the
last decade as the political windows have opened for
favorable legislation.
4.
Energy crops: These are crops grown specifically for use
as a solid or liquid biofuel. Corn and sugar cane are the
most common crops, grown for the production of
ethanol.
Historically, biomass was the primary source of fuel for the
world until the Industrial Revolution of the 1800s brought about
the transition from wood to coal. Biomass is the most widely
used renewable energy in the world due to the fact that many de-
veloping countries rely on it for heating and cooking. Even more
complex applications are being used in developing countries. For
example, Brazil has taken the lead in converting its transporta-
tion sector to use ethanol as a primary fuel in place of gasoline.
Also, biogas producers, which capture methane from the decom-
position of municipal waste in landfills, are used extensively in
China and India. Due to its extremely versatile nature, biomass
can be used in any application that fossil fuels are used in. It can
be used to generate electricity, for commercial and residential
heating, and for transportation. It has surpassed hydropower as
the most used renewable energy source in the United States (En-
ergy Information Administration 2007).
Due to the growing importance of biofuels on the political
agenda of countries throughout the world, different types of bio-
fuels are being promoted. In the United States, ethanol from corn
is the focus of legislation to promote this biomass as a fuel source.
Although corn ethanol can be grown in the United States, thus
aiding in achieving the goal of energy independence, the concern
is that the use of corn for this purpose could lead to significant
soil degradation and pollution from the use of fertilizers needed
to grow it and that it could encourage the use of genetically mod-
ified varieties of corn. There are also concerns that using corn for
fuel will cause the price of corn to increase, resulting in height-
ened food prices because corn is used to make many types of
food and to feed livestock that is subsequently eaten. In Brazil,
sugarcane is the dominant source for ethanol. Sugarcane ethanol
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
17
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
is widely thought to be the most efficient of biofuel sources, and
the cane can be grown on marginal soils, making it less likely to
displace land needed for agricultural production. Some are con-
cerned over the environmental consequences associated with the
pollution emitted from sugarcane ethanol. In Europe, the domi-
nant biofuel is biodiesel made from soybeans. Soybean biodiesel
emits much fewer pollutants than diesel made from petroleum,
making it a more environmentally sustainable fuel. There are
concerns, however, that clearing the land needed to grow the soy-
beans would result in deforestation and that this could have a
negative effect on the reduction of greenhouse gases and on bio-
diversity. The burning of biodiesel still produces air pollution,
though about half that of petroleum-based diesel fuels. Biodiesel
can also be made from cooking grease. This source of biofuel is
attractive because it recycles a material that would otherwise be
wasted. Like soybean diesel, it still causes air pollution and the
emission of greenhouse gases. Although it is not being commer-
cially produced yet, cellulosic ethanol derived from switchgrass,
slash, and agricultural byproducts has been getting attention in
scientific circles. This is because cellulosic ethanol has the real po-
tential to significantly reduce greenhouse gases. There are con-
cerns about this source, however, because widespread growth of
switchgrass could displace native plants and wildlife habitat.
Process of Utilization
Biomass can be converted to energy through a number of
processes. The main method of utilization is through thermal
conversion, which is essentially the combustion of biomass to
create energy or fuel. The process of bioconversion is the direct or
indirect use of the chemical composition of living things to trans-
form one substance to another. Fermentation and hydrolysis are
used to create ethyl alcohol or ethanol, a high-quality fuel that
can be used for transportation or electricity production. Biogas
producers, already mentioned and also known as digesters, are
contraptions that use anaerobic bacteria to process animal waste
and sewage as well as landfill material to create methane, which
is then captured and used.
Biomass has a wider range of potential uses than wind and
solar energy. Like the latter two, it can be converted to electricity.
It can also be burned with coal to reduce sulfur emissions and to
help with the transition from fossil fuels to renewable energies. It
can be used by itself to generate electricity by being converted to
18
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
fuel, which can then be combusted to make steam or power a gas
turbine or used in fuel cells for direct conversion to electricity. A
variety of biomass fuels, in the form of synthetic gases like
ethanol, biodiesel, a combination of alcohol and vegetable oil, an-
imal fat or recycled cooking oils, can also be used to power the
transportation sector, which is currently a significant source of
greenhouse gases.
Advantages of Biomass
Biomass has many of the same benefits as other renewable ener-
gies. It has high availability across the globe, unlike fossil fuels.
Because biomass consists of plant matter and refuse, it can be
found in virtually every country in the world rather than being
limited to a few specific parts of it. It has the characteristic of
being renewable because, when biomass crops are grown sustain-
ably, they become an inexhaustible source of energy. Although
the combustion of biomass can emit carbon dioxide, it also acts as
a carbon sink when it is grown. As long as it does not emit more
carbon dioxide when used than it takes in while growing, it es-
sentially becomes a zero net emitter. Studies have shown that
ethanol, when burned as a fuel, emits as much as 38 percent less
greenhouse gases than gasoline (Shapouri, Wang, and Duffield
2006, 85). Cellulosic ethanol, as opposed to ethanol made from
corn, has the potential to offset even more (Hammerschlag 2006,
1749). It emits much less sulfur dioxide than fossil fuels, so it
would cause less acid rain. Biomass has the added benefit of nat-
ural storage, making it available at all times without the fluctua-
tions that can occur with wind and solar. It also provides an
alternative for managing municipal and agricultural waste, the
former of which has become quite a problem over the last few
decades. Because it can be cofired with fossil fuels, it has been
cited by many experts as the renewable energy that can help
phase out fossil fuel use and smooth over the transition to cleaner
energies like wind and solar.
Prospects for Meeting World Energy Needs
Worldwide production of energy from biomass has the potential
to provide for over half of the world’s energy needs by 2050. Bio-
mass and particularly ethanol have a high potential for offsetting
the need for fossil fuel–dominated energy sources. This is partic-
ularly true in the transportation sector. For electricity production,
however, biomass may be best suited for areas that are not highly
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
19
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
populated and do not require high-intensity use of energy. The
potential for high-intensity use is much lower than other fossil
fuels because of the amount of land required to grow biomass
crops. It could be especially useful in handling municipal waste,
although it is uncertain how much energy could actually be pro-
vided by waste in highly populated areas.
Geothermal
History and Current Uses
Geothermal energy is heat that is stored in the Earth’s crust, usu-
ally beneath the ground. It is created by the decay of radioactive
minerals underneath the Earth’s surface. Hot springs and geysers
are examples of geothermal energy that has traveled aboveground
through the medium of water or steam. This type of geothermal
energy source is known collectively as hydrothermal or convec-
tion-dominated, referring to the production of hot fluid. This cate-
gory also includes boiling mud pots and fumaroles (steam or gas
vents). Hydrothermal sources are generally found in mountain-
ous areas, near volcanoes, and at the edges of crustal plates. Dis-
tribution of these sources is largely related to plate tectonics.
Steam-dominated systems are the least common of all the geother-
mal sources, and they are the primary sources and locations for
geothermal power plants because their temperature can get high
enough to be converted into electricity. Geothermal energy can
also be found in hot dry rock. Hot dry rock is distinguishable from
hydrothermal due to the lack of fluid. This is the most common
form of geothermal energy systems and also more difficult to ex-
tract heat from than hydrothermal systems. Wells must be drilled
into the rock and fluids circulated to transfer heat from under-
ground to where it is needed aboveground. The last type of geo -
thermal system is magma. Magma is rock that is partially or
completely molten. It can usually be found only at great depths,
requiring intensive drilling and making extraction the most diffi-
cult, although not impossible, of all the geothermal resources.
Geothermal energy has been used and is still used for cook-
ing and bathing. The earliest usage probably dates back to prehis-
toric times when humans likely bathed in hot springs. It was first
used for commercial electricity production in the early 1900s in
Larderello, Italy, from steam vents and drilled holes in what is
known as the Larderello field. Use of geothermal for electricity
generation has expanded to the United States, Japan, Mexico, Ice-
20
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
land, and the Philippines, to name a few. Geothermal ranks third
in the United States for renewable energy use behind biomass
and hydropower (Energy Information Administration 2007).
Process of Utilization
To utilize geothermal systems, access to the sources of heat must
be gained. This generally involves drilling techniques similar to
those used by the oil and gas industry. Liquid is essential because
it is the medium needed to transport the heat. It must therefore
either exist at the source, as in hydrothermal systems, or be
brought in externally and run through pipes where it can be
heated by hot dry rocks or magma and circulated to generate en-
ergy. The use of geothermal is very similar to that of solar. It can
be incorporated into building structures through the use of pipe
systems for heating and cooling when the structures are near the
source. It can also be used to generate electricity in large-scale
power plants, which must also be located near the source. It has
found a niche in the agriculture industry where it has been used
to heat soil and greenhouses and to dehydrate foods.
Advantages of Geothermal Energy
Geothermal is a clean energy source releasing practically zero
emissions (Energy and Geoscience Institute 2001, 7). Its use
causes a negligible amount of pollution (sometimes unpleasant
although generally nontoxic smells). Geothermal power plants
can be designed to emit no pollution at all (Bjornsson et al. 1998,
4). It has a large worldwide resource base and can be found in
many countries. Unlike other renewable energies, it is not subject
to fluctuations in supply and is constantly available.
Prospects for Meeting World Energy Needs
Geothermal energies, if captured, have a higher energy content
than other renewable energy sources. While the resource base is
not yet fully known, it is estimated that reserves could contribute
a significant amount of energy to the growing global consump-
tion. It is estimated that geothermal could help offset global
warming emissions by as much as 10 percent by 2020 with just
the present growth rates (Bjornsson et al. 1998, 5). Technology in
this field has the advantage of being shared with the lucrative
fossil fuel industries since the method of extraction (drilling) is
the same. Much of the research and development from these in-
dustries can be used to improve geothermal development.
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
21
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Hydro
History and Current Uses
Hydropower is energy captured from falling or running water,
usually rivers. Hydropower technology can be developed on a
large or small scale. Large-scale hydro generally refers to large
dams. The specific categorization is contingent on the amount of
electricity produced by a hydropower project. Small-scale hydro
captures energy through the use of smaller dams and river tur-
bines. It is usually considered small scale if it produces fewer
than 50 megawatts of electricity, but the definition varies by
country.
Historically, hydropower has been used to run mills and to
generate mechanical energy for industrial uses. It was first used
to generate electricity in 1881 in Surrey, England. Currently, there
are over 45,000 large dams in over 140 countries, although not all
of them generate electricity (World Commission on Dams 2000).
Alternative uses for dams include the storage of water in reser-
voirs for irrigation and other water needs, as well as water-
 oriented recreation.
Process of Utilization
The most widely adopted process of utilizing hydropower is
through large-scale hydro projects that involve the construction
of an impoundment dam on a river. The dam holds water in a
reservoir and directs the flow of water into a penstock, which car-
ries it to the turbines installed in the dam. The turbines are con-
nected to electric generators, and, as the water spins the turbines,
the generators create electricity. When electricity does not need to
be generated, water is kept in storage in the reservoir for future
use. Small-scale projects are generally referred to as micro hy-
dropower. They include projects known as “run of the river” that
use the natural flow of the water to spin turbines or waterwheels.
They do not interfere with the flow of the river and do not in-
clude structures, like dams, that store water in reservoirs.
Advantages of Hydropower
The advantages for hydropower are distinct for large- and small-
scale projects. Large-scale projects have low operating costs and
longer expected power plant life than any other form of electric-
ity production. This fact makes for very low consumer prices.
Reservoirs often serve multiple purposes, including providing a
22
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
source for irrigation, drinking water, recreation, flood protection,
and resources for aquaculture. Environmentally, they emit almost
no carbon dioxide or particulates compared to other fossil fuel
sources of electricity.
Small-scale hydropower is particularly useful for low en-
ergy–intensity uses like those of developing countries. It is more
economically feasible for countries that do not have the capital to
invest in large-scale hydropower. It is also beneficial for remote
areas where the transmission of electricity is difficult. They have
all of the benefits of large-scale hydro, except for those related to
the reservoirs themselves like recreation, and hardly any of the
disadvantages. Therefore, they have minimal environmental im-
pacts compared to large-scale projects and fossil fuel usage.
Potential to Meet World Energy Needs
Much of the potential for hydropower has been tapped in areas
where it has been intensely developed, as in the United States
and most of Europe. The potential for the capture of hydropower
on a global scale, however, is still very high. “Two-thirds of ‘eco-
nomically viable’ hydropower potential is yet to be tapped” (Bei-
jing Declaration on Hydropower and Sustainable Development
2004). The vast majority of this potential exists in developing
countries, many of which have thousands and even millions of
citizens without access to electricity. Unfortunately, the areas
where hydropower could be developed tend to be densely popu-
lated. Developing large-scale hydropower in these areas would
cause the displacement of millions of people. The worldwide po-
tential is unevenly distributed across continents, making hydro a
useful technology for some countries but not for others. For ex-
ample, Asia holds 46 percent of the world’s hydropower poten-
tial, with China making up an additional 15 percent of
worldwide hydropower potential (World Bank 2007).
Ocean Energy: Wave, Tidal, and 
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
History and Current Uses
Ocean energy is caused by the gravitational pull of the moon,
sun, and Earth (creating tides), by wind (creating waves), and by
temperature differences in the water. Medieval times saw a fairly
widespread use of ocean waterwheels across Europe. While
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
23
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
many processes for the utilization of ocean energy have been con-
sidered, only a few methods have received the most research and
development attention. The three most developed types of ocean
energy technologies are wave, tidal, and ocean thermal energy
conversion (OTEC).
Process of Utilization 
Many technologies are currently being developed to capture
wave energy. These technologies extract energy from surface
waves or from pressure fluctuations beneath the water. Wave en-
ergy can be converted to electricity in both onshore and offshore
applications. Offshore applications are located in water that is
over 100 feet deep. The motion of the waves is used either to
power pumps that create electricity or to pressurize water that
then turns a turbine. Special sea vessels have been developed that
can generate electricity from waves as they travel across the
ocean by funneling water inside the craft to turn turbines and
then releasing it back into the ocean. Onshore applications make
use of the power of breaking waves on the shore. Three technolo-
gies have been developed to utilize this energy source. The first is
the oscillating water column. Through the use of a concrete col-
umn located in the water, air is compressed and depressurized by
water that enters the column from wave motion. It is then used to
spin a turbine, which then produces electricity. The second tech-
nology is a tapchon, or tapered channel system, which feeds into
a reservoir located on a cliff above sea level. The narrowed chan-
nel causes the waves flowing inside of it to increase in height and
spill over into the reservoir, where the water is used to run tur-
bines in a manner similar to that of large-scale hydropower appli-
cations. The final device used to convert wave power into energy
is a pendulor device, which is a rectangular box that is open to
the sea at one end with a flap hinged over the opening. As the
flap is moved back and forth by the wave motion, it powers a hy-
draulic pump and generator. Although few of these technologies
have reached the market penetration stage, the first commercial
wave power station came online off the island of Islay off the
coast of Scotland in 2000.
Tidal energy technologies utilize ocean currents and the
difference between low and high tide to generate electricity. The
difference must be great enough, over 16 feet, to create electric-
ity. As in wave power, three main technologies have been devel-
oped to convert tidal power into electricity. The first, a barrage
24
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
or dam, forces tides into an area where they come into contact
with a turbine and power a generator. The second technology is
known as tidal fences, which are apparatuses that look like giant
turnstiles. The turnstiles, spun by ocean currents, are capable of
generating electricity at rates as high as winds with very high
velocity. The last technology is the tidal turbine. Similar to wind
turbines or river turbines, tidal turbines are situated underwater
in an arrangement that is similar to that of a wind farm. At about
50 feet in diameter, they are ideal in waters that range from over
60 to 90 feet in depth. The only large-scale operation using tidal
energy is in La Rance, France.
Ocean thermal energy conversion is a technology that is still
in the developmental stages and that is intended to extract power
from temperature differences between the surface of the ocean
and deeper waters through the use of a heat engine. Georges
Claude, a French engineer, built the first OTEC power plant off
the coast of Cuba in the 1930s. Claude built another plant off the
coast of Brazil. Both plants were destroyed by wind and waves
before they were able to produce more power than they needed
to operate.
There are three types of OTEC technologies. The first is
called a closed-cycle system. Low-boiling point fluid is vapor-
ized by warm surface water that is pumped into a heat ex-
changer. The vapor is used to rotate a turbine, which generates
electricity. Cold deep seawater is then used to condense the
vapor back into a liquid where it is recycled into the system. The
second type of technology is the open-cycle system. When warm
surface seawater is placed into a low-pressure container, it boils,
producing steam that can turn a turbine and generate electricity.
In this system, the steam is turned into freshwater and exported
from the system, and new ocean water is used as input for fur-
ther energy production. The final type of technology is the hy-
brid system. This system uses the steam from the open-cycle
process of boiling water to vaporize the low-boiling-point fluid
used in the closed-cycle system, which is then used to turn a tur-
bine and generate electricity.
Advantages of Ocean Energy
Despite the need for further development, the potential exists for
many benefits if ocean energy can be efficiently captured and uti-
lized. Small island societies stand to gain the most from small-
scale use due to their low energy intensity. Ocean energies are
Renewable and Alternative Energy Technologies
25
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
more predictable and reliable than other renewable energy
sources. These technologies could be paired with offshore wind
operations, thus maximizing the use of such spaces. The ratio of
the energy needed to make the technology to the energy created
by it is low compared to other energy sources. Emissions would
be nil or, in the case of OTEC, much lower than fossil fuels. Any
negative environmental impacts from these technologies are re-
versible and not global in nature. OTEC, in particular, has very
high energy potential despite its low energy conversion effi-
ciency. Another important and interesting advantage of OTEC is
that the process produces not only energy, but also water that is
desalinized enough for human consumption.
Potential for Meeting World Energy Needs
If developed, ocean energies have a greater potential for meeting
world energy needs than any other source. The potential of all
ocean energy technologies is so high that harnessing just a frac-
tion of a percent of the world’s wave power could provide five
times the global demand for energy. There are 40 sites in the
world where tidal power could be converted to electricity. Where
it could be utilized, ocean energy could provide for one-third or
more of that area’s electricity needs. OTEC also has the potential
to provide for all of the world’s energy needs if storage and eco-
nomic obstacles can be overcome (Avery and Wu 1994, 3).
Alternative Energy
Nuclear Fission
History and Current Uses
When the first nuclear chain reaction was achieved in 1942 at the
University of Chicago, the possibility for energy production from
this source seemed infinite. The first commercial nuclear reactor
was built not long after in 1956 in Calder Hall, Britain. It would be-
come the first of hundreds of nuclear power plants. The global
total of operating plants today is 444 in 25 countries (American
Nuclear Society 2006, 37). Although nuclear power provides a con-
siderable amount of the world’s energy (over 6 percent) and elec-
tricity (17 percent), compared to renewable energy, the rate of
adding nuclear power reactors to the grid has been slow globally
(less than 1 percent annually). Only a handful of reactors have
26
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
been added to the grid in the United States since 1973, and they
have come online only because they had been licensed prior to the
moratorium on licensing new reactors. The slow growth is due to
an aggressive and successful grassroots campaign against the use
of nuclear power because of safety and environmental risks. In
1979, those concerns were justified as a nuclear reactor meltdown
occurred at the Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania. Just seven
years later, the world was horrified as it watched the aftermath of a
nuclear explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Russia,
which led to the release of dangerous radiation. Despite these acci-
dents, the development of nuclear power continues to occur glob-
ally, albeit cautiously, to meet the rising world energy needs.
Process of Utilization
Nuclear power requires the input of nuclear fuels like uranium or
thorium. These elements are mined out of the Earth using the
same techniques as coal mining. Ninety percent of the world’s
uranium is mined in Australia or Canada. In the process of nu-
clear fission, nuclear fuels are placed into a nuclear reactor core,
where a self-sustaining process of atom splitting occurs and gen-
erates heat. The heat is then used to create steam, which then
powers a turbine to generate electricity. Once the reaction no
longer produces enough heat to create steam, the reactor cores
must be refueled for the process to start again. Six types of reac-
tors are used worldwide, but they all utilize nuclear fission to cre-
ate energy. The pressurized water reactor (PWR) is the most
commonly used. There are a total of 268 online with the majority
in the United States, Russia, Japan, and France. It uses enriched
uranium as its fuel. The second most common reactor is the boil-
ing water reactor (BWR). There are a total of 94 worldwide, mostly
located in the United States, Japan, and Sweden. Like the PWR,
the BWR uses enriched uranium as its fuel. The pressurized heavy
water reactor (PHWR), also known as the CANDU, is exclusive to
Canada, with a total of 40 plants in operation. It uses natural ura-
nium as a fuel and pressurized water as a coolant. The next most
common reactor is the gas cooled reactor. A total of 23 exist and
are found only in the United Kingdom. It requires natural and en-
riched uranium and uses carbon dioxide instead of water as a
coolant. The light water graphite reactor (RBMK) is found only in
Russia. There are a total of 12, and they rely on enriched uranium
for fuel. The last type of reactor is the fast neutron reactor, also
known as fast breeder reactor (FBR). There are only four plants
Alternative Energy
27
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
online, located in Japan, Russia, and France, and only one is used
commercially. Because they use plutonium as well as uranium to
fuel the reactions, they are capable of getting 60 times more en-
ergy from uranium than other reactors.
Advantages of Nuclear Power
Compared to fossil fuels, nuclear power is a much cleaner source
of energy. Nuclear fission creates zero ghg emissions, making it a
better alternative than fossil fuels in light of global warming
risks. It also emits none of the gases related to acid deposition,
also known as acid rain. Because uranium can be transported, nu-
clear power plants can be built anywhere, making them a very
modular energy source. It is possible therefore to build them in
areas of high energy usage, mitigating transmission problems.
The production of electricity from nuclear fission is fairly efficient
compared to renewable energies. 
Prospects of Meeting World Energy Needs
Nuclear power has a high potential for meeting world energy
needs. Many experts contend that nuclear power is the solution
to becoming independent of fossil fuels for energy production.
Although the world’s electricity needs could be met if enough
nuclear power plants were constructed, there is no guarantee that
the plants would have enough uranium. Studies indicate that
uranium shortages could begin within the next decade, and the
problem would only become more acute if demand for nuclear
power increases. Because uranium is essential for nuclear power
production, a shortage would make nuclear energy a nonviable
option for replacing fossil fuels as our main energy source.
Fusion
History and Current Uses
Whereas in nuclear fission the atoms of heavy elements are split to
create energy, in nuclear fusion light elements are combined, or
fused, to create heavy elements. Nuclear fusion is the dominant
reaction in thermonuclear weapons, but it has not been used to
generate energy. As of 2007, nuclear fusion has not passed the
proof of concept stage in its technological development, and it is
not likely to do so for decades to come. International fusion re-
search programs, however, are currently underway to discover
how to harness this energy source. In 2006, the United States, the
28
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
European Union, China, India, Japan, South Korea, and Russia
signed an international fusion energy agreement to build an inter-
national fusion project called ITER. It is being built in France, and
completion is expected in 2015. The ITER project itself will not be
used to produce electricity from nuclear fusion on a large scale,
but it will be used to generate the data needed to move forward in
the hopes of building the first nuclear fusion power plant. Al-
though nuclear fusion has been so far unable to provide any en-
ergy for human needs, it is a technology with great potential.
Process of Utilization
The most promising type of nuclear fusion requires the light ele-
ments deuterium and tritium. The combination of these elements
creates helium and considerable amounts of energy. Currently, no
successful process of utilization on a grand scale has been discov-
ered. For fusion of deuterium and tritium to occur, they must be
heated to 100 million Kelvin, where they take the form of plasma,
and scientists are trying to learn how to control high-temperature
plasma. The core of the sun is 15,000 Kelvin, making the deu-
terium and tritium plasma an extremely hot form of matter, and
the material needed to store matter at such a hot temperature has
yet to be discovered. The challenge for scientists and engineers is,
then, heating these elements to 100 million Kelvin, containing
them, and sustaining a stable fusion reaction. Cold fusion, also
known as low-energy nuclear reactions (LENR), has yet to be real-
ized. In this theoretical type of fusion reaction, the elements do not
need to be heated to such extreme temperatures, alleviating many
of the challenges that scientists are presently trying to overcome.
Although many scientists are working to prove that cold fusion is
possible, the top countries involved in the initial research, includ-
ing the United States and Japan, have abandoned their efforts. Al-
though whether such a process is possible is unknown, there is
little hope in the scientific community that cold fusion will ever be
realized and able to contribute to large-scale energy generation.
Advantages of Nuclear Fusion
Nuclear fusion enjoys many advantages over nuclear fission. It is
much more environmentally friendly. Not only does it emit no
greenhouse gases or acid deposition compounds, it does not pro-
duce radioactive waste that needs to be disposed of and stored.
Furthermore, the element needed to fuel fusion reactions, deu-
terium, can be economically obtained from the ocean and is
Alternative Energy
29
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
therefore virtually inexhaustible. Although tritium does not
occur naturally, it can be created from lithium, which is also very
abundant. Nuclear fusion has an extremely high energy density
compared to renewable energies. Although the successful utiliza-
tion of nuclear fusion is not expected to happen anytime sooner
than 50 years from now, medical, civilian commercial market, en-
vironmental, and defense commercial opportunities exist to help
fund the cost of fusion research in the short term.
Prospects for Meeting World Energy Needs
Perhaps the best argument for continuing research into nuclear
fusion is its potential for energy production once a reaction can
be contained and sustained. Fusion reactions release extremely
high amounts of energy. If that energy can be harnessed and
transformed into electricity, fusion could provide a significant
amount of power and contribute to a reduction in reliance on fos-
sil fuels (Tokimatsu et al. 2003, 5).
Energy Conservation
While energy conservation is not a source of energy, it can offset
enough energy use that it could be considered as an alternative to
the continued or increased use of fossil fuels as an energy source.
The United States currently uses over 97 trillion joules annually
(British Petroleum 2007, 37). Of that amount, it is estimated that
as much as 32 trillion joules could be saved annually in the
United States if energy conservation strategies and alternate tech-
nologies were implemented (Pimentel et al. 2004, 281). Further-
more, the same study indicates that the United States would be
able to completely eliminate dependence on imported oil
through energy conservation efforts.
Energy conservation and efficiency techniques in the trans-
portation sector include increased vehicle fuel economy (better
gas mileage); increased carpooling and increased use of public
transportation; shifting to trains for commercial shipping; and in-
corporating energy efficiency innovations into current shipping
transport methods like trucks, planes, and ships. In the building
sector, energy wasted through heating and cooling could be dras-
tically reduced by better sealing of air leaks, better insulation, the
conversion of existing windows and the original construction of
new windows to improved window design, the incorporation of
passive solar design, and the use of high-efficiency furnaces and
30
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
air conditioners. Increasing the energy standards for equipment
and appliances like washing machines and refrigerators and the
use of energy-saving software would also reduce energy con-
sumption. Lighting represents a large proportion of energy use.
The conversion of current lighting to improved efficiency light-
ing, such as compact fluorescent lights, could drastically reduce
energy consumption. Chapter 2 provides a discussion of dissent-
ing opinions on the effectiveness of energy conservation and effi-
ciency for reducing energy consumption.
Hydrogen
Hydrogen, discussed briefly here, is a more appropriate topic for
Chapter 2. The use of hydrogen for energy purposes is a fairly
new endeavor, although its possibility has been discussed and
researched for well over a century (Hoffman 2001, 28). Techni-
cally, hydrogen is not a source of energy, but rather a carrier of
energy. Hydrogen cannot be mined or collected using technol-
ogy; it must be created, like electricity, with either fossil fuel or
renewable energy sources. It is created through a highly energy-
intensive process called electrolysis, which is the use of electric-
ity to split chemical elements and compounds. In the case of
hydrogen, the water compound (H2O) is split to separate the hy-
drogen element from the water molecule, leaving oxygen as the
by-product. Most electrolysis today is powered by fossil fuels,
making the creation of hydrogen unsustainable. Most experts
predict that in the future hydrogen will be created using renew-
able and alternative energy sources like those discussed in this
chapter (Dunn 2001, 23). Hydrogen is mainly used to make am-
monia and methanol, to refine oil, to hydrogenate food oils, and
as a rocket propellant. When it is converted into a fuel like gaso-
line, it can power micro turbines to create electricity and power
vehicles. Used in a fuel cell, it mixes with oxygen to create elec-
tricity and emits only water. The potential of hydrogen to meet
world energy needs without creating severe environmental degra-
dation is heightened when it is created using renewable energy.
Conclusion
Because energy consumption is unlikely to decrease in the fu-
ture, there is no doubt that energy issues will remain at the top
Conclusion
31
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
of political agendas around the globe. This chapter has illus-
trated the uses and sources of energy throughout the world. Fos-
sil fuels remain the dominant source of energy by far, but
renewable energy technologies are growing by type and viabil-
ity. Even though energy conservation can result in large overall
energy savings, energy production to meet the growing needs of
the world is still necessary. Renewable energy sources such as
solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, hydro, and ocean are ready for
use on a mass scale. Alternative energies like nuclear and hydro-
gen are also being used and developed for widespread usage.
This chapter has examined each of these energies, their history
and current use, their process of utilization, their advantages,
and their prospects for meeting world energy needs. The next
chapter presents an in-depth look at the problems and contro-
versies surrounding the development of nonfossil fuel energy
and the debate over the need for a transition away from fossil
fuels toward renewable and alternative energy sources. The
main focus of the chapter is on the United States, and it includes
a full survey of policies in place to encourage renewable energy
production and use.
References
American Nuclear Society. Nuclear News World List of Nuclear Power
Plants. La Grange Park, IL: Author, 2006.
Archer, Cristina L., and Mark Z. Jacobson. “Evaluation of Global Wind
Power.” Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmosphere 110 (2005).
Arshadi, Mehrdad, et al. “Energy from Renewable Resources (Bio-en-
ergy).” In Christian V. Stevens with Roland Verhé, eds. Renewable Biore-
sources: Scope and Modification for Non-food Applications. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2004: 105–137.
Avery, William H., and Chin Wu. Renewable Energy from the Ocean: A
Guide to OTEC. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Beijing Declaration on Hydropower and Sustainable Development,
Adopted at the United Nations Symposium on Hydropower and Sus-
tainable Development, Beijing, China, 29 October 2004. unhsd.icold-cigb
.org.cn/english.html
Bjornsson, Jakob, Ingyar Birgir Frideifsson, Thorkell Helgason, Halldor
Jonatansson, Johann Mar Mariusson, Gudmundur Palmason, Valgardur
32
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Stefansson, and Loftur Thorsteinsson. “The Potential of Geothermal En-
ergy and Hydropower in the World Energy Scenario in Year 2020.”
World 
Energy 
Council. 
1998. 
217.206.197.194:8190/wec-geis
/publications/default/tech_papers/17th_congress/3_1_10.asp?mode
=print&x=61&y=8 
British Petroleum. “Statistical Review of World Energy 2006.” 2007.
www.bp.com/statisticalreview 
Criswell, D. R. “Solar-electric Power via the Moon.” Power Technology In-
ternational (Spring 1997): 24–26.
Dunn, S. Hydrogen Futures: Toward a Sustainable Energy System. Washing-
ton, DC: Worldwatch Institute, 2001.
Energy and Geoscience Institute at the University of Utah. “Geothermal
Energy: Clean Sustainable Energy for the Benefit of Humanity and the
Environment.” 2001. www.geothermal.org/GeoEnergy.pdf 
Energy Information Administration (EIA). Monthly Energy Review. DOE
/EIA Report-0035 (2007/01). Washington, DC: Katherine E. Seiferlein,
2007. tonto.eia.doe.gov/FTPROOT/multifuel/mer/00350701.pdf
European Commission, Photovoltaics in 2010. Brussels: AGORES. 2001.
www.agores.org/Publications/PV2010.htm
European Commission. European Union: Energy and Transport Figures.
Brussels: 
2005. 
ec.europa.eu/dgs/energy_transport/figures/pocket -
book/doc/2006/2006_energy_en.pdf 
Green, M. A., K. Emery, D. L. King, S. Igari, and W. Warta. “Solar Cell Ef-
ficiency Tables (Version 24).” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Appli-
cations. 12 (2004): 365–372.
Hammerschlag, Roel. “Ethanol’s Energy Return on Investment: A Sur-
vey of Literature from 1990–present.” Environmental Science and Technol-
ogy 40, 6 (2006): 1744–1750.
Hassan, Ahmad Y., and Donald Routledge Hill. Islamic Technology: An Il-
lustrated History. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Herbert, G., M. Joselin, S. Iniyan, E. Sreevalsan, and S. Rajapandian. “A
Review of Wind Energy Technologies.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 11 6 (2007): 1117–1145.
Hoffman, P. Tomorrow’s Energy: Hydrogen, Fuel Cells, and the Prospects for a
Cleaner Planet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Huber, Peter W., and Mark P. Mills. The Bottomless Well: The Twilight of
Fuel, the Virtue of Waste and Why We Will Never Run Out of Energy. New
York: Basic Books, 2005.
References
33
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
International Energy Agency. “World Energy Outlook 2006.” 2006. www
.worldenergyoutlook.org
Komor, Paul. Renewable Energy Policy. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse, 2004.
McInnes, Colin R. Solar Sailing: Technology, Dynamics and Mission Applica-
tions. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
Melosi, Martin V. Coping with Abundance: Energy and Environment in In-
dustrial America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Concentrating Solar Power: En-
ergy from Mirrors. Washington, DC: Department of Energy, 2001.
Pimentel, D., A. Pleasant, J. Barron, J. Gaudioso, N. Pollock, E. Chae, Y.
Kim, A. Lassiter, C. Schiavoni, A. Jackson, M. Lee, and A. Eaton. “U.S.
Energy Conservation and Efficiency: Benefits and Costs.” Environment,
Development and Sustainability 6 3 (2004): 279–305.
PowerLight. “Press Release—World’s Largest Solar Photovoltaic Power
Plant to Be Built with GE Investment and PowerLight Technology.” April
27, 2006. www.renewableenergyaccess.com/rea/partner/story?id=44745 
Seager, Ashley. “How Mirrors Can Light up the World.” The Guardian
(November 27, 2006). www.guardian.co.uk/business/2006/nov/27/re -
newableenergy.environment 
Shapouri, Hosein, Michael Wang, and James A. Duffield. “Net Energy
Balancing and Fuel-Cycle Analysis.” In Renewables-Based Technology: Sus-
tainability Assessment. Wiley Series in Renewable Resource, edited by Jo
Dewulf and Herman Van Langenhove. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2006: 73–85.
Smil, Vaclav. Energy at the Crossroads: Global Perspectives and Uncertainties.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Sørenson, Bent. Renewable Energy: Its Physics, Engineering, Use, Environ-
mental Impacts, Economy and Planning Aspects. Burlington, MA: Elsevier
Academic Press, 2004.
Tester, Jeffrey W., Elizabeth M. Drake, Michael J. Driscoll, Michael W.
Golay, and William A. Peters. Sustainable Energy: Choosing among Options.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
Tokimatsu, K., J. Fujino, Y. Asaoka, Y. Ogawa, K. Okano, T. Yoshida, R.
Hiwatari, S. Konishi, S. Nishio, K. Yamaji, and Y. Kaya. Studies of Nuclear
Fusion Energy Potential Based on a Long-term World Energy and Environ-
ment Model. 2003. www.iaea.org/programmes/ripc/physics/fec2000/pdf
/sep_03.pdf 
World Bank. Tapping East Asia and Pacific’s Hydropower Potential. 2007.
web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/EASTASIA -
34
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
PACIFICEXT/EXTEAPREGTOPENERGY/0,,contentMDK:20491251
~menuPK:574044~pagePK:34004173~piPK:34003707~theSitePK:574015,
00.html 
World Commission on Dams. “Dams and Development: A New Frame-
work for Decisionmaking.” The Report of the World Commission on Dams.
November 2000. www.dams.org/report/
World Energy Council. “Solar Energy.” Survey of Energy Resources. 2001.
www.worldenergy.org/documents/ser_sept2001.pdf 
References
35
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
Introduction
In Chapter 1, the renewable and alternative energy technologies
in use and under development throughout the world were ex-
plored. Although it was acknowledged that a debate over the
transition to renewable and alternative energy sources goes on
around the world, specifics were not provided. This chapter pro-
vides an in-depth examination of the conflicts surrounding re-
newable and alternative energy, looking at the problems,
controversies, and solutions involving fossil fuel versus renew-
able and alternative energy use. The section on problems ad-
dresses issues that have prompted a debate over an energy
transition, most of which center on the negative effects associated
with continued fossil fuel use. The section on controversies pre-
sents the major disagreements of the energy transition debate.
The section on solutions focuses on the technical and political
tools that could be used to address the problems and controver-
sies. Particular attention will be devoted to U.S. renewable and
alternative energy policies. A section on regional and global ef-
forts to provide solutions concludes the chapter.
Problems
As the leading consumer of fossil fuels in the world, the United
States has placed a transition to a more reliable source of energy
37
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
at the heart of energy issues in the first decade of the 21st century.
In the face of the growing problems with fossil fuel usage, advo-
cates argue that the most feasible avenue for sustainably meeting
the massive and growing energy demand of the world’s most
powerful economy is to shift to a renewable and alternative en-
ergy economy. Of great concern is the finite quantity of fossil
fuels, the negative environmental effects associated with fossil
fuel use, and U.S. dependence on foreign oil from regions of great
political instability.
The Energy Debate
Many factors have prompted the debate over which energy
source should be used. Some experts argue that there is a dire
need to shift from fossil fuel use to renewable and alternative en-
ergy use. This section examines the scientific, environmental, po-
litical, and economic problems that have led to this push for an
energy transition.
Scientific
Most energy experts agree that, at some point, the world will ex-
haust its finite supply of fossil fuels. A more contentious issue is
when these resources will actually run out. Experts have little
disagreement when it comes to the amount of coal available for
future use; according to the United States Energy Information
Administration (EIA), reserves in the United States alone can pro-
vide for current levels of energy demand for up to 250 years (En-
ergy Information Administration 2007a). The remaining reserves
of oil and natural gas are a far more controversial issue. Forecast-
ers differ significantly in their predictions of the peak of oil pro-
duction, known as the topping point. The topping point of oil
will happen when the world has consumed exactly one-half of all
oil available. This means that the peak of oil production has been
reached and that supplies will begin to decline because there are
no other oil resources to draw from. The production of natural
gas, which is reliant on oil reserves, is closely linked to this pro-
duction peak. We address arguments for a late topping point in
the controversies section of this chapter, but first we turn to the
arguments for an early topping point.
Those predicting an early topping point argue that it has ei-
ther already happened or will happen by the year 2010. Many of
these experts are geologists who worked in the exploration divi-
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
sions of major oil companies and who argue that the bulk of oil
that can be derived using conventional methods has been found.
A major part of this argument is that the laundry list of geologi-
cal conditions necessary for oil to be discovered is virtually im-
possible to meet. All prospective oil reserve locations on land
that meet these conditions have been explored, and so it is
highly unlikely that very much oil will be discovered on land in
the future. Furthermore, it is argued that half of the oil known to
be in current reserves will be unrecoverable even through en-
hanced methods (Deffeyes 2005, 28). Although nonconventional
oil deposits, like tar shales and deep water oil, may exist, it is ar-
gued that retrieving oil from these locations would require as
much or more energy than could be produced from the oil ex-
tracted. Such endeavors would be counterproductive because
more energy would be used trying to find the oil than could be
used from the oil.
Another major aspect of the early topping point argument is
Hubbert’s curve. M. King Hubbert was a geophysicist who
worked for Shell Oil Company. In 1956, by combining the princi-
ples of geology, physics, and mathematics, he was able to suc-
cessfully predict that the United States would reach its peak of oil
production in the 1970s. When oil production in the United States
did, in fact, begin declining as Hubbert predicted, his prediction
for the peak of world oil production in the year 2000 began to
gather attention. Although it is unconfirmed that world oil pro-
duction has peaked, it is likely that we will not know when it has
peaked for some years due to the unreliability of data about cur-
rent oil reserves (Laherrere 2006). The data is unreliable because
it is politicized. Oil reserves data is compiled and released by cor-
porations and countries, like those in the Middle East, that bene-
fit from tweaking the numbers.
Environmental 
In 1983, the United Nations developed a resolution to create
the World Commission on Environment and Development.
This commission was later named the Brundtland Commission
after its chair, Gro Harlem Brundtland. Its purpose was to de-
velop a report to determine long-term environmental strategies
for sustainable development. The report, released in 1987 by
the Brundtland Commission, brought to the world’s attention
the preeminent need for the adoption of sustainable develop-
ment practices. The principles of sustainability promoted by
Problems
39
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the commission encouraged the conservation of resources and
the reorientation of technology. By contributing to the aware-
ness of the problems with nonsustainable energy sources like
fossil fuels, the Brundtland Commission helped stimulate and
publicize the debate over the finite quantity of fossil fuels and
the other reasons for the need to develop renewable and alter-
native energy technologies. Energy concerns have been at the
forefront of political debates ever since.
To many of those advocating a speedy adoption of renew-
able and alternative energy technologies, the predicted dates for
the topping points of oil, gas, and even coal are largely irrelevant.
Environmental concerns and the possibility of tipping points,
which can be likened to the domino effect, mean that continued
dependence on fossil fuels could cause irreversible damage to the
natural world. The consequences of irreversible damage could be
devastating. The worst-case scenario is a mass extinction of
species, including humans. Before laying out the more recent
worst-case scenarios proposed by experts engaged in this debate,
it is helpful to look at other environmental and health problems
that have been associated with the use of fossil fuel for decades.
Because fossil fuels must be combusted or burned to gener-
ate energy, the problem of air pollution has been a concern since
the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. Air pollution has
mainly been the result of using fossil fuels to generate electricity
and to power internal combustion engines, especially those used
in the transportation sector like automobiles, trains, and, increas-
ingly, airplanes. Air pollution, in this sense, includes chemicals
released from burning fossil fuels. These chemicals are nitrogen
oxides, sulfur dioxides, volatile organic compounds, ozone, par-
ticulate matter, mercury, carbon monoxide, and lead. Air pollu-
tion not only causes thousands of premature deaths per year in
industrialized nations, but it also has devastating effects on the
environment through the effects of acid deposition, commonly
known as acid rain. Acid rain is caused by emissions of acidic
compounds, like sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide, that pollute
the environment through precipitation like rain and snow.
Acid rain causes severe damage to lake and river ecosys-
tems, trees, and plants, and it can even cause degradation to
human-made buildings. It has also been blamed for reductions in
timber production in industrialized nations, leading to economic
losses. A growing concern is that the increasing acidification of
soil will result in an imbalance of chemicals and nutrients in the
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
soil. Such an imbalance could cause the soil to become infertile.
Because plants rely on the nutrients in fertile soil to grow, acid
rain can ultimately make it very difficult or impossible for plants
to grow. Furthermore, ecosystems can store these acidic com-
pounds in the soil. When rains or floods transport the acidic
chemicals to other parts of the ecosystems, there can be negative
effects on the environment long after the initial pollution. This
delayed effect makes it hard to determine the full impact that
acid rain has on the environment, causing us to underestimate
the damage. By not being able to gauge the actual effect of acid
rain, we risk polluting the natural world beyond repair. Soils and
ecosystems can absorb only so much acid rain; if a tipping point
is reached, the environmental damage could become irreversible.
The death of forests, lakes, and croplands due to acid rain would
undoubtedly and clearly have shocking effects on the economy.
Water sources can be polluted by fossil fuel use not only
through acid rain, but also through pollution to surface water
caused directly by the fossil fuel. An example of this problem is
the Exxon Valdez oil spill. In 1989, the Exxon oil tanker Valdez pol-
luted hundreds of miles of the Alaskan coast causing severe eco-
logical havoc after the ship’s hull was damaged from running
into shallow water. Pollution of groundwater and drinking water
can also be caused, at least in part, by energy exploration prac-
tices, including mining and drilling for oil.
Another concern among renewable and alternative energy
supporters is the effect of energy exploration on land. Surface
mining methods like strip mining, open-pit mining, and moun-
taintop mining cause permanent alteration of the landscape be-
cause the land above the deposits is simply pushed aside by
bulldozers and other earth-moving machines. This can severely
damage ecosystems and the organisms that live in them, and it
requires considerable amounts of water for restoration if restora-
tion is even attempted. Oil exploration and drilling can also dis-
rupt ecosystems and displace the use of arable land. The
transport of fossil fuels, once they are discovered, can have detri-
mental effects on the environment as well. Pipelines can be hun-
dreds of miles long, disrupting the areas through which they run.
Additionally, there is the potential for gas leaks and oil spills
across the large area of land that pipelines cover. In 2006, an oil
spill from a pipeline in Alaska was the result of a pinprick hole
that slowly widened as the pressure from the oil pushed against
it. It went undetected for several days because the leak formed
Problems
41
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
beneath the snow cover, resulting in the pollution of the environ-
ment by thousands of gallons of oil.
There is little debate that air pollution, acid rain, and energy
exploration have severe consequences for environmental and
human health. Governments all over the globe have enacted nu-
merous policies to address these issues. Although these issues
contribute to the push by many scientists and experts for a transi-
tion to a more sustainable form of energy, they are not at the fore-
front of the debate. The major argument of rapid transition
proponents is the looming uncertainty of the intensity of the ef-
fects of climate change or global warming. Much of the scientific
evidence concerning global warming suggests that the process is
being accelerated by anthropogenic, or human-caused, green-
house gas (ghg) emissions (International Panel on Climate
Change 2007, 2). These emissions are due almost entirely to the
burning of fossil fuels for energy use. The fragile balance of the
Earth’s atmospheric makeup gives cause for concern about alter-
ing the chemicals in the shield that is vital for all life. Increases in
carbon dioxide and methane emissions have the effect of trapping
heat from the sun like a greenhouse and creating, over time, a rise
in temperature that will have dramatic effects on ecosystems. The
ability of life on Earth to survive after a certain degree of tempera-
ture increase is hardly a point of contention among scientists.
After the possibility of global warming was discovered, the
United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) and the
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) established the Inter-
national Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 1988 to study and as-
sess the potential impact of human-induced warming. Their
findings indicated that ghg emissions from fossil fuel usage are
most likely the primary cause of the excessive warming that is oc-
curring and that is expected to occur in the future. Wide accep-
tance of the IPCC’s findings is reflected in global agreements like
the Kyoto Protocol, signed in 1997 by 166 countries and other
governmental entities, which sets binding limits on ghg emis-
sions. Although major greenhouse gas emitters like the United
States have not signed the agreement, the general acceptance of
climate change is pervasive throughout American society where
numerous states and corporations are making their own commit-
ments to reductions in ghg emissions despite the lack of action by
the federal government.
The real question is not whether global warming is hap-
pening; the general consensus is that it is. The controversy is
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
over how fast it is occurring, how much of a change in tempera-
ture there will be, what the real effects of this change will be, and
what the impact of nonhuman-related causes may be. Because of
this uncertainty, global warming has also become a contentious
issue: On one side are those who would advocate a rapid transi-
tion away from fossil fuels, prompted by government interven-
tion through policy mandates; on the other side are those who
would opt for a gradual transition through market mechanisms
or no transition at all. We turn first to the arguments for a rapid
transition.
Several factors have warranted concern among scientists,
policy makers, and citizens alike. With the continued combustion
of fossil fuels and hence the emission of greenhouse gases, sev-
eral scenarios for the effects of warming have been explored
through scientific modeling. The degree of warming that will
occur could be too high for many ecosystems to survive because
the rate of the planet’s current and future warming could be too
fast for ecosystems to adapt to it. The result could be the die-off of
entire ecosystems like tropical rain forests and coral reefs. Experts
are already predicting that, with current levels of warming, coral
reefs are in danger of severe degradation and possible extinction
(Buddemeier, Kleypas, and Aronson 2004). This loss of biodiver-
sity would have many dire effects on human and natural popula-
tions. Just from an economic standpoint, the loss of resources like
the rain forests would be devastating for the regions that depend
on them. From a global perspective, a significant loss of ecosys-
tems could have even more serious effects on humanity. Further-
more, specific ecosystems, like the rain forest, serve to provide
global benefits that are absolutely necessary for the survival of
humanity. For example, we rely on rain forests and ocean ecosys-
tems for oxygen to breathe. On the flip side, warming would not
only destroy ecosystems but also could increase the geographic
range of survival for certain organisms, like mosquitoes. The re-
sult would be the spread of diseases like malaria to parts of the
world where they were not previously a problem.
Rising sea levels are also a concern. As global temperatures
increase, glaciers and ice caps are expected to melt, causing a
gradual increase in sea levels over time. Recent studies have
shown that ice caps and glaciers are indeed melting. In fact, the
rate of melting is much higher than was originally thought by ex-
perts (Stroeve et al. 2004). Sea levels, which originally were not
predicted to rise significantly for another millennium, are now
Problems
43
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
predicted to rise anywhere from several inches to several feet in
less than one hundred years (International Panel on Climate
Change 2007a, 13). Much of the world’s infrastructure and many
major cities are located on the coasts. The effect of rising sea lev-
els on cities like New York; Tokyo; Shanghai, China; Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil; and Los Angeles would be particularly disastrous
in terms of human health and economic expenses. A new classifi-
cation of environmental refugees would be seeking protection in-
land, causing strain to already stressed ecosystems and cities.
Rising sea levels, coupled with predictions for more fre-
quent and intense storm systems, would not only put immense
strain on the insurance industry but could bankrupt it altogether
(Leggett 2005, 72). This in turn could cause the collapse of global
financial markets because production would be halted and capi-
tal to repair damages would be nonexistent. The same problems
that would plague the insurance companies are also a threat to
the agricultural sector. Flooding and droughts, the effects of heat
on crops, and the proliferation of pests could dramatically reduce
global food supplies (International Panel on Climate Change
2007b, 6). Similarly, droughts would result in the compounding
of an already stressed water supply. Effects like this are being felt
in rural areas in developing countries where disadvantaged pop-
ulations must rely on international assistance to cope with such
problems (Revkin 2007, 1). Any one of these effects, and certainly
all of them combined, would add to the possibility of water-re-
lated conflicts and societal instability. The potential for violence is
beyond what experts have attempted to describe when present-
ing the global warming scenario.
Perhaps the most worrisome scenario is the possibility that
these effects will occur much sooner than predicted and that the
warming could become irreversible. The chances of naturally oc-
curring amplifying feedbacks create the potential for an apoca-
lyptic situation like something dreamed up for a Hollywood
movie. Amplifying feedbacks refer to the release of naturally oc-
curring greenhouse gases, many of which are currently dormant
due to low temperatures. A rise in temperatures could result in
the stimulation of emissions from sources like methane hydrates
found in the oceans and greenhouse gases locked up in per-
mafrost. The so-called methane burp hypothesis, which refers to
the sudden and immense release of methane from melting hy-
drates in the ocean, contends that past mass extinctions may have
already resulted from accelerated warming caused by methane,
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
which is a greenhouse gas that is many times more powerful than
carbon dioxide. If these methane hydrates were destabilized
again, they could cause catastrophic warming as well as a dra-
matic change in the makeup of atmospheric gases, affecting the
ability of life dependent on oxygen and carbon dioxide to sur-
vive. Additionally, experts predict that warming could cause the
acceleration of decomposition in soil, causing it to switch from a
carbon sink to a carbon source. The loss of other carbon sinks,
like the Amazon rain forest, would affect the Earth’s ability to
naturally balance atmospheric levels of oxygen and carbon diox-
ide. Coupled with anthropogenic additions of greenhouse gases
(like carbon dioxide) to the atmosphere, such an occurrence
would result in a situation that models have not been able to fully
realize. These amplifying feedbacks could result in a rate of
warming much faster than predicted, with much more intense ef-
fects. If the impacts of global warming reach the worst-case sce-
nario, the trend will become irreversible, and humanity and
civilization as we know it will cease to exist.
While there is much uncertainty about the actual results
that warming will have and when, several experts agree that the
precautionary principle should be employed. The precautionary
principle states that, if the impacts of an action or inaction are ex-
treme and irreversible, even if there is inconclusive scientific evi-
dence about the risk for disaster, measures must be taken to
prevent the impacts from occurring (United Nations 1992, 10).
The facts that fossil fuels are finite and that the world population
is growing and developing mean that a new energy source has to
be developed at some point. The risks from global warming make
the case for developing that energy source as soon as possible.
Renewable and alternative energies have the potential to alleviate
the natural world from most of the degradation it undergoes now
due to the dominance of fossil fuels in the energy market.
Political and Economic
Other issues that have contributed to the debate over the need for
renewable and alternative energy sources involve political and
social problems associated with fossil fuel use. The natural geo-
graphic location of raw fossil fuel resources throughout the
world, particularly oil, is very centralized and has resulted in
many negative geopolitical consequences. An example of this is
the latest war between the United States and Iraq, which has been
attributed to the need for a stable oil supply, albeit under the
Problems
45
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
guise of national and global security from weapons of mass de-
struction (Piven 2004, 14). Incidents like the disruption of natural
gas supply in 2006 from Russia to the recently annexed province
of Georgia have caused tension in an already volatile region
(Champion 2006, 1). Political scientists contend that tension be-
tween the United States and Venezuela would not be as severe
were it not for the large reserves of oil Venezuela holds (U.S. Gov-
ernment Accountability Office 2006, 2).
As the globalization of world economies and markets
speeds up the development of highly populated countries like
China and India, these nations begin to compete with already de-
veloped countries for their share of fossil fuels. Because fossil fuel
supplies are limited, competition, especially as these resources
become scarcer, could escalate into conflicts where the use of
military force is entirely possible. Furthermore, either countries
without significant fossil fuel resources could become too depen-
dent on those that have fossil fuels, making their economies
much more vulnerable to price fluctuations, or they could be-
come aggressive in their efforts to secure energy for their people
(Center for American Progress 2006, 9). Most developing coun-
tries are just entering the fossil fuel age, meaning that the worst
effects of mass consumption are yet to come. To prevent the
global consequences of fossil fuel use, there must be a transition
to a reliance on renewable or alternative energy by all countries,
industrialized and developing. Industrialized nations have
caused many problems already through their fossil fuel combus-
tion, and developing countries cannot rely on fossil fuels without
the same negative local, regional, and global implications.
To address the global effects of fossil fuel use, efforts at the
worldwide level must be made because many of the effects of
global warming have an impact on what is called a pure public
good. A pure public good is a resource that can be used by every-
one at the same time and that no one can be stopped from using,
like the atmosphere. Consequently, the misuse of this good, such
as the pollution of it, affects the quality of the good for all users to
some degree. For instance, if the United States and China burn
fossil fuels and emit greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, after
the levels of those gases reach a certain point, the entire world,
not just the United States and China, have to bear the burden of
the effects of the increased warming. The United States, however,
has no incentive to bear the costs of reducing its ghg emissions,
particularly if another country, like China, is going to continue to
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
emit them. This phenomenon is called the tragedy of the com-
mons. The only way the tragedy of the commons can be avoided
in this situation is if both countries agree to reduce their emis-
sions enough to eliminate their contributions to global warming.
In the case of renewable and alternative energy, efforts at a transi-
tion will be more successful if all of the most energy-intensive
countries in the world make an agreement to switch. As such, the
problem of getting the major energy consumers of the world to
sign a binding agreement could hinder the transition to renew-
able energy.
Controversies
This section examines the other side of the energy debate, which
does not support a shift away from fossil fuels. The critics of a
transition to a renewable and alternative energy economy focus
on several important issues. Although proponents of renewable
and alternative energy have answered many of these concerns,
they are important to discuss nonetheless. By looking at the situa-
tion from as many angles as possible, we can develop the most
feasible solution to the problems. First, we address the problems
associated with the renewable and alternative energy technolo-
gies described in Chapter 1. Then we present the alternative side
to the debate over the problems with fossil fuels just presented.
Controversy: Viability of Renewable 
and Alternative Energy Technologies
While using renewable and alternative energy has many advan-
tages, the technologies also have some drawbacks and hurdles to
overcome. Although each technology has specific problems to
surmount, many of the technologies share similar obstacles to use
on a mass scale. If we are to rely on renewable and alternative en-
ergy sources to meet our energy needs, the technologies must be
viable for widespread use. In this section, we discuss the individ-
ual and collective barriers to the use of these technologies on a
mass scale, along with the possibilities for overcoming them.
These barriers include problems with the storage and distribu-
tion of energy produced from renewable sources, the costs of the
technology, technicalities, environmental effects, and social and
Controversies
47
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
political barriers. A separate section presents the particular prob-
lems associated with nuclear power.
Storage and Distribution of Energy
With the exception of biomass and nuclear power, a recurring
problem with renewable and alternative energy is the need for
the storage and distribution of energy, although the latter is typi-
cal for most energy sources, including fossil fuels. While the 
decentralization of renewable energy sources can alleviate prob-
lems like those associated with its geopolitical characteristics and
equity among less developed countries, it can pose a problem for
areas that require excessive amounts of energy, like major metro-
politan areas. This is because the quality of energy sources can
vary by region. For example, although solar is inexhaustible, it is
subject to seasonal fluctuations of light and has much wider
availability in some regions than in others. The Southwest region
of the United States has considerable solar resources, and the
Great Plains region has excellent wind potential, but the energy
from these areas would have to be transmitted across the country
if renewable energy is to provide for the needs of areas like New
York City or Atlanta. For renewable energy from these regions to
meet the energy needs in distant cities, the energy must be trans-
mitted as electricity by wire or stored in another medium as po-
tential energy and transported for distribution. If stored in a
medium, some kind of technology has to be used to utilize the
energy from that particular medium. For example, if renewable
energy were used to make hydrogen fuel that was transported by
tanker to New York City, hydrogen fuel cells would be required
to use the potential energy stored in the fuel.
Even in areas having an abundance of renewable energy, nat-
ural fluctuations, like those due to weather and seasons, create the
need for storage. For example, while there is more than enough
solar energy in the Southwest to provide power for the area year-
round, the sun does not shine at night, and monsoons in the sum-
mer prevent solar radiation from being able to provide energy
directly 24 hours a day. Excess energy must be stored for use at
night and during other times when there is little sunlight. These
variations in supply are common for all renewable energies except
biomass. Wind is a much more variable and localized energy source
than solar. The quality of wind can differ greatly from region to re-
gion, which causes a need for energy storage if it is to be used on a
large scale. Geothermal is often not located near the areas that need
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the most power. Ocean energy is also very localized, requiring the
transmission or transport of electricity over large distances. Tech-
nologies like ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC) may have to
operate far offshore, which complicates the transport of energy
through transmission lines. Like other renewable energies, ocean
energy would benefit from a viable storage technology. Hydroelec-
tric dams are even less modular than most renewable energies; they
must be built in very specific places. Yet large-scale hydroelectric
dams have enjoyed success as energy providers. With financial in-
vestments in such projects, transmission lines have been built to
transport hydroelectricity to city centers. This fact alone makes a
case for the possibilities of overcoming issues with the distribution
of energy produced from renewable sources.
As discussed in Chapter 1, hydrogen has great potential to
act as a storage medium for renewable energy. By converting re-
newable energy into hydrogen and storing it in a fuel cell, it can be
transported as a highly efficient energy source and used in a vari-
ety of energy applications. It makes full exploitation of the most
concentrated renewable energy power densities possible. This
highly modular characteristic could eliminate the need for distrib-
ution via cumbersome transmission lines for large grid applica-
tions. Hydrogen is efficient and reliable. It is clean and emits
nothing but water when combined with oxygen to create electric-
ity in fuel cells. Problems with hydrogen fuel technologies do exist,
however. It is not yet economically viable or at least cost competi-
tive with fossil fuels. There is a lack of infrastructure in place for
the implementation of hydrogen fuel technologies, especially in
the transportation sector. There are also safety concerns about its
flammability. While it has a lower flammability limit than gasoline
or oil, it has a much greater range of flammability. Technology to
effectively store hydrogen fuel is still being developed. As men-
tioned, however, impediments to the use of hydrogen are more fi-
nancial than technical. The main barrier to expanded energy
production from either of these sources is the perceived monetary
costs. Hydrogen production requires significant amounts of en-
ergy, and materials for fuel cells are expensive enough to prohibit
the expansion of this technology. These costs may be more per-
ceived than real, though, as will now be discussed.
Costs
The costs of renewable and alternative energy are probably the
most prohibitive factors to their development on a wide scale.
Controversies
49
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Although renewable and alternative energies can actually pay
for themselves in the long run, they have extremely high initial
capital costs in the short term. As a result, they are not as cheap
at first for consumers to buy as fossil fuels, making the demand
for renewable and alternative energy lower than demand for fos-
sil fuels. This, in turn, discourages investment into renewable
and alternative energy by the private sector, which is essential if
the technologies are to be produced on a large scale. Cost has
proved inhibitive for the development of solar energy in particu-
lar (Perlin 2002).
A couple of contributing factors have ensured that fossil
fuels are the most cost-competitive energy source on the market.
First, subsidies and tax breaks from federal governments have
kept the price of fossil fuels down, despite the high costs of ex-
ploration and extraction (Myers and Kent 2001, 65). While renew-
able and alternative energies enjoy some financial assistance from
the government, they do not receive as much as fossil fuels, nor
have they received it for as long. This gives fossil fuels an unfair
economic advantage over more sustainable energy sources.
Second, arguments have surfaced that many of the costs of
fossil fuels and the benefits of renewable energy and energy from
hydrogen are not accounted for. These costs and benefits are
known as externalities. “Externality” is a term used by econo-
mists to describe a cost or benefit that is not calculated into the
costs or profits of production. Often such costs and benefits are
paid for or enjoyed by the public and by the government, rather
than the industry. Negative externalities are associated with
costs, and positive externalities are associated with benefits. For
example, if photovoltaics (PVs) are used instead of a coal-fired
power plant to generate electricity for a city, the costs and profits
are calculated based on the energy production. In that respect,
power produced from photovoltaics is much more expensive
than power from the coal-fired power plant. This is due to the
amount of technology needed to produce the same amount of en-
ergy as the coal plant and the high cost of that technology. The re-
sult is that the capital costs of using solar energy are much higher
than the cost of the coal plant’s construction and the coal itself. If
the decision to choose solar or coal as an energy source is based
on the costs of the two projects, coal would be chosen because it
is much more inexpensive and turns a quicker and more signifi-
cant profit than solar. Coal, however, contributes to air pollution
and acid rain, whereas solar does not. If the costs borne by society
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
for negative externalities associated with the air pollution and
acid rain caused by coal-fired power plants were calculated into
the cost of production, then the costs of the coal-fired plant
would be much closer to, or perhaps greater than, the price of
solar power. If positive externalities, like cleaner air, improved
environment, and energy security, were factored into the profits
of solar energy production, then it would become even more cost
competitive with coal and other fossil fuels. Unfortunately, calcu-
lating these costs and benefits is very difficult because it is hard
to put a price on clean air and healthy ecosystems. As a result,
most economic analyses simply omit these externalities from
cost-benefit ratio calculations, causing a distorted view of the real
costs of using renewable energy over energy derived from fossil
fuels. But as energy prices rise, particularly oil, renewable and al-
ternative energies become more cost competitive even when ex-
ternalities are not accounted for (Odell 1999, 37). This glitch in
our economic system can be overcome through policies designed
with these facts in mind. A detailed discussion of this is provided
in the section on solutions.
Technicalities
Like most technologies, renewable energy technology is in need
of further development and refinement. The conversion of en-
ergy from renewable sources for more practical applications is
still not as efficient as most critics argue it should be to be viable
for large-scale use. Most solar technologies have much potential
for improvement. Although wind energy is fairly efficient, trans-
mitting the energy over long distances to urban centers can result
in efficiency loss. Even biomass, which does not have the energy
storage problems of other renewable energy sources, is not as ef-
ficient an energy source as fossil fuels (Hammerschlag 2006,
1746). This is because the density of energy intensity found in fos-
sil fuels is much higher than it is in biomass. The result in each of
these cases is that larger quantities of the original energy sources
would have to be used to achieve the same level of energy pro-
duction as fossil fuels. This creates a greater problem for biomass
than for inexhaustible energy sources like wind and solar. Due to
inefficiencies in the conversion process, ocean energy may be un-
able to provide enough energy to make it suitable for largely pop-
ulated areas. However, the more that these technologies are
researched and developed, the quicker the improvements needed
for efficiency will be found.
Controversies
51
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Other technical issues involve the vulnerabilities of the
technology to the elements. Similar to offshore oil drilling, off-
shore wind and ocean technologies are vulnerable to damage in
storms, which can lead to interruptions in energy supply. Large-
and small-scale hydropower projects are at risk from river flood-
ing during excessive rainfall or snowmelt. And dams have to
contend with the issue of silt buildup. In some cases it may take
hundreds of years for the built-up silt to render the dam unusable
for the production of hydropower. Depending on the flow of the
river and the amount of sediment it carries, however, silt buildup
can occur much more quickly.
Environmental Effects
While the environmental effects of renewable energy are minis-
cule compared to fossil fuels, they do have an impact on the envi-
ronment, some much more than others. Being aware of these
impacts makes it easier to minimize them and to make more in-
formed decisions about energy development. Until these tech-
nologies are developed further, complex technologies, like
photovoltaics made from silicon products, will continue to re-
quire a large amount of manufacturing energy. If this energy does
not come from a sustainable source, the one-time production
process of these technologies could contribute to pollution and
emissions, though much less when compared to the life of fossil
fuel technologies. Although biomass can create carbon sinks that
offset its emissions, it still releases carbon dioxide when com-
busted. And it has been found that reservoirs created by large
dams emit small amounts of greenhouse gases due to the acceler-
ated breakdown of ecomatter.
The use of land and disturbances to ecosystems and wildlife
are major concerns. Wind farms, central solar power (CSP) sys-
tems, and especially biomass and large-scale hydroelectric pro-
jects can require a considerable amount of land. In fact, this is
considered one of the biggest drawbacks of biomass. Competi-
tion for land between energy sources and the agricultural sector
could potentially offset agricultural development, particularly in
the case of biomass. If we rely too much on biomass to provide
for our energy needs, interruptions in the food supply are also a
possibility. Additionally, to expand the availability of land for the
cultivation of biomass crops, deforestation could occur, which
could then cause the loss of those carbon sinks creating a nega-
tive trade-off and potentially increasing carbon dioxide in the
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
atmosphere. The potential for this deforestation to cause a host of
other ills—like soil erosion, desertification, loss of biodiversity,
and the siltation of rivers—would be greatly amplified. Large-
scale hydro has been known to cause significant disturbances in
land and river ecosystems through the flooding that occurs with
the creation of the reservoir. Dams cause changes in temperature
and in the chemical content of water, and they interfere with the
quality or flow of water downriver, which can also have detri-
mental effects on river ecosystems. Ocean energy has the poten-
tial to disrupt ecosystems and wildlife, including interference in
the transport of sediment by waves. Offshore wind and ocean
technology requires the use of areas in the sea, which could inter-
rupt nautical navigation for humans as well as fish and bird pop-
ulations. Both onshore and offshore wind projects have been
found to be hazardous to bird populations, though technological
adjustments are expected to mitigate this effect (Chambers 2000,
14). Dams also block the migration of fish populations like
salmon, making it difficult or impossible for them to return to
spawning areas and often pushing them to the point of extinc-
tion. The environmental concerns related to geothermal energy
center on the extraction of the resources. Although the risks are
low, extraction has the potential to cause seismic reactions from
drilling and land subsidence from the extraction of water if re-
placement fluids are not injected into the reservoir.
Biomass also has the potential to deplete soil nutrients nec-
essary for agriculture, though, if used as a rotation crop in agri-
cultural operations, it could have the opposite effect. Similar to
the effect of agriculture on the environment, biomass crops could
cause fertilizer contamination of water, negative impacts from
monoculture, and other pollution related to the growing and har-
vesting of crops. The use of water is a concern in the cases of bio-
mass and geothermal. The cultivation of biomass crops uses
much more water than other renewable energies. Although it is a
minimal concern, certain types of geothermal exploration and ex-
traction are also water intensive.
Social and Political Barriers
Generally, support for renewable energy and energy from hydro-
gen is high. However, these sources still have social and political
issues that must be dealt with. There has already been dissent
over the locations chosen for some types of renewable energy de-
velopments. The dissent stems from what has come to be known
Controversies
53
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
as the NIMBY phenomenon, NIMBY being an acronym for “not in
my backyard” and referring to the opposition of area residents to
a development in their geographical location but not in someone
else’s. A perfect example of NIMBYism is the protest by residents
of Cape Cod over the Cape Wind Project. Off the coast of Cape
Cod, Massachusetts, the Cape Wind Association is developing the
first offshore wind farm in the United States, called the Cape
Wind Project. High-profile property owners in the area, including
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., are hotly contesting the project because of a
perceived negative effect on the seascape, the local economy, and
the ocean, which is considered a global commons (Kennedy 2005).
This lack of local acceptance for the project could cause delays in
its construction or even halt it altogether. Although this example
highlights a rejection due mainly to aesthetics, wind turbines can
also be noisy, making them less socially accepted in urban areas.
This creates a difficult hurdle for renewable energy in particular
because of its localized nature. Certain sites are naturally better
for renewable energy development than others because of the
high concentration of renewable energy found there.
While the NIMBY phenomenon seems to be one of the
biggest social and political problems for renewable energy devel-
opment, other problems are related to specific technologies. The
conditions for working on turbines in wind farms are hazardous
to workers, although this is also true of many fossil fuel extrac-
tion and utilization technologies. The use of biomass or biofuels,
as illustrated in the preceding section, could cause the energy
needs of society to come into direct competition with food and
timber production. The creation of reservoirs can cause a severe
displacement of human populations, as the Three Gorges Dam
project did in China on the Yangtze River, which forced 1.2 mil-
lion people to relocate. With regard to the remaining undevel-
oped hydropower potential in the world, the majority of
potential exists in areas of political instability, making it difficult
to get a project online, much less one that is safe from interfer-
ence. However, most proponents of renewable and alternative
energy do not support the development of large-scale hydro pro-
jects because of the myriad issues associated with them.
Controversy: Nuclear Power
Some argue that the problems associated with nuclear power
have killed it as a possibility for solving our energy woes. Recent
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
events in developing and even in developed countries, though,
have shown that nuclear energy has yet to be abandoned as an
energy option. While far fewer issues are associated with nuclear
fusion than with nuclear fission, fission is the only viable way to
create nuclear energy, and so its disadvantages must be taken
into account. This section examines the problems associated with
both fission and fusion, paying particular attention to the prob-
lems associated with fission. Unlike renewable energy, nuclear
energy does not have the problems with storage and distribution;
therefore, our discussion begins with costs.
Costs
Like renewable energy, nuclear power has high initial capital
costs. Although nuclear power is used commercially, the eco-
nomic benefits of it are misleading. First, it requires considerable
initial capital investment that is often subsidized by the govern-
ment and hence the taxpayers. In reality, nuclear power is not
economically competitive with fossil fuels on its own. The capi-
tal investment needed to build a fusion reactor core, once the
technology is viable, is even higher than that required for the
construction of fission reactor cores because fusion reactor cores
are much larger and more complex. Second, the government
subsidizes the insurance for the operation of such plants so that
they are affordable to run by the private sector. Although the
risks are low that there could be a reactor meltdown or radiation
leak, the costs to insure against the astronomical harm are too
high to make nuclear power an enticing investment for the pri-
vate market. Again this burden is passed on to the taxpayers.
Third, the costs of waste storage and disposal, maintenance,
plant decommissioning, and reparations in the case of a melt-
down also make nuclear power very expensive. Finally, as dis-
cussed below in the next section, if there is a uranium shortage
and uranium supplies decrease, demand will continue to in-
crease as will the price, making nuclear energy even less eco-
nomically viable. There is little debate over the costliness of
nuclear energy, but many supporters of nuclear energy view the
benefits, especially those for the environment and national secu-
rity, as outweighing the economic costs.
Technicalities
Both fission and fusion technologies have issues to overcome.
Fusion reactions are much more difficult to achieve than fission
Controversies
55
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
reactions, as evidenced by the fact that nuclear energy produced
by fission became commercially viable decades ago. The fact that
energy from fusion reactions has yet to be harnessed and used is
discouraging, and the lack of a breakthrough has some countries
phasing out fusion research and development funding. Nuclear
fission requires the use of uranium. But with an impending
shortage that has been estimated to occur as early as 2015, nu-
clear power will become an undependable source of energy
(Jameson 2005). Continued support for nuclear energy is driven
by hopes that new technology will be developed that can create
nuclear reactions without uranium.
Environmental Effects
Despite the environmental benefits of nuclear power’s lack of
emissions, the use of nuclear fission, though not so much nu-
clear fusion, is still a danger to the environment and human
health. The Three Mile Island and Chernobyl accidents are
proof that things can go wrong in nuclear reactors and that the
effects can be potentially devastating. Not only can lives be lost
instantly (30 people died immediately after the Chernobyl acci-
dent), but the radiation released can lead to more deaths in the
future by causing higher rates of cancer. Radiation exposure
and poisoning are damaging to ecosystems as well. While the
safety records of most nuclear reactors are very good, the risks
and consequences of a meltdown or an explosion have made a
strong case for the elimination or reduction of the use of nuclear
power altogether.
Environmental concerns about radioactive waste have
also contributed to the negative perception of nuclear power
(Riley 2004, 94). The permanent storage of nuclear waste from
current nuclear operations has been a contentious issue for
decades. Even after Yucca Mountain in Nevada was designated
as the permanent storage site, numerous delays related to liti-
gation and expanded study of the area have prevented it from
accepting nuclear waste. Radioactive waste produced from nu-
clear power generation must be stored for at least 15,000 years
without leakages to protect the environment and human health
from harmful radiation exposure. It takes thousands of years
for the radiation in the waste to subside. Other environmental
damages include thermal pollution to nearby waterways by
nuclear power plants and disturbances to the ecosystems from
uranium mining.
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Social and Political Barriers
Although support for minimizing the use of fossil fuels as an en-
ergy source is high, support for nuclear power is low and sup-
port for renewable energy is mixed. As mentioned in the
controversies section, despite the lack of nuclear reactor acci-
dents since Chernobyl, nuclear power is perceived to be danger-
ous and risky. This fact has contributed to the halt of licensing of
any new nuclear reactors in the United States since the 1970s.
Though using nuclear waste to make a bomb has not happened
yet, there is always that concern. Nuclear waste would be ex-
tremely dangerous if the wrong people acquired it. Nuclear
power is so expensive and requires such an investment and tech-
nical know-how that it can be used only by industrialized and
politically stable countries where the risks are accepted by the
societies. The NIMBY phenomenon affecting renewable energy
sources contributes to the social barriers for nuclear energy as
well. Most communities are not supportive of building a nuclear
reactor right in their own backyard.
Controversy: Energy Conservation
Chapter 1 presented a discussion of the potential for energy con-
servation and efficiency to alleviate our dependence on fossil
fuels. Although most experts advocate energy efficiency, some
argue that energy-efficient technologies would actually raise en-
ergy consumption rather than reduce it. As energy efficiency has
grown, so has global per-capita energy consumption, which
means that increased use is not just due to population growth.
The argument is that increased energy efficiency leads to greater
energy consumption because it increases the opportunity for
even greater use of energy-intensive products. Furthermore, the
more efficient technology becomes, the more people can do and
the faster they can do it, leading to more energy consumption.
Basically, energy efficiency cannot save energy if it causes more
people to use energy that they might not have used otherwise
(Huber and Mills 2005, 114). For example, suppose a family saves
money using energy-efficient appliances and lighting and then
uses that money to fly somewhere on vacation. In that case, they
are using more energy than they would have used if they were
still using inefficient appliances and lighting. There are, however,
several flaws to this argument. It assumes that the family would
not have flown somewhere on vacation without money from the
Controversies
57
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
energy savings, and there is little evidence to support this hypo-
thetical assumption. Furthermore, the argument that more effi-
cient technologies lead to greater use of those technologies,
offsetting any energy savings, assumes that the less efficient tech-
nologies would not be used by the other people using the tech-
nology for the first time. The argument that there is a correlation
between an increase in energy efficiency and an increase in per-
capita energy use does not prove causation. The correlation could
exist simply because of a correlation between the creation of more
energy-intensive products and the number of people using those
types of products or any similar but less efficient product.
Controversy: Oil Topping Point 
As previously mentioned, there is much controversy over the ac-
tual date for the oil topping point. Those predicting a late topping
point assert that oil production will start to decline no sooner
than 2037. Peter W. Huber and Mark P. Mills argue in their book,
The Bottomless Well: The Twilight of Fuel, the Virtue of Waste and
Why We Will Never Run Out of Energy, that the oil topping point is
completely inconsequential (Huber and Mills 2005, 181). The nat-
ural gas topping point has been predicted to occur as early as
2030. While disagreements abound over the exact date that the
finiteness of fossil fuels will be fully realized, virtually all experts
concede that it will happen eventually. This latter point, taken
alone, points to the need to develop technology that will harness
the inexhaustible resources of wind, solar, hydro, geothermal,
and biomass before society is affected by the squeeze of limited
fossil fuel resources.
Related to the controversy over the oil topping point are
some insightful arguments against the utility of energy forecast-
ing that were mentioned in Chapter 1. Dr. Vaclav Smil exposes
the historical inaccuracies of energy forecasting and the sensitiv-
ity of modeling results to “unanticipated turns of events” in his
book, Energy at the Crossroads: Global Perspectives and Uncertainties
(Smil 2003, 172). He argues that the unmanageable number of
variables and their infinite number of interactions with each
other are impossible to account for and ensure that forecasts and
predictions based on models will continue to be incorrect, often
drastically so. An examination of previous energy consumption
forecasts seems to make Dr. Smil’s point. For example, the two
most widely cited forecasts of the late 1970s, those of the World
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Energy Conference of 1978 and the International Institute for Ap-
plied Systems Analysis, overestimated the use amount of energy
consumption in 2000 by no less than 30 percent in their most con-
servative estimates (Smil 2003, 144).
While Dr. Smil does not deny that energy demand and con-
sumption will continue to increase, he argues that it is futile to
utilize all of our resources trying to determine how much they
will increase. He contends that the solution to the problem of in-
accurate predictions is to shift our efforts toward normative fore-
casting. Normative forecasting focuses on what should happen
rather than what will happen, thereby encouraging the formula-
tion and implementation of proactive solutions that concentrate
on creating the results desired (Smil 2003, 178–180).
Controversy: Global Warming 
Few, if any, climatologists believe that warming is not occurring.
The scientific data to support this belief has been overwhelming.
Although the vast majority of climatologists agree that warming
is occurring, there is debate over the specifics of the theory and
the actions that they warrant (“Global Warning . . .” 2007). Some
scientists are concerned that IPCC projections will be inaccurate
(Tennekes 2007). Similar to Dr. Smil’s argument, they argue that
there are too many factors to make an accurate prediction of
warming or its effects. Several scientists point to data that con-
tradicts the IPCC assessment of the causes of global warming.
Essentially, they argue that global warming is due more to nat-
ural causes than to human activities (Khilyuk and Chilingar
2006, 899). Several scientists argue that the causes are not known
one way or the other. Dr. Richard S. Lindzen, a professor at the
reputable Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is one of the
most vocal proponents of this position. Lindzen has contributed
multiple times to IPCC studies and publications about global
warming. He has remained a vocal critic of the IPCC and any
theories (Lindzen 2005). A handful of scientists even believe that
warming will have a positive effect on the environment and on
humanity (Michaels 2003). As indicated in the section on global
warming under problems, many experts and politicians believe
that the precautionary principle should be used when making
decisions about what actions to take. Despite any doubts about
the probability of global warming causing negative conse-
quences, it is worth taking the measures necessary to prevent the
Controversies
59
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
possible disasters. By analogy, even though we do not expect to
be in a fire, we take precautionary measures to save our lives
through the provision of fire escapes and fire stations.
Controversy: Economic and Political Problems
The major economic and political controversies surrounding re-
newable energy are closely tied to one another. In the United
States, fossil fuel companies have considerable political power,
and many government officials have vested interests in the suc-
cess of these companies (Leggett 2005, 125). This results in the
passage of more favorable legislation as well as greater funding
for fossil fuel development than for renewable and alternative
energy development (Myers and Kent 2001, 70). Furthermore,
economic considerations of the effects of renewable and alterna-
tive energy policy continue to hinder the passage of strong legis-
lation in favor of renewable and alternative energy.
As already discussed, the initial capital costs of investing in
renewable energy development are high compared to fossil fuels.
Thus, there are two positions on how a transition to renewable
and alternative energy sources should occur. The first position
holds that the government should allow market forces to provide the
impetus for the transition. This approach relies on industry and
corporations to take the initiative to produce energy from renew-
able and alternative sources when it becomes more profitable for
them than producing energy from fossil fuels. The second posi-
tion contends that government should intervene in the market by
passing policies that promote or mandate renewable and alternative en-
ergy use, thus speeding a transition to the use of these energy
sources more than the market alone could do.
The controversy stems from an age-old political debate over
the role of government in free markets. Those who hold the first
position argue that economic efficiency has to be sacrificed if gov-
ernments intervene to encourage the market to act one way or an-
other. Economic efficiency is reached when goods are produced in
the market at the lowest possible cost to the producer. The produc-
tion of a supply of goods in a perfect market is the direct effect of
the demand for the good. As discussed, in the case of renewable
energy, the demand is not high enough to compel private interests
to make the scale of investment needed to drive the costs of renew-
able energy technology down and to increase demand. Over time,
if allowed to function without interference, demand would grow
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
to the point at which production would reach the scale necessary
for prices to drop enough to encourage mass demand. The prob-
lem with this scenario is that there is no guarantee that the market
will work in time to prevent the possible irreversible ecological de-
struction caused by fossil fuel use or the economic shocks that an
oil shortage would cause throughout the world. But if economic ef-
ficiency is sacrificed through taxes on fossil fuel use, subsidies for
renewable energy, and even fluctuations in the supply of energy,
there is a possibility for severe economic consequences that could
affect the high quality of life in industrialized countries like the
United States. This is the main concern of those who promote a free
market solution. The risks associated with an economic downturn
are of greater concern to them than the possibility of irreversible
environmental degradation. There is a growing consensus, as re-
flected in the increasing number of renewable energy initiatives
taken by governments around the world, that government inter-
vention is necessary at least to some degree. Taking this into ac-
count, we turn now to the policy solutions available and to the
broader advantages of renewable and alternative energy solutions.
Solutions
Chapter 1 offered a list of the advantages associated with indi-
vidual renewable and alternative energy sources. In this section,
we examine the broader advantages that renewable and alterna-
tive energies have to offer the greater society. We then provide a
discussion of the United States’ renewable and alternative en-
ergy policy. Finally, we provide an overview of global and re-
gional efforts to find solutions. Chapter 3 provides an in-depth
look at the worldwide perspectives of renewable and alternative
energy development.
Broad Advantages of Renewable 
and Alternative Energy
The broad advantages associated with renewable and alternative
energy can be attributed to many characteristics of these sources.
We now discuss in detail the positive effects of the decentralized
nature of renewable and alternative energy sources. Then we ad-
dress the economic benefits that the industry can bring to the
Solutions
61
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
world in the form of employment opportunities and energy secu-
rity. Finally, we explain how renewable energy can contribute to
gender equity, particularly in developing countries.
The abundance of renewable and alternative energy poten-
tial creates a more regional and, hence, more stable supply of en-
ergy than fossil fuels, which are imported by most of the world
from select regions. Discussed in more detail in Chapter 3, this
decentralization of energy resources would not only create more
stability, but it could also result in more autonomy of less power-
ful and less wealthy countries. The potential for renewable and
alternative energy to enhance equity in the world energy markets
is enormous. One-third of the world’s population does not have
adequate electricity to meet their needs (IEA 2006, 567). This is
partially due to the fact that it is too expensive or difficult to build
the infrastructure to transmit electricity over great distances. Re-
newable, more so than alternative, energy development in nonin-
dustrialized Third World countries and in more rural areas has
the potential to result in a more equitable distribution of the ben-
efits of electricity use. Renewable energy developed on a small
scale can provide the localized energy needed to provide power
to people in less developed areas. This could reduce reliance on
fossil fuels in these parts of the countries before it has a chance to
take root. Furthermore, the adoption of renewable and alterna-
tive energy would allow for the social and environmental bene-
fits of restoring forests and other ecosystems that local people
rely on to provide the biofuel that is their primary source of en-
ergy, as it is in many developing countries, especially in Africa
(Energy Information Administration 1999). The benefits of reduc-
ing deforestation are numerous and include the restoration of
carbon sinks, which could help to alleviate the effects of global
warming.
Economically speaking, the decentralized characteristics of
renewable and alternative energy would reduce the costs of trans-
mission as well as the transport of raw fuels. Because renewable
sources like solar, wind, and water are virtually free for the taking,
the main costs of production would be the initial capital invest-
ment in technology and infrastructure. Such operations would es-
sentially pay for themselves once the initial investment is
recouped. When examined from a long-term standpoint, renew-
able energy use could save billions of dollars compared to fossil
fuels. These savings do not include the health and environmental
costs associated with fossil fuels, which can be hard to measure be-
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
cause it is difficult to fully establish causality in every case. While
the exact numbers are difficult to calculate on a global scale, there
is little doubt that a considerable amount of money could be saved
from a reduction or the elimination of fossil fuel use (Center for
American Progress 2006, 12). As already mentioned, many benefits
are associated with good health that cannot be assigned a dollar
value. This may not apply as much to nuclear power because the
cost of one or more nuclear accidents has the potential to far ex-
ceed the costs of using fossil fuels to the society and the environ-
ment. This fact contributes to the lack of development of nuclear
power in many Western nations.
Renewable energy provides a great opportunity for eco-
nomic growth in terms of new jobs, new industries, and new
wealth in both industrialized and developing countries. Studies
have shown that in some instances renewable energy provides
more economic opportunities than the use of fossil fuel sources
do (Center for American Progress 2006, 10). Many renewable en-
ergies offer the added benefit of being able to create more jobs per
unit of energy generation than fossil fuels (MacGill, Watt, and
Passey 2002). These jobs are diverse, ranging from extensions to
existing agricultural and forestry activities through specialized
engineering and electronic functions. Many of them are located in
rural areas where the need for employment is the greatest (Sad-
dler, Disendorf, and Denniss 2004, 77). The economic advantages
of renewable energies are particularly applicable to women in the
developing world. In nonelectrified rural areas of developing
countries, women do most if not all of the housework, in addition
to other jobs required to provide for the family (Clancy,
Oparaocha, and Roehr 2004, 11). This creates an unequal division
of labor between women and men because women work as much
as men outside the house and then do the majority of the work
required to maintain the household. Because renewable energy
has the potential to bring electricity to such rural areas, it also has
the potential to lighten the workload of women in the home, in
turn creating greater equity in the amount of work done by both
sexes (Clancy, Oparaocha, and Roehr 2004, 13).
Technical Solutions 
As mentioned a few times, most technical problems require ad-
ditional funding to be overcome. The more political support
that is given in the form of grants, subsidies, and tax breaks, the
Solutions
63
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
quicker the technical barriers to realizing a transition away from
fossil fuels will be overcome. Most technical issues, therefore,
are more the result of political barriers to giving financial back-
ing to renewable and alternative energy technologies. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 3, international cooperation has the potential
to expedite technological breakthroughs and distribute the costs
more fairly.
The problems that renewable energies have with localiza-
tion, storage, and transmission can be alleviated with the use of
hydrogen. In Chapter 1 we mentioned that hydrogen is actually
an energy carrier, rather than an energy source. Because of its mo-
bility, it can help all renewable energy sources reach their full po-
tential. There is much consensus among experts that a renewable
energy economy has to be coupled with the development of a hy-
drogen economy to meet the world energy demand. Further-
more, hydrogen emits no carbon dioxide, giving it great potential
as a solution to the impending climate change crisis (Hoffman
2001, 17). With political support in the form of research and de-
velopment grants, subsidies, and tax breaks, hydrogen has the
potential to overcome any technical problems associated with it
and become the main fuel for a renewable energy economy.
Policy Solutions
Now that the reasoning behind the push for an expedited transi-
tion to the use of renewable and alternative energy as a primary
energy source has been reviewed, the next section presents the
estimated prospects for renewable and alternative energy use as
the main energy source in the United States.
Renewable and Alternative Energy Prospects in the United States
The United States consumes more energy than any other country
in the world, over 21 percent of the annual world total of energy
consumed, more energy than the entire continent of Europe con-
sumes. By fuel type, the United States consumes almost 25 per-
cent of the world’s oil, exactly 22 percent of the world’s natural
gas, and almost 20 percent of the world’s coal. The next largest
energy consumer in the world is China, which consumes almost
16 percent of the world total of energy, with its high rates of
growth expected to continue. In the meantime, these figures
clearly reflect that the United States is by far the largest consumer
of energy in the world (British Petroleum 2007, 40).
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
This copious consumption of fossil fuels has brought re-
newable and alternative energy to the forefront of the U.S. en-
ergy policy debate. Nuclear energy comprises just over 8
percent of the total energy consumed in the United States.
While no new licenses have been granted since 1976, the Ten-
nessee Valley Authority’s Watts Bar reactor, which obtained its
license in 1972, did not begin operating until 1996, making it the
most recent reactor to be added to the electrical grid in the
United States (Energy Information Administration 2007a). Al-
though no new reactors have been licensed for construction
since 1976 and none have come online since 1996, the U.S. Nu-
clear Regulatory Commission states that uprating (increases in
electricity production by plants currently in operation) of oper-
ating reactors is expected to contribute over 4,000 megawatts of
energy over the next several years. Thus far, uprating is the
dominant policy for increasing electrical output from nuclear
energy. The Energy Act of 2005, however, set new targets for in-
creasing nuclear energy production, encouraging the construc-
tion of new reactors and creating a flurry of debate over the
practicality of doing so. Despite lucrative tax breaks for new nu-
clear reactor construction, no U.S. companies have applied for a
license to build a new reactor (Energy Information Administra-
tion 2007a).
The public is more supportive of expanding renewable en-
ergy capacity than expanding nuclear energy capacity. Currently,
the United States produces 9.5 percent of its energy from renew-
able energy sources. Of that amount, almost half is produced from
biomass, 42 percent from hydroelectric dams, 5 percent from geot-
hermal, 3.7 percent from wind energy, and 1 percent from solar
energy. Expected projections predict that, under current policies,
renewable energy production will increase less than 2 percent by
the mid-2020s (Energy Information Administration 2007a, 279).
Studies conducted by the U.S. National Renewable Energy
Laboratory show that the potential for renewable and alternative
energy development and production in the United States is large.
Solar energy and geothermal potential is greatest in the South-
west and Greater Western area of the country. Wind power re-
sources are located intermittently throughout the country but
tend to be concentrated in the Great Plains states like North
Dakota, South Dakota, and Kansas. Large wind resources are also
available in the Southwest region. Biomass resources are more
concentrated in the East and in parts of the Northwest. Wave
Solutions
65
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
power resources are located up and down both the East and West
coasts of the country. OTEC energy, discussed in Chapter 1, has
potential in the areas of the United States located between the lat-
itudes of 20 degrees north and 20 degrees south. Its potential for
producing electricity, hydrogen, and desalinized water makes in-
vestment into this technology appealing. The Northeast is the
area that is the most lacking in renewable energy potential, yet it
has a higher population density than other regions. For a com-
plete switch to renewable energy, solutions to the problems of
transmission and storage have to be fully developed. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 1, hydrogen as an energy carrier has the great-
est potential to meet this challenge of renewable energy use.
Although still very localized, the greatest hydrogen potential is
located more centrally in the Great Plains states with less poten-
tial elsewhere the country.
While the potential exists for renewable and alternative en-
ergy to displace fossil fuels as the dominant energy source in the
United States, it is unlikely that such a transition will occur with-
out significant government intervention through a variety of
policies to stimulate the technological development and market
penetration of feasible technologies. Numerous correlations have
been found between the growth of renewable energy production
and policies that encourage such growth. It is particularly true
that when financial incentives like tax credits and subsidies are
revoked, the rate of growth of the affected technology slows ac-
cordingly. The next section gives an overview of the specific re-
newable energy policies that have been enacted in the United
States to meet the prospects for energy production from renew-
able and alternative sources.
Renewable Energy Policies in the United States
Earlier we discussed the arguments held by those who think that
government should do nothing and simply allow market forces
to drive a transition to renewable energy. Proponents of govern-
ment intervention argue that market forces may not promote an
energy transition quickly enough to prevent serious environmen-
tal destruction and economic shocks due to the imminent decline
of fossil fuel supplies and the political instability of oil-producing
regions. Only through government intervention can the develop-
ment of technology be encouraged and the timely adoptions of
renewable and alternative energy become possible. Thus far, rely-
ing on market forces like supply and demand has not stimulated
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
a significant transition to renewable energy technologies. Hence,
this section and the following chapter focus on the policies that
involve government intervention to promote renewable and al-
ternative energy use.
In the United States, the majority of these policies are en-
acted at the state level rather than at the federal level. Market-
based policies, which are explained in detail later, have been the
predominant type of policy used by the U.S. federal government.
States have been more aggressive in their passage of policies to
promote renewable energy with the renewable portfolio standard
growing in popularity as a policy mechanism to promote renew-
able energy development.
Market-based Policies.  The first type of policy is called a market-
based policy because it works with the economic system to en-
courage competition of renewable and alternative energies with
conventional energies. The goal of such policies is to create and
support energy markets for renewable and alternative energy
without hurting the economy. Ironically, these types of policies
encourage market freedom with intervention that seeks to ensure
that the market chooses renewable and alternative energy. While
such policies certainly nudge the market in a particular direction,
they allow for more flexibility in meeting certain goals than regu-
latory policies tend to. There are many manifestations of this type
of policy.
Green Energy Market Development.  Green energy market develop-
ment allows consumers to choose between green and brown en-
ergy. Green energy includes all renewable and alternative energy
sources, and brown energy refers to energy derived from fossil
fuels. Under this policy, companies are required to give con-
sumers a choice between these two types of energy, and then they
are required to produce as much electricity with green energy as
is demanded by consumers. Currently, there is no federal policy
to create a national green energy market because most energy is-
sues devolve to the states. In 1993, California was the first state to
implement this type of policy, which currently does not include
nuclear energy. While this type of policy forces the market to give
consumers the option to buy renewable and alternative energy, it
does not guarantee that consumers will pay the extra costs of this
type of energy, nor does it account for the lack of consumer
knowledge about green energy options.
Solutions
67
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Centralized Bidding System.  Another type of market mechanism is
a centralized bidding system combined with supply-side subsi-
dies. In this policy, government allows renewable energy genera-
tors to bid on prices they are willing to provide energy for, and
then the government makes regional electricity companies buy
that energy. Unlike green energy market development policies,
consumers do not have to pay more for this type of energy than
they would for traditional energy sources because the govern-
ment subsidizes the cost. Centralized bidding systems, in tandem
with supply-side subsidies, not only encourage increased renew-
able and alternative energy use, but they reduce the price of such
energy so that it is more desirable to consumers. The problem
with this type of program is that it favors the cheaper sources of
renewable and alternative energy, while providing no support for
market penetration of the more expensive energy sources. Fur-
thermore, renewable and alternative energy technologies that are
not yet commercial, like ocean power and hydrogen, gain noth-
ing from this type of policy because it is impossible for them to
underbid already established energy sources like wind and solar.
These policies tend to be more popular in Europe than the United
States, though states like New York are beginning to implement
them to meet their renewable energy portfolio standards, a type
of policy that will be discussed below in the section on renewable
energy portfolio standards. 
Green Certificates.  Green certificates, also known as tradable re-
newable certificates (TRCs), green tags, and renewable obligation
certificates (ROC), are becoming more prevalent as a solution for
fostering a green energy market. Green certificates are granted
for environmental attributes produced by green energy genera-
tors, which can then be traded on the secondary market. This al-
lows renewable and alternative energy producers to sell the
electricity they produce as well as the positive externalities of
their product. For example, because renewable energy electricity
sources emit much less carbon than traditional energy sources,
producers could sell carbon credits in a carbon trading market.
Because this policy is fairly new, its impact on the renewable and
alternative energy market is difficult to assess. It is praised for its
low cost of implementation and for causing an expected reduc-
tion in the cost of renewable and alternative energy. But, because
green certificates are dependent on consumer demand to be suc-
cessful, there is no guarantee that they will stimulate a significant
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
increase in renewable and alternative energy production and use.
The government merely allows these certificates to be sold by
nongovernmental entities; it does not create any incentive for
people to buy them. Green certificates currently exist in the
United States, but there are no policies in effect to generate de-
mand for them.
Net Metering.  Net metering is another type of policy created to
work with the market. Net metering rules allow electricity cus-
tomers to generate electricity from renewable energy and use it to
offset electricity they would have bought at retail price from util-
ity companies. Essentially, the energy meter rolls back when cus-
tomers generate more electricity than they are using. This allows
customers to create energy without having to deal with storing
excesses for times when energy generation is low. This has the
considerable advantage of reducing renewable energy invest-
ment because it eliminates the need for storage devices like bat-
teries. Unfortunately, the initial costs of such an investment to
individual consumers are still high with a long payback. The rate
of individuals investing in personal renewable energy systems
has not grown considerably despite the fact that net metering
rules are used in 41 states to promote consumer investment in re-
newable energy.
Electricity Feed-in Laws.  A type of nonmarket-based policy is the
so-called feed-in law, also known as an advanced renewable tariff
(ART). Feed-in laws require utilities to pay higher prices for elec-
tricity produced by renewable and alternative energy companies
in order to stimulate investment in renewable technologies. The
extra costs are passed on to customers. This type of policy is gen-
erally effective at promoting renewable energy development,
though not through the use of market mechanisms. Because the
price for the renewable and alternative energy company’s prod-
uct is guaranteed, there is no incentive for them to reduce costs.
This also prevents competition between renewable and alterna-
tive energy suppliers, resulting in excessive profits for producers.
A related policy now being explored by a few states is the renew-
able tariff. Renewable tariffs are similar to feed-in laws, but they
attempt to address the downfalls of feed-in laws by differentiat-
ing tariffs according to technology and by requiring a review of
the renewable or alternative energy program to determine its ro-
bustness. Internationally, the renewable tariff is touted as one of
Solutions
69
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the most successful policies for stimulating a rapid transition to
renewable energy.
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standards.  Another nonmarket-based
policy mechanism that has been gaining popularity in the United
States is the renewable energy portfolio standard (RPS). The RPS
sets mandatory goals to specific actors, like utility companies, for
renewable energy use and then lets the market determine the
least expensive way to get there. The policy penalizes those who
do not reach the goal. Most RPSs allow the trading of excess re-
newable energy production to actors who do not reach the goal.
Under RPSs, a certain level of renewable energy production is
guaranteed, the administration and bureaucratic costs for the
government would be low, and price pressure would be main-
tained. However, this policy does not deal with the differing costs
across technologies, nor is the goal set based on price or perfor-
mance. Although RPSs allow the market to determine how to
reach the goal, it does not ensure that the most efficient technolo-
gies will be used to get there because the high initial capital costs
often discourage utility companies from choosing the best tech-
nology. Currently, 31 states and several cities have enacted RPSs,
although not all of them are mandatory. There is no federal RPS.
Texas has received considerable attention for its ambitious RPS
program. The state is expected to meet the high standards that
were set within the time period determined by the RPS, a total of
10,000 megawatts, or about 9 percent of the state’s electricity de-
mand, by the year 2025 (Rabe 2006, 11).
Other Policies.  Other policies that are not directly geared toward
stimulating market development include financial incentives like
subsidies for research and development of renewable and alter-
native energy technologies and tax incentives for using such tech-
nologies. Although the federal government has enacted many
policies dealing with renewable and alternative energy, the fed-
eral government tends to enact these types of policies the most.
We now look specifically at some of the recent federal policies.
Current Federal Policies
The United States Department of Energy (DOE) is responsible for
overseeing all federal programs and policies related to renewable
and alternative energy. The Million Solar Roofs Initiative is one of
the programs that the DOE currently oversees. Since its enactment
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
in 1997, 300,000 homes and buildings have been outfitted with solar
power energy systems. The goal is to have a million homes and
buildings using solar power by 2010. The Wind Powering America
Initiative, established in 1999, is a regionally based collaborative
program that seeks to meet 5 percent of the nation’s energy needs
with wind energy by 2020 and to triple the amount of wind energy
generated in states with a high wind capacity (to more than 20
megawatts total). Its main feature is the support of public–private
partnerships in wind energy development. Within the DOE exists
the Energy Information Administration (EIA). The EIA, a statistical
agency of the DOE, collects objective data, issues forecasts and
analyses for policy making, follows the efficient energy markets,
and encourages public understanding of the interconnections be-
tween the energy market, the economy, and the environment.
A very important feature of the DOE is the National Renew-
able Energy Laboratory (NREL). Designated in 1991, the NREL is
the principal laboratory for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Of-
fice of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. It is based in
Golden, Colorado, with laboratories near Boulder and offices in
Washington, D.C. The main purpose of the NREL is to drive tech-
nology from the “proof of concept” stage to the market penetra-
tion stage through research and applications of renewable energy
technologies. Under the umbrella of the NREL organization is the
National Center for Photovoltaics, the National Wind Technology
Center, the National Bioenergy Center, and the Hydrogen Tech-
nologies and Systems Center. Underdeveloped technologies like
ocean energy are undergoing development in conjunction with
the private sector in the technology transfer office of the NREL.
The NREL is involved in the Solar America Initiative, which
was enacted in 2006 under the auspices of the Advanced Energy
Initiative. The Solar America Initiative is one of the widest rang-
ing national policies geared toward market development for a re-
newable or alternative technology. It seeks to achieve market
competitiveness for PV and CSP technologies by the year 2015.
The initiative will first focus on research and the development of
solar energy technologies, and then it will fund public–private
partnerships to ensure market penetration of the technologies. It
will also require that the federal government increase its use of
solar energy by 5 percent by 2015.
Although these certainly contribute to an increase in the
amount of renewable energy used, skeptics warn that they are not
enough to result in a transition away from fossil fuels in time to 
Solutions
71
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
prevent climate change or economic shocks from fuel shortages.
The sentiments seem to be shared across the country, as states enact
their own, more stringent policies to facilitate a speedy transition to
renewable energy. We turn now to some examples of these policies.
Current State Policies
Besides the preceding policy types, one of the more popular state
strategies for encouraging renewable energy development is to
deregulate or restructure the energy market. Deregulation in-
volves a transition from a market owned and regulated by the
government to one that is an open competitive market. It is ar-
gued that true deregulation can never occur because government
will always be required to intervene in some way or another. “Re-
structuring of the market” is therefore a more appropriate phrase.
Restructuring still involves a degree of regulation, though it is en-
couraging the competition and privatization of the wholesale and
retail electricity markets. Whatever it is called, it is a mix of gov-
ernment intervention and the increased use of markets to facili-
tate competition of energy prices. It is in such an environment
that renewable energy must now compete. As of 2003, electricity
markets are being actively restructured in 18 states, four states
are facing delays in the process, and California has suspended
the restructuring of its market.
Other policies that have been implemented in states across
the nation include those aimed at building green energy markets.
Contribution programs give consumers the option to round their
energy bills up to the next dollar to stimulate renewable energy
development. Wind programs offer electricity from wind for a
surcharge. These programs have been very popular and have
tended to sell out their capacity. Mixed fuel programs offer op-
tions for renewable energy from a variety of sources, including
small hydro and methane capture from landfills.
While many of these policies have the potential to expedite
the transition to renewable and alternative energy, they are not
without their flaws. The drawbacks of the various types of pro-
grams have already been discussed. The last section of this chap-
ter addresses some of the obstacles to successful renewable
energy policy and the solutions to address them.
Policy Obstacles 
As discussed in Chapter 1, technology emerges in stages. The
stage that a technology is in has serious implications for what
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
types of policies will work. While some argue that policies
should focus on technologies that are ready for market penetra-
tion, some technologies are unlikely ever to reach this stage with-
out supportive policies, especially those that fund research and
development. Regardless, technologies that have not reached the
breakthrough stage are going to require different policies than
those that have in order for them to become competitive in the
energy markets. Commercially viable technologies need policies
that encourage market development in addition to research and
development funding. Furthermore, there is no such thing as a
one-size-fits-all policy. For government to aid in the increased ac-
ceptance of renewable energy, the optimal mix of policies for each
type of technology must be achieved. Until all negative externali-
ties of fossil fuels are fully accounted for (including ghg emis-
sions, pollution, and all of the other environmental drawbacks of
fossil fuel use), policy interventions are necessary for renewable
and alternative energy to enter the energy market and become
widely available enough for their use to offset the harms caused
by fossil fuels.
The question then becomes what type of policy intervention
should the government use? It is helpful to first look at some rea-
sons why policies fail to achieve their objectives. Most experts
agree that governments need to enact policies to encourage pri-
vate sector investment into renewable energy projects. This can
be done by distributing the costs of renewable energy widely to
consumers and taxpayers, through policies that offer tax breaks
to investors, low-cost loans to consumers, and subsidies for re-
search. The issue of costs should not be the main focus of policy
objectives, in accordance with the normative forecasting ap-
proach. To get the desired results, the focus should be on the out-
come, not on the expense of getting there. In the case of global
warming, it may not be affordable in the long run to cut costs in
the short term.
Policy objectives, especially for policies that involve the
private sector, should be well specified. If goals and targets are
not specific, there is a good chance that the real purpose of enact-
ing such a policy will not be met. An example of this is the re-
structuring of the energy markets. While the overall objectives
are to create a competitive market where electricity costs are low,
at the same time leading to the increased use of renewable en-
ergy, simply opening up the market does not guarantee that
these goals will be reached. In the case of California, specifically,
Solutions
73
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
restructuring has been halted as the effects of it are being consid-
ered. It has been found that restructuring can actually raise the
price of electricity, a phenomenon that is related not to specify-
ing the role of the private sector in meeting the objectives of the
policy. For utility companies, restructuring is a means for in-
creasing profits, a goal that can often conflict with attempts to
stimulate investment in expensive technologies.
Another reason that policies can fail to achieve their objec-
tive is the lack of market stability due to poorly developed poli-
cies. Incentives for investment in renewable energy will not
achieve the objectives of the policy if private sector entities do not
trust the government to protect their interests. Policies that have
caps on their incentives will stimulate investment or production
only up to the point where the incentives stop. Placing time
frames, or sunsets, on policies meant to encourage long-term in-
vestment is counterproductive as well. If the private sector is ex-
pected to make long-term investments only when incentives are
provided, then it makes little sense to remove the incentives be-
fore investments have been recouped. An example of an unstable
policy is Wind Energy Tax Credit, which has to be reviewed and
extended every few years (Komor 2004). Such a review would be
a viable policy if it was based on performance rather than on
budget concerns. A performance-based review would not only
stabilize policy, it would create incentives for the private sector to
meet the targets of the policy.
The rejection of renewable energy projects due to costs and
lack of public acceptance are other impediments to successful
policy. Such barriers can be overcome through the involvement of
stakeholders in policy formulation and especially through public
ownership of renewable and alternative energy developments.
As shown in Chapter 3, public acceptance has grown in European
countries where locals are given a stake in the development. Fur-
thermore, policies and developments that have not involved all
stakeholders affected have failed.
The economic burdens of a speedy transition to renewable
and alternative energy should be dispersed as widely as possible,
especially since the benefits will be felt on a large scale once the
transition is complete. Benefits and profits should also be distrib-
uted appropriately, preventing excessive and inefficient gains by
companies as demonstrated by feed-in laws. This may need to be
done on an international scale with agreements like the Kyoto
Protocol, which seeks to alleviate environmental damage from
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
energy use on a proportional basis. Such agreements can also ad-
dress another policy issue, which is technology development and
transfer. If the burden of getting technology through the various
stages of development is shared globally, the solutions could be-
come commercially viable much sooner. We turn now to a discus-
sion of the global and regional agreements in place to provide
these solutions.
Global Perspectives
Over the past 50 years, it has come to the attention of govern-
ments around the world that energy problems are often global in
nature. The problems are economic, environmental, and political,
and they are directly related to the increasing demand and con-
sumption of fossil fuels, as already discussed. Oil price shocks
have been proven to affect the well-being of the entire global
economy. Climate change has been significantly attributed to the
global use of fossil fuels by a consortium of scientists from na-
tions around the world (International Panel on Climate Change
2007b, 2). Satellites have discovered that air pollution is becom-
ing transcontinental, even traveling across the Pacific Ocean
(Holloway, Fiore, and Galanter-Hastings 2003). International con-
flicts have been attributed to dependence on imported oil. As a
result, solutions to these problems also often have to be global in
nature. This section examines the major multilateral initiatives
that have been designed in response to energy-related problems.
These agreements either directly encourage a transition to renew-
able and alternative energy use or have goals that will indirectly
result in an increase in production from these sources. Often they
are in addition to many of the participating country’s domestic
renewable and alternative energy policies. In any case, they are
expected to be a crucial part of the solution.
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol, created in 1997, is an amendment to the in-
ternational agreement, the United Nations Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change, signed by several countries to reduce
ghg emissions like carbon dioxide. As of the publication of this
book, the United States has not ratified the protocol, making its
success in meeting its ultimate goal of combating climate
change uncertain. While the main purpose of this agreement is
Global Perspectives
75
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
to combat climate change using a variety of policy mechanisms,
a transition to renewable energy will have to be part of the solu-
tion because fossil fuel emissions are the main cause of human
contributions to the increase of greenhouse gases in the atmo-
sphere. The main policy mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol is a
carbon cap and trade system. The system sets allowable carbon
dioxide emissions to 1995 levels. This is a flexible market–based
approach, which would allow some countries to produce more
emissions as long as they have acquired permits from other
countries that are producing less. Such an approach does not
mandate an increase in renewable energy use per se, but, to
meet the commitments set in the agreement, the production of
energy via renewable sources will increase as a matter of eco-
nomic sensibility. As indicated in an EIA study on the Kyoto
Protocol, renewable energy will increase to meet emission goals
in sectors where it is cheapest to switch from reliance on fossil
fuels to reliance on renewable energy. The increase in renewable
energy production, however, would not be significant (Energy
Information Administration 1998, xx). Perhaps the main reason
for the Kyoto Protocol’s lack of impact on an energy transition is
related mostly to the fact that it only requires a 5 percent reduc-
tion in current carbon dioxide levels. This amount is not only in-
adequate to reach the ultimate goal of halting or reducing
climate change, it is small enough that it can be reached without
major shifts in energy sources. While the Kyoto Protocol will re-
sult in some increases in renewable energy production through-
out the world, countries will have to voluntarily go beyond the
5 percent target for the agreement to have a significant effect on
the use of renewable energy, as shown in the section on the Eu-
ropean Union.
The Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate
The Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate,
also known as A6, was enacted in 2006. It is a nonbinding negoti-
ation among the United States, Australia, India, Japan, China,
and South Korea to facilitate the cooperation and transfer of tech-
nology that will help reduce ghg emissions. Because it is non-
binding, there are no mandatory limits on emissions as in the
Kyoto Protocol. One of the main objectives of the group is to
work on overcoming barriers to the adoption of renewable en-
ergy technologies. The main concern of the task force on Renew-
able Energy and Distributed Generation is to promote the use of
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the most advanced technologies or those that have already pene-
trated the market like solar, hydro, geothermal, tidal, and alterna-
tive fuels like ethanol (Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean
Development and Climate 2007, 3). The goals set in the A6 Re-
newable Energy and Distributed Generation Task Force Action
Plan are vague and voluntary. There is no time frame for meeting
these goals, nor does the plan seek to generate a set amount of en-
ergy from renewable energy sources. While such an agreement is
better than no agreement at all, critics argue that, without en-
forcement of mandatory targets, the agreement will do little to
promote substantial renewable energy use or reduce ghg emis-
sions (Economist 2006, 46).
Johannesburg Renewable Energy Coalition
The Johannesburg Renewable Energy Coalition (JREC) was
signed in Johannesburg, South Africa, in 2002 at the World
Summit for Sustainable Development (WSSD). As of 2004, 88
countries from the European Union (EU), the Middle East,
Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Islands belong to the
coalition. Countries with the highest energy consumption rates
like the United States, Australia, China, and India are not mem-
bers. The function of the coalition is similar to that of the A6
partnership, which is to facilitate cooperation and coordination
among member countries in an effort to specifically increase
the dissemination of renewable energy technologies. Unlike
A6, however, JREC requires members to adopt targets for re-
newable energy production. The main purpose of JREC is to
achieve the adoption of these targets by its international mem-
bers at the 15th session of the United Nations Commission for
Sustainable Development in 2007. While the 15th session did
result in many positive affirmations of the need for global re-
newable energy development, no binding time tables were set
for when targets should be met. As discussed, the less govern-
ment intervenes to encourage renewable energy development,
the slower this development will occur because market forces
are driving fossil fuel development.
Conclusion
This chapter has revealed the underlying scientific, environ-
mental, political, and social concerns that have surfaced over
Conclusion
77
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the last few decades, contributing to the debate over the use of
renewable and alternative energy as a solution for these con-
cerns. There is a general consensus about issues such as global
warming that the precautionary principle should be employed
and that government intervention is necessary to meet this end.
We have provided a review of the controversies surrounding a
transition to renewable and alternative energy sources. Next we
explored the broad advantages associated with renewable and
alternative energy use, followed by a look at the actual prospect
and potential of renewable energy in the United States to re-
place fossil fuels as the dominant fuel. Following that assess-
ment was a look at the types of federal and state policies in
place to promote renewable and alternative energy. Then we
discussed solutions and suggestions for policy development to
overcome the challenges and barriers of current renewable en-
ergy legislation. Finally, we reviewed some major global and re-
gional efforts to provide solutions
Chapter 3 provides a similar discussion to that in Chapter 2,
but in the context of the various countries. The prospects for re-
newable and alternative energy as a viable solution are explored
further. By examining policies that have been enacted and poli-
cies that have failed internationally, we provide further perspec-
tives on how to achieve a global transition to renewable and
alternative energy.
References
Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate. “Renew-
able Energy and Distributed Generation Task Force Action Plan.” No-
vember 2007. www.asiapacificpartnership.org/RenewableEnergyTF.htm 
British Petroleum. Statistical Review of World Energy Full Report 2007. June
2007. www.bp.com/liveassets/bp_internet/globalbp/globalbp_uk_en -
glish/reports_and_publications/statistical_energy_review_2007/STAG -
ING/local_assets/downloads/pdf/statistical_review_of_world_energy
_full_report_2007.pdf 
Buddemeier, Robert W., Joan A. Kleypas, and Richard B. Aronson. Coral
Reefs and Global Climate Change: Potential Contributions of Climate Change
to Stresses on Coral Reef Ecosystems (report from the Pew Center on Global
Climate Change). Arlington, VA: Pew Center on Global Climate Change,
2004. www.pewclimate.org/global-warming-in-depth/all_reports/coral
_reefs
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Campbell, C. J. The Coming Oil Crisis. Brentwood, UK: Multi-Science
Publishing and Petroconsultants, 1997.
Center for American Progress. American Energy: The Renewable Path to En-
ergy Security (report prepared for the Worldwatch Institute). Washington,
DC: Worldwatch Institute, 2006. americanenergynow.org/ 
Chambers, A. “Wind Power Spins into Contention.” Power Engineering
104 2 (2000): 14–18.
Champion, Marc. “Glitch Forces Georgia to Pay up for Russian Gas.” The
Wall Street Journal (December 23, 2006) 4.
Clancy, Joy, Sheila Oparaocha, and Ulrike Roehr. “Gender Equity and
Renewable Energies” (thematic background paper). Bonn: International
Conference for Renewable Energies, 2004.
Database of State Incentives for Renewables and Efficiency (DSIRE).
“Renewables Portfolio Standard.” 2007. www.dsireusa.org/library/in -
cludes/incentivesearch.cfm?Incentive_Code=TX03R&Search=Type&type
=RPS&CurrentPageID=2&EE=1&RE=1
Deffeyes, Kenneth S. Beyond Oil: The View from Hubbert’s Peak. New York:
Hill and Wang, 2005.
Economist. “More Hot Air; Asian Environmentalism.” Economist 378,
8460 (January 15, 2006): 46.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). Chapter 7, “Environment and
Renewable,” in Energy in Africa. 1999. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs
/chapter7.html#maec
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “International Energy Annual
(IEA) 2005.” 2006. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/iea/contents.html
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “Annual Energy Review
(AER) 2006.” Report DOE/EIA-0384(2006). 2007a. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu
/aer/overview.html
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “International Energy Out-
look 2007.” Report DOE/EIA-0484(2007). 2007b. www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf
/ieo/index.html
“Global Warning; the World’s Scientists Agree, Again, That Climate
Change Is a Big Problem.” Washington Post (February 5, 2007). Lexis-
Nexis, www.lexisnexis.com
Goodstein, David. Out of Gas: The End of the Age of Oil. New York: W. W.
Norton, 2004.
Hammerschlag, Roel. “Ethanol’s Energy Return on Investment: A Sur-
vey of Literature from 1990–Present. Environmental Science and Technology
40 6 (2006): 1744–1750.
References
79
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Hoffman, P. Tomorrow’s Energy: Hydrogen, Fuel Cells, and the Prospects for a
Cleaner Planet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Holloway, T., A. Fiore, and M. Galanter-Hastings. “Intercontinental
Transport of Air Pollution: Will Emerging Science Lead to a New Hemi-
spheric Treaty?” Environmental Science and Technology 37, 20 (2003):
4535–4542.
Huber, Peter W., and Mark P. Mills. The Bottomless Well: The Twilight of
Fuel, the Virtue of Waste and Why We Will Never Run Out of Energy. New
York: Basic Books, 2005.
International Energy Agency (IEA). World Energy Outlook 2006. 2006.
www.worldenergyoutlook.org
International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). “Summary for Policy
Makers.” Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. February 2007a.
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg1/ar4-wg1-spm.pdf
International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). “Summary for Policy
Makers.” Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.” April
2007b. www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-spm.pdf
Jameson, Angela. 2005. “Uranium Shortage Poses Threat.” TimesOnline.
Business Section. August 15. business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business
/industry_sectors/industrials/article555314.ece
Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. “An Ill Wind off Cape Cod.” The New York Times.
Editorials Section. December 16, 2005. www.nytimes.com/2005/12/16
/opinion/16kennedy.html
Khilyuk, L. F., and G. V. Chilingar. “On Global Forces of Nature Driving
the Earth’s Climate. Are Humans Involved?” Environmental Geology 50, 6
(August 2006): 899–910.
Komor, Paul. Renewable Energy Policy. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse, 2004.
Laherrere, Jean. “Oil and Gas: What Future?” Paper published for the
Groningen Annual Energy Convention. November 21, 2006. www
.oilcrisis.com/laherrere/groningen.pdf
Leggett, Jeremy. The Empty Tank: Oil, Gas, Hot Air, and the Coming Global
Financial Catastrophe. New York: Random House, 2005.
Lindzen, Richard S. “Is There a Basis for Global Warming Alarm?” The
Independent Institute. October 21, 2005. www.independent.org/pub li ca -
tions/article.asp?id=1714 
MacGill, I., M. Watt, and R. Passey. 2002. “The Economic Development
Potential and Job Creation Potential of Renewable Energy: Australian
Case Studies.” Report Commissioned by Australian Cooperative Re-
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
search Centre for Renewable Energy Policy Group, Australian Ecogener-
ation Association and Renewable Energy Generators Association. 2002.
Michaels, Patrick J. “Posturing and Reality on Warming.” Washington
Times (October 16, 2003) A17.
Myers, Norman, and Jennifer Kent. Perverse Subsidies: How Tax Dollars
Can Undercut the Economy and the Environment. Washington DC: Island
Press, 2001.
Odell, P. R. Fossil Fuel Resources in the 21st Century. London: Financial
Times Energy, 1999.
Perlin, John. “Solar Power: The Slow Revolution.” Invention and Technol-
ogy Magazine (Summer 2002). www.americanheritage.com/articles/ma -
gazine/it/2002/1/2002_1_20.shtml 
Piven, Frances Fox. The War at Home: The Domestic Cost of Bush’s Mili-
tarism. New York: New Press, 2004.
Rabe, Barry G. 2006. Race to the Top: The Expanding Role of U.S. State Re-
newable Energy Portfolio Standards (report for the Pew Center on Global
Climate Change). Arlington, VA: Pew Center on Global Climate Change,
2006. www.pewclimate.org/global-warming-in-depth/all_reports/race
_to_the_top
Revkin, Andrew C. “Poorest Nations Will Bear Brunt as World Warms.”
The New York Times (April 1, 2007) 1.
Riley, Peter. Nuclear Waste: Law, Policy and Pragmatism. Burlington, VT:
Ashgate Publishing, 2004.
Saddler, Hugh, Mark Disendorf, and Richand Denniss. “A Clean Energy
Future for Australia.” WWF International. March 2004. wwf.org
.au/ourwork/climatechange/cleanenergyfuture/
Smil, Vaclav. Energy at the Crossroads: Global Perspectives and Uncertainties.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Stroeve, J., M. M. Holland, W. Meier, T. Scambos, and M. Serreze. “Arctic
Sea Ice Decline: Faster than Forecast.” Geophysical Research Absracts 34
(2004): L09501, doi:10.1029/2007GL029703. www.agu.org/pubs/crossref
/2007 . . . /2007GL029703.shtml
Swisher, Randall, and Kevin Porter. “Renewable Policy Lessons from the
U.S.: The Need for Consistent and Stable Policies.” In Karl Mallon, ed.
Renewable Energy Policy and Politics: A Handbook for Decision Making. Lon-
don: Earthscan, 2006, 185–198.
Tennekes, Hendrik. “A Skeptical View of Climate Models.” 2007. www
.sepp.org/Archive/NewSEPP/Climate%20models-Tennekes.htm 
References
81
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
United Nations. Agenda 21: The UN Programme of Action from Rio. New
York: United Nations, 1992.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. “Venezuela Report Summary.”
2006. www.lugar.senate.gov/energy/venezuela/pdf/GAO_Report_Ve -
ne zuela_Summary.pdf
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. “Fact Sheet on Power Uprates for
Nuclear Plants.” 2008. www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/fact-
sheets/power-uprates.html
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
3
Worldwide Perspective
Introduction
This chapter focuses on the state of renewable and alternative
energy use and policy throughout the world. Specifically, it
looks at developed and developing countries in the light of im-
portant renewable and alternative energy issues. Each of the two
types of nations, it will be shown, faces different barriers for the
successful advancement of renewable energy technologies. Like
the United States, most developed countries of the world face
economic barriers to and concerns about economic efficiency.
With the exception of China and India, developing and underde-
veloped countries face much more than economic barriers. Al-
though they tend to be more concerned about their economies
than the environment, a lack of funding for the high initial costs
of renewable energy investment is not the only issue preventing
development of the renewable energy sector. Developing coun-
tries are at a disadvantage due to a lack of technical expertise in
the field of renewable energy. Also, they often are missing the
governmental support necessary for developing and imposing
regulations required to build a renewable energy sector. In some
countries, the fossil fuel industries have enough of a say in poli-
tics that they are able to block policies that would increase re-
newable energy production.
To overcome these problems, developing countries need as-
sistance from developed countries and the international commu-
nity. Cooperative efforts have already begun to increase renewable
energy development. Fears over nuclear weapon proliferation and
83
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
accidents associated with the use of nuclear power have caused
developed countries to resist giving developing countries help
with nuclear power development. In some cases, developing
countries seeking to develop nuclear energy are being discour-
aged by developed countries, at times creating hostile relation-
ships. The need for international energy policies is increasing
every year.
The first section of this chapter addresses policies adopted
by the European Union (EU) as a whole and national policies
adopted by EU member states. The following section discusses
Asia-Oceania, paying particular attention to India, China,
Japan, and Australia. The next section focuses on countries in
North and Central America. The last section addresses South
America.
Europe
As of 2007, 27 countries on the continent of Europe have joined
the European Union. The EU is a political and economic inter-
governmental organization. The European Commission (EC) is
the executive body that oversees many of the policies being
jointly implemented by EU member countries. All of Europe
consumes 19 percent of the total amount of world energy pro-
duced, and Europe produces less than two-thirds of the total en-
ergy it consumes. As a result, the continent, as a whole, must
import more than one-third of the energy it consumes (Energy
Information Administration 2006, 302). Of this amount, Ger-
many consumes the most energy, followed by France, the
United Kingdom, and Italy, respectively (Energy Information
Administration 2006, 303). Because of its high energy use and
expected growth in consumption, the EU has taken the role as
the world leader in adopting many policies on climate change
and renewable and alternative energies. These policies often
have binding targets on carbon dioxide emissions reductions
and renewable energy production for member states. Individual
countries enact national policies to meet the targets laid out in
EU directives. This section first gives an overview of the policies
enacted by the EU member states as a whole, followed by a dis-
cussion of the specific national policies of individual member
states to meet the renewable and alternative energy goals of the
EU directives.
84
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
EU Renewable and Alternative Energy Policies
In 1997, to help meet the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol, the EC
set out its strategies and action plan in the European Union white
paper. The white paper, called “Energy for the Future: Renewable
Sources of Energy 1997,” set a goal to double the amount of renew-
able energy used by EU member countries to 12 percent. To do this,
the paper created several legislative proposals to reduce the use of
fossil fuel for electricity, transportation, and heating. Its main policy
is the Renewables Directive, which requires that 22 percent of total
electricity come from renewable energy sources by 2010. Another
major piece of legislation falling under the white paper is a biofuels
directive, which requires biofuels to provide 5.75 percent of the total
fuels used for transportation. Also falling under the white paper
legislative proposals is the Directive on Energy Performance in
Buildings. This directive requires energy efficiency to be improved
in the construction of new buildings.
More recently, the EC developed the Renewable Energy
Roadmap in 2007, which provided a “long term vision for renew-
able energy sources in the EU” (Commission of the European
Communities 2007a, 3). The Roadmap reported that the EU
would fall short of its goal of getting 12 percent of its energy from
renewable energy sources. This is because many of the national
policies of individual countries are not good enough to reach the
goals of the white paper. Despite this setback, the Roadmap es-
tablished an even higher target for renewable energy. By 2020, re-
newable energy must account for 20 percent of total energy use in
Europe. While the cost is expected to be very high, the Roadmap
points out that similar investments were made for the coal and oil
industries in the past. In March 2007, European leaders agreed to
the target. The goal is related to another goal of reducing green-
house gas (ghg) emissions by 20 percent by 2020 (Euractiv 2007b).
It is important to note that these EU commitments are to renew-
able energy only, not to alternative energies like nuclear power.
EU countries are divided on nuclear energy. France is the biggest
supporter of expanding nuclear energy (Euractiv 2007a). In 2007,
EU member states updated their national policies to meet the
goals of the Renewable Energy Roadmap.
Directive on the Promotion of Electricity from 
Renewable Energy Sources in the Internal Electricity Market
Also known as the Renewables Directive, the Directive on the
Promotion of Electricity from Renewable Energy Sources in the
Europe
85
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Internal Electricity Market was adopted in 2001 by the leaders of
EU member countries. It requires that all EU states meet their
electricity needs with at least 22 percent coming from renewable
energy by 2020. As of 2005, electricity from renewable energy
sources was at 15 percent. This amount is expected to increase to
19 percent by 2020. The major source for this increase is large-
scale hydro, though electricity from other renewable resources is
expected to continue growing in the future (Commission of the
European Communities 2007b, 3).
Directive on the Promotion of the Use of Biofuels for Transport
In 2003, the EU adopted the Directive on the Promotion of the
Use of Biofuels for Transport. The Biofuels Directive set a target
for biofuels to provide 2 percent of the EU’s fuel needs by 2005
and 5.7 percent by 2010. A progress report published in 2007
found that biofuels accounted for only 1 percent in 2005 and that
it was unlikely that it would reach more than 4.2 percent by 2010.
Again, the national policies of individual countries are not keep-
ing up with the targets adopted in the white paper (Commission
of the European Communities 2007, 6).
Electricity Feed-in Laws
Chapter 2 presented electricity feed-in laws, which require utili-
ties to pay higher prices for electricity produced by renewable
and alternative energy companies. Electricity feed-in laws are
known as advanced renewable tariffs (ARTs) in Europe. ARTs are
the most popular approach to encouraging renewable energy in
EU member countries. To date, 19 EU member countries are
using ARTs, which have been called the “world’s most successful
policy mechanism for stimulating rapid development of renew-
able energy” (Sijm 2002, 5). ARTs have seen growing success in
EU countries like Spain, Germany, and Denmark. In these cases,
ARTs resulted in over 40 percent of growth in wind power. As
stated in Chapter 2, criticisms of ARTs are that they are not eco-
nomical and that they result in higher prices than if such energies
had developed in a competitive market.
Germany
Germany is the highest consumer of energy in the EU, although
consuming only 3.1 percent of total energy worldwide (British
Petroleum 2007, 37). In 2006, renewable energy made up 5.8 per-
86
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
cent of the total energy and 12 percent of electricity generation in
Germany (Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology 2007).
In 2000, Germany became the first economically developed
country to announce a phase-out of nuclear power. Nuclear
power accounts for 27 percent of its electricity generation. With-
out nuclear power, Germany has had to pass stronger policies
for renewable energy development than other EU countries. As a
result, it is more successful at encouraging renewable energy
(Runci 2005, 2). The major strategy of these policies has been a
shift from publicly funded research and development (R&D) to
policies that promote market penetration of renewable energy
technologies.
As mentioned, electricity feed-in laws resulted in large in-
creases in renewable energy production. Since 1990, when Ger-
many’s Electricity Feed-in Law was passed, renewable energy
production has grown by 500 percent for biomass, 2,000 percent
for wind, and 15,000 percent for solar photovoltaics (PVs) (Runci
2005, 1). This rise has made Germany one of the top renewable
energy producers in the world (Runci 2005, 2). However, because
there was hardly any development to begin with, a 15,000 percent
increase sounds much higher than it really is.
Another important factor in the rise in renewable energy
production in Germany was the passage of the Renewable En-
ergy Law (EEG) in 2000. The goal of the EEG was to increase elec-
tricity produced from renewable energy by 12.5 percent by 2010.
Like the electricity feed-in law, the EEG required that electricity
producers buy renewably generated electricity at set prices. Wind
energy has benefited the most from these policies, but solar con-
tinues to have difficulty competing in the market.
An Ecological Reform Tax passed in 1999 has contributed to
a growth in biofuels by exempting it from taxes. A 100,000 Solar
Roofs Program, passed in 1999, resulted in a 700 percent increase
in installed solar PV capacity from 1998 to 2003 with the help of
considerable government subsidies (Runci 2005, 10). Also passed
in 1999 was the Market Incentive Program (MAP), which pro-
vided over €200 million in grants in 2003 for renewable energy
systems (Runci 2005, 10).
Despite the growing success of Germany’s renewable en-
ergy policies, obstacles must still be overcome. Many renewable
energy policies, especially subsidies, have met resistance from
competing interests like the coal industry, resulting in a reduc-
tion in subsidies in 2003 (Runci 2005, 16). Following the trend of
Europe
87
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
general oppositions to renewable energy, Germany has also ex-
perienced public opposition to wind turbines. Experts say that,
because Germany has produced so much power from renew-
ables, it may be more cost-effective to import renewably gener-
ated electricity from other EU countries. The long-term future
success of renewable energy production depends on whether the
German government passes the right policies. However, it will
be difficult for Germany to phase out nuclear power if renew-
able energy does not continue to grow at the rate it is growing
now.
France
France is the second highest consumer of energy in the EU and
consumes about 2.5 percent of worldwide total primary energy
(British Petroleum 2007, 37). As of 2005, 6 percent of France’s pri-
mary energy came from renewable energy, the majority of which
came from large-scale hydro power plants (European Commis-
sion 2006b, 2.6.9). Nuclear energy provides over 70 percent of
France’s electricity needs (European Commission 2006b, 2.6.9).
France is aiming to have 21 percent of its electricity come from re-
newable energy by 2010. National targets for biofuels have been
set at 10 percent by 2015 (European Commission 2007a, 1). As the
nuclear power percentage indicates, French society is much more
accepting of the option of meeting its energy needs with nuclear
power production. Consequently, France has been the main ob-
jector in EU energy policy discussions when other states propose
that nuclear power should not count toward green energy tar-
gets. Although France has agreed to the energy targets set by the
EU, it continues to call for the incorporation of nuclear energy as
a solution for global warming (Cook 2007).
The General Directorate for Energy and Raw Materials
(DGEMP) within the Ministry of Economy, Finance, and Industry
is responsible for developing energy policy in France. France re-
lies on two main policy mechanisms to promote renewable en-
ergy production. First, like Germany, France has experienced
increases in renewable energy production, particularly wind,
through ARTs. In addition to ARTs, calls for tenders have been is-
sued. This means that the French government is soliciting the pri-
vate sector to invest in large-scale renewable energy projects.
Project Renaissance of Lyons is a good example of a tendering
project. The purpose of the project is to reach specific goals for re-
88
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
newable energy and energy efficiency and to promote sustain-
ability in the private construction sector. Through the financing
of high overhead costs, Project Renaissance also seeks to encour-
age developers to invest in the renewable energy sector.
As of 2007, France has been unable to meet its goals for re-
newable energy electricity production and biofuel use. It is un-
likely that France will meet its commitments for ghg reductions
under the Kyoto Protocol (Commission of the European Commu-
nities 2007b). Renewable energy production fell from 15 percent
in 1997 to less than 13 percent in 2004 (European Commission
2007a, 1). A biofuels target of 2 percent was not met in 2005, the
country falling 50 percent short of this goal (European Commis-
sion 2007a, 1). It is unknown at this time whether France will pro-
ceed to meet its targets for renewable energy sources or continue
developing additional nuclear power capacity.
United Kingdom 
The United Kingdom (UK) is the third highest consumer of pri-
mary energy in the EU but consumes only about 2 percent of total
worldwide energy (British Petroleum 2007, 40). In 2005, renew-
able energy provided just under 2 percent of the United King-
dom’s total primary energy needs and almost 5 percent of its
electricity (DTI 2006, 29). Nuclear energy accounted for 7.5 per-
cent of the total energy in the UK (British Petroleum 2007, 40).
The UK has implemented several national policies to meet the
challenging goals put forth in the EU directives. The Energy Act
of 2004 reflects the commitments of the UK under the white
paper and requires that 10 percent of all energy come from re-
newable sources by 2010. The act also set up the Nuclear Decom-
missioning Authority to address shutting down and cleaning up
nuclear energy sites. In addition, it created the British Electricity
Trading and Transmission Arrangements (BETTA), which created
a single wholesale electricity market that establishes a single elec-
trical grid and will promote competition in the market.
In April 2002, the UK began encouraging renewable en-
ergy production with the Renewables Obligation. The Renew-
ables Obligation requires that 10 percent of electricity must come
from renewable sources by 2010, as long as the costs are not too
high for consumers. The policy works like a renewable portfolio
standard, as discussed in Chapter 2. In addition to the 10 percent
target, the policy gives renewable obligation certificates (ROCs) to
Europe
89
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
companies that produce more than 10 percent of their electricity
from renewable energy. ROCs are similar to the green certificates
discussed in Chapter 2. The ROCs create a market for renewable
energy credits so that companies that are unable to meet the obli -
gation can buy out of it by purchasing certificates from companies
that can meet more than the 10 percent requirement.
Experts expect that renewable energy will contribute a total
of 9.9 percent of electricity production by 2010, just under the tar-
get of 10 percent (National Audit Office 2005, 2). The UK govern-
ment has identified barriers to the success of the renewables
obligation. These include the lack of uniformity of planning sys-
tems across the country, upgrades needed for the grid network,
unstable wholesale electricity prices, unstable policy frame-
works, and the lack of commercial viability of some renewable
energy technologies (National Audit Office 2005, 2–4). The result
has been a dedicated response by the UK federal government to
develop solutions to overcome these barriers.
Other Notable Policies of EU Member States
Sweden is a unique case when it comes to renewable energy. In
2005, Sweden became the first country in the world to pledge a
commitment to fossil fuel independence by the year 2020 (Min-
istry of Enterprise, Energy and Communications 2007). Most of
Sweden’s renewable energy share comes from hydropower and
more recently from biomass. Because of a reliance on biomass for
over 60 percent of domestic heating needs, Sweden has in-
creased its share of renewable energy use to 28 percent of the
total energy supply (Ministry of Enterprise, Energy and Com-
munications 2007). All other renewable energies account for less
than 1 percent of the total energy supply. A recent policy aimed
at increasing energy efficiency in buildings has a target of using
50 percent less energy by 2050. More specific programs for meet-
ing the ambitious goal of fossil fuel energy independence by
2020 are still being developed by the newly created Commission
on Oil Independence.
Denmark succeeded in eliminating the need to import en-
ergy from other countries, making it energy independent. Den-
mark is the world leader in offshore wind energy and is expected
to meet its Kyoto Protocol emission reductions of 29 percent three
to four years early (Commission of the European Communities
2007b, 7). Already, Denmark produces over 20 percent of its elec-
90
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
tricity from renewable energy sources and has ambitions to con-
tinue on the path toward a renewable energy economy (Danish
Energy Authority 2005).
Spain has committed to a renewable energy target of 12 per-
cent of overall energy and 30 percent of electricity by 2010 (Inter-
national Energy Association 2007). To reach this goal, Spain is
looking to increase energy production from solar, wind, and bio-
fuels with 77 percent of financing for the projects coming from
the energy industry (International Energy Association 2007).
Spain is the second largest producer of wind energy in the world
(Commission of the European Communities 2007b, 8).
The Netherlands has found success with electricity feed-in
laws like France and Germany, but with biofuels rather than
wind (Commission of the European Communities 2007b, 8). To
meet its ghg emission reduction commitments under the Kyoto
Protocol, the Netherlands has committed to a renewable energy
target of 5 percent by 2010 and 10 percent by 2020. It is expected
that it will reach these targets, although there have been reduc-
tions in financial support for large-scale biomass and offshore
wind power (European Commission 2007b, 1).
These countries have the most successful policies for pro-
moting renewable energy in the EU. As discussed, the electricity
feed-in laws or ARTs are responsible for most of the increases in
production of renewable energy because they require utilities to
purchase the renewable energy produced by wholesale genera-
tors. Although it is argued that this policy mechanism is not the
most economically efficient, it cannot be denied that it gets re-
sults. The mandatory purchase of electricity produced from re-
newable energy aids in the process of making these technologies
competitive with fossil fuel sources. As a result, other, more mar-
ket-friendly policies can be enacted with more potential for fu-
ture success.
Because the EU drive to adopt renewable energy is the re-
sult of its commitment to lead the global effort to reduce ghg
emissions under the Kyoto Protocol, the EU and its member
states have more aggressive policies than the United States and
other countries for promoting a transition to renewable energy.
The general dislike by EU member states of nuclear power, with
the exception of France and a few countries from Eastern Europe,
reflects shared sentiments with U.S. society on the dangers of nu-
clear accidents and nuclear waste. Recent reports indicate, how-
ever, that nuclear power may have to become accepted as a
Europe
91
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
means for reaching binding targets on emission reductions in EU
countries (Ames 2007).
Although not a EU member state, Iceland has one of the
most advanced renewable energy programs in the world. It is the
only Western country to rely completely on renewable energy for
electricity production. Geothermal supplies 83 percent of electric-
ity, and hydropower supplies 17 percent. The country imports oil
for transportation and coal for industrial uses, and it has no nu-
clear power plants in operation. Iceland is also one of two coun-
tries that have a real potential to produce hydrogen solely from
renewable energy. 
We turn now to a review of renewable and alternative en-
ergy policies in Asia and Oceania.
Asia and Oceania
Many aspects of the Asian energy situation make this region an
important area for study. The first and most obvious is that the
increasing population, combined with the growing economy in
countries like China and India, is expected to create remarkable
demands for energy, resulting in high rates of consumption. En-
ergy forecasters have hardly begun to predict the effects on the
energy supplies and markets if these demands are met with con-
tinued reliance on fossil fuels. Oil shortages and high energy
prices are among a couple of the growing concerns that have
prompted many Asian governments to begin passing policies to
encourage renewable and nuclear power energy production.
Asian mega cities are at the top of the list for the worst air pollu-
tion in the world, causing severe health problems to the people
who live there. The pollution is due to the growth of industrial
development and reliance on coal. Development in Asian
economies is expected to contribute greatly in the near future to
the global warming effect, causing worldwide attention to Asian
energy issues. It is expected that China will surpass the United
States as the top carbon emitter by 2008 (International Energy As-
sociation 2006). As a region, Asia consumes 31 percent of the
world’s primary energy, which is almost as much as North and
South America combined (Energy Information Administration
2006, 302).
As discussed in Chapter 2, the A6 agreement and Kyoto
Protocol do not set binding limits on ghg emissions or targets for
92
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
renewable energy adoption for most Asian countries. Many of
the national policies of Asian countries to encourage renewable
and alternative energy production are concerned first and fore-
most with the benefits the technology can offer to the economy
rather than reducing environmental impacts. Standards of living
of rural residents are another concern; in many cases it is more
economically efficient to develop renewable energy in these areas
than to transport electricity by bringing in electrical lines from
fossil fuel utility plants in urban areas. Because of these issues, re-
newable energy policies seldom impose binding targets.
While most countries in the West have halted nuclear en-
ergy development or are phasing it out altogether, the growing
energy needs of Asia make it an attractive source of energy there.
As international pressures to reduce ghg emissions increase,
Asian countries are turning to nuclear energy development as a
clean and efficient way to provide electricity for its growing pop-
ulations. The Energy Information Association predicts that there
will be considerable growth in the nuclear power industry in
Asia as the U.S. and European markets are dwindling (Energy In-
formation Administration 2002).
In our discussion of Asia, we turn first to the most rapidly
growing country, China. The next section identifies the important
renewable and alternative energy issues in India. Following that
is a discussion of Japan and Australia. We then provide a section
highlighting the other most notable renewable and alternative
energy developments in the region.
China 
As one of the fastest growing countries in the world, China ranks
second in the world for energy consumption. With its rate of eco-
nomic and population growth, it is expected to maintain that po-
sition into the coming decades (International Energy Association
2006, 47). The primary source of energy is coal, followed by oil
and natural gas (European Commission 2006, 2.8.2). But as en-
ergy shortages loom, oil prices rise, and the environmental im-
pacts of fossil fuel use are felt, the Chinese government has
started taking action. A growing middle class has contributed to
the rise in gasoline consumption as the number of automobile
owners increases, resulting in gas shortages in some areas of the
country. The rising price of oil and gas has led China to enter into
agreements with unstable oil producers to maintain supplies at
Asia and Oceania
93
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
reasonable prices. The environmental impacts of China’s energy
consumption include air pollution and the increased contribution
to global warming. Due to its reliance on coal for electricity,
China has 16 of the 20 worst polluted cities in the world, causing
its cities to become “invisible” due to the excessive smog (Fang
2006). The result has been increased attention by the government
to the development of renewable and alternative energy sources.
Furthermore, as the economic prospects of renewable energy de-
velopment grow, the country, along with foreign investors and
industries, is working to exploit the benefits they have to offer. As
of 2006, China is the world’s top investor in renewable energy,
not including hydropower (Xinhua News Agency 2006). With
this rate of investment, the Global Wind Energy Council predicts
that China will surpass Germany, Spain, and the United States as
the world’s largest wind producer by 2020 (Xinhua News Agency
2007). The policies of the Chinese government are responsible for
many of these developments.
On November 8, 2005, at the Beijing International Renew-
able Energy Conference, China pledged to the international com-
munity to double its reliance on renewable energy by 2020, which
would bring renewable energy production up to 15 percent. To
reach the 15 percent target, China has raised electricity rates to
start a renewable energy development fund. It is up to the Chi-
nese Renewable Energies Industry Association to continue devel-
oping a strategy under the Renewable Energy Law and to
implement it. The Chinese Renewable Energy Industry Associa-
tion was established in 2000 to provide institutional support for
handling environmental problems caused by China’s energy use
through the development of the renewable energy sector.
Laws in China and other Asian countries are slightly differ-
ent from Western laws. They are more like principles than actual
plans for achieving the goals stated in the law. Chinese renewable
energy experts say that, without an actual binding commitment
to such targets, the goals are likely to go unmet or be reduced.
But they are more likely to be met when they are expressed in a
formal document like the Renewable Energy Law (Agence France
Press 2006). In support of this, industry experts say that it is likely
that China will reach its 2020 targets ahead of schedule (World-
watch Institute 2006). It is notable, however, that the emphasis on
renewable energy by the Chinese government is due more to the
economic advantages associated with renewable energy than to
the environmental benefits (Renewable Energy Access 2005).
94
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The potential for renewable energy in China is great. Ac-
cording to Worldwatch, “an incomplete list of exploitable renew-
able energy reserves puts the country’s hydropower potential at
400 million kW, wind at around 3 billion kW, biomass energy at
800–1,000 million tons of coal equivalent a year, and solar energy
at a theoretical 1.7 trillion tons of coal equivalent a year” (World-
watch Institute 2006). However, while renewable energies like
wind, solar, biomass, and biogas are to be a part of the plan for
meeting China’s renewable energy targets, the major source of
power will be hydroelectric. Development of large-scale hydro-
electric resources has been a major priority of the Chinese gov-
ernment for over a decade. If fully exploited, hydropower in
China could offset 40 percent of fossil fuel use (“Priority Given to
Efficient Hydropower” 2004).
Chinese citizens have a different view of nuclear power
than citizens in Western countries like the United States and
many countries in the European Union. Unlike Western coun-
tries, where citizens have a very negative view of nuclear power,
Chinese citizens are much more accepting. Even if the Chinese
public did not have a high acceptance of nuclear power, it would
be unlikely to have much of an effect on policy decisions. Deci-
sions involving nuclear power in China are not open to public
input (Florig and Zhao 2002, 61). The Chinese government is pur-
suing an aggressive strategy to increase nuclear power produc-
tion, and, unlike many of the more developed countries in the
world, public opinion is not a barrier. While nuclear is exalted by
many supporters as an important solution to the problem of in-
creasing carbon emissions, critics argue that, with China’s growth
rate, nuclear power will have a minimal impact on ghg emission
reductions. Furthermore, the cost of disposal for nuclear waste
could be problematic for future generations (“Oil Stock Boost for
Emergency” 2007).
The future of China’s energy situation hinges on many fac-
tors. First, it depends on whether the rate of economic growth
continues at the expected pace. More or less growth will impact
the energy needed, the funds available to develop more projects,
and the ability of the government to regulate energy industries.
Second, the level of international cooperation will have an impact
on the amount and rate of energy projects that can be developed.
China will need not only support for some of the technologies,
but additional funding assistance in the form of aid or loans. Fi-
nally, renewable and alternative energy development hinges on
Asia and Oceania
95
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the agenda of those in control of the government. The priority of
hydropower development in the Chinese government has been
attributed to the fact that Jiang Zemin, the former president, was
an electrical engineer and Hu Jintao, the current president, stud-
ied hydroelectric engineering. The development of other types
of renewable and alternative energy could also be dependent on
the technical experience of members of the government. If gov-
ernmental officials are experienced in other forms of renewable
energy, there may be more support for its development. Further-
more, a shift in the country’s paradigm that put more or less
value on the economic and environmental outcomes of develop-
ment could also affect the direction of the country’s energy re-
liance. While many experts believe that China could become a
leader in developing renewable and alternative energy, its re-
liance on fossil fuels will continue to increase as it copes with
finding enough energy from any sources to provide electricity
for its growth and the resulting improved standard of living
(Miller 2006).
India
India, with the world’s second-largest population and growth
rate, has the potential to become the most populated country.
Combine that possibility with its rate of economic growth, and
India is expected to generate large increases in demand for en-
ergy over the next couple of decades (India Core 2006). This rate
of economic and population growth makes it, like China, an im-
portant country for study in the field of energy production, use,
and consumption. Despite the fact that it is not a fully developed
country, India is the fifth largest consumer of energy in the world
(Energy Information Administration 2007). The primary source
of energy in India is coal, followed by oil and natural gas, though
natural gas makes up only 7 percent of total energy consumed
(Energy Information Administration 2007). Renewable energy,
excluding hydropower, accounts for about 3.5 percent of total en-
ergy, hydropower accounts for almost 3 percent, and nuclear
power accounts for about 2 percent, creating a great untapped
potential for these energy sources (Energy Information Adminis-
tration 2007).
Wind, solar, biomass, small hydro, and ocean energy have
the potential to provide almost 30 percent, or the equivalent of
150,000 megawatts, of India’s total energy needs (Meisen 2006,
96
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
20). Large-scale hydropower, if fully exploited, has the potential
to provide over 10 percent, or the equivalent of about 57,000
megawatts, of total energy needs (World Bank 2007). And the po-
tential of nuclear is, of course, limited to the amount of funding
available for investment, uranium supplies, and those applica-
tions it is useful for. Because India is the only developing country
that is producing hydrogen fuel cell vehicles, hydrogen has great
potential there. The full exploitation of renewable and alternative
energy could result in a major offset of fossil fuel use in India.
Energy has become a concern to the Indian government for
many reasons. Like China, India has experienced fuel shortages
and is even more reliant on energy imports. As a result, the pres-
ident of India has made energy independence his top priority. To
meet this priority, the Indian government will have to rely on a
mixture of energy sources. It has low oil and natural gas sup-
plies, but the third largest coal supply in the world. Although
India is passing renewable and alternative energy policies, to
what degree these sources will play into the energy mix is uncer-
tain. Economic concerns tend to trump other concerns regarding
the issue of energy. In addition to the energy independence pri-
ority, the Indian government has set a goal of 100 percent rural
electrification by 2012. Renewable energy will be the cheapest
and most efficient way to achieve this goal because many of
these areas are located far from the energy grid (Energy Informa-
tion Administration 2004a). Conclusively, renewable energy pro-
vides the benefit of a fully electrified nation, in particular, to
India. As discussed in Chapter 2, using renewable energy to
bring electricity to people in rural areas often results in higher
equity throughout the world because people in poorer nations
are able to enjoy the technological advances that more devel-
oped nations have been enjoying for decades.
It is evident that India’s concern with renewable energy is
not guided by its concern for the environment. As indicated by
the statements of Surya P. Sethi, the principal energy policy ad-
viser of India, the Indian government is more concerned with
economic development (“Carbon Reduction or Poverty Reduc-
tion, Not Both” 2006). The goals of renewable energy policies in
India are directed more toward the economic and standard-of-
living advantages that using renewable energy provides, like
achieving energy independence and bringing electricity to poor
rural areas, than for the environmental benefits (Kalam 2006).
This will have an effect on the rate and type of energy developed
Asia and Oceania
97
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
in India. Like China, India’s laws are slightly different from
Western laws. Targets for renewable energy development are
more like suggestive targets and are not backed by any specific
national policy. This means not that there are no policies in
place for support, but that the goals are not necessarily binding
and that other issues can overshadow efforts to develop renew-
able energy, including economics.
For years, India has had an aggressive renewable energy
strategy and was one of the first developing countries to imple-
ment an electricity feed-in law. Most of the renewable energy pol-
icy was left up to the states with the passage of the Electricity Act
of 2003, which also established a goal of an additional 10 percent
of electricity from renewable energy nationwide. Despite the in-
creased role of states in energy policy, the national government is
still involved in the formulation of policies and targets. In 2006,
Indian president Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam called for an increase in
renewable energy power generation from a previous target of 6
percent to 25 percent by 2030. Additionally, India is the first and
only country to establish a Ministry of Renewable Energy, de-
voted solely to the development and advancement of renewable
energy sources.
India has invested the most heavily in wind power. And it
has recently surpassed Denmark to become the fourth largest
producer of wind power in the world and now has the second
fastest growing market for wind. India has one of the largest
national programs to promote the development of solar power
(Energy Information Administration 2004a). Small-scale hy-
dropower is the most utilized source of renewable energy in
India. Given that there is much potential to be tapped into, the
Indian government is striving to develop its large-scale hydro
projects. As the largest producer of sugarcane in the world,
India has been implementing policies to take advantage of this
considerable potential for the development of its biomass econ-
omy. Biogas or methane capture is also being pursued, with
over 100,000 biogas plants installed in 2004–2005 alone (Re-
newable Energy Access 2005).
Like China, India views nuclear power as a viable source of
energy for a country with a large and growing population. The na-
tion has not developed its capacity for energy production like the
more developed countries and also has limited funding sources to
do so. As such, nuclear power is seen as a way to achieve goals of
energy equity, rural electrification, and reliable supplies, which
98
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
are seen as outweighing the costs of building the facilities, dispos-
ing of nuclear waste, and the risks of nuclear accidents.
Due to their similarities, India’s use of renewable and alter-
native energy hinges on many of the same factors as China’s. Re-
gardless, India will be an important player in the advancement of
renewable energy technologies. With the rate that these markets
are growing in India, they will provide the market penetration
that many renewable energy technologies need to bring the costs
of the more expensive technologies down to a level that is more
competitive with fossil fuel sources. The rural electrification pro-
gram could serve as a model for other developing countries that
are seeking to provide full electricity to all of their citizens. As al-
ready stated, concerns over the welfare of its people and econ-
omy are primary at this point in time. If India is to make
environmental concerns related to energy a priority, it will be up
to the developing nations to make this possible through financial,
technical, and institutional assistance.
Japan
As one of the most highly developed countries in the world,
Japan has the second highest rate of energy consumption and use
in Asia and the third highest in the world (British Petroleum
2007). With its characteristic of being such a small but densely
populated country, Japan relies heavily on imported energy be-
cause it does not have the fossil fuel resources to provide for its
own energy needs. As a result, the oil shocks of the 1970s and
1980s prompted the government to diversify its energy supply
and improve energy efficiency. While President Jimmy Carter’s
attempt to put the United States on the same path was thwarted
by President Ronald Regan’s policies, Japan followed through
with its efforts and became the most efficient energy economy in
the world (Moore and Ihle 1999). Through partnerships between
the public and private sector, Japan emerged in the early 1990s as
a leader in renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies
alongside Germany. In 1997, Japan hosted the Kyoto session of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
where the Kyoto Protocol was developed as a binding amend-
ment to the international treaty on climate change. Kyoto brought
environmental concerns to the forefront, and Japan began imple-
menting policies to encourage the market penetration of tech-
nologies that would reduce ghg emissions (Moore and Ihle 1999).
Asia and Oceania
99
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Oil and coal are the dominant sources of energy for Japan,
making up about 47 percent and 21 percent of the total shares of
energy, respectively. Natural gas accounts for only about 13 per-
cent of the total energy supply, while nuclear power accounts for
almost 14 percent and renewable energies, including large-scale
hydropower, account for about 3.5 percent (European Commis-
sion 2006b, 2.8.2). If fully developed, it is estimated that renew-
able energies could greatly offset the use of fossil fuels in Japan’s
energy sector.
While nuclear power makes up a considerably larger share
of energy in Japan compared to other developed countries, devel-
opment of new nuclear power plants is still controversial. Pub-
lished reports indicate that wind is a more viable fuel than
plutonium for meeting Japan’s energy needs (Fioravanti 1999).
The Japanese government, however, views nuclear power as a
necessary part of the fuel mix for achieving energy independence
and security through a reduced reliance on fossil fuels. Govern-
ment reports indicate that it is impossible for nuclear power to be
phased out and replaced by renewable energy (Japanese Ministry
of Economy, Trade and Industry 2006, 1).
Although policies to pursue the development of renewable
energy technology began in earnest in Japan a couple of decades
ago, policies to encourage the significant commercialization of re-
newable energy only emerged in 1998. The first notable policy to
encourage the development of renewable energy technologies in
Japan was the Sunshine Project, implemented in 1974 with a
focus on solar PV technologies, geothermal, and hydrogen. In
1978, the Moonlight Project was implemented to encourage R&D
of energy-efficient technologies. In 1980, the Law Concerning the
Promotion of Development and Introduction of Petroleum Sub-
stituting Energy was passed, requiring that the government es-
tablish a workable plan that would include financial support for
the actual use and deployment of renewable energy technology.
This law also established the New Energy and Industrial Technol-
ogy Development Organization (NEDO), a governmental organi-
zation that has been a key player in carrying out renewable and
alternative energy policies. In 1992, the New Sunshine Law was
passed, which combined the original Sunshine Project with the
Moonlight Project and set the stage for policies that introduced
net metering at competitive prices. Policies related to net meter-
ing coupled with ambitious national targets and the 70,000 Solar
Roofs Program were the catalyst for the unprecedented growth of
100
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the PV market in the 1990s. Similar in many ways to the U.S. Mil-
lion Solar Roofs Initiative, the Japanese Solar Roofs Program has
seen more success because it set targets for energy production
whereas the U.S. policy did not. Prior to 1997, the Solar Roofs
Program was the only policy that encouraged the adoption of re-
newable energy technologies with a strategy that aimed to assist
in market penetration. This policy was limited to PV solar tech-
nology, leaving other solar, wind, ocean, and biomass technolo-
gies at a disadvantage for market penetration.
In 1997, the New Energy Law was adopted. It created subsi-
dies and other market incentives to encourage the adoption of
these technologies by the public and private sectors. It is notable
that the Ministry of International Trade and Industry and NEDO
are the primary government agencies handling the implementa-
tion of Japan’s renewable energy policies. What is even more in-
teresting is that these agencies tend to employ a more
collaborative relationship between the public and private sectors
to achieve their policy goals. This kind of partnership can con-
tribute greatly to the success of policies that deal with technology.
The Special Measures Law Concerning Promotion of the
Use of New Energy by Electricity Utilities of 2002 was the first
law to establish a market for green certificates in an effort to en-
courage the use of renewable energy through consumer choice. It
also created a renewable energy portfolio that set a goal to in-
crease renewable energy. The law has been criticized as setting
too low a standard. Additionally, the law is not binding, making
success uncertain at best (Iida 2002, 8).
Partly because of its ambitious and successful Solar Roofs
Program, Japan dominates the PV market. Wind energy develop-
ment has slowed due to a lack of incentives for investment in, de-
velopment of, and adoption of wind energy. Due to the fact that
Japan is a volcanic island country, it has significant geothermal
resources. It is difficult to develop them, however, because many
of the sites are located within national parks. It is likely that nu-
clear energy will continue to play an important role in the energy
economy because there is more public acceptance for it in Japan.
Japan is a leader in hydrogen fuel cell research and has invested
heavily in R&D of hydrogen compared to other countries. Fol-
lowing in the same trend as other developed countries, Japan has
recently shifted its policy focus from R&D to the encouragement
of the commercialization of hydrogen fuel cells under the New
Hydrogen Project (Hydrogen Association 2004, 2). The successful
Asia and Oceania
101
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
adoption of hydrogen as an energy carrier creates great possibil-
ities for the role that renewable energy can play in its energy
economy.
Australia
Although Australia is as advanced and developed as the United
States or European Union, it uses less energy. Australia con-
sumes about 5 percent of what the United States does (Energy
Information Administration 2006, 303). This is because Australia
has a lower population and a lower energy intensity. Australia,
like the United States, is rich in all fossil fuel energy resources,
and it has many of the energy problems associated with fossil
fuels. Growing consumption and declining energy production
have led to increased dependence on imported oil, raising con-
cerns about the problems of relying on oil from unstable regions.
Air pollution in the cities is worsening, bringing attention to the
need for alternative fuels for transportation. Also, growing con-
cerns about global warming are continuing to shape the agenda
for renewable energy.
As a result, the government has taken a number of steps to
reduce Australia’s dependency on fossil fuels. Despite concerns
about the environment, the economic issues surrounding energy
are the driving force behind policy action. This is reflected in the
programs that have been adopted. Australia did not ratify the
Kyoto Protocol until 2008, after public officials responded to a
shift in public attitude that was indicated by the 2007 election re-
sults. Any country that has ratified the Kyoto Protocol has ex-
ceeded the targets that are set by it. Because the increased use of
renewable and alternative energy provides one of the more im-
portant solutions for meeting the ghg reduction targets of the
protocol, countries that are not seeking to meet reduction targets
are unlikely to have ambitious policies to increase renewable en-
ergy shares. At this point, Australia is no exception.
Australia’s main source of energy is coal, which accounts
for 45 percent of total energy consumption, followed by oil and
natural gas at 33 percent and 19 percent, respectively. Hy-
dropower provides 3 percent of the total energy, and nuclear and
renewable energy sources furnish a negligible amount of energy,
making Australia’s renewable and alternative energy sector one
of the most underdeveloped of the industrialized world (Energy
Information Administration 2006, 329). Recent policies, however,
102
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
reflect a move by the government to incorporate sustainable en-
ergy into the country’s energy portfolio.
Most of the policies provide subsidies to encourage the pri-
vate sector to invest in renewable energy. An exception to this is
the Renewable Energy Act of 2000, which established the Manda-
tory Renewable Energy Target (MRET), requiring that about 5
percent of electricity be produced from renewable energy by
2010. A system of tradable renewable energy credits was estab-
lished under MRET. The 5 percent target is criticized for being too
low and nonbinding (Kent and Mercer, 2006, 1059). Also enacted
in 2000 was the Renewable Remote Power Generation Pro-
gramme (RRPGP) under the Measures for a Better Environment
package. RRPGP is a rebate program that aims to subsidize the
conversion of diesel-based generators to renewable energy gener-
ators, which those living in rural areas rely on and which are not
connected to the electrical grid. A Photovoltaic Rebate Program
took effect on January 1, 2000, and provides rebates for domestic
and industrial installations of PV systems. The Renewable En-
ergy Equity Fund (REEF) became effective in 1999 and provides
funding assistance for R&D of renewable energy technologies.
However, this program does not provide support for the market
penetration of the technologies developed.
The 2004 white paper, “Securing Australia’s Energy Fu-
ture,” is the most recent renewable energy policy action taken by
the Australian national government. The white paper an-
nounced the enactment of several policies to encourage the de-
velopment and commercialization of renewable energy. One of
these initiatives is the Renewable Energy Development Initiative
(REDI). REDI is a competitive, merit-based grant program that
supports the early stages of commercialization in order to get
technologies with potential the support they need to reach the
market penetration stage. The Solar Cities Initiative is a series of
trials in different cities that tests models for sustainable solar en-
ergy applications. The goal is to determine how to overcome bar-
riers to the adoption of large-scale grid applications. Also under
the white paper is the five-year, $20.4 million Advanced Electric-
ity Storage Technologies Program. This program will identify
and promote advanced storage technologies to increase the abil-
ity of renewable energy to contribute to the electricity supply.
The Renewable Energy Industry Development, passed in 2003, is
another measure that provides grants for projects that will ad-
dress market barriers, surveys of renewable energy resources,
Asia and Oceania
103
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and related topics. Ethanol production grants have been distrib-
uted since 2002 to maintain ethanol and biodiesel shares in the
transport sector. While these policies are comprehensive and am-
bitious, they are not expected to make a significant impact on re-
newable energy shares in the market right away (Kent and
Mercer 2006, 1060).
Australia has significant wind and solar resources, with lim-
ited large hydro resources. It also has geothermal resources. There
are few policies to encourage the development of geothermal, be-
cause the sites are located too far from the grid. The potential ca-
pacity of PV technology far exceeds the electricity needs of the
country, but issues of economic efficiency abound because this
technology is also the most expensive. The Photovoltaic Rebate
Program is essential for the development of this technology (Sad-
dler, Disendorf, and Denniss 2004). Australia’s stable political sys-
tem, stable policies, relatively low levels of red tape, and flexible
labor relations are key strengths in attracting investors of renew-
able energy, adding to the potential for success of these policies.
Other Notable Issues in Asia
Russia is unique in many ways as a developed country. With the
fall of communism, Russia experienced a decline in energy con-
sumption as the economy went into a recession. There are no leg-
islative mandates like RPS or ARTs to support the use of renewable
energy. There are, however, programs to encourage investment
into R&D of renewable energy technologies. Russia has an exten-
sive energy transmission system already in place, making it possi-
ble to bring energy produced from remote locations to more
populated areas. Russia also has abundant renewable energy re-
sources like wind, biomass, hydro, tidal, and even solar. Unfortu-
nately, as long as there is economic instability, any major shifts in
energy are unlikely (European Bank 2005).
Other developed countries in the region, like South Korea
and New Zealand, have policies in place to promote renewable
energy. Although neither has an RPS with mandatory targets,
South Korea does have electricity feed-in laws in place. Both
countries have some form of policy that either invests public
funds directly into the renewable energy sector or encourages in-
vestment by the private sector through subsidies and tax breaks.
Both North and South Korea also have considerable nuclear
power developments, whereas New Zealand has none.
104
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Many of the less developed Asian nations lack reliable or
complete data on their energy production, use, and consumption
patterns. This is also true for data on their renewable energy po-
tential. It is known that biomass still provides a considerable
amount of energy compared to what it provides for developed
countries. Many developing Asian nations have not tapped into
their hydropower potential and have prospects for large-, small-,
micro-, and mini-scale developments. Without reliable assess-
ments of the true potential of these resources to provide for the
energy needs of these countries, little is being done in the way of
investment or policy actions to encourage the development of re-
newable or alternative energy sources. Furthermore, many of the
less developed countries are lacking experts with the technical
knowledge necessary to maintain several of these complex sys-
tems. While many of these countries are not financially able to
pursue programs that are as ambitious as those in China, India,
Japan, and Australia, there is still a trend toward a renewable en-
ergy transition. There are several examples indicating that there
is a future, albeit a slow moving one, for renewable and alterna-
tive energies.
Thailand is reliant mostly on oil, followed by natural gas,
biomass, and then coal. Hydropower accounts for less than 1 per-
cent of total energy (International Energy Association 2006). It is
one of the most politically stable countries in the region, a neces-
sary quality if a country is to have a successfully renewable and
alternative energy plan. Compared to other nations, Thailand has
some of the most aggressive policies in place to encourage renew-
able energy, including an RPS and ARTs to encourage the produc-
tion of renewable energy for electricity use. It has only one
nuclear reactor, which is for the purposes of research and pro-
vides a negligible amount of the total energy.
Cambodia has established a preliminary National Renew-
able Electricity Policy for the promotion of renewable energy as a
source for rural electrification, much like India. The law, how-
ever, has not established binding goals or targets for the achieve-
ment of its goals. Its focus is on the fair distribution of electricity
and the diversification of energy sources for the purposes of en-
ergy security rather than the environmental benefits of nonfossil
fuel energy production. Many barriers must be overcome to
achieve these objectives, the bulk of which will require the assis-
tance of regional and global organizations as well as of individual
countries. Assistance will need to be institutional, educational,
Asia and Oceania
105
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
scientific, and technical as well as financial (Australian Business
Council for Sustainable Energy 2005).
Vietnam is still mostly reliant on combustible renewable en-
ergies, like biomass, as its primary energy source. Like India, it
has an aggressive policy to bring electricity to about 5 million
rural households. Recognizing the importance of renewable en-
ergy for electrifying rural households, this goal has become a dri-
ving force in the development of a renewable energy sector. The
government has developed the Renewable Energy Action Plan
(REAP) to help in the development of a renewable energy sector
in Vietnam. The plan outlines the need for international assis-
tance and a strategy of policy actions that need to be taken. The
World Bank is working as a partner in REAP’s 10-year plan along
with many international actors. As the plan is still in the imple-
mentation stage, it is difficult to determine its success, though it
is expected to result in the electrification of over 2.5 million
households, or half of those in need of electricity (Australian
Business Council for Sustainable Energy 2005, 10).
Africa and the Middle East
Africa is one of the more underdeveloped regions in the world.
Many Africans live in poverty, lacking essentials such as clean
water and electricity. Most countries in Africa are underdevel-
oped or developing with the exception of South Africa, which can
be considered a newly industrialized nation on the brink of full
development. Because of the lack of economic development,
Africa tends to have a much lower energy demand and hence
consumes much less energy than the rest of the world. Like some
other underdeveloped regions in the world, many African coun-
tries rely on biomass for their basic energy needs like heating and
cooking. Several of the utility companies are state owned, paying
no taxes and generating many unpaid externalities. All of these
characteristics contribute to the lack of attention by African gov-
ernments to more complex renewable energy technology devel-
opment. Most countries do not have policies in place to
encourage renewable energy or energy efficiency, and they prob-
ably will not begin development of the renewable energy sector
without international assistance. Even then, the economies of
many countries will likely have to improve, and the basic needs
of citizens will need to be met before renewable energy can be-
106
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
come a major priority. Notably, because many countries rely on
simple biomass resources for their energy needs, there has not
been a considerable amount of investment in fossil fuel technolo-
gies, making it more feasible for the region to leapfrog these tech-
nologies and invest in more sustainable ones when it is ready to
invest in energy technology.
Africa has an abundance of renewable energy resources with
considerable potential for exploitation. Only about 7 percent of
large-scale hydropower has been exploited. The mini and micro
hydro potential has not yet been assessed. Of 9,000 megawatts of
geothermal energy potential, only 60 megawatts, in Kenya, are
being exploited (United Nations 2003, 1). The region has excellent
solar energy resources compared to other areas, especially in the
winter, giving it some of the greatest potential in the world for
solar technology development. Many PV projects have been
started throughout the continent to aid in rural electrification (Or-
ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2004, 1).
Due to Africa’s location in relation to the tropical zones, it has
much less wind potential than other regions. This has led to a
standstill of the wind market in the region. Ocean energy has not
been much a focus for the region, although in 1956 an ocean ther-
mal energy conversion (OTEC) plant was under construction in
the ocean near the Ivory Coast, but the project was halted because
of a lack of funding (U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy 2006). There have been no significant in-
vestments in R&D of hydrogen-based technology, so technology
transfer from more developed countries is essential for a speedy
transition to a hydrogen economy in the future. If small-scale,
local renewable energy is the primary focus of development, how-
ever, the need for hydrogen is less important because the energy
produced for local use does not need to be transported.
A variety of issues have limited the success of renewable en-
ergy in Africa. Lack of economic development enhances the prob-
lems of the high costs of renewable energy, poor infrastructure,
and the lack of skilled technicians and maintenance workers. Po-
litical instability contributes to the lack of government support,
the lack of coordination and collaboration, and insufficient policy
planning. For the development and dissemination of renewables
to be successful, African countries need to formulate and imple-
ment long-term policies, determine the appropriate types, de-
velop capacity-building programs specific to those technologies,
and tap into internationally supported financing opportunities.
Africa and the Middle East
107
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
South Africa
South Africa is one of the most developed countries in Africa. Its
energy usage is more similar to industrialized nations than to its
underdeveloped counterparts on the African continent. For in-
stance, South Africa consumes 45 percent of the total energy in
Africa (United Nations 2003, 3). Although it still relies heavily on
biomass as a source of energy, South Africa also relies on coal for
90 percent of its electricity production and has developed nu-
clear power. Only 0.01 percent of its large-scale hydropower is
being exploited. It has the highest wind potential of all the coun-
tries in Africa, although little of this has been developed (United
Nations 2003, 15). Recognizing the impacts of its energy use and
the benefits of sustainable energy development, the South
African government has developed a more enthusiastic energy
plan that aims at promoting a transition to renewable and alter-
native energies.
In 2003, the government published the “White Paper on Re-
newable Energy,” which addresses the need for policy support of
renewable energy. The white paper establishes a low target for re-
newable energy production by the year 2013 and focuses on the
development of a variety of renewable energy technologies. The
policy seeks to address many of the barriers to renewable energy
market penetration and focuses on the need for research and the
development of renewable energy. Rural electrification is a policy
goal for South Africa and has resulted in the highest growth in
the PV market of any African country. Despite this growth, PVs
have not been found to be the most economically efficient solu-
tion for rural electrification. This has caused nuclear power de-
velopment to gain status on the political agenda. Due to its status
as a newly industrialized nation, economic efficiency will con-
tinue to play a role in the energy plans of the future (Energy In-
formation Administration 2004b).
Middle East
The Middle East is well-known for its abundant oil reserves.
These reserves are the driving force behind energy technology
development in the region. Although the area is rich with this re-
source, growing demand is starting to catch up with the supply.
This is leading to an increased concern over the development of
sustainable energy in the region. From the development of re-
108
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
newable energy research centers to initiatives like the Trans-
Mediterranean Renewable Energy Cooperation, actions are being
taken by domestic and foreign actors to help with the develop-
ment of renewable and alternative energy sources.
The Middle East has large solar resources and opportunities
for wind power (International Energy Association 2006). As such,
there is a considerable amount of investment in solar energy. The
United Arab Emirates is investing heavily in large- and small-
scale solar power as well as in wind farms. The organization re-
cently built the first wind power project of the region on Sir
Baniyas Island and has plans for the construction of more wind
farms with technology built specifically to withstand the heat
and humidity of the area. Although it has no major investments
yet, Saudi Arabia is looking into developing its renewable energy
resources. Iran has plans to exploit its wind, solar, and geother-
mal resources. The development of nuclear power in the region
has caused international tensions, especially in the case of Iran.
Israel is the only country to pass an RPS, albeit for only 5 percent
of electricity shares by 2016. Other countries in the area have
begun doing studies to determine the potential of renewable en-
ergy resources. Although the region does not have the most ag-
gressive policies in the world, its financial resources give it the
ability to make the investments needed for faster development.
The political instability of the region and its reliance on oil may
prove to be the greatest barrier to the realization of its renewable
and alternative energy capacity.
North America
North America has promising potential for renewable and alter-
native energy development, as Chapter 2 demonstrated about the
United States. It has abundant renewable energy supplies and
meets many of the other conditions necessary for full utilization
of the resources. Between Canada and the United States, the tech-
nological know-how for both renewable resources, nuclear and
hydrogen, are among the best in the world. Cooperative frame-
works for Canada, the United States, and Mexico have already
been established through trade regimes like the North American
Free Trade Agreement and other regional agreements. The poten-
tial for this region to overcome the barriers to renewable energy
development discussed in Chapter 2 is still uncertain. The United
North America
109
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
States remains the highest consumer of energy in the world, but
has relatively low federal involvement in the encouragement of
market penetration for renewable energy technologies. As a de-
veloping country, Mexico needs more international assistance
than the United States and Canada to fund its renewable energy
projects. The region of Central America remains relatively unde-
veloped compared to the United States, Canada, and Mexico and
is definitely reliant on international technology sharing and fi-
nancing to exploit its renewable energy resources.
Canada
As one of the more developed countries in the world, Canada
ranks eighth in terms of energy consumption (International En-
ergy Association 2006, 50). It ranks fifth in the world in terms of
carbon dioxide emissions (International Energy Association
2006, 50). Unlike the United States, Canada has committed to
the targets set by the Kyoto Protocol. Not having the strong sup-
port of state governments for the protocol as in the United
States, the Canadian federal government faced opposition from
its provinces when it signed the agreement. Since 2001, a few
provinces have begun to pass policies to meet the targets.
Canada will be using renewable and alternative energy sources
as a way to reduce carbon dioxide emissions to the required tar-
gets under the agreement. With concerns growing over the envi-
ronment, energy security, and the economy, the Canadian
government and several provincial governments have imple-
mented policies to encourage the development and market pen-
etration of renewable and alternative energies.
Canada, like many other developed nations, relies primar-
ily on oil, which accounts for over 36 percent of the total energy
the country consumes (International Energy Association 2006).
Compared to many other developed nations, Canada uses much
less coal, about 10 percent, and its renewable energy shares are
higher than average. Renewable energy provides just over 15
percent of the total energy used (International Energy Associa-
tion 2006). In terms of production, Canada is the fourth-ranking
producer of large-scale hydroelectric power, behind China (REN21
2006, 3). In fact, over 55 percent of its electricity needs are met with
large-scale hydropower (International Energy Association 2006,
19). Wind, solar, ocean, and geothermal are extremely small con-
tributors to the total energy capacity. Ethanol is playing an increas-
110
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ing role with new plants being built and federal laws that make
ethanol account for 10 percent of the motor fuel mixture. Nuclear
power makes up almost 9 percent of the total energy.
As discussed in Chapter 1, Canada is well-known for its nu-
clear technology development and exports its breeder reactor
knowledge to many other countries. While there is controversy
about using nuclear power in Canada, its citizens have been
much more accepting. Whereas the United States stopped licens-
ing new nuclear plants, Canada has continued bringing plants
online throughout the 1990s and into the new millennium. The
upkeep of aging plants and the construction of new plants will
continue indefinitely.
Canada is very similar to the United States in terms of its
policy actions toward renewable and alternative energy. Like the
United States, the Canadian federal government has not estab-
lished a national RPS, but three Canadian provinces have. The
federal government did, however, pass the Wind Power Produc-
tion Initiative (WPPI) in 2002, which is a national electricity feed-
in law specific to wind power. It has a goal of increasing wind
power shares in electricity by 500 percent over a few years, but it
does not set mandatory targets for the public or private sector.
Two provinces have implemented new electricity feed-in laws for
a variety of renewable energies since 2004 (REN21 2006, 9). There
is also a trend among the provinces to impose renewable fuel re-
quirements for the transportation sector. Most federal policy fo-
cuses on providing incentives for the private sector to develop
and utilize renewable energy technologies. Canada is one of the
few countries in the world with serious hydrogen R&D funding.
In collaboration with the private sector, the Canadian govern-
ment has set aside millions of dollars to fund its hydrogen pro-
jects (Solomon and Banerjee 2006, 89). There is also a focus in
many of the national policies on increasing public awareness of
renewable and alternative energy sources.
Despite the progress that Canada has made in establishing
policies to support renewable energy, it is behind many other de-
veloping countries in using these technologies to their potential.
Little is being done to ensure the market penetration of technolo-
gies like wind, solar, and ocean. As discussed throughout the
book, government intervention is necessary for the full penetra-
tion of renewable energy into the market. By placing their invest-
ments in nuclear power, private sector utilities are diverting
funds from renewable energy technologies. Like so many other
North America
111
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
countries, Canada’s renewable energy market could benefit from
the incorporation of its positive externalities and an accounting of
the costs and negative effects of energy sources like oil, coal,
large-scale hydro, and nuclear. It is unlikely that the growth of re-
newable energy will improve without the government creating
more targets and mandates.
Mexico
Mexico falls into the same category as many other newly indus-
trialized nations. It uses much less energy than more developed
nations, but its economic growth will cause its energy consump-
tion to increase, creating a concern for the future of its energy
supply. Less concerned with the environment than it is with eco-
nomic efficiency, it falls victim to the classic dilemma associated
with renewable and alternative energy: a lack of funding due to
the high initial short-term costs. Mexico remains reliant on the
advances of other countries in the development of renewable en-
ergy technology. It requires information sharing about technolo-
gies because it has little to contribute to R&D programs itself.
Regardless, the Mexican government is still passing policies to
encourage renewable energy where it can.
The Mexican economy is dependent on oil for almost 60
percent of its energy needs. This percentage is much higher than
most countries in the world (International Energy Association
2006). Natural gas ranks second at over 26 percent. Unlike most
countries, renewable energy sources provide more of the total en-
ergy than coal (almost 10 percent), which accounts for less than 5
percent of total energy (International Energy Association 2006).
While the majority of Mexico’s renewable energy shares are pro-
duced by large-scale hydro, its geothermal resources are also
fairly developed. Mexico ranks third in the world for geothermal
energy production (REN21 2006, 3). But like most countries in the
world, its other renewable energy sources are significantly unde-
veloped. Nuclear power provides less than 2 percent of Mexico’s
energy needs. These facts, combined with the problems sur-
rounding the reliance on imported oil, have brought the potential
of renewable energy as a solution for improved energy security
to the forefront. Policies that encourage renewable energy as a so-
lution have been passed over the last decade.
Renewable energy policy is at an early stage in Mexico.
Laws to encourage the private investment in the use of renewable
112
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
energy technologies have been in place the longest. As recently as
2003, laws allowing net metering for renewable energy produc-
tion were passed. Electricity feed-in laws and RPSs have not been
incorporated into the policy mix, but policies have been passed
requiring that these requirements be developed. It is uncertain as
to when binding targets will be passed in the future or how ambi-
tious they will be. There are no plans for the development of nu-
clear power. The one plant in operation is not viewed by the
government as having benefits that outweigh the costs of a proj-
ect in operation for more than 30 years. Furthermore, funding is
limited for development.
The future of renewable energy in Mexico hinges on over-
coming several of the same barriers that many developing and
developed countries must overcome. Mexico is on the right track,
though a slow one, in creating the support needed for the success
of renewable energy penetration into the market. It will, how-
ever, be dependent on international financing and technological
assistance until it is financially stable enough to fund R&D on a
large scale. The political stability of the country creates an envi-
ronment with more potential for success. While Mexico will not
be a leader in renewable energy production anytime in the near
future, it will be receptive to the leadership of other countries to a
transition to a more sustainable energy economy.
Central America
Central America consists of Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama, which are all de-
veloping countries, though the region is considered one of the
poorest in the world. While it does have many natural resources,
it has relatively few fossil fuel energy resources. This emphasizes
the need for the development of renewable energy in the region,
especially to aid in the electrification of rural areas. Small efforts
by a few countries are being made to increase the renewable en-
ergy shares, but their success hinges on the amount of support
they receive from the international community.
Oil is the primary energy source for most countries, making
up 70 percent of the total, and pollution from cars and industry is
rapidly becoming a problem in some areas. Large-scale hy-
dropower contributes the second highest amount of energy to the
region, 22 percent (Energy Information Administration 2002). Al-
though hydropower is an important resource for the region, the
North America
113
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
weather patterns create risks for excessive rain and flooding,
which has resulted in evacuations that would be affected by the
breaching of a dam. The first coal-powered plant was not built
until 2000 in Guatemala and therefore provides hardly any of the
power for the region. At the time of publication, energy from nat-
ural gas and nuclear sources was not used in this region at all.
The development of complex renewable energy technologies like
solar, wind, and biomass has only begun over the last decade and
only with international assistance.
Most renewable energy development is driven by rural
electrification programs seeking to provide electricity for the en-
tire population, similar to many developing countries in Asia.
Honduras has a notable rural electrification program with plans
to build renewable capacities to reach its goals. Costa Rica has the
most advanced renewable energy economy with geothermal and
biomass developments accounting for almost 50 percent of total
energy use. Finland has established a partnership with the gov-
ernments of Central America to help with the development of re-
newable energy. The state of economic development in the
region, or the lack thereof, will certainly prohibit serious develop-
ment of renewable and alternative energy in the region unless in-
ternational assistance is provided for that aim.
South America
South America has a promising renewable energy market, but it
also has some of the world’s largest oil reserves. The combination
has the potential to be both helpful and harmful to the develop-
ment of renewable sources. On the one hand, the existence of oil
reserves can cause a natural dependence on those resources while
creating a political environment full of conflict between those
who want to use the oil to meet the economic needs of the region
and those who recognize the need for a transition to more sus-
tainable energy sources. Furthermore, a strategy of exporting oil
while reducing dependence on it domestically has the potential
to generate the money needed for the development of a renew-
able energy market. This is a major issue for the region because
Venezuela, which has large oil resources, has been attempting to
undermine the development of Brazil’s ethanol market. The po-
litical situation between Brazil and Venezuela is complex. Both
countries are exporting a competing product, and Venezuela has
114
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
criticized Brazilian plans for increased ethanol production, argu-
ing that it could create risks for food security. The conflict, how-
ever, involves disagreements not just over which energy source to
use, but also over exportations of both fuels to foreign countries.
Venezuela does not want Brazil to be involved in a cooperative
effort with the United States to provide ethanol for U.S. energy
needs because of the tense relations between the United States
and Venezuela. Brazil would like to export ethanol in an effort to
boost its economic development. At the First South American En-
ergy Summit on April 16, 2007, Venezuela discussed the possibil-
ity of importing ethanol from Brazil so that it does not have to
rely on the U.S. market for exports (Sanchez 2007). Despite
Venezuela’s opposition to Brazil’s plans for ethanol production, it
does not appear that Brazil will change its energy policy.
Brazil
Despite its status as a developing country, Brazil has promoted
renewable energy development in many ways that even devel-
oped countries have not. The share of renewables in its energy
market are slightly less than that of oil and much higher than
those of coal and natural gas. This is mainly due to its intensive
development of biofuels that began in the 1970s after the first oil
shocks. It now has one of the most promising renewable energy
markets in the world. In fact, Brazil is the highest-ranking pro-
ducer of ethanol on earth, sharing the ranking with the United
States after years as the top producer. There has been a lack of de-
velopment of other renewable energy sources because all of the
funding available for energy development has been directed to
large-scale hydro projects and ethanol production. Recent poli-
cies show a shift in priorities in Brazil toward the development of
a more diverse energy economy. Brazil is expected to rank with
China and India as one of the leading renewable energy markets
of the future.
Receiving much of its energy supply from renewable re-
sources, Brazil relies on hydropower for over 80 percent of its
electricity needs (International Energy Association 2006, 19).
Therefore, it ranks third in the world for electricity produced
from large-scale hydro sources, and it is also one of the highest-
ranking small-hydro energy producers (REN21 2006, 3). Ethanol
provides over 40 percent of its motor vehicle fuel consumption
(REN21 2006, 5). The use of flex-fuel vehicles, which can run on
South America
115
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
both ethanol and gasoline, makes this possible in Brazil, where
such vehicles make up over 70 percent of the vehicle market
(REN21 2006, 5). Oil accounts for just over 43 percent of the total
energy supply, and renewable energy accounts for 40 percent.
Coal and natural gas account for over 7 percent each of the en-
ergy supply, and nuclear energy sources account for less than 2
percent. Although nuclear power does not contribute much to the
energy mix, Brazil has some of the world’s largest uranium de-
posits. Solar and wind power have not been developed on a large
scale anywhere in the country because of the focus on biofuels
and hydropower development. Hydrogen research is in its early
stages in this country, but, with its biomass resources, Brazil is
one of two countries in the world with the potential to produce
hydrogen using only renewable energy (Solomon and Banerjee
2006). The political actions and climate in the near future will de-
termine whether Brazil reaches its potential for renewable energy
production.
The National Alcohol Program of 1975 was implemented
after the oil crisis of 1973–1974 and led to the largest-scale devel-
opment of alcohol-based fuels, including ethanol, in the world
(Solomon and Banerjee 2006). Recent federal mandates show a
continuation of this trend by setting a target to increase sugar-
cane production for ethanol by 40 percent by 2009. In addition,
Brazil is spending more than any other country on its 2008 plans
for the construction of new biofuel production plants.
In 2006, Brazil announced plans to build seven new nuclear
power plants by 2025. This would be in addition to the two plants
already producing power and a third that is expected to be fin-
ished in 2010. As a result, nuclear power would increase its share
of the electricity market by 3 percent. In the past, issues with
funding have delayed nuclear development, and it is possible
that the projects could be delayed again. The launch of a new ura-
nium enrichment center in 2006 could aid in Brazil’s nuclear am-
bitions because the nation will no longer have to rely on other
countries for enriched uranium. Concerns have arisen in the in-
ternational arena over the political consequences of these actions,
given the tense relationship between Venezuela and Brazil. As
Brazil moves closer to energy independence through the devel-
opment of nuclear resources, there may be a move by Venezuela
to develop nuclear power. In the end, both countries could be ca-
pable of building a nuclear weapons arsenal, which could greatly
strain the increasingly unstable relations between the two.
116
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
In the case of other renewable energy sources, the PRO-
FINA program provides a set of stages for various policy mecha-
nisms with an aim to increase the production of energy from
renewable energy sources like wind, bioenergy, and hydropower.
In English, PROFINA stands for the Program of Incentives for Al-
ternative Electricity Sources. The policy mechanisms include
electricity feed-in laws, RPS obligations, subsidies and tax breaks,
and tradable permits. This policy encourages the development
only of certain renewable energy technologies, neglecting to pro-
vide incentives for solar and ocean energy development. Such
sources may be developed under Brazil’s rural electrification pro-
grams, though it is doubtful that these more expensive technolo-
gies will be invested in to the extent that the other renewable
energy technologies have.
The result of these policies will undoubtedly lead to an in-
crease in the use of renewable and alternative energy. The lack of
attention to the broad array of technologies available could result
in an unbalanced reliance on some sources, like large-scale hydro,
ethanol, and nuclear power. While this could certainly result in
more positive environmental effects than the use of fossil fuels,
all these sources have the greatest potential for environmental
and human harm of all the renewable and alternative energy
technologies. The political instability of the region could also be
worsened by the growing energy independence of Brazil. Be-
cause it is almost certain that Brazil will play a great role in the
future of energy markets, international assistance to help with
peacekeeping efforts could be more important than economic
and technological assistance.
Other Issues in South America
Most countries in South America have not passed any significant
policies to develop renewable energy, although Paraguay and Ar-
gentina are exceptions to the rule.
Paraguay, in an effort to increase energy security and rural
electrification, has implemented policies aimed at diversifying
the energy mix by working to develop the regulations required
for the proper functioning of the energy market when produc-
tion from new sources is added. While renewable energy ac-
counts for over 80 percent of the total primary energy supply, the
majority of this is from biomass. The negative effects on the envi-
ronment from using primarily biomass to supply energy for a
South America
117
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
more developed economy has also caused the Paraguayan gov-
ernment to shift its focus to more sustainable energy sources like
wind and solar power.
Argentina’s rural electrification target prompted the pas-
sage of a renewable energy target of 8 percent. As of 2006, the
policy has resulted in an increased capacity for renewable en-
ergy production and is expected to continue contributing to the
growth of renewable energy. Bolivia has a rural electrification
program as well, which has a target of 50 percent access by 2015
and full access by 2025. Bolivia has plans to build 20,000 solar
home systems as part of the program by mid-2009—one of the
most ambitious solar energy programs in the region. The rural
electrification plans in Peru and Chile also recognize the poten-
tial of renewable energy for achieving its goals. In these coun-
tries, the passage of regulations will be essential for successful
penetration of renewable energies into the mainstream energy
market. Of course, international assistance in the form of fund-
ing, technology sharing, and policy advice will also increase the
chances of success.
Conclusion
Given the high initial expense of renewable energy projects, even
developed countries are struggling to get the investment funds
needed by the private and public sectors to make a speedy and
successful transition to a more sustainable energy economy. As
discussed in Chapter 2, this is a problem in the developed world
because of the dominance of the fossil fuel industry in the econ-
omy and because of the misperceptions about the true costs of
using renewable and alternative energy compared to traditional
sources. This translates into a problem for developing and under-
developed countries that almost certainly require financial assis-
tance from the developed world to enable renewable energy
resources to grow. Although developing countries require finan-
cial assistance from the international community, many of these
countries have the advantage of lacking an energy structure to
begin with. As these countries seek to provide electricity for pop-
ulations that have never had it, they can leapfrog over inefficient
technologies and technologies relying on traditional fossil fuel
energy sources. Although the initial investment may be high, the
development of renewable energy in the Third World has many
118
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
benefits, including energy security, political stability, and envi-
ronmental sustainability.
To begin to achieve a renewable energy transition throughout
the world, policymakers must make changes that decrease the un-
fair economic power of fossil fuel industries and that reflect the
true costs and benefits of all energy sources. Additionally, due to
the global nature of many of the negative effects of traditional en-
ergy technologies, it will be crucial for more advanced countries to
provide assistance in all forms to less advanced countries to help
prevent further damage to the environment. If these actions are not
taken, the prospects become bleak that a transition to a renewable
energy economy will occur within the time frame needed to pre-
vent the destruction caused by fossil fuel use, as described in
Chapter 2. The next chapter provides a chronology of the events
that have contributed to our understanding of the energy situation
in this context, as well as the technological breakthroughs that
have made renewable and alternative energy sources an option.
References
Agence France Press. “China Lowers Target for Renewable Energy.” Oc-
tober 26, 2006. Lexis-Nexis. www.lexisnexis.com
Ames, Paul. “EU Drafts Plan to Battle Global Warming; Sets Binding Tar-
gets for Switch to Green Energy.” Environmental News Network. March 9,
2007. www.enn.com/energy/article/6160
Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development & Climate. “Renewable
Energy and Distributed Generation Task Force Action Plan.” November
2007. www.asiapacificpartnership.org/RenewableEnergyTF.htm
Australian Business Council for Sustainable Energy (BCSE). “Renewable
Energy in Asia: The Cambodia Report.” Carlton, Victoria: Author, Au-
gust 2005a. www.bcse.org.au/docs/International/BCSE%20Cambodia
%20Final%20V2.pdf
Australian Business Council for Sustainable Energy (BCSE). “Renewable
Energy in Asia: The Vietnam Report.” Carlton, Victoria: Author, August
2005b. www.bcse.org.au/docs/International/BCSE%20Vietnam%20%20
Final%20V2.pdf
“Authorized Release: The Renewable Energy Law.” Renewable Energy
Access. No date. www.renewableenergyaccess.com/assets/download
/China_RE_Law_05.doc 
References
119
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
British Petroleum. “Statistical Review of World Energy 2006.” 2007.
www.bp.com/statisticalreview 
“Carbon Reduction or Poverty Reduction, Not Both.” Reasononline. No-
vember 14, 2006. www.reason.com/news/show/116724.html 
Chang, J., Dennis Y. C. Leung, C. Z. Wu, and Z. H. Yuan. “A Review on
the Energy Production, Consumption and Prospect of Renewable En-
ergy in China.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 7, 5 (2003):
453–468.
“China’s Hydropower Resources Top World.” China Daily. May 30, 2004.
search.chinadaily.com.cn/searchen.jsp?channelname=ICS_EN&strTodat
e=2004-05-30&secondsearch=ON&strFromdate=2004-05-30&search-
Text=hydropower&ch=all&usedate=yes&f_yy=2004&f_mm=05&f_dd=3
0&t_yy=2004&t_mm=05&t_dd=30&strAuthor=&Submit=Search
Clean Development Mechanism in China. “China Accelerates Construc-
tion of Renewable Energy Projects.” August 1, 2006. cdm.ccchina.gov.cn
/english/NewsInfo.asp?NewsId=1068 
Clean Development Mechanism in China. “Approval Status of CDM
Projects in China.” May 10, 2007. cdm.ccchina.gov.cn/WebSite/CDM
/UpFile/File1277.pdf
Commission of the European Communities. “Communication from the
Commission to the Council and the European Parliament. Renewable
Energy Road Map: Renewable Energies in the 21st Century: Building a
More Sustainable Future.” Report 848. January 10, 2007a. ec.europa.eu
/energy/energy_policy/doc/03_renewable_energy_roadmap_en.pdf 
Commission of the European Communities. “Communication from the
Commission to the Council and the European Parliament. Green Paper
Follow-up Action: Report on Progress in Renewable Electricity.” Report
849, January 10, 2007b. 72.14.253.104/search?q=cache:hbyRFTMbNeQJ
:ec.europa.eu/energy/energy_policy/doc/06_progress_report_renewable
_electricity_en.pdf+EU+renewables+directive+progress&hl=en&ct=clnk
&cd=2&gl=us&client=firefox-a 
Cook, Lorne. “EU Split on Renewable Energy Targets.” Energy Daily.
March 5, 2007. www.energy-daily.com/reports/EU_Split_On_Renewable
_Energy_Targets_999.html 
Danish Energy Authority. “Energy Strategy 2025.” 2005. www.ens.dk
/graphics/Publikationer/Energipolitik_UK/Energy_Strategy_2025/
index.htm 
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI). “UK Energy in Brief, July
2006.” National Statistics Publication. 2006. www.berr.gov.uk/files
/file32387.pdf 
120
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Ecoworld. “India’s Nuclear Power, Assisting Energy Independence or a
Dangerous Experiment?” 2005. www.ecoworld.com/home/articles2
.cfm?tid=402
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “Executive Summary.” Im-
pacts of the Kyoto Protocol on U.S. Energy Markets and Economic Activity.
October 1998: xi. tonto.eia.doe.gov/ftproot/service/oiaf9803.pdf
Energy Information Administration (EIA) “Central America Regional In-
dicators.” August 2002. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/guatemal.html
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “Country Analysis Briefs:
India.” 2004a. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/India/pdf.pdf
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “Country Analysis Briefs:
South Africa.” 2004b. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/South_Africa/Full
.html
Energy Information Administration (EIA). Annual Energy Review 2005.
2006. tonto.eia.doe.gov/FTPROOT/multifuel/038405.pdf
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “Country Analysis Briefs:
India.” 2007. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/India/Background.html 
Euractiv. “EU Divided over Nuclear and Renewables.” March 8, 2007a.
www.euractiv.com/en/energy/eu-divided-nuclear-renewables/article-
162309 
Euractiv. “EU Makes Bold Climate and Renewables Commitment.” March
29, 2007b. www.euractiv.com/en/energy/eu-bold-climate- renewables-
commitment/article–162373 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. “Russia: Country
Profile 2005.” 2005. www.ebrdrenewables.com/sites/renew/countries
/Russia/profile.aspx#Policy
European Commission. “State of Renewable Energies in Europe—2006.”
2006a. www.energies-renouvelables.org/observ-er/stat_baro/baro bilan
/barobilan6.pdf
European Commission. “Part 2—Energy.” In Energy and Transport Figures
in 2006. Luxembourg: European Commission/Eurostat, 2006b. book-
shop.europa.eu/eGetRecords
European Commission. “France—Renewable Energy Fact Sheet.” Janu-
ary 2007a. ec.europa.eu/energy/energy_policy/doc/factsheets/re new -
ables/renewables_fr_en.pdf 
European Commission. “Netherlands—Renewable Energy Fact Sheet.”
January 2007b. ec.europa.eu/energy/energy_policy/doc/factsheets/re -
newables/renewables_nl_en.pdf 
References
121
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Fang, Bay. “China’s Renewal.” U.S. News & World Report (January 12,
2006). Lexis-Nexis. www.lexisnexis.com
Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology. “Renewable Energies in
Germany—A Success Story.” August 7, 2007. www.german-renewable-
 energy.com/Renewables/Navigation/Englisch/root.html. 
Florig, H. K., and S. Zhao. “Debating Perspectives on Nuclear Power
Safety.” Science and Technology Review 165 (March 2002): 61–64.
Fioravanti, Marc. “Wind Power versus Plutonium: An Examination of
Wind Energy Potential and a Comparison of Offshore Wind Energy to
Plutonium Use in Japan” (report prepared for the Institute for Energy
and Environmental Research). January 1999. www.ieer.org/reports
/wind/marcstat.html 
Guardian. “China Pledges to Double Reliance on Renewable Energy by
2020.” November 8, 2005. www.guardian.co.uk/china/story/0,7369,163
6632,00.html 
Government Offices of Sweden. “Energy Policy.” 2007. www.sweden
.gov.se/sb/d/5745/a/19594 
Holloway, T., A. Fiore, and M. Galanter-Hastings. “Intercontinental
Transport of Air Pollution: Will Emerging Science Lead to a New Hemi-
spheric Treaty?” Environment Science and Technology 37, 20 (2003):
4535–4542
Hydrogen Association. “A Global Hydrogen Effort—Factsheet.” August
2004. www.hydrogenassociation.org/general/factSheet_global.pdf
Iida, Tetsunari. “Green Power and Renewable Energy Policy in Japan.”
(Presented at the 7th National Green Power Conference.) September 30,
2002. www.eere.energy.gov/greenpower/conference/7gpmc02/iida02.pdf
India Core. “Energy Overview.” 2006. www.indiacore.com/overview-
energy.html 
International Energy Association (IEA). “World Energy Outlook 2006.”
2006. www.worldenergyoutlook.org 
International Energy Association (IEA). “Global Renewable Energy Poli-
cies and Measures Database.” 2007. www.iea.org/textbase/pm/grindex
.aspx
International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). “Summary for Policy
Makers.” Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. February 2007.
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg1/ar4-wg1-spm.pdf
Japanese External Trade Organization (JETRO). “Wind Power on the In-
crease in Japan.” Japan Economic Report.” April–May 2006. www.jetro.go
.jp/en/market/report/pdf/2006_17_hs.pdf 
122
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. “Main Points and
Policy Package in ‘Japan’s Nuclear Energy Plan’” (report from the Nu-
clear Energy Subcommittee). September 2006. www.enecho.meti.go
.jp/english/report/rikkokugaiyou.pdf 
Kalam, A. P. J. Abdul. “Address at the Inauguration of the South Asian
Conference on Renewable Energy New Delhi.” April 18, 2006. mnes
.nic.in/president/splangnewPDF%2520Format758.pdf
Kent, Anthony, and David Mercer. 2006. “Australia’s Mandatory Renew-
able Energy Target (MRET): An Assessment.” Energy Policy 34, 9 (2006):
1046–1062.
MacGill, I., M. Watt, and R. Passey. “The Economic Development Poten-
tial and Job Creation Potential of Renewable Energy: Australian Case
Studies.” Report Commissioned by Australian Cooperative Research
Centre for Renewable Energy Policy Group, Australian Ecogeneration
Association and Renewable Energy Generators Association. 2002. 
Meisen, Peter. “Overview of Renewable Energy Potential of India.” Oc-
tober 2006. Global Energy Network Institute (GENI). www.geni.org
/globalenergy/library/energytrends/currentusage/renewable
/Renewable-Energy-Potential-for-India.pdf 
Miller, Tom. 2006. “Greener China with Double the Coal?” FT.com (No-
vember 5, 2006). us.ft.com/ftgateway/superpage.ft?news_id=fto110520
062339123456
Moore, Curtis, and Jack Ihle. “Renewable Energy Policy Outside the
United States.” Renewable Energy Policy Project. 1999. www.crest.org
/repp_pubs/articles/issuebr14/01Intro.htm 
National Audit Office. “Executive Summary.” In Renewable Energy. De-
partment of Trade and Industry, Report by the Comptroller and Auditor
General. February 2005. www.nao.org.uk/publications/nao_reports/04-
05/0405210es.pdf
“Oil Stock Boost for Emergency.” China Daily. April 23, 2007. www1.cei
.gov.cn/ce/doc/cenm/200704231627.htm 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
“Exploiting Africa’s Huge Energy Potential as a Weapon Against
Poverty.” 2004. www.oecd.org/dataoecd/43/45/32285615.PDF
“Priority Given to Efficient Hydropower.” China Daily. October 31, 2004.
www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/doc/2004-10/31/content_387070.htm
Renewable Energy Access. “Snapshot of Renewable Energy in India.”
May 23, 2005. www.renewableenergyaccess.com/rea/news/story?id
=30729 
References
123
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century (REN21). Renew-
ables Global Status Report 2006 Update. 18 July 2006. www.ren21.net
/globalstatusreport/g2006.asp. 
Runci, Paul. “Renewable Energy Policy in Germany: An Overview and
Assessment.” Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Technical Report
PNWD-3526. January 17, 2005. www.globalchange.umd.edu/energy -
trends/germany/1/ 
Saddler, Hugh, Mark Disendorf, and Richard Denniss. “A Clean Energy
Future for Australia.” March 2004. wwf.org.au/ourwork/climate change
/cleanenergyfuture/
Sanchez, Fabiola. “Chavez Seeks to Counter U.S. Influence at South
American Energy Summit.” Indian Country Today, April 23, 2007.
www.indiancountry.com/content.cfm?id=1096414885
Sijm, J. P. M. “The Performance of Feed-in Tariffs to Promote Renewable
Electricity in European Countries.” Report ECN-C-02-083. 2002. Petten,
The Netherlands: Netherlands Energy Research Foundation, November
2002.
Solomon, Barry D., and Abhijit Banerjee. “A Global Survey of Hydrogen
Energy Research, Development and Policy.” Energy Policy 34, 11 (11 July
2006) 781–792.
United Nations. “Renewable Energy in Africa: Prospects and Limita-
tions.” 2003. www.un.org/esa/sustdev/sdissues/energy/op/nepad -
karekezi.
U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy.
“Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion.” 2006. www.eere.energy.gov
/consumer/renewable_energy/ocean/index.cfm/mytopic=50010 
World Bank. “Hydropower Development in India.” 2007. www.world -
bank.org.in/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/SOUTHASIAEXT
/INDIAEXTN/0,,contentMDK:21388713~pagePK:141137~piPK:141127
~theSitePK:295584,00.html 
Worldwatch Institute. “China Speeds up Renewable Energy Develop-
ment.” October 26, 2006. www.worldwatch.org/node/4691 
Xinhua News Agency. “China a Leading Investor in Renewable Energy.”
May 17, 2006. www.china.org.cn/english/environment/168626.htm 
Xinhua News Agency. “China to Become World’s Largest Wind Power
Producer.” January 7, 2007. www.uofaweb.ualberta.ca/chinainstitute
/nav03.cfm?nav03=55229&nav02=50883&nav01=43092 
124
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
125
4
Chronology
M
any events have led up to our current energy situation.
Technological breakthroughs and discoveries seem to be the
main force driving the insatiable demand for energy and the
subsequent transitions to different energy sources. More recently,
discoveries about the environment, including the effect of green-
house gases on the global climate, have played a key role in the
development of renewable energy. This chronology provides a
comprehensive list of the events that have had an impact on
world energy issues. In particular, the events are related to re-
newable and alternative energy. The use of energy allowed hu-
mans to bring about the sophisticated and complex civilization of
today. Ironically, energy may end up being the cause of the
downfall of the society it helped us to build. What is most in-
triguing is the long history of development of renewable energy
and alternative energy technologies and the concurrent growth of
the fossil fuel industry. Over 100 years ago, engineers and scien-
tists of the day questioned the viability of an economy based on
nonrenewable energy and worried that the fossil fuel supply
would be exhausted in the near future, causing untold hardships
on nations that relied on them as a primary energy source. His-
torically, fossil fuel companies have used their political power to
subvert the development of renewable and alternative energy
sources. 
5–8 
The evolution of modern humans from ancient human
species like the now extinct Homo erectus begins in
Africa. The only energy used at this time comes from
the sun. Energy from the sun is used for light, heat,
and, through the consumption of vegetation where
million 
years ago
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
126
Chronology
solar energy is converted and stored as potential en-
ergy, sustenance. The consumption of plants by hu-
mans allows this potential energy to be converted. As
humans develop the skills to make tools and use
them, their diet expands to include animals (Cook
1971, 135).
100,000–
Homo erectus discovers fire and begins using it for
cooking, heating, and lighting. The main fuel for fires
during this time is wood. This discovery enables hu-
mans to survive the Ice Age and continue evolving
into Homo sapiens, the same species as modern-day
humans. Fire becomes the first source of energy to be
used for residential purposes (Cook 1971, 135).
40,000
Homo sapiens (modern humans) emerge and begin mi-
grating around the globe.
10,000
Humans shift from hunter-gatherer to primitive
agrarian or agriculturally based society. Energy usage
increases at least sixfold as animals are domesticated
and used for agricultural purposes. Power is derived
from wind and water for a variety of purposes, al-
though official documentations of this did not begin
until thousands of years later.
5,000
Some experts believe that the use of wind and water
for grinding grain begins in Egypt or Greece, though
there are no official records to prove this (Iowa En-
ergy Center 2006).
1200 BCE
Polynesians use sails to power ships with wind.
1000 BCE
China is the first country to use coal instead of wood
for cooking and heating purposes (World Coal Insti-
tute 2005, 19).
Ca. 500
Thales, a Greek philosopher, discovers the existence
of electricity by creating and observing static (An-
zovin and Podell 2000, 91).
85 BCE
Antipater, a Greek poet, makes what is thought to be
the first reference to the use of water mills in the
5–8
million 
years ago
(cont.)
400,000
years ago
years ago
years ago
years ago
BCE
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Western world, though it is widely accepted that they
were used in Asia (Reynolds 1970, 11).
7 BCE
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “a mag-
nifying glass is used to concentrate the sun’s rays on a
fuel and light a fire for light, warmth, and cooking”
(“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
3 BCE
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Greeks
and Romans use mirrors to light torches for religious
purposes” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1 CE
Hero of Alexandria is the first to document the use of
a windmill, which powers an organ (Drachmann
1961, 141).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “passive
solar design is incorporated into the design of Roman
bath houses where large, south-facing windows were
built to let in the sun’s warmth” (“Solar History Time-
line: 1900s” 2005).
6
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, passive
solar design becomes so common that “the Justinian
Code establishes ‘sun rights’ to ensure that a building
has access to the sun” (“Solar History Timeline:
1900s” 2005).
9
An Islamic geographer records the use of vertical
windmills in Persia (Hassan and Hill 1986, 54). Some
experts believe that horizontal windmills are in-
vented concurrently in Europe, perhaps in Germany
(Preston 1923, 14).
1003
The Chinese drill natural gas wells and use bamboo
pipes to vent the gas and fuel kilns and forge fires
(Anzovin and Podell 2000, 92).
1100
A tidal-powered mill is built in England (Anzovin
and Podell 2000, 89).
1180
The first horizontal axis windmills in Europe are doc-
umented (Preston 1923, 14).
Chronology
127
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1275
Marco Polo returns to Italy after exploring China to
introduce coal as an energy source to the entire West-
ern world.
1599
The first greenhouses to resemble those of modern
times are used in Europe to protect the exotic plants
that explorers are bringing back from foreign lands.
This marks a major progression in the use of passive
solar energy.
1663
Otto Von Guericke, a German physicist and engineer,
invents the electric generator. Guericke becomes the
first person to create and observe artificial lighting,
albeit on a small, impractical scale (Anzovin and
Podell 2000, 91). This development is the first of many
that would have major consequences for the future of
energy consumption.
1673
Father Louis Hennepin discovers coal in what would
later become the state of Illinois (Kane, Anzovin, and
Podell 1997, 222).
1698
Captain Thomas Savery invents the first steam engine
for the express purpose of drawing water out of coal
mines so that mining operations could proceed. Ironi-
cally, the most energy-intensive invention of the cen-
tury is created to aid in the extraction of energy
sources.
1700s
Coal becomes the dominant source of energy in Eu-
rope after forests are overharvested for their wood
and the steam engine is put to use.
1712
Thomas Newcomen invents a more efficient steam
engine than the Savery engine to draw water out of
coal mines faster.
1729
Stephen Grey, an English inventor, achieves the
conduction of electricity along a wire by rubbing
his hands on a corked glass tube. The charge was
transmitted almost 500 feet (Anzovin and Podell
2000, 91).
128
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1750
Ben Franklin determines the nature of electricity
while observing lightning. This development is criti-
cal for future developments in renewable energy
technology.
1767
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, the
Swiss scientist Horace de Saussure builds the world’s
first solar collector, which is later used by Sir John
Herschel to cook food during his South African expe-
dition in the 1830s (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s”
2005).
1769
James Watt patents his steam engine that is several
times more powerful than the Savery-Newcomen en-
gines and that can be used for applications other than
in coal mining. This single invention is believed by
many to be one of the most important turning points
in the course of modern history. The Watt steam en-
gine is widely responsible for the Industrial Revolu-
tion, which causes human consumption of energy to
skyrocket. In a sense, Watt’s steam engine is responsi-
ble for the energy situation we now find ourselves in
(Routledge 1989, 4).
1774
Antoine Lavosier, a French chemist, develops the first
solar furnace, considered by many to be the first mod-
ern form of solar energy technology.
1775
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is founded. The
Corps becomes responsible for the design and con-
struction of hundreds of hydroelectric projects in the
United States.
1800
William Nicholson and Sir Anthony Carlisle, En-
glish scientists, are credited for being the first to use
electrolysis to break water down into hydrogen and
oxygen. 
1802
Humphry Davy, an English chemist, describes the
first fuel cell, which becomes the basis for generating
electricity through electrolysis in future hydrogen en-
ergy applications (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 89).
Chronology
129
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1803
James Watt’s foundry in Birmingham, England, is the
first large building to be illuminated using coal gas as
the fuel (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 93).
1804
Watt’s steam engine is used in the invention of the lo-
comotive. The use of engines instead of manpower or
horsepower for transportation creates even more de-
mand for energy from coal and wood, further increas-
ing our consumption of these finite resources
(Routledge 1989, 14).
1807
Watt’s steam engine is incorporated into nautical de-
signs, resulting in the invention of the first steamboat
(Routledge 1989, 92).
1812
The London Gas Light and Coke Company becomes
the first public power utility.
1816
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “On
September 27, 1816, Robert Stirling applies for a
patent for his economiser at the Chancery in Edin-
burgh, Scotland. This engine is later used in the
dish/Stirling system, a solar thermal electric technol-
ogy that concentrates the sun’s thermal energy to pro-
duce electric power” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s”
2005).
1820
Reverend W. Cecil reads his paper, “On the Applica-
tion of Hydrogen Gas to Produce Moving Power in
Machinery,” at Cambridge University. It is the first
documented proposal for the use of hydrogen as a
fuel (Hoffman 2001, 27).
1827
Benoit Fourneyron, a French engineer, invents the
first water turbine not only that is more efficient than
traditional waterwheels but that can endure more
pressure like that produced by a hydroelectric dam
(Anzovin and Podell 2000, 89).
1839
William R. Grove, an English chemist, invents the first
fuel cell that is actually used to convert hydrogen into
electricity (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
130
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “French
scientist Edmond Becquerel discovers the photo-
voltaic effect while experimenting with an electrolytic
cell made up of two metal electrodes placed in an
electricity-conducting solution; the electricity genera-
tion increases when exposed to light” (“Solar History
Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1841
Frederick de Moleyns patents the first incandescent
lamp in Great Britain. This bulb does not have a fila-
ment, like the later model of Thomas Edison and
Joseph Swan, but relies on carbon powder heated be-
tween two platinum wires to produce light (Anzovin
and Podell 2000, 92).
1850
The most popular lamp fuel is made from turpentine
(distilled from wood), alcohol (distilled from grain),
and camphor oil. Basically, biofuels are used widely
before oil is discovered (Kovarik 2007).
1855
American Dr. Abraham Gesner patents a process for
creating kerosene. Kerosene becomes an important
fuel for lighting in the 19th century (Anzovin and
Podell 2000, 93).
1857
The first biogas plant is built in Bombay, India, to pro-
vide methane fuel for a nearby leper colony (Anzovin
and Podell 2000, 90).
1859
Edwin Drake strikes oil in Titusville, Pennsylvania,
creating the first commercially productive oil well
and setting off the oil drilling craze. Oil quickly be-
comes the preferred alternative to coal for lighting.
Oil is used mainly in the form of kerosene (Melosi
1985).
Gaston Planté invents the first practical dry cell bat-
tery. This battery is the precursor to the modern auto-
mobile battery (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 91).
1860
Auguste Mouchout of France develops the first solar
engine, which uses concentrated solar radiation to
Chronology
131
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
boil water and run an engine with the steam it pro-
duces (Smith 1995).
1869
Aristide Bergés of France invents the hydroelectric
generator to supply electricity to the machines in his
workshop (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 92).
1870
The oil industry is emerging, and the transition from
coal to oil is underway (Melosi 1985, 39).
1872
John Ericsson invents the first solar parabolic trough
(Smith 1995).
1873
According to the U.S. Department of Energy,
Willoughby Smith discovers the photoconductivity of
selenium (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1876
Pavel Nikolayevich Yablochkov, a Russian electrical
engineer, develops the first electric rail and street
lamps, which are used in Russia and Europe for street
lighting until improved technology emerges at the
turn of the century (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 92).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy,
“William Grylls Adams and Richard Evans Day dis-
cover that selenium produces electricity when ex-
posed to light. Although selenium solar cells fail to
convert enough sunlight to power electrical equip-
ment, they prove that a solid material can change
light into electricity without heat or moving parts”
(“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1878
William Adams begins construction on the first solar
tower. His design is the basis for modern-day solar
towers (Smith 1995).
Edison Electric Light Company of New York becomes
the first electric company.
1879
American inventor Thomas Edison and British inven-
tor Joseph Swan merge patents for the first incandes-
cent light bulb to use filaments to produce light in a
132
Chronology
1860
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
vacuum inside a glass bulb. This invention becomes
the basis for modern incandescent light bulbs.
Rookes Evelyn Bell Crompton, an English electrical
pioneer, becomes the first person to have a private
home fully illuminated with electric lighting (An-
zovin and Podell 2000, 92).
The first electricity to be generated by the water
power of Niagara Falls lights up 16 lamps in Prospect
Park, Niagara Falls, New York. Large-scale electricity
production does not occur until 1890.
1880
Michigan’s Grand Rapids Electric Light and Power
Company builds the first hydroelectric power plant
in the United States to provide lighting services. The
plant uses a waterwheel to supply lighting power to
the Wolverine Chair Company.
1882
The first hydroelectric power plant to provide incan-
descent lighting in the United States is built in Apple-
ton, Wisconsin, to provide 12.5 kilowatts of power for
two paper mills and a home.
1883
Charles Fritts, an American inventor, develops the
first solar cell. It uses selenium, which is very ineffi-
cient, converting less than 1 percent of the energy it
collected from the sun into electricity (Anzovin and
Podell 2000, 90).
Marcel Deprez, a French inventor, conducts the first
transmission of electricity through a high-voltage
cable in Paris, France (Anzovin and Podell 2000,
92).
1885
Charles Tellier invents the first solar-powered water
pump. It is the first solar-powered technology devel-
oped that does not use reflection as a technique for
concentrating solar power (Smith 1995).
1886
Forty-five water-powered electric plants are now in
operation in the United States and Canada.
Chronology
133
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1887
The first fully operational hydroelectric plant in the
West comes online in San Bernardino, California. The
plant is able to provide for more than just lighting,
unlike the Grand Rapids Electric Light and Power
Company plant in Michigan.
1888
According to the Energy Information Administration
(EIA), “Charles F. Brush used the first large windmill
to generate electricity in Cleveland, Ohio. The wind-
mill starts to be called ‘wind turbine.’ In later years,
General Electric acquired Brush’s company, Brush
Electric Co.” (EIA 2005).
The development of steel blades makes windmills
more efficient. Six million windmills spring up across
the United States as settlers moved west.
1889
The first hydroelectric power plant to generate elec-
tricity for use over a long distance is built by the
Willamette Falls Electric Company at Willamette
Falls, Oregon City, Oregon. At this time, 200 electric
plants in the United States rely on water power for
some or all power generation.
1890
The mass production of automobiles begins driving
up the demand for oil.
1891
Indiana enacts a natural gas conservation law to pre-
vent the use of the resource in wasteful applications
(Kane, Anzovin, and Podell 1997, 224).
The Baltimore inventor Clarence Kemp patents the
first commercial solar water heater, which is still used
extensively throughout the world (“Solar History
Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1892
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the first
district heating system to be heated by geothermal
energy is developed in Boise, Idaho” (“Solar History
Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1896
The first hydroelectric plant to use a storage battery is
built by the Hartford Electric Light Company in Hart-
134
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
ford, Connecticut. This makes it possible to store en-
ergy from water power that would have gone to
waste during periods of low demand.
1898
The first underground hydroelectric plant is built be-
hind the Snoqualmie Falls near Seattle, Washington
(Anzovin and Podell 2000, 92).
1901
The Federal Water Power Act is established to govern
the development of water power resources in the
United States.
1902
The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation is established. The
Bureau of Reclamation is responsible for commis-
sioning hundreds of federal dams in the United
States.
1904
The first geothermal plant goes into operation in
Larderello, Italy.
Willhelm Halwachs discovers the photosensitive na-
ture of copper and coprous oxide when combined.
Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius conducts the first
studies on the influence of increased concentrations
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Although his re-
search recognizes a link between anthropogenic car-
bon emissions and warming, his conclusions are that
the effects of this warming are beneficial for plant
growth and food production. At this time, there are
no suspicions in the scientific community that hu-
mans could actually cause dramatic changes in the
climate.
1905
Albert Einstein publishes a paper on the photoelectric
effect, also called the photovoltaic effect. His descrip-
tion of how light can be transformed into electricity
earns him the Nobel Prize in physics in 1921.
1906
Taxes are repealed on industrial and fuel alcohol to
encourage the use of ethanol. At this time, Europe is
using ethanol to power cars and household appli-
ances (Kovarik 2007).
Chronology
135
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1907
Hydropower provides 15 percent of the electricity-
generating capacity in the United States.
1908
According to the U.S. Department of Energy,
“William J. Bailey of the Carnegie Steel Company in-
vented a solar collector using copper wires and an in-
sulated box. The design is still used today for solar
collectors” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
Bailey’s company, Day and Night, is put out of busi-
ness by 1920 due to discoveries of cheap natural gas
(Kovarik 2007).
1909
Minidoka Dam on the Snake River in Idaho is the first
dam to be built by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation,
Department of the Interior.
1910
Georges Claude, a French engineer and chemist, in-
vents the neon light. It is used to illuminate the Grand
Palais in Paris (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 92).
1914
Thomas Alva Edison invents the first alkaline dry cell
battery. He does not commercialize it, however, and it
does not become widely used until the 1970s (An-
zovin and Podell 2000, 92).
The controversial O’Shaughnessy Dam is built in
Hetch Hetchy Valley, the sister valley to Yosemite,
flooding what environmentalists like John Muir deem
a national treasure (Righter 2005).
1917
Alexander Graham Bell promotes the use of alcohol
as a fuel in an issue of National Geographic (Kovarik
2007).
1920
Hydropower generates 25 percent of U.S. electricity.
An article in Scientific American declares that the ma-
jority of people are of the opinion that alcohol
(ethanol) will be the fuel of the future (Kovarik 2007).
1921
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “John D.
Grant builds the United States’ first geothermal
136
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
power plant. The operation produced 250 kilowatts,
enough electricity to light the buildings and streets at
Grant’s resort. The plant, however, is not competitive
with other sources of power, and it soon falls into dis-
use” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1923
Leaded gasoline goes on sale for the first time. The
lead replaces ethanol as a gasoline additive even
though flex-fuel engines were created to run on the
latter (Kovarik 2007).
1925
Henry Ford promotes the use of ethanol, which he
deems the “fuel of the future,” for fueling automo-
biles (Kovarik 2007).
1927
The first hydroelectric plant to use water from a reser-
voir is constructed by the Connecticut Light and
Power Company at Rocky River, Connecticut. Water
stored in a reservoir is used to generate electricity in a
33,000-horsepower turbine.
1928
The St. Francis Dam in California bursts, killing 511
people on March 12, showing that hydroelectric dams
are not guaranteed to be safe (Kovarik 2007).
1930
The first commercial greenhouse use of geothermal
energy is undertaken in Boise, Idaho.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “In Kla-
math Falls, Charlie Lieb develops the first downhole
heat exchanger (DHE) to heat his house. Today, more
than 500 DHEs are in use around the country” (“A
History of Geothermal Energy in the United States”
2006).
1931
The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation of the Department
of the Interior awards a contract to build the first
concrete arch-gravity dam in Boulder City, Nevada.
The dam’s turbines begin producing power in 1936.
Originally named the Boulder Dam, it is renamed
Hoover Dam in 1947. It is one of the biggest dams in
the world.
Chronology
137
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1933
The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) is established
by the U.S. federal government. The TVA is created as
a government-owned electricity provider to help the
Tennessee Valley, which was severely affected by the
Great Depression. The TVA is responsible for the con-
struction of several dams in the area.
1934
Arthur Compton, an American electrical engineer
and inventor at the General Electric Company, in-
vents the first fluorescent light bulb.
The first international oil pipeline is completed, run-
ning from the oil fields of northern Iraq to Syria (An-
zovin and Podell 2000, 93).
1936
Leo Szilard, a Hungarian American physicist, discovers
the nuclear chain reaction necessary for nuclear fission.
1937
The Hindenburg disaster results in a debilitating
stigma for hydrogen despite the fact that not one of
the 36 deaths is caused by the burning hydrogen.
Thirty-four people die from sustained injuries after
jumping from the blimp, and two die of burns caused
by flaming on-board diesel fuel.
1938
The first government-financed ethanol plant is
opened in Atchison, Kansas, but the plant is not a
commercial success (Kovarik 2007).
1939
Electric power generated by cosmic rays is carried by
wire to the New York World’s Fair to power the lights
at the Lagoon of the Nations.
1940
Hydropower generates 40 percent of U.S. electricity.
1941
Russell Ohl, an American, is the first to replace sele-
nium in solar cells with silicon, which proves to be
slightly more efficient than Fritts’s original design
(Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
A wind turbine invented by Palmer Cosslet Putnam
generates electricity in Vermont, becoming the first tur-
138
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
bine in the United States to be connected to a central
power system for the purpose of energy production.
1942
Enrico Fermi builds the first nuclear reactor while
working on the Manhattan Project at the University
of Chicago.
1943
Boulder Dam, later renamed Hoover Dam, becomes
the first hydroelectric power plant to produce a mil-
lion kilowatts of electricity.
1946
The first commercially sized solar furnace is built in
Meudon, France (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
The first Soviet nuclear reactor goes online and be-
gins producing power. The F-1, as the plant is
named, is designed by a team of Soviet physicists
under Igor Vasilyevich Kurchatov. Initially, it pro-
duces 10 watts of power (Anzovin and Podell 2000,
94).
1947
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “de-
mand for passive solar building designs increases in
the U.S. in response to the energy shortages caused by
the war” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1948
Geothermal technology moves east when Professor
Carl Nielsen of Ohio State University develops the
first ground-source heat pump, for use at his resi-
dence (“A History of Geothermal Energy in the
United States” 2006).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “J. D.
Krocker, an engineer in Portland, Oregon, pioneers
the first commercial building use of a geothermal
groundwater heat pump” (“A History of Geothermal
Energy in the United States” 2006).
1951
Electric power from a fast breeder nuclear reactor is
obtained in the United States for the first time in
Idaho Falls, Idaho.
Chronology
139
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1954
Soviet engineers build the first civilian power plant
outside Moscow. It produces 5 megawatts of power
(Anzovin and Podell 2000, 94).
Bell Labs creates the first solar photovoltaic cell to
produce “useful” power, converting 6 percent of the
sunlight hitting the cell into electricity. Three Ameri-
can researchers, Gerald L. Pearson, Daryl Chapin,
and Calvin Fuller, are responsible for its development
(Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
1955
Electric power from nuclear energy is sold commer-
cially in the United States for the first time by the
Atomic Energy Commission to the Niagara Mohawk
Power Corporation in Milton, New York.
The first solar cell to be produced commercially in the
United States is made by National Fabricated Prod-
ucts, a Chicago-based company.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “U.S. ar-
chitect Frank Bridgers designs the world’s first com-
mercial office building to use solar water heating and
passive solar design” (“Solar History Timeline:
1900s” 2005).
1956
The first nuclear power plant to produce a substantial
amount of electricity is Calder Hill in England.
The first Asian nuclear power plant, Apsara, goes on-
line in Trombay, India. It is designed and built by the
Atomic Energy Establishment, Trombay, founded by
Indian physicist and mathematician Homi Jehangir
Bhabha.
1957
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Hoff-
man Electronics develops a solar cell with 8 percent
efficiency. Just one year later they increase efficiency
to 9 percent” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
Roger Revelle coauthors a paper with Hans Suess
suggesting that human-induced gas emissions might
140
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
create a “greenhouse effect” and cause global warm-
ing over time. This is the first paper to seriously con-
sider the effects of fossil fuel use on the climate. 
1959
The first experimental fast breeder reactor, the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority Technology Pro-
totype Fast Reactor, is built in Dounreay, Scotland. It
is closed in March 1994 (Anzovin and Podell 2000,
94).
Harry Karl Ihrig demonstrates the first hydrogen fuel
cell to power a vehicle—a 20-horsepower tractor (Hy-
drogen Now 2001).
The Malpasset Dam in France bursts, killing 420 peo-
ple (Kovarik 2007).
1960
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, Hoff-
man Electronics develops a solar cell that reaches 14
percent energy conversion efficiency, a 5 percent in-
crease from 1958 (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s”
2005).
The first experimental solar thermal power plant is
finished in what was then the capital of Ashkhabad
(now Ashgabat, Turkmenistan). It has more than
1,200 mirrors that concentrate sunlight on a central
steam boiler, which is connected to an electric genera-
tor (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
The first nuclear power plant to operate commercially
in the United States is built by the Yankee Atomic
Electric Company in Rowe, Massachusetts. It is per-
manently shut down for safety reasons in 1995.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the
country’s first large-scale geothermal electricity-
 generating plant begins operation. Pacific Gas and
Electric operates the plant, located at The Geysers in
California. The first turbine produces 11 megawatts
(MW) of net power and operates successfully for
more than 30 years. Today, 69 generating facilities are
Chronology
141
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
in operation at 18 resource sites around the country”
(“A History of Geothermal Energy in the United
States” 2006).
1961
Construction of the Rance River Power station, the
first commercial tidal electric generator plant, begins
in Brittany, France, in the estuary of the Rance River.
The plant is completed in 1967. The design includes a
dam with turbines that are reversible so that energy
can be produced whether the tide is coming in or
going out. The plant is capable of producing 240,000
watts of electricity (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
Three workers are killed by high levels of radiation
from a federally supported experimental nuclear re-
actor in Idaho Falls, Idaho. These are the first fatalities
to be attributed to nuclear energy in the United States.
1969
The Tarapur Atomic Power Station in Maharashtra
becomes India’s first nuclear plant for commercial
power production. It produces 420 megawatts of
electricity.
On January 28, an offshore oil rig begins leaking crude
oil off the coast of Santa Barbara. The spill has disas-
trous effects on wildlife and on more than 200 miles of
beaches, causing a stir among the American public
about the environmental risks of oil exploration.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “a solar
furnace is constructed in Odeillo, France featuring an
eight story parabolic mirror” (“Solar History Time-
line: 1900s” 2005).
1970
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Dr. El-
liot Berman designs a solar cell that brings the cost
down from $100 per watt to $20 per watt, prompting
a growth in domestic use of solar powered applica-
tions” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
Construction of the Itaipu Dam on the border of
Brazil and Paraguay begins. Twenty-five thousand
142
Chronology
1960
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Guarani Indians are displaced, and people around the
world begin questioning the value of massive hydro-
electric dam projects (Kovarik 2007).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the Ge-
othermal Resources Council is founded to encourage
development of geothermal resources worldwide”
(“A History of Geothermal Energy in the United
States” 2006).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the Ge-
othermal Steam Act is enacted, which provides the
Secretary of the Interior with the authority to lease
public lands and other federal lands for geothermal
exploration and development in an environmentally
sound manner” (“A History of Geothermal Energy in
the United States” 2006).
1972
The University of Delaware creates the Institute of
Energy Conversion, the world’s first laboratory dedi-
cated to research and development in the area of thin-
film photovoltaic and solar thermal systems (“Solar
History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
The Buffalo Creek Dam in West Virginia bursts,
killing 125 people (Kovarik 2007).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, the 
Geothermal Energy Association is formed. The asso-
ciation includes U.S. companies that develop geother-
mal resources worldwide for electrical power
generation and direct heat uses (“A History of Geo -
thermal Energy in the United States” 2006).
1973
The oil crisis of 1973 begins on October 16 when an
Arab oil embargo is imposed on countries that sup-
port Israel in the Yom Kippur War. In addition, the
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) agrees to raise the price of oil, taking advan-
tage of the dependency of industrialized nations on
their oil supplies. This results in shortages and infla-
tion in countries dependent on the importation of oil
Chronology
143
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
from these countries. The United States is especially
hard hit.
1974
Government-sponsored research into wave power be-
gins in earnest in response to the oil crisis caused by
the Arab embargo of 1973 and the excessive depen-
dency of industrialized countries on imported oil.
Japan, Norway, and the United Kingdom are instru-
mental in advancing this technology. All these pro-
grams fail, however, to achieve market penetration of
wave technologies, damaging the credibility of this
energy source.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
develops a two-bladed wind turbine at the Lewis Re-
search Center in Cleveland, Ohio, in response to the
oil crisis (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1975
The Shimantan Dam in China bursts, killing no fewer
than 250,000 people (Kovarik 2007).
1976
The Grand Teton Dam in Idaho bursts, killing 14 peo-
ple (Kovarik 2007).
1977
A 2-megawatt windmill is installed at Howard’s
Knob in Boone, North Carolina, by General Electric. It
is dismantled in 1983 following local residents’ com-
plaints of noise (Kovarik 2007).
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is formed.
1978
The Carter administration enacts the first electricity
feed-in law in the world under the Public Utility Reg-
ulatory Policies Act (PURPA) to promote the use of
renewable energy in the United States. The electricity
feed in-law, known in some countries as the advanced
renewable energy tariff, requires utility companies to
buy a percentage of their electricity from nonutility
power producers. Electricity feed-in laws are deemed
by many to be the most successful policy mechanism
for increasing the share of renewable energy in the
energy economy (Chapters 2 and 3).
144
Chronology
1973
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1979
A partial core meltdown caused by equipment fail-
ures and human error at the Three Mile Island nu-
clear reactor in Middleton, Pennsylvania, on March
28 results in the evacuation of nearby neighbor-
hoods. This accident prompts a speedy and forceful
rejection of all new nuclear projects by the Ameri-
can public, a sentiment that continues into the 21st
century.
After the energy crisis, proposals for ethanol-blended
gasoline reemerge. (At this time, it seems like a new
idea, as it has not been explored since the 1930s and
1940s.) Oil industries lobby against such proposals
(Kovarik 2007).
In response to the energy crisis, Brazil begins invest-
ing heavily in ethanol production from sugarcane. By
2007, over 40 percent of Brazil’s automobiles are pow-
ered by ethanol, making the country practically inde-
pendent of imported oil (Kovarik 2007).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the first
wind turbine rated over 1 megawatt (MOD-1), begins
operating. It had a 2-megawatt capacity rating”
(“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1980
A photovoltaic power plant, made up of 266,029 solar
cells, is dedicated on June 7 to Governor Scott Mathe-
son at the Natural Bridges National Monument, Utah.
The plant provides enough power for six staff resi-
dences, maintenance facilities, a water sanitation sys-
tem, and a visitors’ center. The U.S. National Park
System, the U.S. Department of Energy, and the Mass-
achusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Labora-
tory collaborate on the project (Anzovin and Podell
2000, 90).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the
Crude Oil Windfall Profits Tax Act further increased
tax credits for businesses using renewable energy. The
Federal tax credit for wind energy reached 25 percent
and rewarded businesses choosing to use renewable
energy” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
Chronology
145
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
1981
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Paul
MacCready builds and flies the first solar powered
aircraft from France to England across the English
Channel. The aircraft had more than 16,000 solar
cells mounted to the wings to produce over 3000
watts of power” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s”
2005).
1982
Solar One, a 10-megawatt solar power tower plant,
begins operating in California. The plant stops oper-
ating in 1988 (Chapter 1).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “world-
wide, photovoltaic production exceeds 9.3 mega -
watts” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1983
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Solar
Design Associates completes a home powered by an
integrated, stand-alone, 4-kilowatt photovoltaic sys-
tem in the Hudson River Valley” (“Solar History
Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “world-
wide, photovoltaic production exceeds 21.3 mega -
watts” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “be-
cause of a need for more electricity, California utilities
[contract] with facilities that qualified under PURPA
to generate electricity independently. The price set in
these contracts [is] based on the costs saved by not
building the planned coal plants” (“Solar History
Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1984
Luz International Ltd. begins construction on the
first of nine commercial-scale thermal solar energy
installations in the United States. Each unit pro-
duces 30,000 kilowatts, and, by 1990 when the final
plant is built, the cost per kilowatt is reduced by 50
percent. The company goes bankrupt while build-
ing the tenth plant due to the falling price of natural
gas and oil (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
146
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the
Sacramento Municipal Utility District commissions
its first 1-megawatt photovoltaic electricity generat-
ing facility” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
Superphénix, the first commercially sized fast breeder
reactor, is built in France. Technological problems pre-
vent the plant from producing electricity for more
than nine months over a 10-year period. French prime
minister Lionel Jospin orders the Superphénix closed
in 1997 after it experiences a brief period of produc-
tivity from late 1995 to late 1996 (Anzovin and Podell
2000, 95).
1985
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “re-
searchers at the University of South Wales break the
20% efficiency barrier for silicon solar cells” (“Solar
History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
Fifteen alcohol fuel plants are producing 50 million
gallons of ethanol per year in Virginia. By 1992, every
one of these plants is bankrupt (Kovarik 2007).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Califor-
nia wind capacity exceeds 1,000 megawatt, enough
power to supply 250,000 homes. But the wind tur-
bines used [are] very inefficient resulting in their dis-
mantling and replacement in the late 1980s” (“Solar
History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1987
The Sanyo Corporation of Japan develops the first
thin-film solar cells. The company replaces the expen-
sive and difficult-to-manufacture crystalline silicon
material with a less expensive amorphous (noncrys-
talline) silicon (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
1988
A temperature of 100 million Kelvin is achieved. This
is considered the minimum temperature necessary to
sustain a controlled fusion reaction.
1990
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “more
than 2,200 megawatts of wind energy capacity [is] 
Chronology
147
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
installed in California—more than half of the world’s
capacity at the time” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s”
2005).
1991
President George H. W. Bush announces that the U.S.
Department of Energy’s Solar Energy Research Insti-
tute has been designated the National Renewable En-
ergy Laboratory (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1992
Sanyo Electric and Hyogo Prefecture of Japan de-
velop the first practical, portable fuel cell. The cell is
capable of producing 250 watts of electricity (An-
zovin and Podell 2000, 91).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “re-
searchers at the University of South Florida develop a
15.9% efficient thin-film photovoltaic cell made of
cadmium telluride, breaking the 15% barrier for this
technology” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, the En-
ergy Policy Act is passed. The act reforms the Public
Utility Holding Company Act and many other laws
dealing with the electric utility industry. It also autho-
rizes a production tax credit of 1.5 cents per kilowatt
hour for wind-generated electricity (“Solar History
Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1993
The first Green Power Market Program is started in
the United States.
A commercial electric plant powered by poultry litter
begins operating in Suffolk, England. It is designed
by Lifschutz Davidson (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 90).
Intersource Technologies, a California-based com-
pany, develops the E-lamp. The E-lamp is an elec-
tronic light bulb that uses 75 percent less electricity
than an incandescent light bulb but with the same
brightness. The E-lamp is a breakthrough in energy
conservation technology (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 93).
148
Chronology
1990
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Pacific
Gas & Electric installs the first grid-supported photo-
voltaic system in Kerman, California. The 500-
 kilowatt system is the first ‘distributed power’ PV
installation” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the Na-
tional Renewable Energy Laboratory . . . completes
construction of its Solar Energy Research Facility; it
will be recognized as the most energy-efficient of all
U.S. government buildings in the world” (“Solar His-
tory Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1994
The Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor at the Plasma
Physics Laboratory of Princeton University becomes
the first fusion reactor to generate 10 megawatts of
power. This is considered to be an important mile-
stone by fusion power researchers (Anzovin and
Podell 2000, 95).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the Na-
tional Renewable Energy Laboratory develops a solar
cell made of gallium indium phosphide and gallium
arsenide; it’s the first one of its kind to exceed 30%
conversion efficiency” (“Solar History Timeline:
1900s” 2005).
Construction of the Three Gorges Dam in China be-
gins. The dam becomes the largest hydroelectric dam
on the planet and the most controversial, with over
1.13 million people displaced (Kovarik 2007).
1995
The first commercial wave-powered electricity gener-
ator, the OSPREY (Ocean Swell Powered Renewable
Energy), is anchored to the seabed and begins operat-
ing near the mouth of the River Clyde, Scotland. It is
designed to generate 2 megawatts of electricity from
wave power and another 1.5 megawatts from wind
turbines attached at the surface. It is also the first
plant to commercially power water desalinization
plants (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 91).
Chronology
149
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
According to the U.S. Department of Energy,
Kenetech, the producer of most of the U.S.-made
wind generators, faces financial difficulties, sells off
most of its assets, and stops making wind generators
after the Standard Offer Number 4 contract rollovers
in California lead to lower rates being paid to the
Qualifying Facilities (QF). “This ‘11th-year cliff’ cre-
ate[s] financial hardships for most QFs on these con-
tracts” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1996
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the
world’s most advanced solar-powered airplane, the
Icare, flies over Germany. Its wings and tail surfaces
are covered by 3,000 super efficient solar cells, for a
total area of 21 square meters” (“Solar History Time-
line: 1900s” 2005).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, the de-
partment joins with an industry consortium to “begin
operating Solar Two—an upgrade of the Solar One
concentrating solar power tower. Until the project’s
end in 1999, Solar Two demonstrates how solar en-
ergy can be stored efficiently and economically so
power is produced even when the sun isn’t shining; it
also spurs commercial interest in power towers”
(“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1998
The Stellarator, an improved version of the Tokamak
fusion reactor, is built by Japan’s National Institute of
Fusion Science.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Sub-
hendu Guha, a scientist noted for pioneering work in
amorphous silicon, leads the invention of flexible
solar shingles, a roofing material and state-of-the-art
technology for converting sunlight to electricity on
buildings” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
1999
Four solar service stations for electric vehicles are
opened in Germany and the Netherlands by Royal
Dutch Shell. The purpose of the stations is to recharge
150
Chronology
1995
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
electric vehicles with power generated from solar en-
ergy (Anzovin and Podell 2000, 91).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “con-
struction is completed on 4 Times Square in New
York, the tallest skyscraper built in the city in the
1990s. It has more energy-efficient features than any
other commercial skyscraper and includes building-
integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) panels on the 37th
through the 43rd floors on the south- and west-facing
facades to produce part of the building’s power”
(“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “Spectro-
lab, Inc., and the National Renewable Energy Labora-
tory develop a 32.3 percent efficient solar cell. The
high efficiency results from combining three layers of
photovoltaic materials into a single cell, which is most
efficient and practical in devices with lenses or mirrors
to concentrate the sunlight. The concentrator systems
are mounted on trackers to keep them pointed toward
the sun” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005). 
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “re-
searchers at the National Renewable Energy Labora-
tory develop a record-breaking prototype solar cell
that measures 18.8 percent efficient, topping the pre-
vious record for thin-film cells by more than 1 per-
cent” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “cumu-
lative installed photovoltaic capacity reaches 1000
megawatts, worldwide” (“Solar History Timeline:
1900s” 2005).
2000
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “First
Solar begins production at the Perrysburg, Ohio, pho-
tovoltaic manufacturing plant, the world’s largest at
the time; estimates indicate that it can produce enough
solar panels each year to generate 100 megawatts of
power” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
Chronology
151
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Industry Researchers develops a new inverter for
solar electric systems that increases safety during
power outages.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “in-
stalled capacity of wind-powered electricity generat-
ing equipment exceeded 2,500 megawatts. Contracts
for new wind farms continue to be signed” (“Solar
History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
2001
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the Na-
tional Space Development Agency of Japan, NASDA,
announces plans to develop a satellite-based solar
power system that beams energy back to Earth. A satel-
lite with large solar panels would use laser technology
to transmit solar power to an airship at an altitude of
about 12 miles; the airship would then transmit power
to Earth” (“Solar History Timeline: 1900s” 2005).
2002
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, “the
largest solar power facility in the Northwest—the
38.7-kilowatt White Bluffs Solar Station—goes online
in Richland, Washington” (“Solar History Timeline:
1900s” 2005).
2003
Seventy-two plants produce over 3 billion gallons of
ethanol—enough to raise octane in nearly one-quar-
ter of the nation’s gasoline supply. By 2005, the total is
closer to 6 billion gallons (Kovarik 2007).
References
Anzovin, Steven, and Janet Podell. Famous First Facts: International Edi-
tion. New York: H. W. Wilson Company, 2000.
Cook, E. “The Flow of Energy in an Industrial Society.” Scientific Ameri-
can 225, 3 (September 1971): 135–144.
Drachmann, A. G. “Heron’s Windmill.” Centaurus 1, 7 (1961): 145–151.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). “Wind Power Timeline.” En-
ergy Kid’s Page. September 2005. www.eia.doe.gov/kids/history/time -
lines/wind.html
152
Chronology
2000
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Foley, Gerald. The Energy Question. New York: Viking Penguin, 1989.
Hassan, Ahmad Y., and Donald Routledge Hill. Islamic Technology: An il-
lustrated history. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
“A History of Geothermal Energy in the United States.” U.S. Department
of Energy, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. November 1, 2006.
www1.eere.energy.gov/geothermal/printable_versions/history.html 
Hoffman, P. Tomorrow’s Energy: Hydrogen, Fuel Cells, and the Prospects for a
Cleaner Planet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Hydrogen Now. “History.” 2001. www.hydrogennow.org/Facts/History
.htm
Iowa Energy Center. “A History of Wind Energy.” Wind Energy Manual.
2006. www.energy.iastate.edu/renewable/wind/wem/wem–04_history
.html
Kane, Joseph, Steven Anzovin, and Janet Podell. Famous First Facts: A
Record of Famous First Happenings, Discoveries and Inventions in American
History, 5th ed. New York: H. W. Wilson, 1997.
Kovarik, Bill. “Renewable Energy History.” 2007. www.radford.edu
/~wkovarik/envhist/RenHist/intro.html
Melosi, Martin V. Coping with Abundance: Energy and Environment in In-
dustrial America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985.
Preston, Hayter. Windmills. New York: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1923.
Reynolds, John. Windmills and Watermills. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1970.
Righter, Robert W. The Battle over Hetch Hetchy. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2005.
Routledge, Robert. Discoveries and Inventions of the Nineteenth Century.
New York: Crescent Books, 1989.
Smith, Charles. “Revisiting Solar Power’s Past.” Technology Review 8, 5
(July 1995): 38-47.
“Solar History Timeline: 1900s.” U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Effi-
ciency and Renewable Energy. 2005. www1.eere.energy.gov/solar
/solar_time_1900.html 
World Coal Institute. “How Coal Is Used.” The Coal Resource. 2005. www
.worldcoal.org/pages/content/index.asp?PageID=37 
Chronology
153
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
5
Biographical Sketches
T
he people profiled in this chapter have made an impact in the
field of alternative and renewable energy. They have been
chosen for their contributions as scientists, inventors, schol-
ars, advocates, and entrepreneurs in energy-related disciplines.
Of this group, many of the scientists, inventors, and scholars
laid the groundwork for later developments, and their work is
extremely important for making alternative and renewable en-
ergy a viable source of power. Others made the discoveries that
highlight the need for diversifying our energy economy, such as
the occurrence of global warming and its causes. The advocates
and entrepreneurs are responsible for raising awareness of the
need for alternative and renewable energy and how it can meet
our energy needs. Some disseminate information about the ef-
fect of energy use on our environment and health, and they en-
courage the adoption of responsible policies that take these facts
into account. All of these people are important parts of the alter-
native and renewable energy equation, especially in their con-
tributions to the debate over how to move beyond carbon-based
energy resources.
William Grylls Adams (1836–1915)
William Grylls Adams was an English scientist who taught as a
professor in the Department of Natural Philosophy at King’s Col-
lege. He is notable for his contribution to the discovery of the
photoelectric effect, on which all solar energy applications are
based. He was inspired by Auguste Mouchout’s invention of the
solar steam engine. With the intent of making improvements to
155
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Mouchout’s design, Adams began to experiment with different
materials and designs. In 1876, working in conjunction with his
student, Richard Day, he discovered that selenium produced elec-
tricity when exposed to sunlight. Using the selenium, he then
added mirrors to the design to concentrate sunlight on the en-
gine. This design came to be known as the power tower concept
and is still in use today. In 1878, Adams wrote the first book on
solar energy, Solar Heat: A Substitute for Fuel in Tropical Countries,
which argued that solar power should be used as a fuel in tropi-
cal countries. Later that year, he displayed his power tower solar
engine invention before many English notables. The resulting
consensus was that, while solar energy might not be able to re-
place coal and wood, it could feasibly be used as a supplemen-
tary source of power. Unfortunately, he halted experimentation
after he proved the feasibility of his invention and ceased con-
tributing to the development of solar energy. Virtually all large-
scale, centralized solar plants that use towers rely on his design
of concentrating sunlight with the use of mirrors onto a central
engine.
Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927) 
Svante Arrhenius was a Swedish chemist considered to be one of
the founders of the science of physical chemistry. He attended the
University of Uppsala from 1874 to 1881 and received a master’s
degree in physics from the Academy of Sciences in Stockholm in
1884. In 1903, he was the first Swedish scientist to be awarded the
Nobel Prize in chemistry. He was the first to discover that carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere created a greenhouse effect, which
years later became the basis for explaining the phenomenon of
global warming. He developed a theory to explain the Ice Ages,
in which he determined that changes in the levels of carbon diox-
ide in the atmosphere had the potential to significantly affect the
temperature through the greenhouse effect. Arrhenius made pre-
dictions about the exact range in temperature change that would
occur, and his predictions are incredibly close to the most recent
estimates of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Arrhenius, however, had based his estimates on the rate of ex-
pected carbon dioxide level rise on the emissions of his time. He
estimated that the expected doubling of carbon dioxide would
take about 3,000 years. Since then, industrial carbon dioxide lev-
156
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
els have risen at a much faster rate, and it is now expected that
the doubling will take about century. Arrhenius laid the ground-
work for subsequent work on climate change, which became a
major driving force for the transition to renewable energy.
Jacques-Arsène d’Arsonval (1851–1940)
Jacques-Arsène d’Arsonval was a French biophysicist. He was fa-
mous for his work in the field of electrophysiology, the study of
the effects of electricity on living organisms, where he contributed
several important inventions. He was the director of the labora-
tory of biological physics at the College de France as well as a pro-
fessor. In 1881, he suggested that we could tap the thermal energy
of the oceans to create electricity. He became the first person to
conceive of ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC), making
him an important contributor to renewable energy technology.
His idea was for a closed-cycle system, as discussed in Chapter 1,
which has been used in most modern-day OTEC pilot plants. His
student, Georges Claude, was the first person to build a prototype
OTEC plant off the coast of Cuba in 1930. D’Arsonval is an impor-
tant figure in renewable energy for his conception of OTEC and
his work as an educator, which ultimately resulted in the advance-
ment of renewable energy technology by his students.
Alexandre-Edmond Becquerel (1820–1891) 
Alexandre-Edmond Becquerel was a French physicist known for
his work on electricity. Becquerel’s father, Antoine César Bec-
querel, was a well-respected physicist and his son, Henri Bec-
querel, won the Nobel Prize in 1903 for his discovery of
radioactivity. His father was an experimental professor of the
Musee d’Histoire Naturelle, where Becquerel served as his pupil,
assistant, and successor. He eventually received his doctorate
from the University of Paris in 1840. In 1839, when he was just 19
years old, he discovered the photovoltaic effect while experi-
menting with an electrolytic cell made up of two metal electrodes
placed in an electricity-conducting solution. He observed that the
electricity generation increased when the electrodes were ex-
posed to light. Solar cells are based on the physics of the photo-
voltaic effect. His work is foundational for today’s work on
Biographical Sketches
157
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
photovoltaic cells that are used to generate electricity from solar
power.
Elliott Berman (b. 1944) 
Elliott Berman, an American chemist, graduated from Brown
University and received a PhD in chemistry from Boston Uni-
versity. His biggest contribution to the field of renewable en-
ergy is his development of a solar cell in 1970. His solar cell was
able to drive down the cost of solar power from $100 per watt to
$20 per watt, making it economically feasible for solar to be
used in a variety of domestic applications. He is also the
founder of the Solar Power Corporation, an early maker of solar
cells in Braintree, Massachusetts. He currently works in New
York as the vice president of the Zentox Corporation, an envi-
ronmental cleanup company.
Homi Jehangir Bhabha (1909–1966)
Homi Jehangir Bhabha was an Indian nuclear physicist. He played
a major role in the development of the Indian atomic energy pro-
gram and is considered the father of India’s nuclear program. After
receiving his doctorate from the University of Cambridge in 1934,
he went on to establish the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) in
India in 1948. The Atomic Energy Commission worked toward the
peaceful development of atomic energy. India’s first atomic power
plant, the Tarapur Maharashtra, was built in 1963 and went online
in 1969. In 1974, eight years after Bhabha died in a plane crash, In-
dian scientists working for the AEC exploded a nuclear device,
making India the sixth country in the world to acquire nuclear
weapons.
Frank Bridgers (1932–2005)
Frank Bridgers was a U.S. mechanical engineer and architect. He
established the Albuquerque-based mechanical engineering firm
of Bridgers & Paxton Consulting Engineers in 1951. He is well-
known for designing the first commercial office building to use
solar water heating and passive solar design in 1955. Known as
158
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the Solar Building, it is located at 213 Truman St., N.E., in Albu-
querque, and is now designated a historic landmark. The Solar
Building, the world’s first commercial structure to use the heat of
the sun as its primary source for interior heating, was featured in
Life magazine in 1956 and earned Bridgers a place in the Solar En-
ergy Hall of Fame. In 1990, he was awarded the American Society
of Heating and Ventilating Engineers’ highest recognition, the F.
Paul Anderson Medal.
Gro Harlem Brundtland (b. 1939) 
Dr. Gro Harlem Brundtland began her career as a physician and
scientist in the Norwegian public health system. She became in-
volved in politics at the young age of seven as a member of the
Norwegian Labour Movement. As an adult she served in public
office for over 20 years, 10 of which she spent as the prime min-
ister of Norway. In 1976, Brundtland was appointed to the posi-
tion of minister of Environment, where she used her medical
knowledge to find links between health and the environment.
In the 1980s, she served as the chair of the World Commission of
Environment and Development, which published its famous re-
port Our Common Future, known informally as the Brundtland
Report, in 1987. The report served as the catalyst for the 1992
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED), also known as the Earth Summit, in Rio de Janeiro.
The Brundtland Report is famous for developing the principle
of sustainable development, on which nations have been trying
to base their energy policies, albeit unsuccessfully in most
cases. Brundtland now serves as a special envoy on climate
change for the United Nations Secretary-General, Ban Ki-
moon, and continues to explore the capacity of sustainable de-
velopment in providing the world’s citizens with a higher
standard of living.
Jimmy Carter (b. 1924)
Although he is known throughout the world as a renewable en-
ergy advocate, Jimmy Carter is best-known for serving as the
39th president of the United States from 1977 to 1981. As presi-
dent in the midst of an oil shortage during the OPEC embargo,
Biographical Sketches
159
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Carter made a significant attempt to move the United States to-
ward energy independence. While in office, he created the De-
partment of Energy and established the first comprehensive
national energy plan. The plan included taxes on oil company
profits, taxes on vehicles that did not achieve a certain level of gas
mileage, requirements for builders to use more insulation, energy
efficiency improvements for household appliances, tax credits for
homeowners who switched to solar-powered hot water heaters,
and support for mass transit projects. He also promoted energy
conservation by example. Carter promoted wearing sweaters and
turning the heat down, installed solar hot water panels on the
White House, and put temperature controls on government
buildings to prevent people from turning thermostats up too
high or down too low. He encouraged the development of renew-
able energy and was the first U.S. president to encourage ethanol
research and development. Funding for renewable energy pro-
jects soared under Carter, although most of his efforts were killed
off during President Ronald Reagan’s term after he successfully
campaigned against Carter in 1980.
Georges Claude (1870–1960)
Georges Claude was a French engineer and chemist who is best-
known for inventing the modern neon light in 1910, which he
then introduced in the United States. His contribution to the re-
newable energy field is in the building of the first ocean thermal
energy conversion plant. He was also a student of Jacques-Ar-
sène d’Arsonval, the inventor of the OTEC concept. Claude built
the first prototype OTEC plant off the coast of Cuba in 1930 and
was able to produce 22 kilowatts of energy. He built a second
plant off the coast of Brazil aboard a 10,000-ton cargo ship. Al-
though both plants were destroyed by weather before they could
become net energy producers, the designs provided the founda-
tion for future OTEC energy developments.
Arthur Compton (1892–1962) 
Arthur Compton was an American physicist and inventor at the
General Electric Company. He received his PhD from the Univer-
sity of Wooster, where the subject of his dissertation was X-rays.
160
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
In 1927, he was awarded the Nobel Prize for his discovery of the
Compton effect, which describes the behavior of X-rays when
they interact with matter. His research findings had a powerful
effect on quantum physics and ultimately contributed to the in-
vention of the first nuclear reaction achieved by the Manhattan
Project at the University of Chicago. The Manhattan Project’s
work was key to the development of nuclear power. Compton’s
work with the General Electric Company resulted in the develop-
ment of the first fluorescent light bulb in 1934. His invention was
critical to later developments in energy-efficient lighting, particu-
larly the compact fluorescent light bulb.
Georges Jean Marie Darrieus (1888–1979)
Georges Darrieus was a French aeronautical engineer, best-
known for his contributions to wind energy technology. In 1931,
he patented the Darrieus turbine, a vertical axis wind turbine
with long, thin blades connected at the top and bottom of the
axis. Due to its likeness to an eggbeater, the Darrieus turbine is
also known as the eggbeater windmill. Although it is not as
widely used as the horizontal axis design, Darrieus’ contribution
encouraged the development of wind energy.
Rudolph Diesel (1858–1913)
Rudolph Diesel was a German inventor and mechanical engineer
who is most famous for his invention of the diesel engine. He was
educated at Munich Polytechnic, where he graduated with a de-
gree in refrigeration engineering in 1879. His work in refrigera-
tion inspired him to develop an engine that was more efficient
than the steam engine. This desire was driven by sociological
concerns for small-scale artisans who could not afford the large
steam engines that were driving the Industrial Revolution. He
designed many engines, including a solar-powered air engine.
After years of development, he succeeded in creating the first
diesel internal combustion engine in 1897, which was then
patented in 1898. He became an instant millionaire because the
diesel engine was much more efficient than the steam engine. He
originally conceived of the engine running on local fuels derived
from vegetable oil. Although the engine has been predominantly
Biographical Sketches
161
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
run on diesel fuel derived from petroleum, rising oil prices and
environmental concerns have led to developments in biodiesel,
bringing the diesel engine full circle back to the original concep-
tion that Rudolph Diesel had in mind when he invented it.
Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931)
Thomas Edison is one of the most famous inventors in American
history. He is best-known for his contributions to mass lighting
through his development of centralized electricity. The United
States and other industrialized nations adopted his design for the
transmission of electricity, as well as, subsequently, by other na-
tions as they entered the electrical age. His design has had a pow-
erful impact on the energy sources chosen for electricity
generation around the world. Only coal and nuclear power are
capable of fulfilling the energy needs of industrialized countries
in a centralized electrical design, making it difficult for renewable
energy adoption. Renewable energy is the most efficient when
used for decentralized and localized power needs. The problem
of integrating renewable energy into a centralized power design
has inhibited its adoption by major energy users like the United
States. The problem of efficient power transmission from renew-
able energy sources has often been cited as one of the major ob-
stacles to its widespread use. Although Edison’s design has kept
the world on a hard energy path, he was known as a socially con-
scious inventor who stressed the need to explore renewable en-
ergy sources to replace oil and coal.
John Ericsson (1803–1889)
John Ericsson was a Swedish inventor and mechanical engineer.
He is best-known for inventing the ship propeller and his im-
provements to steam engine designs, particularly for ships. He
was never formally educated but gained experience through his
service in the Swedish army in 1820. After encountering several
problems over the years with his ship engine designs based on
traditional energy sources, he became interested in solar power.
In the last 20 years of his life, he devoted his work to capturing
solar energy out of fear that coal supplies would eventually run
out. He succeeded in developing the first solar parabolic trough
162
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
design. By 1888, he was on the verge of mass-producing an effi-
cient solar engine for the purposes of irrigation. Unfortunately he
died before he succeeded in mass-producing his solar motor, and
the details of his design went with him because he never allowed
for records of his designs to be kept until they were patented.
Michael Faraday (1791–1867)
Michael Faraday was a well-known English chemist and physi-
cist who made many contributions to the fields of electromag-
netism and electrochemistry. With little formal education, he
worked his way up the ranks of scientific achievement and was
eventually granted lifetime tenure as a Fullerian professor of
chemistry in the Royal Society, a prestigious institute of scien-
tific investigation in England. In 1833, he successfully explained
what happened during electrolysis. His explanations became
known as Faraday’s laws and have formed the foundation of
the modern understanding of electrolysis, making him known
as the father of electrolysis. Electrolysis is the phenomenon by
which electricity creates hydrogen, making his discoveries in-
strumental in the development of hydrogen as a carrier for re-
newable energy.
Enrico Fermi (1901–1954)
Enrico Fermi was an Italian physicist and an instrumental mem-
ber of the Manhattan Project. Fermi received a doctorate in
physics from the University of Pisa in 1922. He worked in various
universities in Europe until earning a Nobel Prize for his work in
1938. Promptly after winning the Nobel Prize, he left his post at
the University of Rome and went to the United States to escape
Mussolini’s fascist dictatorship. Once in the United States, he was
appointed professor of physics at Columbia University. His work
contributed to the discovery of nuclear fission, making him one
of the greatest experts on neutrons in his time. After Otto Hahn
and Frit Strassman discovered nuclear fission in 1939, Fermi
begin working with Leo Szilard on the Manhattan Project at the
University of Chicago to achieve a nuclear chain reaction. His
work on the Manhattan Project ultimately led to the development
of the first nuclear bomb and nuclear power.
Biographical Sketches
163
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Benoit Fourneyron (1802–1867)
Benoit Fourneyron was a French engineer who invented the first
water turbine in 1827. At the age of 14, he graduated at the top of
his class from the New School of Mines in Saint Etienne, France,
in 1816. Working in collaboration with many of his past instruc-
tors, he began searching for ways to make the ancient water-
wheel design more efficient for the purpose of powering the
Industrial Revolution, which was just getting underway. He ulti-
mately developed the first water turbine, which was a more effi-
cient horizontal version of the waterwheel. The horizontal
design, which allowed the turbine to fully utilize the power of the
water motion, won him an award from the French Society for the
Encouragement of Industry because the 6-horsepower turbine
was the first commercial hydraulic turbine. With the prize money
from the award, Fourneyron went on to improve his design, end-
ing up with a 60-horsepower turbine that functioned at 80 per-
cent efficiency. The design was adopted throughout Europe and
the United States, becoming an important source of power for the
Industrial Revolution. In 1895, Fourneyron turbines were in-
stalled at Niagara Falls to generate electricity.
Charles Fritts (d. 1903)
Charles Fritts was an American inventor from New York. Draw-
ing on his experience as an electrician, Fritts built the first solar
cell in 1883 out of selenium. He ambitiously believed that his
photovoltaic cell would compete with Thomas Edison’s new
coal-fired electricity-generating plants. Unfortunately, his solar
cells were able to convert solar power to electricity at an effi-
ciency rate of less than 1 percent. Despite its inefficiency, Fritts’s
invention proved that it was possible to use sunlight to create
electricity. Despite the fact the invention never competed with
Edison’s electric power plants, Fritts’s work laid the necessary
foundation for future developments in solar power technology.
Arnold J. Goldman (b. 1942) 
Arnold J. Goldman is an American engineer and founder of Luz
International Ltd. He received a degree in engineering from the
164
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
University of California, Los Angeles, and a master’s degree in
electrical engineering from the University of Southern California.
In 1984, Goldman started Luz International Ltd., which designed,
constructed, financed, and operated nine solar energy–generating
stations in the Mojave Desert in California. By 1990 when the
ninth plant was built, the company had succeeded in creating an
economy of scale that resulted in a 50 percent reduction in cost per
kilowatt of the ninth plant. The plants consisted of thousands of
solar parabolic troughs that have generated over 11,000 gigawatt-
hours and $1.7 billion in revenue since 1984, making them the first
profitable large-scale solar projects. In 1991, Luz International
filed for bankruptcy when it failed to obtain financing for the
tenth solar thermal plant project. The bankruptcy was also attrib-
uted to the price drops in the oil and natural gas sectors and to re-
peals of government tax breaks for solar energy projects. Despite
the bankruptcy, the nine plants continued operation. In 2004,
Goldman established the company BrightSource Energy and is
negotiating contracts in California to begin constructing solar pro-
jects using the solar power tower design. Lutz II, a Jerusalem-
based subsidiary company of BrightSource, is building a power
tower pilot project in the Negev Desert in Israel. Goldman’s com-
panies have succeeded in proving that large-scale solar energy
projects can be profitable when government policies are in place
to support development.
Albert A. Gore Jr. (b. 1948)
Albert A. Gore, known to the world as Al Gore, was born in Wash-
ington, D.C., to Albert Arnold Gore Sr., a U.S. representative
(1939–1944, 1945–1953) and senator (1953–1971) from Tennessee,
and Pauline LaFon Gore, one of the first women to graduate from
Vanderbilt University Law School. Gore graduated from Harvard
in 1969 with a BA in government. While at Harvard, Gore at-
tended classes taught by Roger Revelle, the first scientist to link
fossil fuel emissions to global warming. Revelle had a significant
impact on Gore’s views of the environment and has been cited by
Gore as a major influence in his passion for the global warming
issue. After serving in the U.S. military, Gore returned from Viet-
nam to attend Vanderbilt University but left without a degree and
ran for Congress in Tennessee in 1976. He was reelected three
more times and then ran a successful campaign for the U.S. Senate
Biographical Sketches
165
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
in 1984. During his tenure as a U.S. representative, Gore held the
first congressional hearings on climate change and pushed the
U.S. government to take measures to study and address its causes
and effects. While serving in the Senate for nine consecutive years,
Gore worked on his book, Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the
Human Spirit, which was published in 1992 and provides policy
recommendations to address global ecological challenges. The
book was one of only a few written by a politician to make it onto
The New York Times best-seller list.
Gore was elected vice president of the United States in 1992
and served two terms with President Bill Clinton. While serving
as the vice president, Gore strongly pushed for the passage of the
Kyoto Protocol. In 2000, Gore lost a bid for president to George
W. Bush in a controversial election that was ultimately decided
by the U.S. Supreme Court. After the defeat, Gore devoted much
of his time and energy to raising awareness of the seriousness of
climate change and implementing solutions in the private sector.
In 2004, he started Generation Investment Management, a firm
that assists firms already dedicated to preventing climate change
with investment strategies that focus on a variety of solutions. In
2006, Gore’s documentary, An Inconvenient Truth, was released.
The documentary sheds light on human-caused global warming
and argues for immediate action on the part of governments and
individuals to address the problem. The documentary was
awarded an Academy Award for best documentary and was one
of the top grossing documentaries of all time. In 2007, Gore and
the scientists working for the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change were awarded a joint Nobel Peace Prize for their ef-
forts. Gore is internationally known as a renewable energy
advocate and champion for environmental causes.
William R. Grove (1811–1896)
Sir William R. Grove was a British scientist known as a pioneer in
fuel cell technology, although he pursued a career in law. He was
born in Swansea, Wales, and studied classics at Brasenose Col-
lege, Oxford. He received his degree in 1832 and began practicing
law in 1835. Grove was married in 1837 and took a lengthy year-
long honeymoon, during which he was able to pursue his pas-
sion—science—and wrote his first scientific paper on designing
fuel cells. In 1839, he built a fuel cell, known as the Grove cell,
166
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and drew the attention of Michael Faraday who was, at the time,
studying the phenomenon of electrolysis. Faraday invited Grove
to present his findings to the prestigious Royal Institute, where
he was subsequently offered a fellowship as the first professor of
experimental philosophy. In 1842, he gave his inaugural lecture
where he was the first to propose the theory of the conservation
of energy, although he called it the correlation of physical forces.
During his tenure, he built the first practical fuel cell, which pro-
vided electrical energy by combining hydrogen and oxygen, a
key foundation for the development of modern-day fuel cells.
Grove, like many scientists of his time, also suggested that there
were energy sources beyond the dominant sources of his time
and that had yet to be discovered, foreshadowing the renewable
energy revolution of the late 19th century.
Subhendu Guha (b. 1941)
Subhendu Guha is an Indian American scientist known for his pi-
oneering work in amorphous silicon and nanocrystalline silicon,
which are used in solar energy applications. Born in Calcutta,
India, Guha attended the Presidency College where he earned a
degree in physics. He then went on to earn a PhD in electronics
from the University of Calcutta in 1968, after which he went to
work for the India-based Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
(TIFR). At TIFR, his work on semiconductors led him to be inter-
ested in research on solar power. He became interested in the use
of amorphous silicon as a material for photovoltaic cells because
it is made from sand and does not have the toxic properties of
other materials used in solar technology. After doing postdoc-
toral work in 1974 and 1975 at the University of Sheffield in En-
gland, he went back to TIFR and began researching a new way to
produce amorphous silicon. He published his research findings
in 1981, causing a major breakthrough in the solar energy tech-
nology field. His revolutionary technique for producing amor-
phous silicon is now used by most producers of the material.
Afterward, he became interested in the practical applications of
his research and took a position at a U.S.-based company called
Energy Conversion Devices. In 1994, he combined his academic
research experience on amorphous silicon with his industrial re-
search on solar photovoltaics, and, by 1997, flexible solar roof
shingles were on the market. Flexible solar shingles can be used
Biographical Sketches
167
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
as a roofing material and reflect state-of-the-art technology for
converting sunlight to electricity on buildings. Although the cells
are still not quite cost competitive in areas where electricity is
produced through traditional means, they offer a more cost-
 effective way of bringing electricity to areas, especially in devel-
oping countries, that have yet to be electrified. They are already
being used in Egypt, Mexico, and other developing countries
around the world.
John Burden Sanderson Haldane
(1892–1964) 
John Burden Sanderson Haldane was a British geneticist and evolu-
tionary biologist best-known as one of the founders of population
genetics. Haldane graduated from the New College, Oxford, in
1911. After serving in World War I, Haldane went back to New Col-
lege, as a fellow and then on to Cambridge University. After teach-
ing at Cambridge for nine years, he accepted a professorship at the
University College London. In the late 1950s, he moved to India,
where he became a guru to the country’s burgeoning scientific com-
munity. Haldane was an unusual and a distinctive man, qualities
that inspired characters based on him in books by Aldous Huxley
and C. S. Lewis. He was a popularizer of science and had an un-
canny knack for predicting scientific advances. His greatest contri-
bution to the field of renewable energy was a lecture he gave while
at Cambridge University in 1923. In the lecture he suggested that
liquefied hydrogen, produced from wind power by electrolysis,
would be the energy carrier of the future. He was the first person to
suggest this and spurred research in and development of hydrogen
and renewable energy sources by other scientists.
James E. Hansen (b. 1941)
James E. Hansen is an American scientist who is best-known for
his work in climatology. Hansen studied at the University of Iowa
in the space science program under Dr. James Van Allen. He grad-
uated with a degree in physics and mathematics in 1963, receiving
the highest distinction. He remained at the University of Iowa and
received a master’s degree in astronomy in 1965 and a PhD in
168
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
physics in 1967. Shortly after receiving his doctorate, he began
conducting research on human-induced climate change, making
him one of the first experts in the field. In 1981, Hansen published
an article in Science magazine detailing his research on global
warming and predicting that the effects of climate change would
be evident as early as 1990. This was much sooner than the predic-
tions of other climate scientists, who had projected that the effects
would begin to be felt in 2020. Also in the paper, he made a correct
prediction that it would be difficult to get politicians and the pub-
lic to take action. After his paper was published, he began testify-
ing about climate change before congressional committees,
helping to raise more widespread awareness of the issue of global
warming. Many members of the scientific community ridiculed
Hansen for being a doomsayer, but they have since retracted their
critiques as his predictions have come true. Hansen is one of the
few climate scientists to argue that carbon dioxide has had less of
an impact on warming than other greenhouse gases like methane,
chlorofluorocarbons, and nitrous oxide. Despite this, his position
is that emissions from fossil fuels must be reduced before carbon
dioxide emissions tip the atmospheric balance even further.
Hansen is well-known for his argument that the tipping point for
irreversible climate change will occur in 2016 if drastic measures
are not taken to bring greenhouse gas emissions under control. Al-
though a criticizer of the Bill Clinton and George W. Bush admin-
istrations’ positions on climate change, Hansen is one of Al Gore’s
top advisors and was referred to numerous times in Gore’s
award-winning documentary on climate change, An Inconvenient
Truth. Hansen currently heads the NASA Goddard Institute for
Space Studies in New York City and holds a position as an adjunct
professor at Columbia University in the Department of Earth and
Environmental Sciences. In 2005 and 2006, Hansen received con-
siderable media attention for his claims that NASA administrators
were trying to censor and influence his public statements on cli-
mate change, although top officials deny it. Despite the denial,
NASA and other government agencies were pressured by the
media, Congress, and the public to revise their media policies.
William Heronemus (1920–2002)
William Heronemus was an American engineer known for his
contributions to wind energy technology. Heronemus received
Biographical Sketches
169
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
his BS from the U.S. Naval Academy and his MS in marine engi-
neering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In 1941,
he began his service in the U.S. Navy, retiring as a captain in 1965.
After being employed by United Aircraft Corporate Systems
Center from 1965 to 1967, he taught civil engineering at the Uni-
versity of Massachusetts until 1985. While at the University of
Massachusetts, Heronemus started the alternative energy pro-
gram, now the Renewable Energy Research Laboratory. He led
the team of researchers responsible for the development of a
wind turbine that would be the basis for U.S. wind turbines
today. He was a pioneer of the wind farm concept, although his
interest lay mainly in offshore wind development. His offshore
wind projects of the 1970s are being used in Europe as a guide for
offshore wind power projects. Heronemus testified before con-
gressional hearings in the 1970s as a wind power expert and has
been called the father of American wind power.
M. King Hubbert (1903–1989)
M. King Hubbert was an American geophysicist who is best-
known for his accurate prediction of peak oil production in the
United States. Hubbert received a BS in geology from the Univer-
sity of Chicago in 1926. He remained at the university and re-
ceived his MS in mathematics in 1928 and his PhD in physics in
1937. While pursuing his doctorate, he gained considerable expe-
rience teaching geophysics at Columbia University until 1940 and
working on geophysical problems for the Amerada Petroleum
Corporation in Oklahoma, the Illinois State Geological Survey,
and the United States Geological Survey during his summers.
After receiving his doctorate, he took a position at Shell Oil Com-
pany as director of the research laboratory. While working for the
Shell Oil Company, Hubbert published a paper, “Energy from
Fossil Fuels” (Science, 1949), in which he argued that the fossil
fuel era would be much shorter than many supposed, creating a
need for investment in other energy sources. In 1964, he left Shell
Oil Company to work for the U.S. Geological Survey until retir-
ing in 1976, all the while teaching at both Stanford University and
the University of California, Berkeley. In 1956, he presented his
theory on oil reserves, which became known as Hubbert’s curve,
in which he stated that oil and gas production would resemble a
bell curve over time. This was one of the first solid scientific argu-
ments for the finiteness of oil and gas. He used his theory to pre-
170
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
dict that the United States would hit peak oil production between
1966 and 1971, an argument that came to be known as Hubbert’s
peak. In 1975, the National Academy of Sciences confirmed that
Hubbert’s prediction was correct. Then in 1976, Hubbert pre-
dicted that global oil production would reach its peak in 1995.
His prediction is unconfirmed and remains controversial.
Jeremy Leggett (b. 1954) 
Jeremy Leggett is a British geologist, who is well-known for his
work as an environmental activist and renewable energy advo-
cate. He graduated with a PhD in earth sciences from Oxford.
After receiving his doctorate, he began an academic career at Im-
perial College, where he researched earth history and acted as a
consultant for the oil industry. In the 1980s, he went on to work at
the London School of Mines, where major oil companies, like
British Petroleum and Shell, funded his research. After witness-
ing the destruction that oil exploration was causing, in 1989 he
left the business and joined Greenpeace as its principal scientific
adviser on global warming. Disappointed by the lack of results
the environmental advocacy group was achieving, he left Green-
peace in 1996 and founded Solar Century, the largest solar solu-
tions company in the United Kingdom, in 1997. He is still the
chief executive of the company and also serves on the U.K. gov-
ernment’s Renewables Advisory Board. He is also a director of
the world’s first private equity renewable energy fund, Bank
Sarasin’s New Energies Invest AG. His work has been credited
for being instrumental in bringing about global awareness of the
climate change issue, and he is seen as a leading advocate of re-
newable energy technology. He has argued for years that global
oil production is near its peak, creating a dire need for investment
in renewable energy resources. He has written several books on
energy and climate change, including The Carbon War: Global
Warming and the End of the Oil Era; Half Gone: Oil, Gas, Hot Air and
the Global Energy Crisis; and The Empty Tank: Oil, Gas, Hot Air and
the Coming Global Financial Catastrophe.
Amory Bloch Lovins (b. 1947)
Amory Lovins, a well-known American environmentalist and re-
newable energy advocate, has been called by Newsweek one of the
Biographical Sketches
171
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
most influential energy thinkers in the Western world. His profi-
ciency in science in high school led to his admittance to Harvard
in 1964, but he left to study experimental physics at Magdalen
College, Oxford, England. He then studied as a junior research
fellow at Merton College, Oxford, where he earned his master’s
degree. He did not pursue a doctorate there because Oxford
would not allow him to study energy. Since then, he has been
awarded nine honorary doctorate degrees from distinguished
universities around the world. In 1976, he received notoriety as
an advocate for energy efficiency and renewable energy in an
essay written for the journal Foreign Affairs titled “Energy Strat-
egy: The Road Not Taken?” He has served as an adviser to the en-
ergy industry and the U.S. departments of Energy and Defense
for over 30 years. Since 1990, he has led the development of ultra
efficient automobiles and a profitable hydrogen transition strat-
egy. Lovins has authored and coauthored several books on re-
newable energy and energy efficiency, including Winning the Oil
Endgame.
He is currently the chair and chief scientist at the Rocky
Mountain Institute, a nonprofit organization devoted to research
on energy policy that he started with his former wife, Hunter
Lovins, in 1982.
Auguste Mouchout (Mid-19th Century)
Auguste Mouchout was a 19th-century French inventor who
taught mathematics at the Lyce de Tours. He was concerned with
finding alternative sources of energy because of his country’s de-
pendence on coal. This interest led him to begin work in solar en-
ergy in 1860. His initial experiments involved concentrating solar
power onto a cauldron that was encased in glass in order to pro-
duce steam. He improved the design by adding a reflector that
concentrated the sun’s rays, and he succeeded in using the appa-
ratus to power a small steam engine in 1865. This made Mou-
chout the first known inventor to convert solar radiation into
mechanical energy. He succeeded in impressing Emperor Napo-
leon III, who offered financial assistance for the development of
an industrial-sized solar engine. Mouchout improved on his de-
sign by refining the reflector so that the solar energy could be
even more concentrated and by adding a tracking device that en-
abled his machine to follow the sun. The improved design was
172
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
well received by the French government, which thought it could
be most useful in the tropical climate of the French colony Alge-
ria. Mouchout was sent to Algeria, where he worked to enlarge
his design. He then presented the new design back in Paris in
1878, and this time connected it to a refrigeration device, demon-
strating that he could make ice from the sun’s energy. Although
this won him a medal, his funding was cut in 1880 due to the low
price of coal and an improved transportation system. His
groundbreaking research provided the foundation for the mod-
ern understanding of converting sunlight to mechanical energy.
Willie Nelson (b. 1933)
Willie Nelson is an American country singer, who is best-known
for his style of outlaw country music developed in the 1970s. He
is also a well-known environmental and biofuel advocate. In
2004, he partnered with his wife, Annie, and with Bob and Kelly
King to build two Pacific Bio-diesel plants in Salem, Oregon, and
Carl’s Corner, Texas. He then founded Willie Nelson’s Bio-diesel
in 2005 with several other businesspeople. The company markets
biodiesel biofuel to truck stops across the country. The fuel,
which is called BioWillie, is made from vegetable oil derived
from soybeans and can be used without modification in diesel
engines. Efforts to encourage the use of BioWillie also coincide
with Nelson’s support of small American farmers, whose plight
he has brought awareness to, since 1985, with an annual concert
called Farm Aid. BioWillie thus serves three purposes: to help
end U.S. dependence on foreign oil, to support American family
farmers, and to improve the environment.
Roger Revelle (1909–1991)
Roger Revelle was an American scientist and one of the first to
study global warming. He graduated from Pomona College in
1929 with a degree in geology and then received a PhD in oceanog-
raphy at the University of California, Berkley. Revelle founded the
Committee on Climate Change and the Ocean under the Scientific
Committee on Ocean Research and International Ocean Commis-
sion. This led to the creation of the Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
Program, which started monitoring carbon dioxide in Hawaii and
Biographical Sketches
173
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Antarctica in 1956. In 1957, Revelle coauthored a paper with Hans
Suess arguing that the oceans would be unable to absorb carbon
dioxide at a rate fast enough to prevent it from having an effect on
the atmosphere, meaning that there would be a greenhouse effect if
large amounts of carbon dioxide are emitted into the atmosphere.
The ocean’s inability to absorb carbon dioxide became known as
the Revelle factor. This was one of the first scientific studies to sug-
gest that fossil fuel–induced carbon dioxide emissions could have
a major effect on the climate. In the early 1980s, Revelle taught
some of the first classes in academia that addressed the global
warming issue. Revelle also taught these classes at Harvard Uni-
versity, where he inspired Al Gore’s interest and concern about
global warming.
Frank Shuman (1862–1918)
Frank Shuman was an American inventor responsible for devel-
oping the most cost-effective solar technology prior to the space
age. Although he had very little formal education, Shuman’s pas-
sion for scientific research landed him a position as a chemist at
the Victor G. Bloede Company of West Virginia when he was just
18. In 1897, after years of development, Shuman developed a
primitive parabolic trough that heated a chemical with a lower
boiling point than water to produce steam and run an engine. In
1908, after making improvements to his design, Shuman estab-
lished the Sun Power Company with the intention of producing
larger versions of his model. His goal was to create a solar power
plant that was capable of running industrial-sized steam engines.
In 1911, he constructed the largest solar conversion system ever
built near his home in Tacony, Pennsylvania. Although the struc-
ture was able to collect over 10,000 square feet of sunlight, it was
still not sufficient to run the larger steam engines. After several
improvements and collaborations with another engineer, E. P.
Haines, Shuman was able to produce enough energy to power in-
dustrial applications. Like most renewable energy systems, the
initial cost was much higher than that of fossil fuel sources,
though in the long term, it was a much cheaper source because
the fuel was free. Unfortunately, the short-term costs were the de-
termining factor in Shuman’s inability to get his invention
adopted on a mass scale in North America. So he made plans to
export his solar power plant to Africa. A machine more akin to
174
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
modern-day parabolic trough designs was built in Cairo in 1912.
The new machine was even more efficient than his previous ef-
forts, and there was great potential for solar power to gain status
as one of the dominant power sources. Unfortunately, Shuman’s
solar system was destroyed shortly afterward when World War I
swept through the region. Fortunately, Shuman’s design sur-
vived and was the foundation for successful modern-day solar
parabolic troughs.
Lyman Spitzer Jr. (1914–1997)
Lyman Spitzer Jr. was an American astrophysicist who has been
called one of the 20th century’s greatest scientists. He is most fa-
mous for his contributions to space astronomy and was instru-
mental in the development of the Hubble Space Telescope. In the
field of alternative energy, Spitzer was one of the first to study
thermonuclear fusion. Spitzer received a degree in physics from
Yale University in 1935, after which he spent a year at Cambridge
University. In 1937, he earned a master’s degree from Princeton
University and a doctorate in astrophysics in 1938. He then spent
a year as a postdoctorate fellow at Harvard University and went
on to join the faculty at Yale in 1939. In 1951, after working on ex-
periments to create a controlled nuclear fusion reaction, Spitzer
founded the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, originally
called Project Matterhorn. This project was Princeton’s pioneering
nuclear fusion program and funded by the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission. Spitzer hoped to create a clean source of energy
from fusion without the nuclear waste that fission reactions pro-
duced. Spitzer’s research led to the development of the Tokamak
Fusion Test Reactor, which made critical advances in scientific
knowledge about fusion that were necessary for the International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), an international fu-
sion test facility that will be completed in 2016 in France. ITER
project leaders hope that after the 30-year experimental phase, nu-
clear fusion will be capable of providing for our energy needs.
Robert Stirling (1790–1878)
Robert Stirling was a Scottish clergyman and inventor of the
Stirling engine, which is used in solar dish designs. Although a
Biographical Sketches
175
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
minister by profession, Stirling had a profound interest in engi-
neering. His inventions were driven by a concern for his parish-
ioners and the dangers many of them faced working around
steam engines, which were known to explode. Stirling worked
on an improved engine design in his home workshop in his
spare time. In 1817, Stirling’s economiser was patented by the
Chancery in Edinburgh, Scotland. The design could not explode
and worked at a lower pressure that prevented burns from
steam. The first practical model was built in 1818 and became
known as the Stirling engine. The engine is the highest-effi-
ciency heat engine in existence even today, although it is not as
cost-effective as internal combustion engines. Stirling never
produced his engine on a mass scale because it was unable to
compete with steam engines due to its costs, but the original de-
sign is used in contemporary solar applications. Most notably,
Stirling Engine Systems, a California-based solar technology
firm, has developed the Solar Stirling Dish System, which uses a
solar dish to concentrate power onto a Stirling engine and pro-
duce electricity.
Alexander T. B. Stuart (1888–1950)
Alexander T. B. Stuart was a Canadian engineer and entrepre-
neur who conducted pioneering work in the development of
hydrogen-based electrolysis. Stuart studied chemistry and min-
eralogy at the University of Toronto under Lash Miller, who had
studied under William Grove, the inventor of the fuel cell. In
1905, Stuart began to take an interest in hydrogen as an energy
source while working at the Niagara Falls Power Station. At the
station, Stuart began to analyze the opportunity for a hydrogen
energy economy, where he noted that only 30 to 40 percent of
the capacity of the hydroelectric system was being used for lack
of a way to store excess energy. He concluded that the excess en-
ergy should be used in a water electrolysis process to produce
hydrogen fuel, which could then be used in a variety of energy
applications. He spent the remainder of his life developing and
commercializing energy technology. In 1920, he invented a
water electrolysis device, the Stuart cell, which is still popular
for use in hydrogen energy applications. In 1948, he formed Stu-
art Energy with his son, Alexander K. Stuart, to research and
commercialize hydrogen energy applications. The company is
176
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
still in business, run by his grandson Andrew T. B. Stuart, and is
one of the largest and most successful hydrogen companies in
the world.
Hans Eduard Suess (1909–1993)
Hans Eduard Suess was an Austrian chemist and physicist who
contributed to the development of nuclear energy and the science
of global warming. Suess earned his PhD in chemistry from the
University of Vienna in 1935. During World War II, he was part of
a team of German scientists studying atomic energy. He also ad-
vised the development of Norsk Hydro, a heavy water plant in
Norway that was producing hydrogen by electrolyzing water. He
emigrated to the United States in 1950 to continue his work in
atomic energy. After coming to the United States, Suess became
interested in carbon dating and began using it to study the cli-
matic history of the Earth. In 1957, Roger Revelle, another pio-
neering climate change researcher who was interested in Suess’s
carbon dating research, invited Suess to join the faculty at the
University of California, San Diego. That same year he coau-
thored a paper with Revelle arguing that the oceans would be un-
able to absorb carbon dioxide at a rate fast enough to prevent it
from having an effect on the atmosphere, meaning that there
would be a greenhouse effect if large amounts of carbon dioxide
are emitted into the atmosphere. It was one of the first scientific
papers to suggest that fossil fuel–induced carbon dioxide emis-
sions could have a major effect on the climate. He also used his
carbon dating method to determine the amount of dilution of car-
bon dioxide that had occurred in the atmosphere since the Indus-
trial Revolution. The dilution is known as the Suess effect and has
been used extensively in climate change measurements and stud-
ies for the past couple of decades.
Leo Szilard (1898–1964)
Leo Szilard was a Hungarian American physicist who discovered
the nuclear chain reaction necessary for nuclear fission. He began
his studies in engineering at the Budapest Technical University in
1916 but later transferred to the Berlin Institute of Technology,
where he began studying physics. There he studied under Albert
Biographical Sketches
177
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Einstein, who thought that Szilard was one of his most promising
students. In 1922, he received his doctorate in physics from Hum-
boldt University in Berlin and was awarded the highest honor for
his dissertation on thermodynamics. In 1933, Szilard conceived of
the idea of a nuclear chain reaction while stopped at a traffic
light, and in 1934 he filed to patent the idea. In 1938, he went to
Columbia University in New York to conduct research and was
soon joined by Enrico Fermi. Szilard and Fermi were recruited to
work on the Manhattan Project at the University of Chicago,
where they achieved a sustained nuclear chain reaction on De-
cember 2, 1942. The discovery led to the development of nuclear
power. Szilard and Fermi are coholders of the patent for the nu-
clear fission reactor.
Tom Udall (b. 1948)
Tom Udall has served as a U.S. representative for New Mexico’s
Third Congressional District since 1999 and has proposed numer-
ous pieces of renewable energy legislation throughout his tenure.
Udall graduated with a prelaw degree in 1970 from Prescott Col-
lege. He then attended Cambridge University, England, where he
graduated in 1975 with a bachelor of law degree. He enrolled in
the University of New Mexico School of Law, where he earned
his juris doctor in 1977. Udall went on to serve as law clerk to
Chief Justice Oliver Seth of the U.S. 10th Circuit Court of Ap-
peals, an assistant U.S. attorney, chief counsel to the Department
of Health and the Environment, and attorney general of New
Mexico. He successfully ran for election in 1999 to the U.S. House
of Representatives as a Democrat. Udall has sponsored several
bills to establish a national renewable energy portfolio standard.
Most recently, Udall successfully proposed an amendment to a
house energy bill requiring electricity providers to produce no
less than 15 percent of their electricity from renewable energy
sources by 2020. The amendment and bill were passed by the
House but not supported by the Senate. Udall is also a member of
the United States House Peak Oil Caucus, which was formed in
2005 to address the need to make a transition to a sustainable en-
ergy economy.
178
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter provides recent data on energy in general and on
renewable energy use throughout the world and in the United
States. All data has been extracted from the Annual Energy Re-
view 2006, which is updated annually to include information on
world energy use from 1946 or 1949 to the present. First, Table 6.1
presents the geographical and organizational definitions needed
for any inquiry into the state of world affairs. An energy conver-
sion table acts as a point of reference for comparing various esti-
mates of energy use (Table 6.2). Following that, the numbers for
total world energy consumption, world energy consumption by
fuel, and world energy consumption by country are provided
(Tables 6.3 through 6.12). This data reflects the broad picture of
energy use and helps to identify individual characteristics of
fuels and countries. The same is done for the United States by
providing a look at overall U.S. renewable energy use and then at
energy consumption by individual states (Tables 6.13 and 6.14).
Concluding this chapter is data on global carbon emissions (Table
6.15).
179
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
180
Data and Documents
Worldwide Data
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
181
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
182
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
183
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
184
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
185
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
186
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
187
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
188
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
189
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
190
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
191
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
192
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
193
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
194
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
195
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
196
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
197
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
198
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
199
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
200
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
201
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
202
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
203
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
204
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
205
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
206
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
207
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
208
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
209
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
210
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
211
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
212
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
213
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
214
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
215
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
216
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
217
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
218
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
219
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
220
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
221
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
222
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
223
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
224
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
225
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
226
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
227
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
228
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
229
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
230
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
231
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
232
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
233
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
234
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
235
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
236
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
237
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
238
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Worldwide Data
239
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
240
Data and Documents
U.S. Data 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. Data
241
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
242
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
U.S. Data
243
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
244
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Environmental Impacts
Environmental Impacts
245
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
246
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Environmental Impacts
247
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
248
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Environmental Impacts
249
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
250
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Environmental Impacts
251
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
252
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Reference
Energy Information Administration. Annual Energy Review 2006, 2007. Re-
port No. DOE/EIA-0384, June 27, 2006. 
Reference
253
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
7
Directory of Organizations
Nongovernmental Organizations
American Council on Renewable Energy (ACORE)
P.O. Box 33518 
Washington, DC 20033-3518
(202) 393-0001
Fax: (202) 393-0606
Web site: www.acore.org
The American Council on Renewable Energy (ACORE) is a non-
profit organization based in Washington, D.C. It was founded in
November 2001, with a focus on promoting a transition from fos-
sil fuels to renewable energy, including solar, wind, geothermal,
hydro and ocean, waste and energy fuels, and biomass energy
and biofuels. To do this, ACORE has a three-prong strategy. It con-
venes meetings, conferences, roundtables, forums, and other gath-
erings that help to inform people and provide an opportunity for
them to connect with others on renewable energy issues related to
trade, finance, and policy. The second part of its strategy is infor-
mation publishing, including the annual report “Renewable En-
ergy in America.” This report provides an updated assessment of
the status and future development of various renewable energy
technologies. The third part is communications; although this in-
volves the education of the public, the media, and policy makers,
the organization specifically says it is not a lobbying organization.
Its intent is to provide information about renewable energy that
will better inform, not necessarily persuade, decision makers.
255
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Environmental and Energy Study Institute (EESI)
122 C Street NW, Suite 630
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 628-1400
Fax: (202) 628-1825
E-mail: eesi@eesi.org
Web site: www.eesi.org
The Environmental and Energy Study Institute (EESI) is a non-
profit organization started in 1984 by a bipartisan group of mem-
bers of the U.S. Congress who were concerned about energy and
environmental issues. The organization promotes environmen-
tally sustainable societies through the production of information
and the formulation of public policy initiatives. The goal of these
initiatives is to promote the transition to the social and economic
conditions that will facilitate sustainable living conditions. EESI
provides education to policy makers and policy analysis projects
in the areas of energy efficiency and renewable energy, global cli-
mate change, agriculture, biofuels, smart growth, and clean bus
technologies.
Geothermal Resources Council (GRC)
P.O. Box 1350
2001 Second Street, Suite 5
Davis, CA 95617
(530) 758-2360
Fax: (530) 758-2839
E-mail: grc@geothermal.org
Web site: www.geothermal.org
The Geothermal Resources Council (GRC) is a nonprofit educa-
tional association that was formed in 1970. It has members in more
than 20 countries. The mission of the council is to become the pre-
mier geothermal energy educational association throughout the
world. The council seeks to promote the development of geother-
mal resources across the globe by collecting and distributing data
and technological information. It also encourages research into en-
vironmentally sustainable exploration and development of geot-
hermal energy sources. To do this, it cooperates and communicates
with academic institutions, the geothermal industry, and the gov-
ernment on development and use of geothermal resources with a
concern for economical and environmentally sound solutions. It
also provides a forum for members of the international geothermal
256
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
community to transfer objective information about geothermal en-
ergy and its development.
Global Environmental Facility (GEF)
1818 H Street NW 
Washington, DC 20433
(202) 473-0508 
Fax: (202) 522-3240/-3245 
E-mail: gef@gefweb.org
Web site: www.gefweb.org
Contact: GEF Secretariat
Global Environmental Facility (GEF) is an independent financial
organization whose members consist of both developing and de-
veloped countries. Founded in 1991, it began funding projects in
developing countries with a focus on improving the global envi-
ronment and sustainability of the local communities. GEF grants
fund projects that address global environmental problems like
biodiversity, climate change, international waters, land degrada-
tion, the ozone layer, and persistent organic pollutants (POPs).
The organization works in cooperation with various United Na-
tions agencies, the World Bank, the European Bank, and similar
regional organizations. Its connection to renewable energy is due
to its work on climate change. In an effort to reduce worldwide
emissions of greenhouse gas emissions, GEF funds renewable en-
ergy, energy efficiency, and sustainable transportation projects in
the developing world. It is the largest single source of funding for
the environment.
Green Power Market Development Group
10 G Street NE, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20002 
(202) 729-7624
E-mail: chanson@wri.org.
Web site: www.thegreenpowergroup.org
Contact: Craig Hanson
The Green Power Market Development Group was convened in
2000 by the World Resources Institute, an environmental think
tank, and consists of representatives from 12 leading corporations,
including companies like British Petroleum, General Motors, and
Monsanto, and other “green power affiliates.” The group is a col-
laboration among these members in an effort to increase the
Directory of Organizations
257
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
shares of green power by 1,000 megawatts by 2010. Its strategy for
doing this is to create economies of scale for technologies and re-
duce market barriers by providing information for customers.
Through the purchase of renewable energy credits and the devel-
opment of projects that use energy from wind, geothermal, and
hydrogen fuel cells, the group generated 360 megawatts of power
between 2001 and 2005.
Interstate Renewable Energy Council (IREC)
P.O. Box 1156 
Latham, NY 12110-1156 
(518) 458-6059
E-mail: info@irecusa.org
Web site: www.irecusa.org/
The Interstate Renewable Energy Council (IREC) is a collabora-
tive effort among state and local offices with national laboratories
and solar and renewable energy organizations and companies
that began in 1982. Its purpose is to expedite the transition to re-
newable energy through the actions of state and local govern-
ments 
and 
communities 
that 
support 
market-oriented
approaches and that facilitate the implementation of uniform
standards within the industry. It focuses particularly on shaping
and working with administrative rules and regulations, getting
small-scale projects connected to the grid, building the credibility
and competency in renewable energy professionals, and provid-
ing information. It also promotes the Solar Rating and Certifica-
tion Corporation, which aims to develop and implement
standardized rating and certification of solar energy technolo-
gies. It manages the Database of State Incentives for Renewables
and Efficiency (DSIRE), a comprehensive and helpful database
available to the public.
Public Renewables Partnership 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
University of California-Berkeley 
(510) 486-5229
E-mail: whgolove@lbl.gov
Web site: www.repartners.org
Contact: Bill Golove, national chair
Public Renewables Partnership serves to inform the utility decision
makers for public organizations, cooperatives, and Native Ameri-
258
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
can tribes about their renewable energy options and prospects. To
do this, it evaluates renewable energy resource potential, analyzes
the market and energy portfolios, provides assistance with strate-
gic planning, and maintains a Web site with a host of information.
Its underlying aim is to increase the utilization of renewable en-
ergy technologies by providing the information needed to make
the decision. This means that it provides an efficient means for de-
cision makers to access the information needed to make the best
decision they can regarding their utility use or production. It does
this by maintaining an up-to-date database of news in the field,
finding funding for and conducting research projects related to re-
newable energy, and serving as a bridge between various stake-
holders to coordinate collaboration among them.
Sustainable Energy Coalition (SEC)
1612 K Street NW, Suite 202-A 
Washington, DC 20006-2802
Web site: www.sustainableenergycoalition.org/
The Sustainable Energy Coalition (SEC) is comprised of more
than 60 national and state-level business, environmental, con-
sumer, and energy policy organizations. It was founded in 1992
to promote increased federal support for energy efficiency and
renewable energy technologies. It also works to reduce federal
support for unsustainable energy developments. The SEC works
to influence policy decisions regarding the federal budget, elec-
tric utility restructuring, pollution prevention, climate change,
and tax policies. SEC hosts the annual Renewable Energy and En-
ergy Efficiency Expo in collaboration with U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives and Senate renewable energy and energy efficiency
caucuses, which provides a forum for leading businesses and ex-
perts to present viable technologies and analyze their potential to
offset climate change.
Research Institutes
National Center for Photovoltaics
901 D Street SW, Suite 930 
Washington, DC 20024-2157 
(303) 384-6491
E-mail: david_christensen@nrel.gov
Directory of Organizations
259
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Web site: www.nrel.gov/pv/
Contact: David Christensen
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory’s (NREL) National
Center for Photovoltaics (PV) research is focused on decreasing
the nation’s reliance on fossil fuel–generated electricity by lower-
ing the cost of delivered electricity and improving the efficiency
of PV modules and systems. NREL’s PV research contributes to
these goals through fundamental research, advanced materials
and devices, and technology development. NREL’s capabilities
include research and development, testing and evaluation, and
deployment. Its PV R&D (research and development) empha-
sizes innovative research, thin film development, manufacturing
R&D, and systems development and reliability. It conducts this
research in collaboration with universities and solar industry
through research partnerships and direct support of the NREL
Solar Program and the Solar America Initiative.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, CO 80401-3393
(303) 275-3000
E-mail: info@nrel.gov
Web site: www.nrel.gov
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) is the na-
tion’s primary laboratory for renewable energy and energy effi-
ciency R&D. NREL’s mission and strategy are focused on
advancing the U.S. Department of Energy’s and U.S. energy
goals. The laboratory’s scientists and researchers support critical
market objectives to accelerate research from scientific innova-
tions to market-viable alternative energy solutions. At the core of
this strategic direction are NREL’s research and technology de-
velopment areas. These areas span from understanding renew-
able resources for energy, to the conversion of these resources to
renewable electricity and fuels, and ultimately to the use of re-
newable electricity and fuels in homes, commercial buildings,
and vehicles. The laboratory thereby directly contributes to the
nation’s goal of finding new renewable ways to power homes,
businesses, and cars.
A critical part of the Lab’s mission is the transfer of NREL-
 developed technologies to renewable energy markets. NREL’s
Technology Transfer Office supports laboratory scientists and engi-
260
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
neers in the successful and practical application of their expertise
and the technologies they develop. NREL’s world-class R&D staff
and facilities are recognized and valued by industry, as demon-
strated through hundreds of collaborative research projects and li-
censed technologies with public and private partners. NREL’s
innovative technologies have also been recognized with 39 R&D
100 awards—the most per staff member of any DOE laboratory.
The engineering and science behind these technology transfer suc-
cesses and awards demonstrates NREL’s commitment to develop-
ing and applying innovative renewable energy solutions for the
nation’s secure and sustainable energy future. NREL PV R&D is
performed under the National Center for Photovoltaics.
National Wind Technology Center (NWTC)
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, CO 80401-3393
(303) 384-6945
Web site: www.nrel.gov/wind/nwtc.html
Much of the wind industry’s success can be attributed to the re-
search conducted at NREL’s National Wind Technology Center
(NWTC). Funded by the U.S. Department of Energy Wind En-
ergy Technologies Program, research conducted at the NWTC has
led to the development of multimegawatt wind turbines that pro-
duce electricity at a cost that is starting to compete with conven-
tional energy sources in the marketplace. To make wind energy
fully cost competitive and to increase wind energy development,
researchers at the NWTC are working in partnership with indus-
try to develop larger, more efficient, utility-scale wind turbines
for land-based and offshore installations, as well as more effi-
cient, quiet, small wind turbines for distributed applications.
Renewable Energy Policy Project (REPP) 
1612 K Street NW, Suite 202 
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 293-2898
Fax: (202) 293-5857
E-mail: info2@repp.org
Web site: www.crest.org
The Renewable Energy Policy Project (REPP) was started in 1995
with the support of the Energy Foundation and the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy. Its main task is to promote the advancement of
Directory of Organizations
261
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
renewable energy through policy research. REPP research focuses
on the relationships among policy, markets, and consumer de-
mand. The information is disseminated by the organization to
policy makers, renewable energy companies, environmental ad-
vocates, and the public. In 1999, REPP joined with the Center for
Renewable Energy and Sustainable Technology (CREST) to fur-
ther public involvement in the process through online forums
and discussion groups and interactive software. The project also
provides reports for states containing information about the sta-
tus of renewable energy, its potential, and the policy options.
Sandia National Laboratories 
P.O. Box 5800 
Albuquerque, NM 87185
(505) 284-5200
E-mail: info@sandia.gov
Web site: www.sandia.gov
Started in 1949, Sandia National Laboratories is a government-
owned and contractor-operated (GOCO) facility. Sandia Corpora-
tion, a Lockheed Martin company, manages Sandia for the U.S.
Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administra-
tion. It develops science-based technologies that support goals
associated with national security. Through science and technol-
ogy, people, infrastructure, and partnerships, Sandia’s mission is
to meet national needs in five key areas: ensuring that the nuclear
weapons stockpile is safe, is secure, is reliable, and can support
the United States’ deterrence policy; enhancing the surety of en-
ergy and other critical infrastructures; reducing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, the threat of nuclear accidents,
and the potential for damage to the environment; assessing de-
fense systems and addressing new threats to national security;
and helping to ensure homeland security from terrorist threats.
The Sandia National Laboratories Corporate Archives and His-
tory Program exist to preserve, document, and disseminate San-
dia’s history. As a critical link in the nuclear weapons
development chain, Sandia played a large role in the history of
the Cold War, while its reimbursable projects have responded to
U.S. national security policy more broadly. To preserve the crucial
records of Sandia’s history, the Corporate Archives collects and
preserves information from Sandia’s past, and the History Pro-
gram brings Sandia’s story to a broader public.
262
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
University of Delaware Center for Energy and Environmental
Policy
Newark, DE 19716 
(302) 831-8405
Fax: (302) 831-3098
E-mail: jbbyrne@udel.edu
Web site: ceep.udel.edu/ceep.html
The University of Delaware is a leading institution for research
into renewable energy and renewable energy policy. The univer-
sity has several organizations within it dedicated to the advance-
ment of renewable energy technologies. The Center for Energy
and Environmental Policy was established in 1980 after the oil
shocks of the 1970s highlighted the need for concentrated re-
search in energy and the environment. The Center is the leading
institution for interdisciplinary education, research, and advo-
cacy in energy and environmental policy. The research and advo-
cacy programs of the Center address issues at the international,
regional, national, state, and local levels. The university also
houses the Institute of Energy Conversion, which was created in
1972 as the world’s first laboratory dedicated to the research and
development of thin-film photovoltaic and solar thermal sys-
tems. The Institute leads the Consortium for Very High Efficiency
Solar Cells (VHESC), which has achieved record levels of effi-
ciency in solar cell technologies. Most recently, VHESC achieved
a 42.8 percent efficiency solar cell.
University of Massachusetts–Amherst Center for Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy (CEERE)
College of Engineering
160 Governor’s Drive
Amherst, MA 01003
(413) 545-4359
E-mail: rerl@ecs.umass.edu
Web site: www.ceere.org/
Contact: Dr. James Manwell
The University of Massachusetts houses the Center for Energy Ef-
ficiency and Renewable Energy (CEERE), which seeks to provide
technological and economic solutions to environmental problems
resulting from energy production, industrial, manufacturing,
commercial activities, and land use practices. CEERE partners
with state, federal, and private organizations to conduct research
Directory of Organizations
263
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
in one of four areas: renewable energy resources, building en-
ergy efficiency, industrial energy efficiency, and environmental
technology. The Massachusetts Energy Efficiency Partnership is
a program that coordinates the major gas and electric utilities in
the state to conserve energy in the commercial and industrial
sectors.
Associations
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA)
1101 14th Street NW, 12th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 383-2500
Fax: (202) 383-2505
E-mail: windmail@awea.org
Web site: www.awea.org/
The American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) is one of the
biggest trade associations related to wind power in the United
States. It promotes wind power development through advocacy,
community, and education. It is well-known for providing up-to-
date, reliable, and accurate information about the wind power is-
sues in the United States and the world. This information
includes data and statistics about domestic and international
market development. Its annual conference, WINDPOWER, is
the largest in North America, attended by many of the 1,000
members of the association. It also publishes the only weekly
newsletter about wind energy. The Association interacts with
members of Congress to ensure that wind energy interests are
represented in renewable energy legislation.
Biomass Energy Research Association (BERA)
901 D Street SW, Suite 100 
Washington, DC 20024 
(847) 381-6320 
Fax: (847) 382-5595 
E-mail: beraorg2@excite.com 
Web site: www.bera1.org
The Biomass Energy Research Association (BERA) is a nonprofit
organization that was started in 1982 by researchers from the bio-
mass industry and academic institutions. Its purpose is to de-
264
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
velop and commercialize biomass energy technology for the pub-
lic good. To do this, BERA encourages research in the private and
public sectors, facilitates the exchange of information between
them, and educates the public on the potential of biomass. The
association also monitors federal biomass legislation and con-
tributes its knowledge to discussions about research funding
needs by participating in public hearings and issuing an annual
position statement on federal funding of research on bioenergy.
The association also publishes a catalog of products being sold by
its members for the purpose of promoting U.S. exports of these
goods.
British Wind Energy Association (BWEA)
Renewable Energy House 
1 Aztec Row, Berners Road 
London N1 0PW, United Kingdom
020 7689 1960
Fax: 020 7689 1969
E-mail: info@bwea.com
Web site: www.bwea.com
The British Wind Energy Association (BWEA) is the trade and
professional body for the United Kingdom wind and marine re-
newables industries. Formed in 1978, and with over 310 corpo-
rate members, BWEA is the leading renewable energy trade
association in the U.K. In 2004, BWEA expanded its mission to
champion wave and tidal energy and use the association’s expe-
rience to guide these technologies along the same path to com-
mercialization.
Danish Wind Industry Association 
Vester Voldgade 
106 DK-1552 
Copenhagen V, Denmark 
45 3373 0330 
Fax: 45 3373 0333 
E-mail: danish@windpower.org
Web site: www.windpower.org/en/core.htm/
Danish Wind Industry is a nonprofit association that promotes the
domestic and international adoption of wind energy technologies.
Founded in 1981, the Danish Wind Industry Association now rep-
resents virtually all of Danish wind turbine manufacturers with
Directory of Organizations
265
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
energy measured in megawatts. It also represents more than 140
companies associated with wind energy activities in Denmark.
Using a variety of methods to promote energy, the Danish Wind
Industry Association publishes information about wind energy
online through its Web site and in printed form, including an an-
nual report of the state of the industry. Additionally, it engages in
political advocacy for policies that support wind energy develop-
ment in Denmark. The Association is also a member of the Euro-
pean Wind Energy Association.
European Renewable Energy Centres Agency (EUREC)
Renewable Energy House
63-65 rue d’Arlon 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium 
32 2 546 1930
Fax: 32 2 546 1934
E-mail: info@eurec.be
Web site: www.eurec.be/
The European Renewable Energy Centres Agency (EUREC) was
established in 1991 to strengthen European research, demon-
stration, and development efforts in all renewable energy tech-
nologies. EUREC is an independent member-based association
with 48 prominent research groups from all over Europe. It is
the voice of renewable energy research in Europe. Its members
conduct research in the fields of solar building design, wind,
photovoltaics, biomass, small hydro, solar thermal power sta-
tions, ocean energy, solar chemistry and solar materials, hybrid
systems, renewable energy in developing countries, and inte-
gration of renewable energy in the energy infrastructure.
EUREC is also a founding member of the European Renewable
Energy Council.
European Biomass Association (AEBIOM)
Croix du Sud 
2 bte 11 Louvain-la-Neuve
1348 Brussels, Belgium 
32 10 47 3455
Fax: 32 10 47 3455
E-mail : jossart@aebiom.org
Web site: www.aebiom.org
Contact: Jossart Jean-Marc, secretary-general
266
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The European Biomass Association (AEBIOM) is a nonprofit, in-
ternational organization founded in 1990. Based in Brussels, the
AEBIOM serves as an umbrella organization for 28 national as-
sociations across Europe. Its mission is to represent bioenergy at
the European Union (EU) level. The associations act as members
in the General Assembly, which, along with the Steering Com-
mittee and the board, manages AEBIOM. The activities of AE-
BIOM range from project management, EU affairs, and event
organization to information dissemination and communication
using tools such as a bimonthly newsletter; a yearly journal, Bio-
mass News; and other publications. To encourage the production
and use of biomass throughout Europe, AEBIOM undertakes a
number of strategies. AEBIOM develops and advertises global
solutions to encourage the production of biomass and under-
takes studies toward the same end. It coordinates among the dif-
ferent international associations and encourages information
sharing among members. It provides assistance to those inter-
ested in setting up new national associations. It cooperates with
important European institutions such as the European Commis-
sion, European Parliament, and Economic and Social Council.
AEBIOM organizes seminars, conferences, and information and
awareness campaigns. AEBIOM also promotes technology trans-
fer to developing countries.
European Geothermal Energy Council (EGEC)
63-65, rue d’Arlon 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
32 2 400 1024 
Fax: 32 2 400 1010 
E-mail: info@egec.org
Web site: www.egec.org/
Formed in 2003, the European Geothermal Energy Council
(EGEC) is an international association that promotes use of geo -
thermal energy in Europe and the export of geothermal technol-
ogy from the European geothermal industry to the rest of the
world. Its main priority is to encourage research and development
of geothermal resources in Europe and to make the results of this
research useful for the public in exploiting geothermal resources.
The EGEC works with European institutions to encourage the
adoption of legislation and regulations that will help geothermal
compete with conventional energy sources. The organization also
Directory of Organizations
267
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
works to have the environmental benefits considered when deci-
sions about fiscal support are made. The EGEC cooperates with
national geothermal associations, including the International Geo -
thermal Association (IGA) and its European branch, as well as with
any other organizations promoting research on and application of
renewable energy sources. It disseminates information through
publications, meetings, and discussions at the European level.
European Ocean Energy Association
63-65 rue d’Arlon
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
32 0 2 400 1040
Fax: 32 0 2 791 9000
Web site: www.eu-oea.com/
The European Ocean Energy Association is a nonprofit organiza-
tion with a member-elected board of directors created to repre-
sent all actors in the ocean energy sector at a European level.
Because ocean energy is still small compared to other types of re-
newable energy, most of the members are just getting businesses
started. To make ocean energy a more viable option, the Euro-
pean Ocean Energy Association seeks to make the source more
visible and promote its use on an international level. The associa-
tion provides a forum for the burgeoning industry to explore av-
enues for development of ocean energy. It belongs to the
European Renewable Energy Council, which has access to deci-
sion makers and governmental officials at the EU level.
European Photovoltaic Industry Association (EPIA)
63-65 rue d’Arlon
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
32 2 465 3884
Fax: 32 2 400 1010
E-mail: com@epia.org
Web site: www.epia.org
Founded in 2006, the European Photovoltaic Industry Associa-
tion (EPIA) is the world’s largest solar electricity industry associ-
ation. EPIA’s membership is comprised of over 100 companies
from over 20 countries. The Association promotes the develop-
ment of photovoltaic markets at the national, European, and
global levels. EPIA represents its members when collaborating
with European institutions like the European Commission. It pro-
268
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
vides policy analysis to its members to predict what effect poli-
cies and programs that are passed will have on the industry.
EPIA also advocates for specific legislation to encourage photo-
voltaic market development. It also coordinate legislation with
industrial advances. Like many of the other associations men-
tioned in this chapter, EPIA facilitates interaction among its mem-
bers and supports national organizations in achieving their local
objectives. EPIA works to organize conferences in areas where
solar electricity has strong potential but requires additional sup-
port. EPIA is also a founding member of the Alliance for Rural
Electrification (ARE), which promotes the use of renewable ener-
gies for rural electrification.
European Renewable Energies Federation (EREF)
73 avenue de la Fauconnerie 
1170 Brussels, Belgium 
32 2 672 4367 
Fax: 32 2 672 7016 
E-mail: info@eref-europe.org 
Web site: www.eref-europe.eu
The European Renewable Energies Federation (EREF) is the Eu-
ropean interest and lobby group for independent producers of
electricity and fuels from renewable energy sources like wind,
solar, small-scale hydro, and biomass. The members include na-
tional associations of renewable energy producers and support-
ing agencies from many EU member states. EREF members have
a combined total of approximately 17.000 megawatts of installed
capacity in renewable energy electricity in the European Union.
EREF is the voice of renewable energy producers. It acts as a
watchdog of the energy sector and provides information to the
public and the media to promote renewable energy and regional
sustainable development.
European Small Hydropower Association (ESHA)
Renewable Energy House 
63-65 rue d’Arlon 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
32 2 546 1945
Fax: 32 2 546 1947 
E-mail: info@esha.be
Web site: www.esha.be
Directory of Organizations
269
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
The European Small Hydropower Association (ESHA) is a non-
profit international association that represents national associa-
tions and individuals who belong to the small hydropower sector.
ESHA was founded in 1989 as an initiative of the European Com-
mission. ESHA is one of the founding members of the European
Renewable Energy Council, which groups all main European re-
newable energy industry and research associations. ESHA is lo-
cated in the Renewable Energy House, in Brussels, with other
EREC members. ESHA believes that the benefits of small hy-
dropower can be achieved only if policies favorable for its devel-
opment are sought at the European, national, and local levels. Like
many of the other associations that belong to EREC, ESHA encour-
ages the sharing of technology and information among its mem-
bers. It also engages in studies that analyze the various factors that
affect the development and adoption of small hydropower.
European Wind Energy Association (EWEA)
63-65 rue d’Arlon 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
32 2 546 1940 
Fax: 32 2 546 1944 
E-mail: ewea@ewea.org
Web site: www.ewea.org/
European Wind Energy Association (EWEA) is considered to be
one of the most powerful wind energy networks in the world. With
members from 40 countries including over 300 companies, associa-
tions, and research institutions, EWEA’s members include manu-
facturers making up 98 percent of the world wind power market,
component suppliers, research institutes, national wind and re-
newables associations, developers, electricity providers, finance
and insurance companies, and consultants. With such a broad
array of members, the EWEA has become the most influential or-
ganization in the world wind energy network. The EWEA secre-
tariat is located at the Renewable Energy House in Brussels. The
secretariat works to coordinate EU wind policy, communications,
research, and analysis. It serves as a manager of various European
wind energy projects, hosts events, and supports the needs of its
members. EWEA is a founding member of the European Renew-
able Energy Council, which serves as an umbrella organization for
the eight major renewable industry and research associations. It is
also the founder of the Global Wind Energy Council
270
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Geothermal Energy Association 
209 Pennsylvania Avenue SE 
Washington, DC 20003 
(202) 454-5261 
Fax: (202) 454-5265 
E-Mail: daniela@geo-energy.org
Web site: www.geo-energy.org
The Geothermal Energy Association is a trade association that
consists of companies that support the expansion of geothermal
energy. To encourage the adoption of geothermal energy, the 
Association advocates favorable policies, provides a forum for
discussion of geothermal issues, encourages research and devel-
opment of geothermal energy resources, gathers data and re-
search, represents the industry before the government in public
hearings, and provides education and outreach to the public.
Specifically, the Association is advocating the adoption of a geo -
thermal energy target of 20 percent of the total power shares. The
association also hosts a trade show to facilitate the dissemination
of technology and information.
German Wind Energy Association (BWE)
Herrenteichsstr. 1 
49074 Osnabrück, Germany 
49 0 541 350 60 0 
Fax: 49 0 541 350 60 30 
E-mail: info@wind-energie.de
Web site: www.wind-energie.de/en/
The German Wind Energy Association (BWE) is the largest re-
newable energy association in the world, with almost 19,000
members. The members consist of wind technology manufactur-
ers, operators and their shareholders, planning office financiers,
scientists, engineers, technicians, and lawyers. Members also in-
clude early conservationists, schoolchildren, and students. BWE
maintains its regional roots, with 13 state and 41 regional associ-
ations providing consultation and the provision of information.
Advocacy activities target political parties and decision makers
at the regional and state level and provide expertise in designing
policies to promote the optimum conditions for wind energy de-
velopment. BWE works to implement projects with high levels
of support and acceptance by all of those affected and involved.
BWE is responsible for organizing regional presentations for
Directory of Organizations
271
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
congresses and trade fairs. It focuses on confronting criticism by
local stakeholders through the provision of press releases and in-
formation presentations. BWE publishes a free monthly maga-
zine called New Energy, which highlights the vast array of
renewable energy sources available.
Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC)
Renewable Energy House 
63-65 rue d’Arlon 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium 
32 2 400 1029 
Fax: 32 2 546 1944
E-mail: info(at)gwec.net
Web site: www.gwec.net/
The Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC) was established in
early 2005 to provide a coordinated, representative forum for the
entire wind energy sector at an international level. GWEC’s mis-
sion is to promote wind power as one of the world’s leading en-
ergy sources. To promote the development of wind power, the
GWEC works on the adoption of policy initiatives, global out-
reach, education, and the dissemination of information. Members
of GWEC include over 1,500 companies, organizations, and insti-
tutions in more than 50 countries and account for over 99 percent
of the installed wind capacity in the world.
Integrated Waste Services Association (IWSA) 
1331 H Street NW, Suite 801 
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 467-6240 
Fax: (202) 467-6225
E-mail: tmichaels@wte.org
Web site: www.wte.org
Contact: Ted Michaels, president
The Integrated Waste Services Association (IWSA) was founded
in 1991 to provide innovative solutions to waste management
problems through the use of waste-to-energy technology. Its
membership base includes companies and communities that
own waste-to-energy plants. Like other trade associations, the
Integrated Waste Services Association engages in activities like
research, political advocacy, education, and information compi-
272
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
lation to promote the development and use of waste-to-energy
technology.
International Geothermal Association (IGA)
IGA Secretariat c/o Samorka Sudurlandsbraut 
48 108 Reykjavik, Iceland 
354 588 4437
Fax: 354 588 4431 
E-mail: iga@samorka.is
Web site: iga.igg.cnr.it/index.php
Contact: IGA Secretariat
The International Geothermal Association (IGA), founded in
1988, serves as a scientific, educational, and cultural nonprofit,
nongovernmental organization, operating worldwide. There are
more than 2,000 members in 65 countries. The IGA is nonpoliti-
cal and acts as a consultant to the Economic and Social Council
of the United Nations, and serves as a partner of the European
Union for the Campaign for Take Off (CTO) the Renewable En-
ergy. With an objective to encourage research, development, and
utilization of geothermal resources worldwide, the IGA com-
piles, publishes, and disseminates scientific and technical infor-
mation on geothermal resources. The organization works to
facilitate information exchange between geothermal experts and
the general public.
Renewable Fuels Association (RFA) 
One Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 820
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 289-3835
E-mail: info@ethanolrfa.org
Web site: www.ethanolrfa.org/
The Renewable Fuels Association (RFA) is a trade association that
has represented the U.S. ethanol industry since 1981. Its member-
ship base consists of businesses, organizations, and individuals
that want to see increased ethanol use in the United States. To in-
crease the production and use of ethanol, the group promotes
state and federal legislation that will result in favorable policies,
regulations, and research and development for ethanol. Addi-
tionally, the Association attempts to provide timely information
for decision makers in the ethanol industry.
Directory of Organizations
273
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Solar Electric Power Association (SEPA)
1341 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 3.2 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 857-0898 
Fax: (480) 393-5631 
E-mail: info@solarelectricpower.org
Web site: www.solarelectricpower.org/
The Solar Electric Power Association (SEPA) is a nonprofit orga-
nization with members including 175 utilities, electric service
providers, manufacturers, installers, government entities, and re-
search institutions. The mission of SEPA is to encourage and facil-
itate the development and use of solar electric power by electric
utilities and service providers and their customers. SEPA fosters
business-to-business networking to encourage the sharing of in-
formation on solar electric technologies, applications, and pro-
grams. It reports to members on policies, regulations, and
legislation. In addition, it provides an online resource library
with over 200 solar documents that are categorized by individual
topic and date. These documents include reports from around the
industry that are added as they become available. SEPA also con-
ducts studies of utility solar cases to determine the types of utility
programs that facilitate solar power development and use. Once
a year, it hosts the Solar Power Conference and Expo, which pro-
vides educational workshops in areas of policy, technology, mar-
kets, and finance. Additionally, it publishes a biweekly electronic
newsletter that provides up-to-date news and information on
solar technologies, programs, and policies.
Solar Energy Industries Association (SEIA) 
805 15th Street NW, #510 
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 682-0556
Fax: (202) 682-0559
E-mail: info@seia.org
Web site: www.seia.org/
Solar Energy Industries Association (SEIA) is a trade association
that represents businesses and individuals from all aspects of the
solar industry. Its purpose is to expand the use of solar technol-
ogy across the world. For its members, it provides information
pertinent to both political advocacy of solar technology and the
general developments in the field, and it provides networking
274
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
opportunities through conferences. The Association provides
press releases for the media to keep the public informed about
solar energy developments and benefits. It produces publica-
tions to inform its members about tax laws, regulations, and
technologies.
U.S. Government Agencies
California Energy Commission 
1516 Ninth Street, MS-29 
Sacramento, CA 95814-5512 
(916) 654-4287
E-mail: renewable@energy.state.ca.us
Web site: www.energy.ca.gov
The California Energy Commission is the state’s primary energy
policy and planning agency. Created by the legislature in 1974
and located in Sacramento, the Commission has five major re-
sponsibilities: forecasting future energy needs and keeping his-
torical energy data; licensing thermal power plants 50 megawatts
or larger; promoting energy efficiency through appliance and
building standards; developing energy technologies and sup-
porting renewable energy; and planning for and directing state
response to energy emergencies. With the signing of the Electric
Industry Deregulation Law in 1998 (Assembly Bill 1890), the
Commission’s role includes overseeing funding programs that
support public interest energy research; advancing energy sci-
ence and technology through research, development, and
demonstration; and providing market support to existing, new,
and emerging renewable technologies.
Energy Information Administration (EIA)
1000 Independence Avenue SW 
Washington, DC 20585
(202) 586-8800
E-mail: InfoCtr@eia.doe.gov
Web site: www.eia.doe.gov
The Energy Information Administration (EIA), created by Con-
gress in 1977, is a statistical agency of the U.S. Department of En-
ergy. Its mission is to provide policy-independent data, forecasts,
and analyses to promote sound policy making, efficient markets,
Directory of Organizations
275
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and public understanding regarding energy and its interaction
with the economy and the environment. By law, EIA’s products
are prepared independently of administration policy considera-
tions. EIA neither formulates nor advocates any policy conclu-
sions.
EIA issues a wide range of weekly, monthly, and annual re-
ports on energy production, stocks, demand, imports, exports,
and prices, and it prepares analyses and special reports on topics
of current interest. Examples include weekly reports, monthly re-
ports, annual reports, and special reports. EIA’s data and analy-
ses are widely used by researchers and policy makers from
countries around the world. 
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE)
Mail Stop EE-1 
Department of Energy 
Washington, DC 20585
(877) 337-3463
Web site: www1.eere.energy.gov
The Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE)
falls under the Department of Energy and is the administrative
body that coordinates all policy efforts toward the advancement
of energy efficiency and renewable energy. The EERE mission is
to strengthen America’s energy security, environmental quality,
and economic vitality in public–private partnerships that en-
hance energy efficiency and productivity; bring clean, reliable,
and affordable energy technologies to the marketplace; and make
a difference in the everyday lives of Americans by enhancing
their energy choices and their quality of life. The Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy will play an important role in
the Advanced Energy Initiative, passed by President George W.
Bush, by advancing technologies such as biomass and biofuels,
solar power, wind power, advanced vehicles, and hydrogen fuel
cells. EERE sponsors various initiatives to build awareness about
energy efficiency and renewable energy topics and to coordinate
efforts toward specific goals.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) 
1000 Independence Avenue SW 
Washington, DC 20585
(202) 586-5000
276
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Fax: (202) 586-4403
E-mail: The.Secretary@hq.doe.gov
Web site: www.energy.gov
Contact: Secretary of Energy
The history of the Department of Energy (DOE) can be traced back
to the Manhattan Project, when, in 1946, Congress created the
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) to control the various aspects
of the project. In 1977, the Department of Energy Organization Act
distinguished the DOE from the AEC and brought together for the
first time all programs related to energy and to the design, con-
struction, and testing of nuclear weapons. Over the years, the DOE
has focused less on national security directly and more on energy
security. Today, DOE stands at the forefront of helping the nation
meet its energy, scientific, environmental, and national security
goals. These include developing and deploying new energy tech-
nologies, reducing dependence on foreign energy sources, protect-
ing the nuclear weapons stockpile, and ensuring that the United
States remains competitive in the global marketplace. Recent initia-
tives to spur scientific innovation and technology development
have served to expand DOE’s continuing support for the competi-
tive energy markets, both domestically and internationally, and for
policies that facilitate continued private investment in the energy
sector. In addition, DOE supports the demonstration and deploy-
ment of energy technologies through collaborative efforts with the
private sector and public sector entities.
The Department of Energy’s overarching mission is to ad-
vance the national, economic, and energy security of the United
States; to promote scientific and technological innovation in sup-
port of that mission; and to ensure the environmental cleanup of
the national nuclear weapons complex. The DOE’s strategic goals
to achieve the mission are designed to deliver results along five
strategic themes: energy security, nuclear security, scientific dis-
covery and innovation, environmental responsibility, and man-
agement excellence.
International Agencies
A Global Overview of Renewable Energy Sources (AGORES)
Lior International SA
P.O. Box 30-1560 
Directory of Organizations
277
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Hoeilaart, Belgium 
32 2 657 5300 
Fax 32 2 657 3640 
E-mail: agores@lior-int.com
Web site: www.agores.org
A Global Overview of Renewable Energy Sources (AGORES) can
be compared to the Energy Information Administration in the
United States. It is an extensive global international information
center and knowledge gateway for renewable energy. The site is
designed to promote the European Union’s strategy to achieve 12
percent of renewable energy resources (RES) by 2010 and to reach
a reduction of 20 percent of fossil fuel energy consumption by
2020. It does this by allowing fast and efficient access to an exten-
sive range of information and connecting all the major renewable
energy players. The aim is not to duplicate any information that
already exists on the Internet, but simply to make efficient links
to this data. The site is divided into four main sections: Policy—
EC and national strategies for the increased implementation of
renewable energy; Fields—information on all areas of renewable
energy activity; Sectors—information on the various sources of
renewable energy; and an extensive who’s who directory of key
players from around the world. AGORES also contains AL-
TENER (alternative energy) Projects, a searchable renewable and
alternative energy project database and an extensive list of rec-
ommended Web sites.
European Renewable Energy Council (EREC)
Renewable Energy House 
63-67 rue d’Arlon 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
32 2 546 1933 
Fax: 32 2 546 1934
Web site: www.erec.org
E-mail: erec@erec.org
The European Renewable Energy Council (EREC) was created in
2000. EREC serves as the umbrella organization for the European
renewable energy industry, trade, and research associations.
Members are active in the sectors of bioenergy, geothermal, ocean,
small-scale hydropower, solar electricity, solar thermal, and wind
energy. The following nonprofit organizations and federations are
members: European Biomass Association, European Geothermal
278
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Energy Council, European Photovoltaic Industry Association, Eu-
ropean Small Hydropower Association, European Solar Thermal
Industry Federation, European Biomass Industry Association, Eu-
ropean Wind Energy Association, European Renewable Energy
Centres Agency, European Bioethanol Fuel Association, European
Renewable Energies Federation, and European Ocean Energy As-
sociation. EREC acts as a forum for information exchange and dis-
cussions on issues related to renewable energy. It provides
information and consulting services on renewable energy to polit-
ical leaders at the local, regional, national, and international levels
in order to promote the adoption of policies that create favorable
conditions for renewable energy development. To reach these ob-
jectives, EREC works on a series of international projects and or-
ganizes regular conferences, workshops, and events. In addition,
EREC produces a series of position papers and publications on re-
newable energy–related topics.
International Energy Agency (IEA)
9 rue de la Fédération 
75739 Paris Cedex 15, France
33 1 40 57 65 00/01 
Fax: 33 1 40 57 65 59
E-mail: info@iea.org
Web site: www.iea.org
Based in France, the International Energy Agency (IEA) acts as
energy policy adviser to 26 member countries in an effort to en-
sure reliable, affordable, and clean energy for their citizens.
Founded during the oil crisis of 1973–1974, the IEA’s initial role
was to coordinate measures in times of oil supply emergencies.
As energy markets have changed, so has the IEA. Its mandate has
broadened to incorporate the so-called Three Es of balanced en-
ergy policy making: energy security, economic development, and
environmental protection. Current work focuses on climate
change policies, market reform, energy technology collaboration,
and outreach to the rest of the world, especially major producers
and consumers of energy like China, India, Russia, and the OPEC
countries. With a staff of around 150, mainly energy experts and
statisticians from its 26 member countries, the IEA conducts a
broad program of energy research, data compilation, publications
and public dissemination of the latest energy policy analysis, and
recommendations on good practices.
Directory of Organizations
279
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
International Solar Energy Society (ISES) 
Villa Tannheim Wiesentalstr. 50 
79115 Freiburg, Germany
49 761 45906 0 
Fax: 49 761 45906 99 
E-mail: hq@ises.org 
Web site: www.ises.org/
The International Solar Energy Society (ISES) was founded in
1954 to serve the needs of the solar energy community. It is a UN-
accredited nongovernmental organization (NGO) operating in
more than 50 countries. The organization supports its members
by helping to advance the development and use of renewable en-
ergy technology. To achieve this, ISES educates about the benefits
of renewable energy all over the world. The organization empha-
sizes the importance of a global community and social responsi-
bility in its advocacy of sustainable energy choices. To do this, it
works to forge alliances among industries, individuals, and insti-
tutions in support of renewable energy technologies, through
communication, cooperation, support, and exchange. It supports
the development of renewable energy through applying practical
projects, encouraging technology transfer, conducting education
and training, and supporting global energy development. It also
supports the science of solar energy through the encouragement
of research in the field with an eye toward community growth.
The organization also provides access to information through the
use of the modern technology in order to keep its members up-
dated and connected.
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership (REEEP)
Vienna International Centre, Room D1732
Wagramerstrasse 5
A-1400 Vienna, Austria
43 1 26026 3425 
Fax: 43 1 21346 3425
E-mail: info@reeep.org
Web site: www.reeep.org
The Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership
(REEEP) is an active, global, public–private partnership that
structures policy and regulatory initiatives for clean energy and
that facilitates financing for energy projects. Backed by more than
200 national governments, businesses, development banks, and
280
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
NGOs, REEEP contributes to international, national, and regional
policy dialogues. The aim behind the organization is to accelerate
the integration of renewables into the energy mix and to advocate
energy efficiency as a path to improved energy security and re-
duced carbon emissions, ensuring socioeconomic benefits. With a
network of eight regional secretariats and more than 3,500 mem-
bers, REEEP has the ability to effect change worldwide. The part-
nership has funded more than 50 high-quality projects in 44
countries that address market barriers to clean energy in the de-
veloping world and economies in transition. These projects are
beginning to deliver new business models, policy recommenda-
tions, risk mitigation instruments, handbooks, and databases.
Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century
(REN21)
15 rue de Milan 
75441 Paris Cedex 9 France 
33 1 44 37 50 94 
Fax: 33 1 44 37 50 95 
E-mail info@ren21.net
Web site: www.ren21.net
Contact: REN21 Secretariat
Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century (REN21)
is a global policy network in which ideas are shared and action is
encouraged to promote renewable energy. It provides a forum for
leadership and exchange in international policy processes. It bol-
sters appropriate policies that increase the wise use of renewable
energies in developing and industrialized economies. Open to a
wide variety of dedicated stakeholders, REN21 connects govern-
ments, international institutions, nongovernmental organiza-
tions, industry associations, and other partnerships and
initiatives. Linking actors from the energy, development, and en-
vironment communities, REN21 leverages their successes and
strengthens their influence for the rapid expansion of renewable
energy worldwide.
World Renewable Energy Congress/Network (WREC/WREN) 
P.O. Box 362 
Brighton BN2 1YH, United Kingdom 
44 0 1273 625643 
Fax: 44 0 1273 625768 
Directory of Organizations
281
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
E-mail: asayigh@netcomuk.co.uk
Web site: www.wrenuk.co.uk/
Contact: Prof. A. Sayigh
World Renewable Energy Congress/Network (WREN) is a major
nonprofit organization registered in the United Kingdom with
charitable status and affiliated to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), the deputy di-
rector general of which is its honorary president. It has a govern-
ing council, an executive committee, and a director general. It
maintains links with many United Nations, governmental, and
nongovernmental organizations. Established in 1992 during the
second World Renewable Energy Congress in Reading, United
Kingdom, WREN is one of the most effective organizations in
supporting and enhancing the utilization and implementation of
renewable energy sources that are both environmentally safe and
economically sustainable. This is done through a worldwide net-
work of agencies, laboratories, institutions, companies, and indi-
viduals, all working together toward the international diffusion
of renewable energy technologies and applications. Representing
most countries in the world, it aims to promote the communica-
tion among and technical education of scientists, engineers, tech-
nicians, and managers in this field and to address itself to the
energy needs of both developing and developed countries. Over
$2 billion have been allocated to projects dealing with renewable
energy and the environment by the World Solar Summit and
World Solar Decade along with the World Bank. 
282
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
8
Resources
T
his chapter provides a list of resources for anyone who wants
to delve deeper into the topic of alternative and renewable en-
ergy. The first section contains print resources, including
books, articles, and journals. The next section provides the non-
print resources that are widely used for the purposes of research-
ing energy. The nonprint resources are divided into subsections
on DVDs, Internet resources, and databases and CD-ROMs.
Some sources provide general alternative and renewable energy
information, and others are specific to certain types of energy. Al-
though many sources are neutral and scientifically oriented,
some make a case for the use of alternative and renewable energy.
Thinking critically about the information provided is essential to
coming to independent conclusions about the issues. Many of the
sources included in this chapter are accessible to people without
strong math and science backgrounds, but they can still offer im-
portant information for those with technical experience.
Print Resources
Books and Articles
Asmus, Peter. Reaping the Wind: How Mechanical Wizards, Vi-
sionaries and Profiteers Helped Shape Our Energy Future. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Island Press, 2001 
Asmus follows the development of wind technology from a
nascent energy source to its current unprecedented growth in the
mainstream energy market. He provides a historical account of
the growth of wind power and of the inventors, scientists, and
283
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
entrepreneurs who helped it achieve its current rates of use. In-
formation about the technologies and policies of wind power is
also included with this interesting and informative human inter-
est story.
Berman, Daniel M. Who Owns the Sun? People, Politics, and the
Struggle for a Solar Economy. White River Junction, VT: Chel -
sea Green Publishing, 1996
Berman provides an overview of the reasons that solar energy
should be included in the current energy mix and why it is not.
He exposes the power struggle between renewable energy advo-
cates and the fossil fuel industry to explain the low rate of solar
energy development. The book provides suggestions for over-
coming the problems contributing to this lack of development,
including the public ownership of utilities and the removal of
government subsidies for fossil fuels.
Congressional Research Service. Energy from the Ocean. Hon-
olulu, HI: University of the Pacific Press, 2002
This book is a comprehensive overview of the different types of
ocean energy sources. The chapters cover wave energy, ocean
thermal energy conversion, tidal energy, energy from currents,
and energy from oceanic winds. Other nonrenewable ocean ener-
gies are also addressed. The information is accessible to those
who lack expertise in the energy fields.
Geller, Howard. Energy Revolution: Policies for a Sustainable
Future. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002
Geller argues that current government policies are the main hin-
drance to a transition away from fossil fuels to renewable energy
sources. This book examines policy options for reducing our de-
pendence on fossil fuels and helping to achieve more sustainable
energy solutions, including energy efficiency and renewable en-
ergy use. Geller provides an overview of the current situation, a
look at the barriers that need to be overcome, 10 case studies on
policies that have worked in other parts of the world, suggestions
for the improvement of international policies and institutions,
and evidence that a shift to a more sustainable energy economy is
possible. This book is useful for anyone seeking a critical assess-
ment of current energy policies.
284
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Goettemoeller, Jeffrey, and Adrian Goettemoeller. Sustainable
Ethanol: Biofuels, Biorefineries, Cellulosic Biomass, Flex-fuel
Vehicles and Sustainable Farming for Energy Independence.
Maryville, MO: Prairie Oak Publishing, 2007
Goettemoeller and Goettemoeller give an in-depth account of the
pros and cons of ethanol use in North America. Providing current
information on the state of ethanol, the authors show that ethanol
technology is becoming more efficient and less dependent on fos-
sil fuel inputs. They focus on the advancements in ethanol pro-
duction that have been made with the intention of overcoming
the criticisms of using ethanol as a fuel, including the emergence
of sustainable farming (so that ethanol crops do not compete with
our food supply) and the development of cellulosic ethanol (pro-
duced from agricultural waste). Anyone interested in learning
more about this complex energy source will appreciate this useful
and easy-to-understand book.
Gupta, Harsh K., and Sukanta Roy. Geothermal Energy: An Al-
ternative Resource for the 21st Century. Burlington, MA: Else-
vier Science, 2006
Gupta and Roy present a comprehensive overview of geothermal
energy from a multidisciplinary perspective. They address geol-
ogy, geophysics, engineering, and social perspectives of geother-
mal development, resting on the premise that the world needs to
fully utilize this energy source. The book’s information on geo -
thermal sources is up-to-date. This is an excellent resource for
anyone wanting to learn more about geothermal energy.
Hoffman, Peter. Tomorrow’s Energy: Hydrogen, Fuel Cells, and
the Prospects for a Cleaner Planet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2001
Hoffman provides a detailed overview of the concept of a hydro-
gen economy. Arguing in favor of the need to move beyond fossil
fuels to sustainable energy sources, Hoffman presents the histori-
cal, technological, and economic considerations related to hydro-
gen as an energy carrier. He provides information on the
chemical characteristics of hydrogen and the history of its devel-
opment. He looks at a variety of contexts in which hydrogen
could be used, including transportation, electric generation, and
utility applications. He discusses fuel cells and the technological
Print Resources
285
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
and political problems that are hindering their progress, stressing
the need to include them in the hydrogen economy. This book
provides an in-depth yet easy-to-understand overview of hydro-
gen for anyone interested in the subject.
Komor, Paul. Renewable Energy Policy. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse,
2004
Komor analyzes government efforts to promote renewable en-
ergy in several different countries, taking lessons from each. He
addresses the technological, economical, and political aspects
that contribute to the success or failure of renewable energy poli-
cies. This book is clear and simple enough for those without ex-
pertise in policy to understand. It gives an excellent overview of
general types of policies that can be used for promoting renew-
able energy, while providing specific information in the case
studies on Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Kryza, Frank T. The Power of Light: The Epic Story of Man’s
Quest to Harness the Sun. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill, 2003
Kryza examines both the social and the technological history of
solar power. He follows the development of solar technology by
chronologically detailing the inventions that contributed to our
ability to harness the sun’s power. He provides a detailed account
of the inventors and scientists who dedicated their lives to the ad-
vancement of solar energy technology. The overarching theme of
the book is to convey the revolutionary impact of scientific ad-
vancements.
Leggett, Jeremy. The Empty Tank: Oil, Gas, Hot Air, and the
Coming Global Financial Catastrophe. New York: Random
House, 2005
Leggett combines several pertinent topics related to alternative
and renewable energy and develops a well-supported argument
for less reliance on fossil fuels. He provides convincing evidence
that oil reserves should not be taken for granted. He reviews the
major arguments about the seriousness of global warming and
the real possibility of economic collapse due to its effects. Despite
the severity of the doomsday scenarios presented, Leggett pro-
vides hope with his list of solutions. He argues for the use of
wind and solar, and he suggests that, if production efforts like
286
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
those made during World War II were used for renewable energy,
we would have no problem overcoming the challenges we face.
This book is a good source for people who are interested in the
arguments against fossil fuel use and for those with an interest in
global warming.
Scheider, Walter. A Serious but Not Ponderous Book on Nuclear
Energy. Manchester, UK: Cavendish Press, 2001
This is an accessible explanation of renewable energy for anyone
with an understanding of high school mathematics and algebra.
Scheider provides a clear, engaging, and unbiased scientific look
at nuclear energy. His goal is to make nuclear energy principles
understandable so that people can make their own judgments on
the viability of nuclear energy. This book covers the sources of
nuclear energy, the different nuclear energy reactor designs, the
inner workings of a nuclear reaction, and the nature of radioac-
tivity and its effects. Mainly a technical explanation of nuclear
principles, the book does not provide much information on the
social and political issues surrounding nuclear power.
Solomon, Barry D., and Abhijit Banerjee. “A Global Survey of
Hydrogen Energy Research, Development and Policy.” Energy
Policy 34, 7 (May 2006): 781–792.
Solomon and Banerjee raise “serious questions about the sustain-
ability of a hydrogen economy” through a survey of the current
measures being taken to implement hydrogen energy use in de-
veloping and developed nations around the world. Not only do
they look at the status of research and development projects and
public policies regarding hydrogen, they address the energy mix
needed in these countries to initiate a hydrogen economy. They
find in their survey that only two major automakers and two na-
tions have time tables for the production of hydrogen fuel cells or
vehicles. Additionally, their survey determines that only two
countries, Brazil and Iceland, would be able to produce the energy
needed for a hydrogen economy with renewable energy sources.
Wizelius, Tom. Developing Wind Power Projects: Theory and
Practice. London: Earthscan Publications, 2007
This book is geared toward students and professionals rather
than engineers or policy analysts. The purpose is to provide an
Print Resources
287
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
overview of how wind power projects interact with society eco-
nomically, socially, and politically. The book also provides a com-
prehensive overview of wind power basics to provide the
foundational information necessary for understanding how it
works. Mainly, the book views wind power in the realistic con-
text of project development.
Journals and Magazines
Environmental Science and Technology
This journal provides scientific and technical information on a
wide range of environmental disciplines. It often publishes stud-
ies on specific renewable energy technologies, ranging from their
technical viability to their social and economic consequences. The
journal is published by the American Chemical Society.
Nuclear Technology
This journal is published by the American Nuclear Society. Nu-
clear Technology is an international publication that reports new
information in all areas of the practical application of nuclear sci-
ence. Topics include all aspects of reactor technology: operations,
safety materials, instrumentation, fuel, and waste management.
Also covered are medical uses, radiation detection, production of
radiation, health physics, and computer applications.
Renewable Energy
This international journal, published by the World Renewable
Energy Network, seeks to promote and share knowledge of the
various topics and technologies of renewable energy. The target
audience includes researchers, economists, manufacturers, and
world agencies. The goal is to help the target audience and soci-
eties stay informed about the latest developments in the various
renewable energy fields as well as to unite in finding alternative
energy solutions to current issues such as the greenhouse effect
and the depletion of the ozone layer. The scope of the journal en-
compasses photovoltaic technology conversion, solar thermal
applications, biomass conversion, wind energy technology, ma-
terials science technology, solar and low energy architecture, en-
ergy conservation in buildings, climatology and meteorology
(geothermal, wave and tide, ocean thermal energies, mini hydro
288
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
power and hydrogen production technology), socioeconomic is-
sues, and energy management.
Renewable Energy World
This online magazine is published bimonthly for renewable energy
professionals. The international publication contains the latest
news and features on all aspects of renewable energy, including in-
depth policy and market updates, project profiles, technology re-
ports, company listings, information on renewable energy
conventions and exhibitions, and more. Much of the information is
useful for nonprofessionals as well. Most articles cover the main-
stream renewable energies like wind, solar, biomass, and biofuels.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
This journal publishes specially commissioned review articles de-
signed to bring together, under one cover, current advances in the
ever broadening field of renewable and sustainable energy. The
coverage of the journal includes all of the renewable energy re-
sources discussed in Chapter 1; information on the applications of
renewable energy in the building, industry, electricity, and trans-
portation sectors; policy aspects of renewable energy; environ-
mental impact and sustainability assessments; and regionally
focused coverage. The journal is targeted at scientists, researchers,
and consultants involved in all aspects of renewable energy.
Nonprint Resources
DVDs 
Energy Crossroads: A Burning Need to Change Course
Type: DVD
Length: 54 Minutes
Date: 2007
Cost: $25.95
Source: Tiroir A Films
Energy Crossroads highlights the possibility of an energy shortage
due to increases in global energy demand and resource depletion.
This film provides viewpoints from experts in an easy-to-
 understand and convincing manner. The conclusion is that, to
Nonprint Resources
289
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
avert an energy crisis, renewable energy sources must be devel-
oped as soon as possible.
Inconvenient Truth, An
Type: DVD
Length: 94 minutes
Date: 2006
Cost: $19.99
Source: Paramount Classics
An Inconvenient Truth is an award-winning documentary about
Al Gore’s efforts to educate the public about global warming
and options for dealing with it. In the movie, Gore gives a slide
show on the scientific evidence supporting the claim that
global warming is being caused by carbon dioxide emissions
from human activities and the effects of climate change. The
politics and economics of global warming are discussed, as
well as the refutations of critics. Renewable energy is discussed
as a solution for emitting less carbon dioxide into the atmo-
sphere. This DVD makes global warming arguments easy to
understand.
NOVA: Solar Energy—Saved by the Sun
Type: DVD
Length: 56 minutes
Date: 2007
Cost: $17.99
Source: WBGH Boston
NOVA presents the latest thinking by solar advocates and skep-
tics as it investigates cutting-edge research developments. The
film introduces viewers to the scientists and businesspeople who
are working to make solar power practical—for lighting, heating,
and running power plants. This movie is based on the premise
that there is an impending energy crisis and that it is time to start
seriously pursuing solar energy as an option for meeting our
power needs. The program provides an accessible look at solar
technology and its prospects for the future.
Power Shift: Energy + Sustainability
Type: DVD
Length: 26 minutes
Date: 2004
290
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Cost: $24.95
Source: Green Planet Films
Hosted and narrated by Cameron Diaz, this four-part program
takes place around the world, exploring all the ways that energy
is consumed. It examines energy use in the lives of astronauts in
the International Space Station, villagers in the Amazon River
Basin, and an actress in Hollywood. In the first part, “Connec-
tions,” linkages between our energy consumption and the global
community are explored. The second part, “Cradle to Cradle,”
chronicles William McDonough’s innovative green building de-
signs. The third part, “Energy Path,” follows energy from its end
use to its source. The final part, “Be the Difference,” encourages
personal responsibility and action for reducing energy consump-
tion and seeking out sustainable energy options. The movie is
geared toward students, suggesting how they can create a sus-
tainable future while examining critical energy issues.
Internet Resources
Alternative Energy News
www.alternative-energy-news.info/
The Alternative Energy News Web site provides links to news
and information about renewable energy technologies. News is
categorized by energy type, and there is also a link to energy
news in general. News from multimedia sources gives visitors a
choice of reading articles or watching news clips. Subjects are
subdivided even further by categories ranging from batteries to
ethanol to politics, making the site a very comprehensive source
of information. A directory of over 1,500 sites on renewable en-
ergy is also available. Discussion forums allow visitors to share
ideas and opinions about renewable energy issues. This page is
great for students and other nontechnical readers interested in
broadening their knowledge of renewable energy issues.
Canadian Renewable Energy Network (CanREN)
www.canren.gc.ca/default_en.asp
The Canadian Renewable Energy Network (CanREN) offers gen-
eral information on renewable energy sources and highlights the
technologies and applications being developed to harness these
sources. It seeks to increase the understanding of renewable energy
Nonprint Resources
291
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
so that development and commercialization of renewable energies
will be accelerated. The Web site allows visitors to browse informa-
tion by energy source and other topics. There are links to other re-
newable energy Web sites, educational and instructional materials,
a glossary, maps, and other data. Although mostly based on Cana-
dian efforts, the Web site provides a wealth of general information
that visitors from any country will find useful.
Energy Information Administration (EIA)
www.eia.doe.gov/
The EIA Web page provides energy statistics on traditional and
renewable energy use in the United States and around the world.
Statistics on the environment are also available. The renewables
covered include biomass, solar, wind, geothermal, hydro, and
ethanol. Data is divided into categories including U.S. data, inter-
national data, reports, analyses, and forecasts. Summaries on his-
torical data are available. The site includes numerous color
graphs and charts, making the information interesting and easy
to understand. Reference materials and a glossary are provided
for clarification.
European Commission, Energy
ec.europa.eu/energy/index_en.html
The Energy Web page is maintained by the European Commis-
sion for the European Union (EU) and focuses on energy and
transportation. The site contains information on the energy poli-
cies of the EU and its member states, transportation issues and
statistics, and reports related to both. The Annual Energy and
Transport Review can be accessed from this page. Renewable en-
ergy is portrayed on this site as a solution to energy and trans-
portation issues in the EU.
Geothermal Resources Council (GRC)
www.geothermal.org
The Geothermal Resources Council Web page provides access to
several resources for information on geothermal energy, includ-
ing its extensive library. The GRC’s library is the largest geother-
mal technical library in the world, offering title and author
citations for over 30,000 papers, articles, books, and other geo -
thermal publications. The library is updated regularly and can be
292
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
navigated using keyword searches. There is also access to infor-
mation about geothermal power production in the United States.
This is an excellent site for in-depth information on geothermal
technology.
A Global Overview of Renewable Energy Sources (AGORES)
www.agores.org/
The AGORES site is an extensive global international information
center and knowledge base for renewable energies. Although it
covers information on the entire world, its main focus is on Euro-
pean development and experience in the renewable energy field.
It is updated daily and is divided into four main sections: policy,
fields, sectors, and who’s who. The policy section covers devel-
opments in national and international renewable energy policy.
The fields section provides information on all areas of renewable
energy activity. The sectors section provides information on the
various sources of renewable energy. Who’s who covers key play-
ers and stakeholders from around the world, such as government
agencies and associations. AGORES also contains several data-
bases on projects, Web site links, publications, and news about re-
newable energy.
Green Energy News 
www.nrglink.com/
Green Energy News is a Web site that offers news and commen-
tary about renewable energy as it relates to business, technology,
issues, and policy. It is geared toward a wide audience, including
consumers, industry affiliates, educators, and policy makers.
Topics include green energy building design, renewable fuels, en-
vironmental issues, social issues, political issues, electricity gen-
eration, and transportation. The Web site also provides a link to
funding opportunities for renewable energy projects.
International Energy Agency (IEA)
www.iea.org/
The IEA Web page is devoted to international energy informa-
tion. The information links are conveniently divided by topic,
country, and publications and papers. Statistical information on
most countries in the world is available, much of it free of charge
and available to the public. The World Energy Outlook, the annual
Nonprint Resources
293
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
report on global energy issues published by the IEA, is available
on this Web page. Maps and graphs are used to make the infor-
mation more accessible. Information on the environment is also
available. The Web site offers several links to additional informa-
tion on numerous topics and to official government Web pages.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
www.nrel.gov
The NREL Web page primarily provides information on research
projects that the laboratory is conducting, with great emphasis on
the technological side of renewable energy. The site also contains
general information about wind, solar, biomass, and geothermal
energies for consumers, homeowners, businesses, and students,
with a special emphasis on advanced renewable energy fuels.
Pertinent news information about the laboratory, general news
about renewable energy, and renewable energy resource maps
are also available. Links to the National Wind Technology Center
and the Solar America Initiative are found at this page.
Renewable Energy Atlas of the West
www.energyatlas.org
The Renewable Energy Atlas of the West is an 80-page, full-color
atlas of renewable energy sources in the Western United States.
The atlas is a synthesis of several energy resource maps for solar,
wind, geothermal, and biomass. It not only provides quantitative
data on estimates of untapped renewable energy resources, but it
highlights the issues surrounding their development. It serves a
variety of purposes for several stakeholders, including the facili-
tation of planning and understanding of areas for where poten-
tial is unmet. It is freely accessible to the public and provides key
data on renewable energy potential.
University of California Energy Institute (UCEI)
www.ucei.berkeley.edu/
The UCEI Web page provides access to data that the institute has
compiled and publications of its researchers. It is a good source
for information on energy markets. Although not much general
information is provided, the site has a comprehensive list of links
to other energy research organizations ranging from universities
to governmental departments to the private sector. It is a good
294
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
starting place for information on research efforts that may not
have been published yet.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Biofuels Information
www.nal.usda.gov/ttic/biofuels.htm
The USDA Web page on biofuels information provides general
information on biofuels as well as news on biofuel events, legisla-
tion, and policy reports. Funding opportunities for research and
commercial endeavors are also listed on the Web site. Access to
research on results for biofuel studies is available, and links to
other helpful Web sites on biofuels are provided.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Hydrogen Program 
www.hydrogen.energy.gov/
The DOE Hydrogen Program Web page is an excellent resource
for information on hydrogen. The Program’s efforts are dis-
cussed, but the page is mostly devoted to general information on
hydrogen production, delivery, storage, and fuel cells. There is a
section on international collaborative efforts to research hydro-
gen. Links to other government programs that are also research-
ing hydrogen are provided in the general information sections.
This is a good starting place for research on government efforts to
develop hydrogen.
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Re-
newable Energy (EERE) 
www.eere.energy.gov/
The Web page for the DOE’s Office of Energy Efficiency and Re-
newable Energy contains general information about renewable
energies in addition to information about specific programs to de-
velop renewable energy in the United States. Information is di-
vided by energy source and provides links to inform stakeholders,
policy makers, consumers, students, and researchers. Information
is available on renewable energies that are not yet widely used,
like wave and tidal energy, in addition to established renewable
energy technologies. There are also links to data on specific energy
sources and to published resources. Glossaries and databases are
provided to improve understanding of the complexities of renew-
able energy resources. The EERE’s green power network can be
accessed from this page. The green power network provides infor-
Nonprint Resources
295
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
mation on the availability of renewable energy in different states
for consumers. The alternative fuels and advanced vehicles data
center program, which provides information to help reduce oil de-
pendency through the use of alternative fuels and advanced vehi-
cle technologies, can also be accessed on this page.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Landfill Methane Out-
reach Program (LMOP) 
www.epa.gov/lmop/
The LMOP home page is a good source of information for landfill
methane capture. The site contains information on the program and
general information on landfill methane energy sources. Colorful
diagrams illustrate how methane is captured. There are also pho-
tographs of the different types of wells used to harness methane.
Maps of methane capture projects are provided. Statistics on energy
production and benefits of methane capture are addressed.
Virtual Nuclear Tourist
www.nucleartourist.com/
This Web site was developed by Joseph Gonyeau, an indepen-
dent energy consultant, who has worked at several nuclear en-
ergy plants. Although the author is biased in favor of nuclear
energy, the site provides a broad range of information. Hot topics
are addressed, photographs from inside several nuclear plants
are available, maps detailing the location of nuclear power plants
in the United States and around the world can be accessed, com-
parisons of nuclear power with other energy sources are made,
the pros and cons of nuclear power are discussed, and an
overview with sections on how nuclear energy works and the de-
signs of different plants is available. This site also contains infor-
mation about important historical nuclear events and the Nobel
laureates who contributed to the development of nuclear power.
This site is a great starting place for those who want to broaden
their understanding of nuclear energy.
Databases and CD-Roms
21st Century Complete Guide to Solar Energy and 
Photovoltaics (2004)
www.connectedglobe.com/cgi-local/amazon/cgapf.cgi?Oper -
ation=ItemLookup&ItemId=1422014681&templates=millennium
296
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
This CD-Rom from World Spaceflight News provides over 20,000
pages of official federal documents on the subject of solar energy
and photovoltaics. It draws from government sources such as
the United States Department of Energy Photovoltaics Program;
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Center for Pho-
tovoltaics; Photovoltaics for Buildings; Photovoltaics Research
and Development; Photovoltaics Silicon Materials Research;
Solar Decathlon; Amorphous Silicon; and NREL Solid State The-
ory Group and Solid State Spectroscopy. This CD-Rom provides
detailed information on the programs to promote solar energy as
well as technical information to give readers a more in-depth un-
derstanding of the science behind solar power.
Country Nuclear Power Profiles (CNPP)
www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/cnpp2004
/CNPP_Webpage/pages/index.htm
The CNPP Web site offers a database and a technical publication
containing information highlighting the energy and economic
conditions, the energy and the electricity sector, and the primary
organizations involved in nuclear power in the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) member states. The CNPP pro-
vides background information on the status and development of
nuclear power programs in countries having nuclear plants in
operation and/or plants under construction. It reviews the orga-
nizational and industrial aspects of nuclear power programs in
participating countries, and it provides information about the rel-
evant legislative, regulatory, and international environments in
each country. The CNPP places the information of the current is-
sues in the new environment in which the electricity and nuclear
sectors operate, taking into account energy policy, privatization
and deregulation, the role of government, nuclear energy and cli-
mate change, and safety and waste management, all of which
often differ from country to country.
Database of State Incentives for Renewables and Efficiency
(DSIRE) Database
www.dsireusa.org
This database is run by North Carolina State University for the
North Carolina Solar Center and the Interstate Renewable En-
ergy Council (IREC). It is funded by the U.S. Department of En-
ergy and updated daily. The database is a comprehensive source
Nonprint Resources
297
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
of information on state, local, utility, and federal incentives that
promote renewable energy and energy efficiency. The database
is very user-friendly and has a glossary to explain various policy
terms. There is also a library of technical papers, reports, and
presentations written by DSIRE staff members since 1997.
EnergyFiles
www.osti.gov/energyfiles/
EnergyFiles contains over 500 databases and Web sites with infor-
mation and resources related to the science and technology of in-
terest to the Department of Energy, with particular emphasis on
the physical sciences. The site is sponsored, developed, and main-
tained by the Department of Energy’s Office of Scientific and Tech-
nical Information (OSTI). EnergyFiles combines information, tools,
and technologies to facilitate access to and use of scientific re-
sources. The R&D Highlights section provides a collection of non-
technical summary information about selected research conducted
or sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy and its national
laboratory infrastructure, making the Web site’s contents accessible
to those without a significant physical science background.
Energy Technology Data Exchange
www.etde.org/
The Energy Technology Data Exchange is a database that was es-
tablished under the International Energy Agency to provide gov-
ernments, industry, and the research community in the member
countries with access to the widest range of information on en-
ergy research, science, and technology and to increase dissemina-
tion of this information to developing countries. The database is
the largest collection of energy-related research and technology
literature in the world. It contains bibliographic references to and
abstracts of journal articles, reports, conference papers, books,
Web sites, and other miscellaneous document types. The data-
base is updated regularly and information comes from various
reputable sources.
Global Energy Marketplace (GEM)
www.acca21.org.cn/cres.html
The GEM database consists of more than 2,500 annotated Web
links on energy efficiency and renewable energy. It is sponsored
298
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to disseminate in-
formation on sustainable energy solutions to promote more re-
sponsible energy use. The database includes useful case studies,
reports, publications, economic analyses, product directories, dis-
cussion groups, country profiles, mitigation assessments, and
other beneficial resources.
Johannesburg Renewable Energy Coalition (JREC) Policies and
Measures Database
ec.europa.eu/environment/jrec/index_en.htm
The JREC Policies and Measures Database provides information
on renewable energy policies in various countries and on the re-
newable energy targets that they are seeking. The database is
very user-friendly. Visitors can click on a country on a world map
to bring up that country’s renewable energy policies and mea-
sures. Full explanations of the policies are provided, along with
links to outside resources, including, if applicable, the energy
Web page of the government for that country.
Regional Energy Database
www.serd.ait.ac.th/red/RedHome.htm
The Regional Energy Database contains several online data-
bases, mostly based on renewable energy efforts in Asia and the
Pacific region. The Web site contains a comparison of renewable
energy and energy efficiency policies and incentives, success
factors, and barriers to success in the study countries (those that
respond to the survey). These databases’ subjects include gov-
ernment support, incentives, and policies; success stories; na-
tional databases of the pilot countries; and a directory of
renewable energy and energy efficiency databases. The data-
base on government support, incentives, and policies provides
information on national energy policies that address the utiliza-
tion of renewable energy. The database on success stories on re-
newable energy and energy efficiency provides examples of
successful renewable energy and energy efficiency policies and
developments in Asia and the Pacific region. The national data-
bases provide country profiles highlighting the current status of
renewable energy and energy efficiency in the country; policies
to promote research, development, and technology sharing; and
the key players in the promotion and utilization of these pro-
grams. The Regional Energy Database also contains an online
Nonprint Resources
299
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
directory of other existing databases on renewable energy and
energy efficiency worldwide that focus on Asia and the Pacific
region. The Regional Energy Database is sponsored by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organiza-
tion (UNESCO).
World Energy Outlook Database
www.iea.org/textbase/pm/?mode=weo
The International Energy Agency’s World Energy Outlook data-
base is a comprehensive source of various energy-related poli-
cies. It is based on information from a number of sources,
including IEA Climate Change Mitigation Database, IEA Energy
Efficiency Database, IEA Global Renewable Energy Policies and
Measures Database, the European Conference of Ministers of
Transport (ECMT) from “Transport CO2 Policy Review Report,”
as well as contacts from industry and government. There is much
information on the efforts of countries throughout the world to
develop alternative and renewable energy and the likely out-
comes of these efforts. 
300
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Glossary
advanced renewable energy tariffs (ARTs)
See electricity feed-in laws.
alternative energy
A category of energy that includes sources other
than fossil fuels that are not considered renewable. Nuclear power and
energy stored in hydrogen are the main alternative energy sources exam-
ined in this book.
anthropogenic
Term used to describe effects caused by human activities.
biomass
An energy source that consists of virtually any living plant
material, as well as organic wastes from other sources, such as humans
and plants.
central solar power (CSP)
Also known as a concentrating system. Sun-
light is focused or concentrated to generate steam, which is then used to
run turbogenerators. There are three types of CSP systems. (1) Parabolic
trough systems use concentrators that focus sunlight into a tube that runs
the length of the trough. (2) Towers collect sunlight using ﬁelds of sun-
tracking mirrors known as heliostats and concentrate the heat onto a cen-
trally located tower-mounted receiver where it heats a liquid, which is
constantly circulated. (3) Parabolic dishes, or dish-engine systems, con-
centrate sunlight onto a focal point in the middle of a dish, where the heat
is then transferred to an engine and converted to mechanical energy. All
of these technologies can be used to heat and cool air or water and to gen-
erate electricity.
cold fusion
A theoretical type of fusion requiring a nuclear reaction in
which the elements do not need to be heated to such extreme tempera-
tures. Also known as low-energy nuclear reactions (LENR). See also nu-
clear fusion.
dish engine systems
See parabolic dishes.
economies of scale
The level of production at which the more goods
that are produced, the less it costs to produce them.
301
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
electricity feed-in laws
Laws that reﬂect a type of nonmarket-based
policy and that require utilities to pay higher prices for electricity pro-
duced by renewable and alternative energy companies in order to stimu-
late investment in renewable energy technologies.
externality
In economics, a cost or beneﬁt that is not calculated into the
costs or proﬁts of production. Often such costs and beneﬁts are paid for
or enjoyed by the public and the government rather than by the industry.
Negative externalities are associated with costs, and positive externali-
ties are associated with beneﬁts.
fast breeder reactor (FBR)
A type of nuclear reactor that uses pluto-
nium as well as uranium to fuel the reactions, they are capable of getting
60 times more energy from uranium than other reactors.
fossil fuels
Fuels that are hydrocarbon based, that are derived from
the fossilized remains of decayed plants and animals, and that have been
captured in geological deposits. They are considered nonrenewable en-
ergy sources because they take millions of years to form and cannot be
easily replenished after use. Coal, oil, and natural gas are all fossil fuels.
geothermal energy
Heat that is stored in the Earth’s crust, usually be-
neath the ground, and that is created by the subsurface decay of radioac-
tive minerals. Hot springs and geysers are examples of geothermal energy
that has traveled aboveground through the medium of water or steam.
green certiﬁcates
Certiﬁcates that are granted for environmental attri -
butes produced by green energy generators and that can then be traded
on the secondary market. Also known as tradable renewable certiﬁcates
(TRCs), green tags, and renewable obligation certiﬁcates (ROCs).
green energy market development
A policy that allows consumers to
choose between green and brown energy. Green energy includes all re-
newable and alternative energy sources, and brown energy refers to en-
ergy derived from fossil fuels. Under this policy, companies are required
to give consumers a choice between these two types of energy, and then
they are required to produce as much electricity with green energy as is
demanded by consumers.
greenhouse gases (ghgs)
Gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, that
have the effect of trapping heat from the sun in the atmosphere, as in a
greenhouse, and over time creating a rise in temperature that will have
dramatic effects on ecosystems.
green tags
See green certiﬁcates. 
horizontal axis wind turbine (HAWT)
The most common type of
wind turbine, similar in shape to propellers.
Hubbert’s curve
An accurate prediction for the United States’ oil top-
ping point made by M. King Hubbert, a geophysicist who worked for
302
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Shell Oil Company. In 1956, by combining the principles of geology,
physics, and mathematics, he was able to accurately predict that the
United States would reach its peak of oil production in the 1970s. His
prediction was presented on a graph and was known as “Hubbert’s
curve” due to its shape. 
hydrocarbon-based fuels
See fossil fuels.
large-scale hydro projects
Large hydropower systems, generally large
dams, whose water-driven turbines produce electricity from ﬂowing
water.
light water graphite reactor (RBMK)
A type of nuclear reactor found
only in Russia.
low-energy nuclear reactions (LENR)
See cold fusion.
micropower
See small-scale hydro projects.
net energy producer
An energy source that yields more energy than it
uses.
net metering
An energy policy that allows electricity customers to gen-
erate electricity from renewable energy and use it to offset electricity
they would have bought at retail prices from utility companies. Essen-
tially, the energy meter rolls back when the customers generate more
electricity than they are using.
NIMBY (not in my backyard)
An opposition to a project that beneﬁts
many people by those who will suffer the negative effects of having it
near their residence. It can also be referred to as NIMBYism. Most people
who have an opposition to a project that is in close proximity to them
would not oppose it if it was in someone else’s backyard. 
nuclear ﬁssion
A thermonuclear process in which energy is harnessed
from the splitting of atoms by placing nuclear fuels into a nuclear reactor
core, where a self-sustaining process of atom splitting occurs and gener-
ates heat. The heat is then used to create steam, which then powers a tur-
bine to generate electricity.
nuclear fusion
Energy derived from the fusing of light elements to cre-
ate heavy elements. Nuclear fusion is the dominant reaction in ther-
monuclear weapons, but it has not been used to generate energy.
ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC)
A type of ocean energy in
which power is extracted from temperature differences between the sur-
face of the ocean and deep waters through the use of a heat engine.
parabolic dishes
A type of central solar power system in which sun-
light is concentrated onto a focal point in the middle of a dish, where the
heat is then transferred to an engine and converted to mechanical en-
ergy. Also known as dish engine systems or solar dish systems.
Glossary
303
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
parabolic trough
A type of central solar power system that uses con-
centrators to focus sunlight into a tube that runs the length of the trough.
passive solar
A form of solar heating that is utilized when buildings
are designed in a way that captures heat and transmits daylight. Basi-
cally, this method involves the strategic placement of windows in build-
ing design to capture the maximum solar energy potential.
peak oil
The point at which the world has consumed exactly one-half
of all the oil available and supplies begin diminishing. Also known as
topping point.
per-capita energy consumption
The average amount of energy con-
sumed by each person in a country.
photovoltaics (PV)
Solid-state semiconductor devices that convert
sunlight directly into electricity, which can then be used for several types
of applications. They require no moving parts or ﬂuid, and they are ei-
ther made of one of three types of silicon or come in the form of thin ﬁlm
made from other semiconductor materials. PV systems can be stand-
alone, roof-mounted, or roof shingles.
power towers
A type of central solar power system in which towers
collect sunlight using ﬁelds of sun-tracking mirrors known as heliostats
and concentrate the heat onto a centrally located receiver mounted on a
tower.
precautionary principle
A principle stating that, if the impacts of an
action or inaction are extreme and irreversible, even if there is inconclu-
sive scientiﬁc evidence about the risk for disaster, measures must be
taken to prevent the impacts from occurring.
pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR)
Also known as the CANDU-A
nuclear reactor; it was developed by Canada and only found there.
pressurized water reactor (PWR)
The most commonly used nuclear re-
actor on the planet.
renewable energy
Sources of energy considered to be inexhaustible.
Such sources include the sun, wind, falling water, waves, tides, biomass,
or heat generated beneath the surface of the Earth. Most renewable en-
ergy sources, except geothermal, are a type of solar energy.
renewable obligation certiﬁcates (ROCs)
See green certiﬁcates. 
renewable portfolio standard (RPS)
A government requirement that sets
mandatory goals for speciﬁc actors, such as utility companies, for renew-
able energy use and then lets the market determine the least expensive way
to get there. The policy penalizes those who do not reach the goal.
small-scale hydro projects
Small hydropower systems that capture en-
ergy through the use of small dams and river turbines. They often use
304
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
the natural ﬂow of the water to spin turbines or waterwheels so that they
do not interfere with the ﬂow of the river and do not usually include
structures, like dams, that store water in reservoirs. Also known as mi-
cropower. 
solar dish systems
See parabolic dishes.
tapcon
Also known as a tapered channel system. It is a wave energy
technology that feeds into a reservoir located on a cliff above sea level. The
narrowed channel causes the waves ﬂowing inside of it to increase in
height and spill over into the reservoir, where the water is used to run tur-
bines in a manner similar to that of large-scale hydropower applications. 
theory of technology development
Theory that technology develop-
ment occurs in stages. (1) In the conceptualization stage, the idea for the
technology is conceived. (2) in the proof of concept stage, the idea is
taken beyond the conceptualization stage, and a concrete model is cre-
ated, often on a small scale, and then tested on a large scale until it is
fully operational. (3) In the next stage, the design is tweaked until it is
ready for market penetration. (4) The ﬁnal stage is the market penetra-
tion stage, in which the technology is ready to meet the user’s needs.
Market penetration involves the commercial development of a technol-
ogy that can be used on a mass scale so that it becomes available for
widespread usage.
tipping point
A concept borrowed from epidemiology in which small
changes have no effect on a system until a threshold is reached. Once the
threshold is reached, the effects are irreversible.
topping point
See peak oil.
tradable renewable certiﬁcates (TRCs)
See green certiﬁcates. 
vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT)
One of the two main types of wind
turbines. It looks like an eggbeater.
wind power
Wind is the result of differential heating of the Earth’s
surface. Differential heat is the difference between how much heat is ab-
sorbed by land and water surfaces. Wind energy is captured via a tur-
bine, which turns as the wind blows. The turbine generates mechanical
or electrical energy, which can then be used for a variety of applications.
Glossary
305
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Index
307
A Global Overview of Renewable
Energy Sources (AGORES),
277–278
acid rain, deﬁned, 40–41
Adams, William Grylls, 155–156
Advanced Electricity Storage
Technologies Program
(Australia), 103
advanced renewable tariffs
(ARTs), 86, 91
use of, in Asia, 104, 105
use of, in France, 88
Africa
carbon dioxide emissions,
249–251 (table) coal
consumption, 212–214
(table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
182 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by country, 236–238 (table)
hydropower consumption,
220–222 (table)
natural gas consumption,
204–206 (table)
nuclear power, consumption,
228–230 (table)
oil consumption, 196–198 (table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 106–107
Agence France Press, 119
air pollution, and fossil fuels, 40
alternative energy, 26–31
advantages of, 61–63
costs of, 49–50
decentralized characteristics of,
62–63
deﬁned, 2
economic and political aspects
of, 60–61
environmental effects, 52–53
global perspectives, 75–77
policy solutions, 64–65
related technicalities, 51–52
social and political barriers to
development, 53–54
technical issues, 63–64
viability of, 47–54
worldwide perspective, 83–119
American Council of Renewable
Energy, 255
American Nuclear Society, 26, 32
American Wind Energy
Association (AWEA), 264
Ames, Paul, 92, 119
amplifying feedbacks, deﬁned,
44–45
Archer, Cristina L., 16, 32
Argentina, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
117–118
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Aronson, Richard B., 43, 78
Arrhenius, Svante, 156–157
Arshadi, Mehrdad, 16, 32
Asaoka, Y., 34
Asia Paciﬁc Partnership on Clean
Development and Climate
(A6), 76–77, 78, 119
Asia
carbon dioxide emissions,
251–252 (table) coal
consumption, 214–215
(table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
182–183 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by country, 238–239 (table)
hydropower consumption,
222–223 (table)
natural gas consumption,
206–207 (table)
nuclear power, consumption,
230–231 (table)
oil consumption, 198–199
(table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 92–106
Australian Business Council for
Sustainable Energy (BCSE),
106, 119
Australia, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
102–104
Avery, William H., 26, 32
Banerjee, Abhijit, 111, 124
barrages. See dams
Barron, J., 34
Becquerel, Alexandre-Edmond,
157–158
Beijing International Renewable
Energy Conference, 94
Berman, Elliott, 158
Bhabha, Homi Jehangir, 158–159
biodiesel, use of , 18
biodiversity, loss of, due to energy
use, 43
biogas
deﬁned, 16
use of, 17
biomass
advantages of, 19
consumption by United States,
240 (table)
by state, 241–244 (table)
as current source of energy, 9
as energy source, 2
environmental effects, 52, 53
location of sources, 65–66
forms of, 16–17
history and current uses, 16–17
location of sources, 65–66
related technicalities, 51–52
social and political barriers to
development, 53–54
potential for meeting world
energy needs, 19–20
use of
in India, 96
in Russia, 104
in Sweden, 90
utilization of, 18–19
Biomass Energy Research
Association (BERA),
264–265
Bjornsson, Jakob, 21, 32
The Bottomless Well: The Twilight of
Fuel, the Virtue of Waste and
Why We Will Never Run Out
of Energy (Huber and Mills),
58
Brazil, renewable and alternative
energy policies, 115–117
Bridgers, Frank, 158 British
Electricity Trading and
Transmission Arrangements
(BETTA), 89 British
Petroleum, 64, 86, 88, 89, 120
British thermal unit (Btu)
deﬁned, 3
conversion values, 186 (table)
See also conversions of energy,
conversion table, energy
measurements
308
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
British Wind Energy Association
(BWEA), 265
Brundtland Commission, 39–40
Brundtland, Gro Harlem, 39, 159
Btu. See British thermal unit
Buddemeier, Robert W., 43, 78
California Energy Association, 275
Cambodia, energy policy of, 105
Campbell, C. J., 79
Canada, renewable and alternative
energy policies, 110–112
carbon dioxide
emissions, global, 179, 245–252
(table)
use of, as coolant, 27
Carter, Jimmy, 159–160
and U.S. energy policy, 7, 99
categories of energy sources, 2
cellulosic ethanol, 19
Center for American Progress, 46,
63, 79
Central America
carbon dioxide emissions,
245–246 (table) coal
consumption, 208–209
(table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
180–181 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by country, 232–233 (table)
hydropower consumption,
216–217 (table)
natural gas consumption,
200–201 (table)
nuclear power, consumption,
224–225 (table)
oil consumption, 192–193
(table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 113–114
centralized bidding system, 68
central solar power (CSP) system,
13, 14
environmental effects, 52
and Solar America Initiative, 71
Chae, E., 34
Chambers, A., 53, 79
Champion, Marc, 46, 79
Chang, J., 120
Chernobyl, 57
Chillingar, G. V., 59, 80
China, renewable and alternative
energy policies, 93–96
Chinese Renewable Energies
Industry Association, 94
Clancy, Joy, 63, 79
Claude, Georges, 160
Clean Development Mechanism in
China, 120
closed-cycle OTEC system, 25
coal
consumption by country, 190
(table), 208–215 (table)
as current source of energy, 8
as energy source, 2
historical use of, 4
total world consumption,
188–189 (table)
consumption by United States,
240 (table
by state, 241–244 (table)
use of
in Australia, 102, 108
in Brazil, 116
in Canada, 110
in China, 94
in Mexico, 112
cold fusion, 29
Commission of the European
Communities, 86, 91, 120
Commission on Oil
Independence (Sweden),
90
Compton, Arthur, 160–161
conceptualization stage of
technological development,
11
conservation, 57–58
consumption
of coal, by country, 208–216
(table)
by country, 192–199 (table)
Index
309
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
consumption (continued)
by energy type and country,
190–191 (table)
by fuel type, 188 (table)
in European Union, 84
of geothermal, solar, wind,
wood and waste energy
sources, by country, 232–239
(table)
of hydropower, by country,
216–223 (table)
of natural gas, by county,
200–207 (table)
by non-OECD economies, by
region, 240 (table)
of nuclear power, by country,
224–231 (table)
total world energy, 179, 187
(table)
by United States, by source, 240
(table)
by U.S. state, 179
by source, 241–244 (table)
contribution programs, and
renewable energy
development, 72
convection-dominated
geothermal, deﬁned, 20
conversions of energy, 2–3
See also conversion table,
energy measurements
conversion table, energy
measurements, 179, 186
(table)
See also conversions of energy
Cook, Lorne, 88, 120 cost, as
barrier to renewable energy
development, 74–75
Criswell, D. R., 13, 33.
d’Arsonval, Jacques-Arsène, 157
dams
environmental effects, 53
as form of ocean energy, 
24–25
related technicalities, 52
social and political barriers to
development, 53–54
use of, 22
Danish Energy Authority, 120
Danish Wind Industry
Association, 265–266
Darrieus, Georges Jean Marie, 161
Database of State Incentives for
Renewables and Efﬁciency
(DSIRE), 79
Deffeyes, Kenneth S., 39, 79
Denmark, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
90–91
Denniss, Richard, 63, 81, 104, 124
Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI), 120
deregulation of energy market,
72–74
deuterium, as fuel in fusion, 29
developing nations, energy
policies of, 105
Dewulf, Jo, 34
Diesel, Rudolph, 161–162
Directive on the Promotion of
Electricity from Renewable
Energy Sources in the
Internal Electricity Market
(Renewables Directive),
85–86
Directive on the Promotion of the
Use of Biofuels for
Transport, 86
Disendorf, Dr. Mark, 63, 81, 104,
124
Drake, Elizabeth M., 34
Driscoll, Michael J., 34
Dufﬁeld, James A., 19, 34
Dunn, S., 31, 33.
Eaton, A., 34
Ecological Reform Tax (Germany),
87
economic and political problems
in renewable energy
development, 5, 60–61
310
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Ecoworld, 121
Edison, Thomas Alva, 162
Electricity Act (India), 97
electricity feed-in laws
in the European Union, 86
in Germany, 87
use of
in Brazil, 117
in Mexico, 112
energy
conservation, 30–31, 57–58
consumption of, 4, 6
projection of, 9–10
controversies, 47–61
current sources, 8–9, 10 (ﬁgure)
debate over, 38–47
economic and political
problems, 5, 60–61
and environmental
degradation, 5
historical use of, 3–4
political and economical issues,
45–4
related problems, 37–38
and U.S. policy, 5–6
and standard of living, 4–5
storage and distribution, 48–49
and technological
development, 11–26
See also alternative energy,
consumption, renewable
energy 
Energy Act of 2005, 7, 65
Energy at the Crossroads: Global
Perspectives and Uncertainties
(Smil), 58–59
energy crops, deﬁned, 17
Energy and Geoscience Institute at
the University of Utah, 33.
Energy Information
Administration (EIA), 8, 17,
21, 33, 38, 65, 71, 76, 79,84,
93, 96, 97, 102, 108, 121, 185,
187, 189, 191, 199, 207, 215,
223, 231, 239, 244, 252, 253,
275
enriched uranium, as fuel, 27
Environmental and Energy Study
Institute, 256
environmental degradation, and
energy, 5, 39–45
Ericsson, John, 162–163
ethanol 
production in Australia, 104
use of, 18
in Brazil, 114, 115
in Canada, 110–111
Eurasia
carbon dioxide emissions, 248
(table) coal consumption,
211 (table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
181 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by country, 235 (table)
hydropower consumption,
219 (table) natural gas
consumption, 203 (table)
nuclear power,
consumption, 227–228
(table) oil consumption, 195
(table)
Europe
carbon dioxide emissions,
246–248 (table) coal
consumption, 209–211
(table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
181 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by county, 233–235
(table)hydropower
consumption, 217–219
(table) natural gas
consumption, 201–203
(table) nuclear power,
consumption, 225–227
(table) oil consumption,
193–195 (table)
See also European Union (EU)
Index
311
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
European Association of
Renewable Energy Research
Centres (EUREC), 266
European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, 104, 121
European Biomass Association
(AEBIOM), 266–267
European Commission (EC), 12,
33, 88, 89, 91, 93, 121
European Geothermal Energy
Council (EGEC), 267–268
European Ocean Energy
Association, 268
European Photovoltaic Industry
Association (EPIA), 268–269
European Renewable Energies
Federation (EREF), 269
European Renewable Energy
Council (EREC), 278–279
European Small Hydropower
Association (ESHA),
269–270
European Union (EU), 77
energy consumption of, 84
geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
184 (table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 85–86
See also Europe
European Wind Energy
Association (EWEA), 270
externalities, deﬁned, 50–51
Exxon Valdez, 41
Fang, Bay, 94, 121
Faraday, Michael, 163
fast breeder reactor. See fast
neutron reactor
fast neutron reactor (or fast
breeder reactor, FBR), 27–28
Federal Ministry of Economics
and Technology, 87, 122
Fermi, Enrico, 163
Fioravanti, Marc, 100, 122
Fiore, A., 80
First South American Energy
Summit, 115
ﬂex fuel vehicles, use of, in Brazil,
115–116
Florig, H. K., 95, 122
force, deﬁned, 3
fossil fuels
as current source of energy, 8
deﬁned, 2
ﬁnite nature of, 38
global effects of, 46–47
negative effect of, on
environment, 38, 40
Fourneyron, Benoit, 164
France, renewable and alternative
energy policies, 88–89
Frideifsson, Dr. Ingyar Birgir, 32
Fritts, Charles, 164
Fujino, J., 34
fusion
advantages of, 29–30
deﬁned, 28
history and current uses, 28–29
prospects for meeting world
energy needs, 30
utilization of, 29
See also nuclear power
Galanter-Hastings, M., 75, 80, 122
gas cooled reactor, 27
Gaudioso, J., 34
General Directorate for Energy
and Raw Materials
(DGEMP), 88
geographical and organizational
deﬁnitions, 179, 180–185
(table)
geothermal energy
advantages of, 21 consumption
by country, 191 (table),
232–239 (table) consumption
by United States, 240 (table)
by state, 241–244 (table)
history and current uses, 20–21
potential for meeting world
energy needs, 21
312
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
utilization of, 21
use of
in Australia, 104
in Canada, 110
in Iceland, 92
in Japan, 101
in Mexico, 112
Geothermal Energy Association,
271
Geothermal Resources Council
(GRC), 256–257
German Wind Energy Association,
271–272
Germany, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
87–88
Global Environmental Facility
(GEF), 257
globalization of world
economies, effect of, on
energy use, 46
global warming, controversy,
59–60
Global Wind Energy Council
(GWEC), 94, 272
Golary, Michael W., 34
Goldman, Arnold J., 164–165
Goodstein, David, 79
Gore, Albert A. Jr., 165–166
Government Ofﬁces of Sweden,
122
government policies, and
pollution, 42
green certiﬁcates, 68–69
use of, in United Kingdom,
89–90
green energy market
development, 67
Green Power Market Development
Group, 257–258
green tags. See green certiﬁcates
Green, M. A., 15, 33
greenhouse gas emissions, (ghg),
8
in Australia, 102
and European Union, 85
and international reaction,
42–45
Grove, William A., 166–167
Guardian, 122
Guha, Subhendu, 167–168
Haldane, John Burden Sanderson,
168
Hammerschlag, Roel, 19, 51, 80
Hansen, James E., 168–169
Hassan, Ahmad Y, 15, 33
Helgason, Dr. Thorkell, 32
Herbert, G. M., 16, 33.
Heronemus, William, 169–170
Hill, Routledge, 15, 33
Hiwatari, R., 34
Hoffman, P., 31, 33, 64, 80
Holland, M. M., 81
Holloway, T., 75, 80, 122
Hubbert, M. King, 170–171
Hubbert’s curve, deﬁned, 39
Huber, Peter W., 57, 58, 33, 80
hybrid OTEC system, 25
See also ocean thermal energy
conversion (OTEC)
hydrogen
as energy source, 31
storage and distribution, 49
use of
in Australia, 102
in Canada, 111
in India, 97
in Japan, 101–102
Hydrogen Association Project,
101, 122
Hydrogen Technologies and
Systems Center, 71
hydropower
advantages of, 22–23
consumption by country,
191 (table), 216–223 (table)
consumption by United
States, 240 (table)
by state, 241–244 (table)
as current source of energy, 9
as energy source, 2
Index
313
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
hydropower (continued)
history and current uses, 22
potential for meeting world
energy needs, 23
use of
in Australia, 108
in Brazil, 115
in Canada, 110, 112
in Central America, 113
in China, 96
in India, 96
in Mexico, 112
in Russia, 104
utilization of, 22
hydrothermal sources, 20
Iceland, and renewable energy, 92
Igari, S., 33.
Ihle, Jack, 99, 123
Iida, Tetsunari, 19, 40
India Core, 96, 122
India, renewable and alternative
energy policies, 96–99
Industrial Revolution, 4, 17,
40 Iniyan, Joselin, S., 33.
Integrated Waste Services
Association (IWSA),
272–273
International Energy Agency
(IEA), 9, 10, 62, 80, 92, 102,
109, 110, 112, 113, 114, 122,
279
geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
184 (table)
international fusion project
(ITER), 29
International Geothermal
Association (IGA), 273
International Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), 42, 44, 75,
80, 122
International Solar Energy Society
(ISES), 280
Interstate Renewable Energy
Council (IREC), 258
Iran, and renewable energy
sources, 109
Jackson, A., 34
Jacobson, Mark Z., 16, 32
Jameson, Angela, 56, 80
Japan, renewable and alternative
energy policies, 99–102
Japanese External Trade
Organization (JETRO), 122
Japanese Ministry of Economy,
Trade and Industry, 100,
122
Jintao, Hu, 96
Johannesburg Renewable Energy
Coalition, 77–78
Jonatansson, Halldor, 32
joule
conversion values, 186 (table)
deﬁned, 3
See also conversions of energy,
conversion table, energy
measurements
Kalam, Dr. APJ Abdul, 97, 98, 123
Kaya, Y., 34
Kennedy, Robert F. Jr., 54, 80
Kent, Anthony, 103, 104,123
Kent, Jennifer, 50, 60, 81
Khilyuk, L. F., 59, 80
kilowatt, conversion values, 186
(table)
Kim, Y., 34
kinetic energy, deﬁned, 3
King, Emery, D. L., 33.
Kleypas, Joan A., 43, 78
Komor, Paul, 11, 34, 74, 80
Konishi, S., 34
Kyoto Prococol, 42, , 75–76
and Asia and Oceania, 92–93
and Australia, 102
and Canada, 110
and Denmark, 90
and European Union, 85, 90
and France, 89
and Japan, 99
314
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Laherrere, Jean, 80
land, effect of energy exploration
on, 41–42
Lassiter, A., 34
lava, as source of geothermal
energy, 20
Lavoisier, Antoine, 12
Lee, M., 34
Leggett, Jeremy, 44, 60, 80, 171
Leung, Dennis Y. C., 120
light water graphite reactor
(RBMK), 27
Lindzen, Richard S., 59, 80
liquid biofuels, deﬁned, 17
Lovins, Amory Bloch, 171–172
low-energy nuclear reactions
(LENR), 29
lunar power systems, 13
MacGill, I., 64, 81, 123
Mandatory Renewable Energy Act
(MRET) (Australia), 102, 103
Mariusson, Johann Mar, 32
market-based policies on
renewable energy, 67
Market Incentive Program (MAP0,
87
market penetration stage of
technological development,
11
market stability, lack of, 73
McInnes, Colin R., 14, 34
megawatt, conversion values, 186
(table)
See also conversions of energy,
conversion table, energy
measurements
Meier, W., 81
Meisen, Peter, 123
Melosi, Martin V., 4, 6, 34
meltdown, danger of, 55, 56
Mercer, David, 103, 104, 123
methane burp hypothese, 44–45
Mexico, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
110, 112–113
Michaels, Patrick J., 59, 81
micro hydropower
advantages of, 23
deﬁned, 22
use of, in India, 96, 97
See also hydropower
Middle East
carbon dioxide emissions,
248–249 (table) coal
consumption, 211–212
(table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
181 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by county, 235–236 (table)
hydropower consumption,
219–220 (table)
natural gas consumption,
203–204 (table)
nuclear power, consumption,
228 (table)
oil consumption, 195–196
(table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 106,
108–109
Miller, Tom, 96, 123
Million Solar Roofs Initiative,
70–71
Mills, Mark P., 33, 57, 58, 80
Moonlight Project (Japan), 100
Moore, Curtis, 99, 123
Mouchout, Auguste, 172–173
Myers, Norman, 50, 60, 81
National Alcohol Program of 1975,
116
National Audit Ofﬁce, 90, 123
National Bioenergy Center, 71
National Center for Photovoltaics,
71, 259–260
National Energy Plan of 1977, 7
National Energy Policy Plan, 7
National Renewable Electricity
Policy, 105
Index
315
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL), 13, 34,
71, 260–261
National Wind Technology Center
(NWTC), 71, 261
natural gas
consumption of, by country,
190 (table), 200–207 (table)
consumption of, by United
States, 240 (table
by state, 241–244 (table)
as current source of energy, 8,
9
as energy source, 2
historical use of, 4
total world consumption,
188–189 (table)
use of
in Brazil, 116
in Central America, 114
in Mexico, 112
natural uranium, as fuel, 27
Nelson, Willie, 173
net metering, 69
Netherlands, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
91
New Energy and Industrial
Technology Development
Organization (NEDO), 100
New Energy Law (Japan), 101
New Hydrogen Project, 101
New Zealand, energy policy of,
104
NIMBY (“not in my backyard”)
deﬁned, 54
and radioactive waste disposal,
57
Nishio, S., 34
North America
carbon dioxide emissions, 245
(table)
coal consumption, 208 (table)
geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
181 (table)
geothermal, solar, wind, wood
and waste energy
consumption, by country,
232 (table)
hydropower consumption, 216
(table)
natural gas consumption, 200
(table)
nuclear power, consumption,
224 (table)
oil consumption, 192 (table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 109–114
See also United States
North American Free Trade
Agreement, 109
nuclear power
advantages of, 28
compared to renewable energy
development, 65
consumption by United States,
240 (table
by state, 241–244 (table)
controversy over, 54–55
cost of, 55
as current source of energy, 9
environmental effects of, 56–57
ﬁssion compared to fusion, 55
history and current uses, 26–27
prospects for meeting world
energy needs, 28
related technicalities, 55–56
social and political barriers to
development of, 57
use of, in Asia and Oceania, 93
consumption by country, 191
(table), 224–231 (table)
total world consumption,
188–189 (table)
use of
in Australia, 108
in Brazil, 116
in Canada, 111
in Central America, 114
in China, 95
in India, 97–98
316
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
in Japan, 100, 101
in Mexico, 112
utilization of, 27–28
See also ﬁssion, fusion
nuclear waste, disposal of, in
India, 98
ocean energy
advantages of, 25–26
history and current uses, 23–24
potential for meeting world
energy needs, 26
storage and distribution, 49
use of
in India, 96, 97
in Canada, 110, 111
and U.S. policy, 71
utilization of, 24
See also tidal power, wave
power
Oceania
carbon dioxide emissions,
251–252 (table) coal
consumption, 214–215
(table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
182–183 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by country, 238–239 (table)
hydropower consumption,
222–223 (table)
natural gas consumption,
206–207 (table)
nuclear power, consumption,
230–231 (table)
oil consumption, 198–199
(table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 92–106
ocean thermal energy conversion
(OTEC), 26, 49
deﬁned, 24
development of, 25
potential for, in Africa, 106
Odell, P. R., 51, 81
Ofﬁce of Energy Efﬁciency and
Renewable Energy (EERE),
276
offshore applications of ocean
energy, 24
Ogawa, Y., 34
oil
consumption by country, 190
(table), 192–193 (table)
consumption by United
States, 240 (table)
by state, 241–244 (table)
as current source of energy, 8–9
discovery of, 4
as energy source, 2
ﬁnite nature of, 38–39
total world consumption,
188–189 (table)
use of
in Canada, 110
in Central America, 113
in Mexico, 112
See also oil and gas
oil and gas, use of
in Australia, 102, 108
in China, 93–94
in India, 97
in Japan, 99, 100
in Middle East, 108–109
See also oil
Okano, K., 34
Oparaocha, Shelia, 63, 79
open-cycle OTEC system, 25
See also ocean thermal energy
conversion (OTEC)
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and
Development (OECD), 106,
123
geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
183 (table)
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and
Development (OECD)
Europe, geographical and
Index
317
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
organizational deﬁnitions,
183 (table)
Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC)
establishment of, 6 geographical
and organizational
deﬁnitions, 185 (table)
oscillating water column, 24
ozone layer, effect on, of fossil fuel
use, 40
Palmason, Dr. Gudmundur, 32
parabolic dishes, 13
parabolic trough systems, 13
Paraguay, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
117–118
Passey, R., 64, 81, 123
pendular device, deﬁned, 24
Perlin, John, 50, 81
petroleum. See oil
photovoltaic (PV) cell
development of, 12
and Solar America Initiative, 71
use of, 13
in Australia, 104
in Japan, 101
Photovoltaic Rebate Program
(Australia), 103, 104
Pimentel, D., 30, 34
Piven, Frances Fox, 81
Pleasant, A., 34
policy obstacles to renewable
energy development, 72–73
Pollock, N., 34
Porter, Kevin, 81
potential energy, deﬁned, 3
pressurized water reactor (PWR),
27
PROFINA, 117
Project Renaissance of Lyons, 88
proof of concept stage of
technological development,
11
in renewable energy
development, 71
Public Renewables Partnership,
258–259
Public Utility Regulatory Policies
Act (PURPA), 7
Rabe, Barry G., 70, 81
radiation leak, danger of, 55, 56
radioactive waste, problems with,
56, 57
Rajapandian, S., 33.
Reagan, Ronald, and U.S. energy
policy, 7, 99
Renewable Action Plan (REAP)
(Vietnam), 106
renewable energy
advantages of, 61–63
costs of, 49–50
consumption by United States,
240 (table)
decentralized characteristics of,
62–63
deﬁned, 2
economic advantages of, 63
economic and political aspects
of, 60–61
environmental effects, 52–53
global perspectives, 75–77
policy solutions, 64–65
potential for, in China, 95
related technicalities, 51–52
social and political barriers to
development, 53–54
technical issues, 63–64
total world consumption,
188–189 (table)
U.S. policy on, 66–75
viability of, 47–54
worldwide perspective,
83–119
Renewable Energy Act (Australia),
102
Renewable Energy and
Distributed Generation, 76
Renewable Energy and Energy
Efﬁciency Partnership
(REEEP), 280–281
318
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Renewable Energy Development
Initiative (REDI) (Australia),
103
Renewable Energy Equity Fund
(REEF) (Australia), 103
Renewable Energy Industry
Development (Australia),
103
Renewable Energy Law (China),
94
Renewable Energy Law (EEG)
(Germany), 87
Renewable Energy Policy Project
(REPP), 261–262
Renewable Energy Policy
Network for the 21st
Century (REN21), 123, 281
renewable energy portfolio
standards (RPS), 70
use of, in Brazil, 117
use of, in Asia, 104, 105
Renewable Energy Roadmap, 85
Renewable Fuels Association
(RFA), 273
renewable obligation certiﬁcates
(ROCs). See green
certiﬁcates
Renewable Remote Power
Generation Programme
(RRPGP) (Australia), 103
Renewables Directive. See
Directive on the Promotion
of Electricity from
Renewable Energy Sources
in the Internal Electricity
Market
Renewables Obligation, 89
Revell, Roger, 173–174
Revkin, Andrew C., 44, 81
Riley, Peter, 56, 81
river turbines, use of, 22
Roehr, Ulrike, 63, 79
Roel, Hammerschlag, Roel, 33.
Runci, Paul, 87, 124
rural electriﬁcation
in Argentina, 118
in Australia, 108
in Brazil, 117
Russia, and energy transmission,
104
Saddler, Dr. Hugh, 63, 81, 104, 124
Sanchez, Fabiola, 115, 124
Sandia National Laboratories, 262
Saudi Arabia, and renewable
energy sources, 109
Scambos, T., 81
Schiavoni, C., 34
sea levels, rise of, 43–44
Seager, Ashley, 14, 34
Serreze, M., 81
Sethi, Surya P., 97
Shapouri, Hosein, 19, 34
Shuman, Frank, 174–175
Sijm, J.P.M., 86. 124
Sir Baniyas Island, 109
Smil, Vaclav, 4, 58–59, 34, 81
Solar America Initiative, 71
Solar Cities (Australia), 103
Solar Electric Power Association
(SEPA), 274
Solar Energy Industries
Association (SEIA), 274–275
solar power
advantages of, 14 consumption
by country, 191 (table),
232–239 (table) consumption
by United States, 240 (table)
by state, 241–244 (table)
conversion to thermal, 12
history and uses, 12
potential to meet world energy
demands, 14–15
use of
in Canada, 110, 111
in Chile, 118
in India, 96
in Middle East, 109
in Middle East, 109
in Peru, 118
in Russia, 104
in U.S. Southwest, 48
Index
319
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
solar power (continued)
utilization, 12–12
See also sun
solar powered satellites, 13–14
solar-powered water pump, 12
Solar Roofs Program (Germany),
87, 100
solar sails, 14
solid biofuels
deﬁned, 17
use of, 17
See also biomass
Solomon, Barry D., 111, 124
Sørenson, Bent, 34
South Africa, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
108
South America
carbon dioxide emissions,
245–246 (table) coal
consumption, 208–209
(table) geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
180–181 (table) geothermal,
solar, wind, wood and
waste energy consumption,
by country, 232–233 (table)
hydropower consumption,
216–217 (table)
natural gas consumption,
200–201 (table)
nuclear power, consumption,
224–225 (table)
oil consumption, 192–193
(table)
renewable and alternative
energy policies, 114–118
South Korea, energy policy of, 104
Spain, renewable and alternative
energy policies, 91
Special Measures Law Concerning
Promotion of the Use of
New Energy by Electricity
Utilities of 2002 (Japan), 101
Spitzer, Lyman Jr., 175
Sreevalsan, E., 33.
state policies on renewable energy
development, 72
Stefansson, Dr. Valgardur, 32
Stevens, Christian V., 32
Stirling, Robert, 175–176
Stroeve, J., 43, 81
Stuart, Alexander T. B., 176–177
Suess, Hans Eduard, 177
sugar cane, as solid biofuel, 17–18
sun, as energy source, 2
Sunshine Project (Japan), 100
sun-tracking mirrors, 13
Sustainable Energy Coalition
(SEC), 259
Sweden, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
90
Swisher, Randall,  81
Szilard, Leo, 177–178
tapchon (tapered channels
system), deﬁned, 24
technological development, stages
of, 11–12
Tennekes, Hendrik, 59, 82
Tennessee Valley Authority, 65
Tester, Jeffrey W., 13, 34
Thailand, energy policy of, 105
Third World countries
demand for energy, 5
energy development in, 62
Thorsteinsson, Loftur, 32
tidal fences, deﬁned, 25
tidal power
as energy source, 2
as form of ocean energy, 24–25
use of, in Russia, 104
See also ocean energy
tipping point, and acid rain, 40, 41
Tokimatsu, K., 30, 34
topping point
deﬁned, 38
for oil, 58–59
tradable renewal certiﬁcates
(TRCs). See green
certiﬁcates
320
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Trans-Mediterranean Renewable
Energy Cooperation, 109
Udall, Tom, 178
United Arab Emirates, 109
United Kingdom, renewable and
alternative energy policies,
89–90
United Nations, 42, 45, 82, 106,
108, 124
United Nations Environmental
Programme (UNEP), 42
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate
Change, 75, 99
United States
energy consumption, 179
by source, 240
renewable and alternative
energy prospects, 64–66
See also North America
University of Delaware Center for
Energy and Environmental
Policy, 263
University of Massachusetts–
Amherst Center for Energy
Efﬁciency and Renewable
Energy (CRRRE), 263–264
uranium, supplies of, 55
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE),
70–71, 277–278
U.S. Department of Energy,
Energy Efﬁciency and
Renewable Energy, 71, 106,
124
U.S. Government Accountability
Ofﬁce, 46, 82
U.S. National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, 65
U.S. policy on renewable energy,
66–75
U.S. Regulatory Commission, 65,
82
USSR (former), geographical and
organizational deﬁnitions,
184 (table)
Van Langenhove, Herman, 34
Venezuela and Brazil, 114–115,
116
Verhé, Roland, 32
Vietnam, energy policy of, 106
Wang, Michael, 19, 34
Warta, W., 33.
water reactor , 27
water sources, pollution of, 41
water power. See hydropower
watt, conversion values, 186
(table)
See also conversions of energy,
conversion table, energy
measurements
Watt, M., 64, 81, 123
Watts Bar Reactor, 65
wave power
as energy source, 2
as form of ocean energy, 24
See also ocean energy
“White Paper on Renewable
Energy” (Australia), 108
Wind Energy Tax Credit, 74
windmills, use of, 15
wind power
advantages, 16 consumption
by country, 191 (table),
232–239 (table)
consumption by United
States, 240 (table)
by state, 241–244 (table)
as energy source, 2
environmental effects, 52
history and uses, 15
potential for meeting world
energy needs, 16
related technicalities, 51–52
use of
in Australia, 104
in Canada, 110, 111
in India, 96, 98
in Middle East, 109
in Russia, 104
utilization of, 15–16
Index
321
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
Wind Power Production Initiative
(WPPI) (Canada), 111
Wind Powering America
Initiative, 71
wind turbine, ﬁrst, 15
wood, consumption by country,
191 (table), 232–239 (table)
World Bank, 23, 34, 97, 106, 124
World Commission on Dams, 22,
35
World Energy Council, 14, 35
World Meteorological
Organization (WMO), 42
World Renewable Energy
Congress/Network
(WREC/WREN), 281–282
World Summit for Sustainable
Development (WSSD), 77
World Wars I and II, and energy
policy, 6
Worldwatch Institute, 95, 124
worldwide perspective, on
alternative and renewable
energy development,
83–119
Wu, C. Z., 120
Wu, Chin, 26, 32
Xinhua News Agency, 94, 124
Yamaji, K., 34
Yoshida, T., 34
Yuan, Z. H., 120
Zemin, Jiang, 96
Zhao, S., 95, 122
322
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

 
About the Authors
Zachary A. Smith is a Regents’ Professor of Political Science at
Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff. Dr. Smith has written
more than 20 books and numerous articles on environmental and
natural resource policy topics, and many consider him one of the
premier experts in the ﬁeld. 
Katrina Darlene Taylor is a graduate student in the public policy
PhD program, focusing on environmental policy, in the Depart-
ment of Politics and International Affairs at Northern Arizona
University in Flagstaff. Ms. Taylor is the coauthor of a chapter ti-
tled “Transborder Air Pollution” with Dr. Zachary A. Smith in
Handbook on Globalization and the Environment, edited by Khi V.
Thai, Dianne Rahm, and Jerrell D. Cogburn. 
323
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

