RENOVATING WOOD  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Renovating wood is not difficult, but it does require patience 
and application. Don't be tempted to work on fine or antique 
furniture - leave that to the experts! 
  
 
 
Always wear a face mask when working with an electric 
sander. Wear protective gloves when using paint stripper or 
solvents. Work in a well-ventilated atmosphere when 
stripping or finishing wood. Keep your fingers away from the 
cutting edges of tools. Keep stains, varnishes and solvents 
away from naked flames. 
  
 
 
Warmth, colour, and subtle or dramatic grain patterns are 
amongst the stunning effects this natural material can bring 
into your home. 
  
Renovating wood can take many forms, from stripping and 
varnishing floors and internal fitted woodwork to stripping 
and staining chairs, tables and fittings, polishing surfaces 
and colouring.  
  
Wood sometimes requires a facelift but be selective and 
choose your projects carefully. There is little point in 
stripping or altering antiques, because it will almost certainly
reduce their value. Some pieces are often the better for their
aged appearance. 
 
2  - Planning your work  
Decide on a method to remove the old finish on the timber 
(if there is one). For instance, by blow torch, paint stripper, 
planing or sandpaper.  
 
 
 
On large areas, such as floors, you may need to obtain an 
industrial sander. Remember, you will also have the room 
out of action for some time.  
 
 
 
Structural damage through rot, wear or accident should be 
repaired before any overall renovation can begin. These 
repairs can often be something simple such as letting in a 
small section of floorboard, patching a window frame or 
perhaps filling the hole where a lock has been removed from 
a door. You may also need to apply a fungicide in areas of 
poor ventilation or where there is evidence of fungal activity.
 
 
 
To avoid handling the wet areas when staining or varnishing 
a piece of furniture, decide upon a sequence of work before 
starting. With panelling, work out where you can finish with 
your brush strokes so that there is no obvious line when you 
begin again.  

 
 
 
Before proceeding, always test dyes, stains and varnishes on
a small, inconspicuous area of the wood to be treated, in 
order to assess their suitability.  
 
 
 
Have your materials to hand, and if working with movable 
furniture, have a clear and clean area set aside to work in.  
 
 
 
If you are working a large area such as a floor, set yourself 
a reasonable target.  
 
 
 
When stripping vertical panelling, try to work from the 
bottom up when using a blowtorch because the rising heat 
will pre-soften the paint or varnish above. Work from the top
down when re-applying any wet finish.  
 
 
 
 
3  - Initial preparation 
Remove any projecting nails, screws or any other metallic 
objects which may damage tools.  
 
 
 
Door and drawer knobs should also be removed. These can 
be cleaned, renovated or renewed separately.  
 
 
 
Before sanding wooden floors, punch the heads of the nails 
below the surface to avoid any possible damage to the 
sander.  
 
 
 
When using paint stripper on a piece of furniture on the 
bench, cover the top of the bench with a cloth or newspaper 
for protection, and possibly the surrounding floor area also.  
 
 
 
When using a blow torch, have at least one spare canister 
ready to hand for replacement.  
 
4  - Stripping wood  

This is the first step in wood 
renovation. Before you start 
the stripping process ensure 
you wear protective gloves, 
eye protection, a face mask 
and follow all safety 
instructions on the stripping 
products you intend to use.  
 
 
 
Regardless of whether you 
use a blow torch or paint 
stripper, you will need a 
shavehook or scraper to 
remove the old finish (2).  
 
 
 
It may be necessary to use 
several applications of 
stripper to get into small 
crevices, and this is often 
best achieved by rubbing the 
area with paint stripper on 
wire wool by hand. A small 
wire brush (like those used 
for suede shoes) or a 
toothbrush can also be u
 a blow torch on furniture or 
areas with deep profiles and crevices for fear of scorching 
the wood.  
seful 
(3). It is not advisable to use
f 
 
 
 
Wood that has been 
discoloured by age, 
weathering or fingermarks 
can often be brought back to 
life by taking off a few light 
shavings with a finely set 
smoothing plane. You must 
always work with the grain o
the wood to avoid tearing out 
(4).  
 
 
 

After you have stripped the 
timber, it must be prepared 
for finishing by sanding, 
either by hand or with an 
orbital sander. When hand 
sanding, it's useful to wrap 
the sandpaper around a cork 
block. This helps to create a 
flat surface and protects the 
user's fingers (5).  
 
 
 
Orbital sanders come in 
various sizes and are used fo
finishing larger areas (6). 
Some are also designed to 
reach into very small spaces. 
These are called detail 
sanders. 
r 
 
 
 
One good way of getting a smooth surface is to rub along 
the grain with wire wool. Be sure to vacuum the surface of 
the wood afterwards, or wipe it with a dry rag, to remove 
any tiny wire particles which may be picked up by a wet 
paint brush and spoil the finish.  
 
 
 
Most stripped surfaces need to be neutralised with water or 
white spirit. Be sure to do this, and remember to let the 
surfaces dry thoroughly before attempting to use sandpaper 
on them.  
 
5 - Before applying finishes  
 
All finishes, even clear ones such as polyurethane varnish or 
wax polish, will darken the appearance of the wood to some 
extent. Bear this in mind, especially when trying to match 
wood tones. Bleach will lighten wood.  
 
 
 
All woods, with the exception of pine, tend to get lighter 
when exposed to daylight. Pine will get progressively darker 
even if it has been treated with varnish or polish.  
 
 
 

The 'end grain' of wood will 
always absorb more stain, 
varnish or polish than the 
other surfaces, so it will show 
up darker (7). It is importa
that the end grain is sanded 
well before applying sta
varnish. Use a sanding seal
or give it only one light 
application, even if the rest of
the piece takes several coats.
nt 
in or 
er 
 
After the first coat is dry on 
the end grain, you can wipe 
wax polish along it to prevent 
it from absorbing any more 
 
surface finish.  
 
he first application of any stain, sealer, or varnish may 
l. 
 
 - Wood fillers 
Small nail holes or gaps in 
 
T
raise the grain of the wood and give it a slightly rough fee
When the first application is perfectly dry, give all surfaces a
light rub over with fine sandpaper following the grain, then 
re-apply the finish.  
 
6 
joints can be filled with one of
the many available wood 
fillers. These often come in 
colours to suit various woods, 
and most will accept sta
and dyes (8). 
ins 
 
 
Wood fillers can be used to fill 
ter 
s dried. 
e 
se 
replacement may be necessar
 before any varnishing or waxing takes 
 
fairly deep holes by building 
up layers successively af
the previous one ha
However, they should not b
used for large areas. The
need additional wood 'let in' 
to the damaged area, after 
the rotted or damaged area 
has been cut away, leaving 
only good wood (9). Total 
y if damage is very severe.  
 
7 - Staining 
 
This must be done
lace.  
p
 
 

If you
y
 wish to colour your wood, there are many stains and 
es you can use. Most of these will allow the beauty of the 
essential when applying stains and varnishes to brush in
e direction of the grain (10). You should also keep a 'wet 
d
grain to show through the finish, and you can adjust the 
depth of colour by adding additional coats. Remember, you 
cannot lighten the effect with subsequent applications, only 
darken it, so experiment first! Remember also that when you
apply the varnish or wax afterwards this will darken the 
finish still further.  
 
 
It is 
h
t
edge' and never let a part of the stain dry before coming 
back to it. For this reason, always work out an area you can 
treat in the drying time of the stain, or have an edge where 
you can finish easily, such as a floorboard.  
 
 
 
 
8 - Protective finishes  
here are dozens of products for the protection and 
of the most popular clear 
ing 
tt
 
imbers used outdoors, such as cedar or 
, have 
ecial preparations or oils manufactured for their 
s 
rain sealer can be used for indoor projec
, followed 
 several applications of wax polish. This will give a lovely 
 
T
e
v
nhancement of wood, and one 
arnishes for indoor use is polyurethane. This will br
colours to life and enhance the grain formation, giving it a 
vibrant glow. Polyurethane is available in gloss, satin or ma
finishes. It is not suitable for outdoor use. In that case, a 
yacht varnish or similar preparation is preferable. It may be 
necessary to apply several coats for maximum effect, and 
each coat should be rubbed down with fine sandpaper when 
completely dry and before the next coat is applied. 
Remember too, that the finish will darken slightly each time,
even though this is classed as a clear varnish.  
 
 
 
Some t
p
teak
s
treatment, and these are applied by brush after the timber
have been sanded down and prepared.  
 
 
 
Clear g
y
ts
b
'body' to the finish which will improve over the years with 
the application of more wax with each polishing. Remember 
that you must sand your wood to a fine finish for the best 

results.  
 

