Compliments of
Sybase Edition
      Get to know how 
database replication         
            can work for you!
Replication
Robert D. Schneider
A Reference
         for the
  Rest of Us!
®
FREE eTips at dummies.com®

These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

by Robert Schneider
John Wiley & Sons Canada, Ltd
Replication
FOR
DUMmIES
‰
SYBASE EDITION
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Replication For Dummies®
Published by
John Wiley & Sons Canada, Ltd.
6045 Freemont Blvd.
Mississauga, ON
L5R 4J3
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2010 by John Wiley & Sons Canada, Ltd. All rights reserved. No part of 
this book, including interior design, and icons, may be reproduced or transmitted 
in any form, by any means (electronic, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) 
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man 
logo, A Reference for the Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun 
and Easy Way, Dummies.com, and related trade dress are trademarks or registered 
trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and 
other countries, and may not be used without written permission. All other trade-
marks are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not 
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
For authorization to photocopy items for corporate, personal, or educational 
use, please contact in writing The Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency (Access 
Copyright). For an Access Copyright license, visit www.accesscopyright.ca or 
call toll free 1-800-893-5777.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE NO 
REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS 
OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUD-
ING WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WAR-
RANTY MAY BE CREATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE 
ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION. 
THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN 
RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL 
ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF A COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD 
BE SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES 
ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN 
THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER INFORMATION DOES 
NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE INFORMATION THE ORGA-
NIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY MAKE. FURTHER, 
READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE 
CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS 
READ.
For general information on John Wiley & Sons Canada, Ltd., including all books 
published by Wiley Publishing Inc., please call our distribution centre at 1-800-567-
4797. For reseller information, including discounts and premium sales, please call 
our sales department at 416-646-7992. For press review copies, author interviews, 
or other publicity information, please contact our publicity department, Tel. 416-
646-4582, Fax 416-236-4448.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that 
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
ISBN: 978-0-470-73980-8
Printed in Canada
1 2 3 4 5 PC 14 13 12 11 10
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

About the Author
Robert Schneider is a Silicon Valley-based technology 
consultant. He has written five books and numerous 
articles on advanced technical topics such as Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA), open source, and rela-
tional database design/optimization. Most recently, 
he’s authored Microsoft SQL Server 2005 Express Edition 
For Dummies and Microsoft SQL Server 2008 All-in-One 
Desk Reference For Dummies. He can be reached at 
Robert.Schneider@think88.com.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

John Wiley & Sons Canada, Ltd.
Bill Zerter, Chief Operating Officer
Jennifer Smith, Vice-President and Publisher, 
Professional & Trade Division
Publishing and Editorial for Consumer Dummies
Diane Graves Steele, Vice President and Publisher, 
Consumer Dummies
Kristin Ferguson-Wagstaffe, Product Development Director, 
Consumer Dummies
Ensley Eikenburg, Associate Publisher, Travel
Kelly Regan, Editorial Director, Travel
Composition Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services
Acquisitions and Editorial
Vice-President Publishing 
Services: Karen Bryan
Editor: Robert Hickey
Project Manager: Alison MacLean
Senior Project Editor: 
Elizabeth McCurdy
US Project Editor: Kelly Ewing
Copy Editor: Laura Miller
Editorial Assistant: 
Katie Wolsley
Cartoons: Rich Tennant 
(www.the5thwave.com)
Composition Services
Project Coordinator: 
Lynsey Stanford
Layout and Graphics: 
Melissa K. Jester
Proofreader: Dwight Ramsey
Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments through 
our online registration form located at http://dummies.
custhelp.com. For other comments, please contact our 
Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside 
the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include 
the following:
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Contents at a Glance
Introduction .................................................................. 1
Who This Book Is For ....................................................1
About This Book ............................................................2
Icons Used in This Book ................................................3
Chapter 1: Today’s IT Realities .................................. 5
Appreciating the Complexity 
of Today’s IT Landscape ............................................6
Considering Business Realities ....................................6
Chapter 2: Database Replication 
to the Rescue ................................................................ 9
Understanding Database Replication ..........................9
Sybase Replication Server ..........................................11
Chapter 3: Three Database 
Replication Solutions ............................................... 15
Disaster Recovery and High Availability ..................15
Introducing Evergreen Motors .............................17
Disaster recovery at Evergreen ............................18
Real-Time Reporting ....................................................20
Identical copy of production database ................21
Data warehousing ...................................................21
Evergreen’s approach to reporting ......................22
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Data Consolidation and Synchronization .................24
Selecting a configuration .......................................26
Choosing what to replicate ...................................26
Evergreen consolidates data .................................27
Chapter 4: Database Replication Technology 
Selection and Implementation Guidelines ........... 31
Operational Best Practices .........................................31
Administration .............................................................33
Extensibility and Upgrading .......................................34
Letter from Sybase .......................................................37
ii
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Introduction
D
atabase replication, which is the distribution of 
information across a series of database servers 
that may be located in the same place or scattered across 
the globe, was once reserved for large, sophisticated 
organizations sporting the big IT budgets. Thankfully, 
for a variety of reasons, the past few years have seen 
wider application of database replication solutions.
This book provides you with a basic understanding of 
this important technology, along with a series of best 
practices for you to consider when implementing a 
database replication strategy.
Who This Book Is For
This book is aimed at two communities. The first group 
of readers is IT and business leadership. Therefore, I 
steer away from detailed technical discussions of data-
base replication and focus on the bigger picture, espe-
cially regarding how database replication can be used 
to solve the business and technological challenges that 
most organizations face today.
The second community encompasses database admin-
istrators who are frequently on the front lines of imple-
menting database replication-driven solutions. While I 
don’t have space in this book to make comprehensive 
recommendations, the configuration examples I use 
can serve as a helpful starting point for this group of 
readers; the collection of best practices also provide a 
solid foundation.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

About This Book
In order to clearly and concisely explore database rep-
lication, this book is divided into four chapters.
In Chapter 1, I look at several trends and factors (from 
both a technical and business perspective) that place 
stress on IT organizations. We then move on to exam-
ine how database replication can help make these chal-
lenges more bearable. While replication isn’t a 
universal solution, it can add real value and rapid 
return on investment (ROI).
In Chapter 2, my goal is to help you get a better under-
standing of database replication. I supply a high-level 
overview, as well as cite several techniques used to 
implement database replication.
Because database replication is a multi-faceted, highly 
customizable approach toward improving IT opera-
tions, Chapter 3 highlights several of the most popular 
replication use cases. I also provide customer exam-
ples to illustrate in a concrete way how database repli-
cation can benefit an organization.
In Chapter 4, I suggest a series of best practices to follow 
when implementing database replication in your 
organization. Note that these guidelines are vendor-
neutral: they’re good practice no matter what 
technology you use.
2
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

3
Icons Used in This Book
This book uses the following icons to indicate informa-
tion that you may find especially helpful as you famil-
iarize yourself with database replication technology.
 
These helpful hints point out ways you can get 
the most from database replication technology, 
perhaps even saving time and money as you do.
 
You don’t want to forget this important 
information.
 
Watch out for these common pitfalls and you’ll 
be cruising your way to success in no time.
 
You may find this information interesting, 
but you can skip it, if you like. You can 
always return to read it later.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

4
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Chapter 1
Today’s IT Realities
▶ Understanding the complexities of running IT
▶ Accepting the business realities
W
hen you consider the complexity of an average 
IT organization, you’ll find that contrasting it 
with organizations from a few years back is worthwhile. 
In the past, for example, the following was true:
 ✓ Information was kept in a central location, under 
lock and key.
 ✓ Data was generally measured in kilobytes; only 
the largest and most sophisticated applications 
worked with megabytes.
 ✓ Reports were run in batches; two or more hour 
delays for results were common.
 ✓ Single vendor environments were prevalent.
Today, the IT landscape is riddled with new complexity 
and struggles against the realities of doing business in 
a global economy. This chapter describes the techno-
logical challenges IT faces, as well as the business con-
text within which it deals with those challenges.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Appreciating the Complexity 
of Today’s IT Landscape
Running an IT organization in today’s corporate land-
scape is extremely challenging. Information is spread 
across servers globally, with consumers located at vari-
ous locations worldwide. The rate at which data is dis-
tributed is accelerating, too. As if these challenges didn’t 
present enough of a headache, the quantity of data that 
consumers use is expanding exponentially, as well.
Budgets, of course, are not keeping pace with the need 
for IT resources to manage the increase in data quantity 
and dispersion, and as you can imagine, most organiza-
tions need to staff the additional expertise required to 
face the challenges presented by today’s IT landscape.
Considering Business Realities
For IT managers struggling to adapt to the technological 
complications described in the preceding section, no 
relief is in sight on the business front. In fact, the overall 
enterprise is dealing with pressures that add to the IT 
burden.
To begin, globalization has mandated 24 x 7 x 365 access 
to information. Many organizations have operations 
around the world, running around the clock. Management 
expects instantaneous access to operational intelligence 
from these far-flung parts of the enterprise. Stale or static 
data is no longer acceptable.
6
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

7
The unprecedented financial and corporate governance 
failures of the past few years are now translating to mas-
sive new regulatory requirements. In order to comply 
with these regulations, accurate information will be vital. 
For those organizations unwilling or unable to toe the reg-
ulatory line, civil and criminal penalties will be harsh.
To add fuel to the operational and regulatory fires, most 
organizations are living with a competitive environment 
that they could not have imagined even a few short 
years ago. There are now more rivals in more locations, 
translating to significant top- and bottom-line pressures. 
Management is under the gun to reduce costs while 
boosting profitability. Operational efficiencies are often 
seen as the best way to make this happen, and the IT 
organization is often first in the cost-cutting crosshairs.
Users themselves are far more sophisticated than ever 
before. “Generation Twitter” has come to expect 
instantaneous access to information where and when 
they want it. To these impatient consumers, latency is 
not acceptable. Downtime is even harder for them to 
imagine, let alone tolerate. In fact, they aren’t even 
willing to put up with a brief system outage to allow 
for application or infrastructure upgrades.
Finally, executives and line-of-business managers are 
now employing sophisticated business intelligence 
software that consumes data in unprecedented ways to 
help make real-time operational decisions. With stale 
or incorrect information, inaccurate and erroneous 
decisions are inevitable. Delayed data is often just as 
bad as no data at all.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

8
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Chapter 2
Database Replication 
to the Rescue
▶ Knowing the techniques for database replication
▶ Understanding Sybase Replication Server
I
ncreasing numbers of IT organizations are turning to 
database replication as a way to deal with the pres-
sures of operating in today’s globalized corporate envi-
ronment (see Chapter 1). They are doing so largely 
because, with advancements in technological products, 
moving large volumes of information across networks and 
onto destination servers is no longer cost-prohibitive.
This chapter describes how database replication 
works and some of the more popular techniques for 
performing it.
Understanding Database 
Replication
At its core, database replication means the process 
by which information is created or updated at one 
location, and then distributed to other destinations. 
Database replication also requires that this information 
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

be kept synchronized without the need for user interven-
tion. In fact, from the perspective of the information con-
sumer, well-executed database replication should simply 
mean that data is available where and when it’s needed.
The exact mechanism of database replication is a com-
plex topic. You can use any of several approaches to 
replicate information across a network. Here are some 
popular techniques, along with some of the challenges 
imposed by each approach:
 ✓ Dump and reload. Data is extracted from one 
location and loaded into one or more destinations. 
Hours, days, or even longer gaps may occur 
between the creation of data and its propagation. 
This approach represents a one-way replication 
strategy that doesn’t allow for remote updates.
 ✓ Two-phase commit-driven distribution. The data-
base engine includes destination servers as part 
of every transaction. This adds significant over-
head to the amount of time it takes to complete a 
transaction, which makes this approach unsuitable 
for highly time-sensitive applications.
 ✓ Snapshots. An image of the database is taken at a 
given point in time. This image is then loaded 
onto one or more destination servers. With this 
approach, recipients work with older data, which 
makes this technique not appropriate when real-
time information is needed. This style of database 
replication is also not cut out for remote updates.
 ✓ Database triggers (non-transactional). A trigger 
copies data to one or more remote locations; 
however, no transactions are invoked to guarantee 
successful delivery. While this reduces overhead, 
10
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

11
it’s easy to imagine scenarios where databases get 
out of sync, which can lead to all sorts of problems 
for the information consumer.
 ✓ Database triggers (with transactions). Because 
transactions are a well-proven method for guaran-
teeing the integrity of data modifications, this 
approach increases reliability of trigger-driven 
database replication. Of course, the cost of this 
increased integrity is reflected in decreased 
application performance caused by transactional 
overhead.
 ✓ Log-based. Employed by Sybase Replication Server, 
this is the most efficient and effective way of deliv-
ering replication. Instead of mandating intrusive 
and costly interaction with the underlying database, 
log-based replication uses direct reads from the 
online transaction logs. The next section covers 
this approach in detail.
Sybase Replication Server
In addition to Sybase’s own Adaptive Server Enterprise 
(ASE), Sybase Replication Server is designed to work 
with a variety of data sources, including
 ✓ Oracle
 ✓ IBM DB2
 ✓ Microsoft SQL Server
Sybase Replication Server employs a distributed archi-
tecture, with a collection of capabilities to guarantee 
delivery of data alterations.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

12
 
Sybase Replication Server supports multiple 
platforms, character sets, and languages. This 
flexibility gives database administrators the 
option of replicating information from any 
data source to any destination.
Simply enabling multifaceted data replication scenarios 
isn’t sufficient. To help enterprises administer these 
intricate replication configurations, Sybase provides 
the Replication Server Manager. This is a powerful three-
tier management tool with a graphical user interface 
where system administrators can create replication 
environments, monitor the status of the individual 
servers, and manage the flow of replicated data, all 
from a single desktop.
Modeling tools have a long history of helping database 
and development professionals visualize, document, 
communicate, collaborate and create systems with 
greater clarity, accuracy and predictable reliability. 
Sybase PowerDesigner® introduces a new graphical 
modeling paradigm, the Information Liquidity Model 
(ILM), that can both graphically diagram the replication 
environment as well as generate Sybase Replication 
Server implementation code from these models.
Since database replication is such a performance-
sensitive application, Replication Server offers a series 
of throughput-related features to keep information 
flowing as rapidly and effectively as possible. These 
include:
 ✓ Dedicated database replication functionality. As 
we describe earlier, database replication has the 
potential to bog down a database server with 
extraneous overhead. To combat this possibility, 
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

13
Sybase Replication Server is delivered as a spe-
cialized add-on solution, rather than as a “bolt-on” 
to a database server. This architecture is minimally 
invasive to the source database.
 ✓ Continuous real-time log-based transactional 
data capture. This tactic, which reads directly 
from the online re-do log, is faster than trigger-
based database replication.
 ✓ SQL statement replication. To minimize the 
amount of information sent over the network, only 
the SQL statement itself is sent to the destination. 
This is an ideal complement to the previously 
described log-based replication strategy imple-
mented by Sybase.
 ✓ Configurable network routing. Sybase 
Replication Server gives administrators the option 
of selecting the network route that replicated 
information will follow when being propagated to 
remote destinations.
 ✓ Enhanced transaction performance in the desti-
nation database. Because Replication Server works 
with products from different providers, it includes 
vendor-specific throughput optimizations and 
tweaks for each supported platform.
 
Organizations of all shapes and sizes rely on 
Sybase Replication Server to effectively dis-
tribute and protect their vital information. It’s 
been particularly well adopted in highly chal-
lenging environments such as financial services 
and capital markets. These enterprises are 
extremely particular when it comes to their 
throughput and latency requirements.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

14
Testimonial — Cargill Grain Division
As the following customer quote illustrates, Replication 
Server facilitates today’s transaction-intensive, large-data- 
volume applications.
“It’s a fairly complex system, but thanks to Sybase, it’s running 
smoothly. For example, in addition to the 2.5 terabytes of data 
stored in our central complex, we’ve got about 1,600 tables in 
our data model, about 6,000 stored procedures and 4,000 trig-
gers. The system manages inventories of approximately one 
billion bushels annually with as many as 16,000 daily shipments. 
On a typical day, we’re moving a gigabyte of data back and 
forth across our enterprise and are running about 8,500 reports 
an hour. We simply couldn’t do this effectively without Sybase.”
– Don Nielsen, Manager of the Database Administrator 
group for the Cargill Grain Division
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Chapter 3
Three Database Replication 
Solutions
▶ Exploring disaster recovery and high availability
▶ Knowing how to implement real-time reporting
▶ Consolidating and synchronizing data
T
his chapter focuses on three scenarios where 
database replication can add significant value to 
every IT organization.
Disaster Recovery and 
High Availability
An increasing number of organizations are running 
their operations around the clock, around the globe 
(see Chapter 1). For these highly sensitive entities, 
downtime can have a devastating effect in any of the 
following ways:
 ✓ Lost revenue
 ✓ Damaged brand
 ✓ Relationship issues with partners and customers
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

 ✓ Supply chain problems
 ✓ Legal repercussions
Rather than being lumped into one overarching cate-
gory, it’s best to think of downtime as falling into one of 
three major categories:
 ✓ Managed, planned downtime. This type of down-
time is common when upgrading hardware, soft-
ware, networks, and so on. Even though it’s 
managed, however, it still has the potential to 
impede operations.
 ✓ Unplanned downtime. This type of downtime 
frustrates users the most and causes the largest 
amounts of disruption. Unplanned downtime most 
commonly results from software bugs, system 
failures, network outages, and other problems.
 ✓ Disasters. While relatively rare, these outages 
have the potential to cause significant long-term 
damage to an organization.
 No matter what kind of downtime you’re 
facing, database replication has the potential 
to dramatically reduce, or even eliminate, 
system outages.
Depending on the type of enterprise, its budget, and its 
exposure to system outages, database replication is 
typically used in concert with a collection of redundant 
hardware, software, and network infrastructure.
By engaging in a well-thought-out strategy of database 
replication, you can go a long way toward increasing 
16
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

17
the reliability of your information architecture, while 
greatly reducing the likelihood of a major system or 
data outage.
Introducing Evergreen Motors
Throughout this chapter, I use the example of 
Evergreen Motors, or simply, “Evergreen,” to illustrate 
the major concepts in an easy-to-understand way.
Evergreen Motors was founded by a group of environ-
mentally focused partners. Its mission is to offer consum-
ers hybrid vehicles for rent at major airports worldwide. 
The company started small, but in the past two years, 
business has begun to grow at an accelerated rate.
Unfortunately, not everything has gone smoothly. A 
series of system slowdowns, outages, and other 
IT-related mishaps have led to unhappy customers and 
embarrassing press reports.
To get matters back under control, Evergreen has 
decided to employ database replication technology. 
This chapter describes three scenarios that benefit 
from this new infrastructure.
Figure 3-1 shows the initial configuration of reservation 
agents, an application server, and a database server. 
 For space and clarity considerations, these 
examples are as concise as possible. In addition, 
each example builds on the previous scenario. 
Finally, each scenario closes with a concrete 
example of how Sybase Replication Server is 
being used to solve similar challenges for real 
customers.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

18
Database Server
(ASE)
Application
Server
Reservation
Agent
Reservation
Agent
Reservation
Agent
Reservation
Agent
Figure 3-1: The Evergreen Motors initial configuration.
Disaster recovery at Evergreen
Each night, Evergreen Motors administrators back up 
the production database. However, after reading 
reports about a competitor that suffered a disastrous 
fire that destroyed their data center (including backup 
tapes), Evergreen decides to use database replication 
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

19
to perform real-time copying of information to a 
backup server located in a separate data center in a dif-
ferent state. Figure 3-2 illustrates this configuration:
Going forward, Evergreen plans on implementing a fully 
replicated environment, including duplicate application 
and database servers. Database replication is a big part 
of this strategy.
Database Server
(ASE)
Internet
Transactions
Managed by Sybase
Replication Server
Application
Server
Reservation
Agent
Backup
Admin
Reservation
Agent
Reservation
Agent
Reservation
Agent
Backup Server
(ASE)
Figure 3-2: Evergreen prepares for disaster recovery.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

20
Real-Time Reporting
User appetite for information is insatiable: Creating, 
viewing, and modifying real-time reports are increas-
ingly popular ways to work with data. Modern informa-
tion technology makes these types of queries feasible. 
High-speed CPUs, large-capacity disk drives, fast net-
works, and powerful business intelligence software 
have opened up new horizons for users to model and 
manage their data. 
SACO for Replication Server
SACO, Saudi Arabia’s largest superstore and an authorized 
dealer for Ace Hardware, needed to find a faster way to rep-
licate data among its 15 retail stores, headquarters, and 
warehouse locations. The company also needed to deploy a 
more reliable disaster recovery plan. SACO found the 
answers to both challenges in Replication Server, which 
copies data in real time from headquarters and the ware-
house to the retail stores, providing up-to-the-minute inven-
tory and pricing information. Replication Server also copies 
data immediately to on-site and off-site data recovery 
servers.
“This disaster recovery design has made our recovery pro-
cess a lot easier, which gives us peace-of-mind. We don’t 
use any third-party tools — just Replication Server with its 
hot-standby replication technology.” 
 
– Raed Ayyoub, IT Director for SACO
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

21
However, all these capabilities have introduced signifi-
cant risk to production applications. Many IT organiza-
tions are learning the hard way what happens when 
you place real-time analysis and reporting tools in the 
hands of the average information consumer and then 
turn them loose against production servers. The inevi-
table result is degraded application performance with 
all sorts of subsequent negative side effects. Database 
replication is an ideal solution for these challenges.
When you picture data-replication-driven applications 
for reporting, imagine two classes of reporting solu-
tions, both of which are greatly facilitated by database 
replication.
Identical copy of production database
In this scenario, IT administrators elect to use database 
replication to maintain an exact replica of live online 
production data. Users can then construct on-the-fly 
queries and reports with minimal IT involvement. All 
the live data that could possibly be available is present 
on the replicated servers, in near real-time fashion. 
Data warehousing
An organization may elect to selectively consolidate 
large quantities of data into one or more centralized 
data warehouses. Users are then supplied with busi-
ness intelligence software and encouraged to analyze 
this subset of the organization’s information using new 
or existing queries and reports. This data may also be 
updated by users and fed back into the live production 
system.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

22
Regardless of the selected reporting approach, the over-
all effects of these techniques are a reduced workload 
for the production application and related server(s).
Evergreen’s approach to reporting
As Evergreen’s business continues to grow, the organiza-
tion hires a collection of well-paid marketing and financial 
analysts to help optimize revenue and profit. Armed with 
spreadsheets and business intelligence tools, these ana-
lysts run a series of “what-if” scenarios.
Although interpreting these simulations is always 
somewhat subjective, one thing is clear: Running these 
queries against the production database server has 
caused dramatic slowdowns for reservation agents 
(and customers, too).
Because these slowdowns begin to affect revenue, Ever-
green decides to add a dedicated server for the market-
ing and financial analysts, as shown in Figure 3-3.
Database replication keeps the reporting server up to 
date, which allows the analysts to run all the queries and
simulations they like without impacting production 
users.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

23
Database Server
(ASE)
Data Analysis
Server
(SQL Server)
Transactions
Application
Server
Reservation
Agent
Backup
Admin
Data Analyst
(Marketing)
Data Analyst
(Finance)
Reservation
Agent
Backup Server
(ASE)
Managed by Sybase
Replication Server
Transactions
Managed by
Sybase Replication
Server
Internet
Figure 3-3: Evergreen’s dedicated server for marketing and 
financial analysts.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

24
Data Consolidation and 
Synchronization
In the minds of many IT professionals, data consolida-
tion and synchronization (whereby information from 
multiple locations is coalesced and distributed in an 
Spice Telecom for Sybase Replication 
Server Option for Oracle
Profit margins are thin in the highly competitive telecommu-
nications industry and even small degrees of efficiency 
improvements add up and fund investments in services and 
basic infrastructure. 
Sanjay Srivastava, General Manager – IT, Spice Telecom, 
explains part of the need for analytics: “The telecommu-
nications industry is one of the most challenging and data-
intensive marketplaces in existence. Competition is relentless, 
and we have to constantly make on-the-spot decisions based 
on the information we have available. We need to be ready 
to counter our competition’s offers and be able to provide 
more options without endangering profitability and keep our 
costs to a minimum. With more data we can model different 
scenarios.”
Spice uses Sybase Replication Server Option for Oracle 
along with Replication Server to immediately capture data 
changes in the Oracle system and move them into Sybase IQ. 
Replication Server’s flexibility also lends itself to a number 
of other uses, including extending the life of the Online 
Transaction Processing (OLTP) database.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

25
orderly manner) represent the most common scenario 
where replication is appropriate. However, several 
classes of replication lie beneath this umbrella term. 
Here are some of the most popular subcategories:
 ✓ Data synchronization. Data is distributed among 
multiple computers, and each computer main-
tains an up-to-date copy of the information. 
Generally, every server is permitted to make 
changes to its information; these alterations are 
then propagated to all other servers 
transparently.
 ✓ Data integration. Information from multiple 
sources is combined and then distributed onto a 
collection of destination computers.
 ✓ Data consolidation. A collection of remote, 
diverse data is extracted and merged onto one or 
more replication servers. In many situations, this 
approach facilitates data warehousing or other 
business intelligence usage.
 ✓ Data migration. In this case, database replication 
moves information from legacy sources onto new 
destination servers. The alternative to replication 
in this context is to unload the data from the 
source and load it onto the destination.
 
Employing more than one of these types of 
replication at the same time is a common 
practice. For example, you might use data 
integration to tie disparate applications 
together, and then turn to data synchroniza-
tion to distribute this information onto several 
replication destinations.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

26
Selecting a configuration
You must consider two primary classes of database 
replication when consolidating or synchronizing infor-
mation. In these classes, information has either
 ✓ A master location along with a collection of subor-
dinate destinations.
 ✓ No particular master location but is instead dis-
tributed onto a collection of equal peers, all of 
which are free to make alterations.
 The database replication technology you 
select must be able to manage data changes 
from any location. This functionality is essen-
tial, even if you don’t initially plan for these 
types of modifications; the eventual usage of 
database replication typically far exceeds the 
original plans.
Choosing what to replicate
To support these data distribution scenarios, replication 
management software gives administrators a choice of 
what should be replicated. Administrators may decide 
to replicate specific columns, rows, or both, depending 
on the replicated needs of their users. Business-driven 
rules may also come into play.
In the past few years, the rise of low-cost commod-
itized hardware has had significant repercussions 
throughout the entire technology industry. In 
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

27
particular, data consolidation and synchronization are 
especially well-suited for leveraging low-cost hard-
ware. This has lowered the price barriers for many 
new applications that are based on the availability of 
database replication.
Some of the most sophisticated database replication 
technologies can now support information hosted by 
multiple database vendors. This is particularly impor-
tant given the fact that most IT organizations struggle 
under the weight of disparate platforms acquired for 
many different reasons. A database replication solution 
that does not address this reality is insufficient for the 
majority of modern enterprises.
Evergreen consolidates data
Evergreen continues to grow. In fact, business is going 
so well that Evergreen acquires a competitor (Recycled 
Wheels, with a primary presence in Europe). Their new 
acquisition uses a series of completely different systems, 
running on different database technology. Evergreen is 
faced with the challenge of integrating these two dispa-
rate environments without disrupting either business.
Database replication can help address Evergreen’s needs. 
Figure 3-4 shows a configuration in which Evergreen 
Motors and Recycled Wheels have a live, bi-directional 
database replication between their primary servers.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

28
Database Server
(ASE)
Data Analysis
Server
(SQL Server)
Transactions
Application
Server
Reservation
Agent
Backup
Admin
Data Analyst
(Marketing)
Data Analyst
(Finance)
Reservation Agent
Backup Server
(ASE)
Managed by Sybase
Replication Server
Managed by Sybase
Replication Server
Transactions
Database Server (Oracle)
(Recycled Wheels)
Transactions
Transactions
Managed by
Sybase Replication
Server
Internet
Internet
Figure 3-4: Live, bi-directional database replication.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

29
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania 
Common Pleas Case Management System
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Common Pleas Case 
Management System (CPCMS) is a comprehensive state-
wide system for criminal case management developed by the 
Administrative Office of Pennsylvania Courts (AOPC) under a 
mandate from the Pennsylvania Supreme Court. The system, 
built using Sybase Technology, brings the 60 Pennsylvania 
Judicial Districts in 67 counties together in a single, uniform 
approach to criminal case processing.
“The ability to quickly access the most current court informa-
tion throughout the state — information including prior con-
victions, bail history, pending charges, and outstanding 
warrants — is invaluable to judges, law enforcement officers, 
and other criminal justice agencies.”
— Ralph J. Cappy, Chief Justice of Pennsylvania
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

30
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Chapter 4
Database Replication 
Technology Selection and 
Implementation Guidelines
▶ Getting a handle on operational best practices
▶ Knowing the administration guidelines
▶ Grasping extensibility & upgrading
T
he tips in this chapter fall into three categories, based 
on the capabilities of the database replication plat-
form, how you administer it, and how you plan for the 
future. Sybase Replication Server supports each of the 
guidelines and recommendations we list in this chapter.
Operational Best Practices
When you implement technology in support of a data-
base replication strategy, use the following guidelines 
to ensure a successful rollout.
 ✓ Support for large volumes of data. Data volumes 
are growing by exponential rates, and this expan-
sion shows no sign of slowing down anytime soon. 
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

For this reason, the database replication technology 
you choose must be able to deal with large sets of 
information in a timely manner without bogging 
down the data source servers with overhead.
 ✓ High availability. Because availability and disas-
ter recovery are the most common uses for data-
base replication, it’s essential that the selected 
replication technology itself be able to maintain a 
very high uptime rate.
 ✓ Heterogeneous data source access. IT and data 
administrators typically face a hodgepodge of infor-
mation sources, all of which need to participate in 
replication. Thus, any database replication tech-
nology that you choose must factor in these dispa-
rate data sources and treat them all equally well.
 ✓ Consistent information delivery. Even the most 
intelligently designed database replication architec-
ture will be an utter failure if it is not able to deliver 
consistent information across all replicated nodes. 
The prospect of making a business decision based 
on incorrect or out-of-date data is not one that most 
IT leaders would care to consider. For this reason, 
be sure that your chosen database replication solu-
tion has built-in transactional integrity capabilities.
 ✓ High performance. Because database replication 
implies additional processes and resource 
demands, the database replication technology 
you choose must place a minimal load on your 
production systems.
 ✓ Local autonomy. In the past, most database repli-
cation topographies sported a master server 
working together with a number of subordinate 
32
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

33
destinations. Generally, data was never modified 
on these secondary locations. That restriction 
is no longer applicable in many modern comput-
ing environments. In fact, many organizations 
are finding that they no longer run a master-
subordinate configuration but instead work in a 
peer-to-peer configuration.
 
Regardless of whether you choose to use 
master/subordinate or peer-to-peer, whatever 
database replication technology you choose 
should be able to deal with either of these two 
types of configurations in a manner that is 
transparent to the user.
Administration
The most sophisticated database replication solution 
will be seriously hampered if the solution is difficult to 
configure or administer. Here are several administra-
tive recommendations:
 ✓ Easy administration from a central location. 
Because modern IT organizations are dealing with 
complex information topographies, the adminis-
trators must be issued the proper set of tools to 
help them make better database replication deci-
sions faster and more accurately.
 ✓ Support for multiple data sources. Given today’s 
reporting and other requirements, chances are 
good that your replication technology will need to 
accommodate several (or possibly many more) 
data sources, all of which must be factored into 
your database replication plan and be supported 
by your chosen technology.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

34
 ✓ Support for multiple targets. Just as you will com-
monly need to distribute information from more 
than one source, it’s quite likely that you will 
need to send this information on to many different 
destinations — in a graceful, efficient manner, ide-
ally in as visually-friendly a way possible.
 ✓ Selective replication. Your database replication 
solution should give you the ability to select rows, 
columns, or other filtering criteria when determin-
ing what and how to replicate data.
Extensibility and Upgrading
In this section, we delve into several important factors 
that you should bear in mind regarding how database 
replication might interact with other strategic IT 
initiatives.
 
While these topics might not be on your radar 
screen right now, you might find that the IT 
and business trends we described earlier, 
combined with falling hardware and band-
width costs, will make these technologies 
more compelling sooner than you think.
 ✓ Message bus support. Enterprise Service Buses 
(ESB) offer a collection of well-integrated capabili-
ties that provide reliable messaging, guaranteed 
delivery, and other middleware features neces-
sary for mission-critical applications. ESBs are 
available in proprietary and open-source imple-
mentations. Many organizations are deploying 
this vital technology as the foundation of their 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA).
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

35
 
 Regardless of your chosen database replication 
technology, it’s important that it be capable of 
integrating with the real-time messaging features 
found in an ESB. This partnership increases the 
reliability of your database replication while also 
boosting performance.
 ✓ Mirroring interoperability. Applying hardware-
based alternatives to database replication, such 
as standby servers, redundant networks, and disk 
mirroring, helps ensure high availability for your 
valuable information.
 
Ideally, your chosen database replication solu-
tion will easily integrate with disk mirroring 
infrastructure. This approach provides you 
with a hot standby database that is kept in 
sync with your primary database server. As an 
added benefit, during normal operations you’re 
free to use the standby database for reporting 
purposes, thereby removing processing load 
from your primary server.
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

36
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

Letter from Sybase
Today’s IT organizations are under increasing amounts 
of pressure. Globalization, around-the-clock opera-
tions, increased regulatory requirements, and higher 
competitive pressures are translating into relentless 
demands to trim costs. At the same time, IT organiza-
tions struggle to manage diverse vendor platforms that 
are distributed around the world. Data is growing rap-
idly, yielding even more serious implications of an 
outage or other unplanned downtime.
Database replication solutions such as Sybase 
Replication Server can help organizations deal with 
these challenges. By distributing data to multiple desti-
nations from multiple sources, IT organizations gain 
flexibility when meeting user needs. Information con-
sumers can now construct real-time queries and reports 
that work with live data. The organization is protected 
from the effects of a system outage, data corruption, or 
other business-threatening event.
Please visit our Web site for access to our demos, 
datasheets, and Webcasts (www.sybase.com/
replication), or contact us to set up a call with one 
of our Replication Server experts. We are happy to 
answer your questions as you take the next steps in 
creating your own data management solutions.
Jenn Buchanan and Bill Zhang
Sybase Replication Server Team
www.sybase.com/replication
1-800-8SYBASE
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

DATABASES
Also available:
 Data Warehousing 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-40747-9
 Database 
Development 
For Dummies 
978-0-7645-0752-6
 Microsoft SQL Server 
2008 For Dummies 
978-0-470-22465-6
 SQL All-in-One 
Desk Reference 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-11928-0
Available wherever books are sold. For more 
information or to order direct: U.S. customers 
visit www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974. 
U.K. customers visit www.wileyeurope.com 
or call 0800 243407. Canadian customers visit 
www.wiley.ca or call 1-800-567-4797.
978-0-470-04652-4
NETWORKING
Also available:
 Networking All-in-One 
Desk Reference 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-17915-4
 RTLS For Dummies 
978-0-470-39868-5
 VoIP Deployment 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-38543-2
 Windows Server 2008 
All-in-One Desk 
Reference 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-18044-0
978-0-470-45060-4
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.

PROGRAMMING
Also available:
 C++ For Dummies 
978-0-470-31726-6
 JavaScript and Ajax 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-41799-7
 iPhone Application 
Development 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-48737-2
 Microsoft SQL Server 
2008 For Dummies 
978-0-470-22465-6
978-0-470-04652-4
WEB DEVELOPMENT
Also available:
 Drupal For Dummies 
978-0-470-55611-5
 HTML, XHTML & CSS 
All-in-One Desk 
Reference 
For Dummies 
978-0-470-18627-5
 Joomla! For Dummies 
978-0-470-43287-7
 Microsoft Silverlight 
3.0 For Dummies 
978-0-470-52465-7
 Wikis For Dummies 
978-0-470-04399-8
978-0-470-14928-7
These materials are the copyright of Wiley Publishing, Inc. and any  
dissemination, distribution, or unauthorized use is strictly prohibited.



ISBN: 978-0-470-73980-8
Part No.: L03227
Not for resale
 
 Find listings of all our books
  Choose from many 
different subject categories
  Sign up for  eTips at 
etips.dummies.com
Explanations in plain English
“Get in, get out” information
Icons and other navigational aids
Top ten lists
A dash of humor and fun
Organizations today have a growing need to move 
and synchronize data across the enterprise in 
real-time without the risk of system downtime or 
performance degradation. Database replication is 
the solution, but up until now, it’s been costly and 
difficult to administer. This friendly guide explains 
how database replication will add value to your 
distributed organization in a cost-efficient and 
simple way.  
    Add value to your IT organization 
 with database replication
Understand how database replication 
can solve your organization’s 
business and technological challenges 
Understand the different 
techniques for database 
replication
Reduce the likelihood of 
a major system or data 
outage
Do real-time 
reporting without 
degraded application 
performance
Consolidate and 
synchronize data from 
multiple data sources 
through replication
Follow best practices to 
ensure your replication 
rollout is effective

