REPLACING A BRICK 
For a variety of reasons bricks can get damaged, marked or stained. You may 
simply have had a hanging basket fixed to a brick with a hook in a wall plug 
and are now left with a messy hole. Changing a single brick is not difficult but 
you will need a power drill, a 6 or 7mm masonry bit, a lump hammer and a 
sharp cold chisel. A jointing or plugging chisel is very useful in the 
circumstances also. To replace the brick you will need a little sand and 
cement mixed to the required strength and colour (See our mixing sand and 
cement project) and a pointing trowel. 
First use the drill and masonry bit to drill holes in the joint surrounding the 
brick and in the brick itself. The more holes the better. 
 
Next, using the cold chisel, even a bolster chisel, chop out the brick. The drilling will have 
made this considerably easier and if you have drilled all the way into the brick, about 100mm, 
you should have no trouble removing all it. For fiddly corners and sections of the mortar bed 
which always seem to want to stay there, use a jointing or plugging chisel. These are really 
sharp and the acute angle of the blade allows you to get right to where you need to be. Click 
on the images below to view or buy the tools. 
l 
  
Having removed the brick, sweep out the hole with a paint brush or similar and get your mix of 
sand and cement ready. Place a bed on the floor of the hole and make sure it is a little thicker 
than the bed joint you removed. If you can now, using the pointing trowel, get some to stick to 
either side of the hole, that's great. If not don't worry we will force that in later. Now spread 
some on the top of the new brick and pat down a little to help it adhere to the surface.  

      
    
Push the brick into the opening. Some mortar will squash out so cut this off with the trowel. 
Wiggle the brick about so it sits level in the opening and the joints line up with the existing 
joints. Use the pointing trowel to push in more mortar where you can see any voids. Finally 
point up the new joints to match the existing shape. If the joints of the wall are in the shape 
shown below, this is called bucket handle pointing and is easily achieved by chopping 6 
inches from the end of your hose pipe and running it along the joint. 
 
 

