    Table of Contents
<strong>Introduction (15 pages) 
</strong> <ol>     <li>BP case study; intro to stakeholder perspectives. </li> </ol>
<strong>Part I: How stakeholders shape and are shaped by reputation 
</strong>(In the first part, case studies and analysis will illustrate the bulleted points
listed for each chapter) 
<strong>Chapter 1-Customers (25 pages) 
</strong> <ol>     <li>How expectations customers hold about a company help
shape a company&#146;s reputation </li>     <li>How actions taken by a company
in managing ethics, innovation, quality, safety, sustainability, and security shape
customer expectations </li>     <li>How a company&#146;s reputation affects
customer behavior </li>     <li>How corporate directors have the unique opportunity
to frame the entire reputation-forming process from the perspective of customers
</li>     <li>Why professional marketing, and communications efforts play a
relatively minor role in reputation formation from the perspective of customers </li>
 <li>How customer behavior collectively determine a company&#146;s stock price
or value. </li>     <li>Case studies: Zales, Rolls Royce, Research in Motion, Kodak
</li> </ol> Chapter 2-Employees (25 pages) 
<ol>     <li>How expectations employees hold about a company help shape a
company&#146;s reputation </li>     <li>How actions taken by a company in
managing ethics, innovation, quality, safety, sustainability, and security shape
employee expectations </li>     <li>How a company&#146;s reputation affects
employee behavior </li>     <li>How corporate directors have the unique opportunity
to frame the entire reputation-forming process from the perspective of employees
</li>     <li>Why professional marketing, and communications efforts play a
relatively minor role in reputation formation from the perspective of employees </li>
  <li>How employee behavior collectively determine a company&#146;s stock price
or value </li>     <li>Case studies: Apple, Inc; Goldman Sachs/Blackrock </li> </ol>
<strong>Chapter 3-Vendors (20 pages) 
</strong> <ol>     <li>How expectations vendors hold about a company help shape
a company&#146;s reputation </li>     <li>How actions taken by a company in
managing ethics, innovation, quality, safety, sustainability, and security shape
vendor expectations </li>     <li>How a company&#146;s reputation affects vendors
behavior </li>     <li>How corporate directors have the unique opportunity to frame
the entire reputation-forming process from the perspective of vendors </li>
<li>Why professional marketing, and communications efforts play a relatively minor

C H A P T E R
1
Avoiding
Hara-Kiri
A reputation for a thousand years may depend upon the conduct of a single 
moment. 
—Ernest Bramah
In one of the final scenes in the 1993 murder mystery film, Rising Sun, a police 
inspector stands in a Japanese corporate boardroom at the top floor of a 
towering office building. In front of the entire board, he prepares to accuse one 
member of criminal culpability. With tension rising, fellow board members 
begin to distance themselves physically from the soon-to-be-accused. Taking 
the cultural cue, the executive takes the honorable route and leaps out of a 
window, mercifully ending the crisis for all. 
In an example of real life imitating art, the scene was replayed on Tuesday, 15 
June 2010, when five major oil company executives lined up at a witness table 
for a House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing to investigate the 
Deepwater Horizon oil rig disaster, which at the time was still pouring 50,000 
barrels of oil a day into the Gulf of Mexico. Exxon Mobil CEO Rex Tillerson 
said, “We would not have drilled the well the way [BP] did.” Chevron CEO 
John Watson and Shell Oil Co. president Marvin Odum concurred. Rep. Joseph 
Cao, who had emigrated from Vietnam, closed the scene: “In samurai days, we 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 1 | Avoiding Hara-Kiri
2
would just give…[the Chairman of BP]…a knife and ask [him]…to commit 
hara-kiri.”1
But the simple solution of seppuku that might have sufficed in an earlier 
Japanese culture is not available in our complex multifaceted world. BP did not 
have the luxury of quickly and mercifully ending the fallout from the 
corporative event that best exemplifies a modern reputational crisis: the 
explosion of the Transocean Deepwater Horizon oil-drilling rig in the Gulf of 
Mexico.
The explosion on 15 April 2010 of the Deepwater Horizon platform, situated 40 
miles southeast of New Orleans on the Macondo Prospect oil field, killed 11 
and critically injured 17 of the 126-member crew. Within hours, Deepwater 
Horizon was completely destroyed. As it burned and sank, severance of the 
connection between the well-head and the rig opened the spill of oil into the 
Gulf of Mexico. On the day of the Energy and Commerce Committee hearing, a 
government panel confirmed that this oil spill was the largest in U.S. history. 
Anatomy of a Reputational Crisis
The Deepwater Horizon disaster was yet another mishap—“…an industry 
accident,” as BP CEO Tony Hayward explained shortly before he stepped 
down.2 Oil spills happen all around the world and, as Hayward implied, are an 
inevitable part of doing business. According to the Oil Spill Intelligence Report, 
spills in the size range of at least 10,000 gallons have occurred in the waters of 
112 nations since 1960.3 The Deepwater Horizon spill was a very large one, 
releasing 205.8 million gallons, but still ranks second to the deliberate release of 
about 240 million gallons of crude oil into the Persian Gulf during the 1991 
Gulf War.4
Accidents involving oil tankers, pipelines, and offshore platforms have caused a 
number of very large oil spills. Platforms have several failsafe systems to 
reduce accidental spills. The weight of the drilling fluid/drilling mud acts as the 
first line of well control. If an influx of pressurized oil or gas breaks through the 
mud, well-control is maintained through the rig’s emergency-closure devices 
(rams) that seal off the well and route the wellbore fluids to specialized pressure 
controlling equipment.4 Both systems failed the Deepwater Horizon in April 
2010.
Chapter 2 picks up the BP story and explains why the Deepwater Horizon spill 
was more than an accident. But to provide context for this and the many other 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
case studies that follow, it is important first to introduce the variables that can 
transform a business operational event into a reputational event:

The event affects a large number of stakeholders 
comprising many different interests.

Reputation-impacting business processes are at the heart of 
the event.

24/7 news coverage and incessant exposure through social 
media promote awareness of the event.

The company’s antecedent PR campaign(s) is dissonant 
with the unfolding facts of the event.

The company’s inept crisis communications exacerbate the 
ill-will triggered by the event.
Because all these key variables were present, BP’s accident was a modern 
reputational perfect storm. Deepwater Horizon is the poster child for a 
reputational event in which the market punishes a company. 
Reputational Stakeholders
The stakeholders who impact directly the profit and loss statement are 
customers, employees, vendors and suppliers, and creditors. Investors set the 
earnings multiple. The special stakeholders, by virtue of their enterprise-wide as 
well as industry-wide influence, include corporate directors, analysts, and 
regulators.
Though the perspectives and values of stakeholders vary, each of them forms 
expectations of how a corporation will behave. In chapters devoted to each of 
the stakeholders, Parts 2 and 3 of this book show how expectations stakeholders 
hold about a company help shape a company’s reputation and its stock price.
Reputation-Impacting Corporate Behaviors
Behaviors in six key areas of business performance underpin reputation: ethics, 
innovation, quality, safety, sustainability, and security (Table 1-1). Reputation 
is the summation of stakeholder expectations in these six areas of behavior.

Chapter 1 | Avoiding Hara-Kiri
4
Table 1-1. The Six Key Business Processes Underpinning Reputation5
Business 
Process
Definitions
Ethics
The moral principles by which a company operates; integrity is the act of 
adhering to those moral principles. Ethics are an integral part of governance 
that, along with integrity, affect the reputation value of all other intangible 
assets. Ethics are also the keystone intangible asset because they form the basis 
for trust and confidence.
Innovation
The design, invention, development, and/or implementation of new or altered 
products, services, processes, systems, organizational structures, or business 
models for the purpose of creating new value for customers and financial 
returns for the firm. Intellectual Property is part of this.
Quality
The extent to which a product is free from defects or deficiencies.
The extent to which a service meets or exceeds the expectations of customers or 
clients, especially in comparison to peers.
The extent to which products and services conform to measurable and verifiable 
criteria.
Safety
The state of being reasonably certain that a set of conditions will not 
accidentally cause adverse effects on the well-being of employees, the public, or 
the environment.
Sustainability
The making, using, offering for sale, or selling of products and services that 
meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs.
Security 
The degree of protection a company offers against events undertaken by actors 
intentionally, criminally, or maliciously for purposes that adversely affect the 
firm. Because fear is the great disruptor of life and commerce, it is useful to 
think of security, the most ethereal of the intangible assets, as “absence of fear.”
The chapters that follow show how companies’ cultures lead to choices in 
managing ethics, innovation, quality, safety, sustainability, and security that 
shape stakeholders’ expectations. They show how companies’ reputations affect 
stakeholders’ economic behaviors and, in turn, how those behaviors create 
reputational value shaping companies’ profit and loss statements and stock 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
prices. The book builds the business case for reputation awareness by operating 
executives, reputational management by senior executives, and reputation 
oversight by the board of directors. We conclude that since measurements 
facilitate management, reputational value metrics can help companies do the 
right thing by their stakeholders.
Reputation, Marketing, and Crisis 
Communications
Reputation is an expectation of behavior shaped by direct personal experience 
and by information from diverse secondary sources.6,7 The cacophony of 
secondary sources has increased in step with the growth in the democratic 
capabilities of the Internet: every individual armed with a keyboard, camera, 
and Web access or even just a smartphone can be an investigative journalist. 
While it remains true that communications professionals can help disseminate 
information and shape a story with authentic content, they have less impact on 
reputation creation than in the past.
Many businesses are still somewhat uncertain about whether to perceive 
reputation as the outcome of actual business practices or as an image created 
through company-generated communications. This book shows that it is both. It 
is a diversity of communications channels and third-party signals, reflecting 
authentic corporate behavior, that can help shape the expectations of 
stakeholders. It also shows that when image-making is not grounded in 
substance, it can produce highly counterproductive results.
Reputation and Risk Management
Executives are seeking reputation management advice, even if they’re not sure 
where to look for it.8 They intuit a link between reputation and intangible asset 
value and recognize that intangible assets comprise more than 65% of the value 
of the average traded firm. Many have heard that improving a firm’s reputation 
can add on average 6% to its enterprise value,9 and that the average major crisis 
will shave 7% of a firm’s market capitalization. Growing awareness of the 
importance of reputation is also showing up in corporate annual reports. As of 
June 2012, 355 of the annual reports of the S&P 500 constituent companies 
were disclosing the significance of reputation risk, up from only 40 firms in 
2009.

Chapter 1 | Avoiding Hara-Kiri
6
This book considers the subject of reputation from the perspective of a risk 
underwriter of reputational value. Most case studies conclude with action 
points, and each chapter provides an actionable summary. The content is geared 
toward improving readers’ understanding of the links between corporate 
culture, behaviors, reputation, and value. The single most important 
management lesson is that managing reputation means managing the business 
processes underpinning reputation. Consider this:
Reputation is a consequence of corporate behavior that motivates stakeholders to behave in 
ways that either reward or punish the corporation.
Organization of the Book 
Chapter 2 is an overture that fleshes out the BP reputation story and details the 
failure of reputation-linked business processes. It describes how the reputation 
of BP evolved within each stakeholder group, how that evolution changed each 
stakeholder’s expectations of BP, and how those changes triggered economic 
consequences.
Part 2 of this book, comprising Chapters 3 through 7, focuses successively on 
the classes of stakeholders whose actions directly drive revenues and the costs 
of operations thereby creating measurable reputational value. Customers will 
reward companies with superior reputations by accepting higher prices, 
consuming greater volumes, and compressing purchase cycle times. In the 
setting of a superior reputation, employees generally will work for lower wages 
and create less operating friction; vendors and suppliers will provide superior 
service at lower cost; creditors will provide capital on better terms; and equity 
investors will grant management greater freedom to operate.
Part 3 looks at the groups of stakeholders with outsized influence on corporate 
reputational value: corporate boards in Chapter 8, analysts in Chapter 9, and 
regulators in Chapter 10.
Part 4 offers perspectives. The book overall is objective—just as risk is an 
objective probabilistic expectation of frequency and severity. In the spirit of 
American pragmatism, this book observes and explains without moralizing.10 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
For example, we make no judgment on what ethical behavior is. A vast 
literature exists on that subject dating to ancient civilizations. We don’t define 
it. Rather, we measure the results of behaviors associated with it. 
Andrew Carnegie once said, “I used to listen to what people say; I now pay 
attention to what people do.” We too look at behaviors: specifically, how each 
class of stakeholders behaves in response to the organization’s reputation. 
Those behaviors constitute observable, empirical evidence—not judgments and 
not speculative opinions. Those stakeholder behavior response patterns are the 
pillars of reputational value metrics calculated by Steel City Re, employer of 
this book’s author.
But since the drivers of reputation are corporate behaviors, and behaviors are 
subject to moral hazard, Chapter 11 focuses on reputation as a human construct 
in the context of liberal and conservative politics. It suggests that reputation can 
provide a mechanism for merging human values and the profit-making 
imperative of corporations.
Chapter 12 returns to form and introduces algorithmically generated 
reputational value metrics on seven of the companies presented in the preceding 
studies. These mathematical formulations objectively link reputation to the 
actual public record of expected stakeholder behaviors in the market. These 
algorithms generate dependable metrics that can offer guidance to stakeholders 
interested in recognizing, shaping, and valuing the behaviors that create 
corporate reputation. 
Chapter 13 reviews central lessons in the volume and restates the business case 
for reputation management on the premise that executives at all levels of an 
organization can manage best that which they measure. And that’s the essence 
of Reputation, Stock Price, and You.
1 Broder JM. Oil Executives break ranks in testimony. New York Times. 15 June 2010. Available 
at: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/16/business/16oil.html. Accessed 14 June 2012.
2 Elkind P, Whitford D, Burke D. BP: 'An accident waiting to happen'. Fortune. 24 January 2011. 
Available at: http://features.blogs.fortune.cnn.com/2011/01/24/bp-an-accident-waiting-to-happen/ 
Accessed 22 July 2012.
3 Accidental discharges of oil. Global Marine Oil Pollution Information Gateway. Available at: 
http://oils.gpa.unep.org/facts/oilspills.htm Accessed 21 July 2012.
4 Repanich J. The Deepwater Horizon spill by the numbers. Popular Mechanics. 10 August 2010. 
Available at: http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/energy/coal-oil-gas/bp-oil-spill-
statistics. Accessed 21 July 2012.
5 Kossovsky N, Miller TA. Mission: Intangible. Managing risk and reputation to create 

Chapter 1 | Avoiding Hara-Kiri
8
enterprise value. Pittsburgh/Vancouver: Intangible Asset Finance Society/Trafford, 2010.
6 Abdul-Rahman A, Hailes S. Supporting trust in virtual communities. In: Proceedings of the 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Maui, Hawaii, 4–7 January 2000.
7 Sheehan NT, Stabell CB. Reputation as a driver in activity level analysis: reputation and 
competitive advantage in knowledge intensive firms. Corp Reput Rev. 2010;13:198–208.
8 Schumpeter. What’s in a name? Economist,. 21 April 2012. 
http://www.economist.com/node/21553033. Accessed 22 July 2012.
9 Greenberg MD. On breaking the log jam: The how and why of corporate reputation leadership. 
Corp Finance Rev. 2012; 17(1):11–17.
10 Pfeiffer R. An introduction to classic American pragmatism. Philosophy Now, 
October/November 2003 (43). Available at: 
http://philosophynow.org/issues/43/An_Introduction_to_Classic_American_Pragmatism. 
Accessed 29 July 2012.

C H A P T E R
2
A $54 Billion 
Reputation
BP plc delivered the worst of a poor set of quarterly results among top oil 
companies on Tuesday, slashing $US5 billion off the value of US assets and 
undershooting expectations with its operating result. The British oil company 
is struggling under the weight of litigation over the 2010 US Gulf oil 
spill…bringing the total set aside for the disaster to $US38 billion or well 
over two years worth of profits at current prices.1
—Canberra Times (31 July 2012)
For more than a century, BP (NYSE: BP) has been one of the world’s giant oil 
producers. The company was founded in 1901 when a lawyer-turned-mining-
and-mineral-tycoon named William Knox D’Arcy negotiated with the Persian 
Shah for a 60-year concession to explore for oil on property covering 480,000 
square miles. Nearly a century later, in a $50 billion deal, British Petroleum 
acquired Amoco Corporation, the fifth largest oil company in the United States 
and largest producer of natural gas in North America, forming BP Amoco plc. 
The “Amoco’’ name soon disappeared and the company has been known since 
as “BP plc.’’ 

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
2
Headline Risk: Reputation vs. Reality
From the mid-1990s to the early part of the new century, BP deliberately turned 
green—at least in its public persona. In a speech on climate change at Stanford 
University in March 2002, Lord John Browne, the group chief executive of the 
British oil giant, declared BP to be a different kind of company: “I believe the 
American people expect a company like BP…to offer answers and not 
excuses.… Companies composed of highly skilled and trained people can’t live 
in denial of mounting evidence gathered by hundreds of the most reputable 
scientists in the world.” Stakeholders took Brown at his word. “BP was the first 
to say that climate change was a problem, the first to take responsibility, and the 
first to have an internal target” for reducing their emissions, said Eileen 
Claussen, the president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. “They 
were pretty brave.”2
BP’s reputation as a green company was solidifying in the early 2000s. 
Although Tony Hayward, Lord Browne’s successor, dismissed the idea that the 
group was working to “save the world,” many employees continued to take the 
green commitment very seriously.3 
Time magazine framed stakeholders’ expectations in 2006 this way:
Pull into a BP station this holiday weekend and you may notice a green and 
yellow starburst over the pump, an image intended to remind you, as you’re 
emptying your wallet of $20 bills, that at least you’re supporting a green 
company. BP, after all, was the first oil giant to publicly acknowledge the 
risks of global warming, back in 1997. The firm has cut its own carbon 
emissions 10% below 1990 levels and last year established an alternative 
energies division. It’s investing big money—$8 billion over the next decade 
—on renewable fuels, such as wind and solar power. Just last week, BP 
announced a partnership with DuPont to develop and commercialize 
advanced biofuels (superior to ethanol), starting next year. Even if you’re 
being gouged at the pump, as you might suspect, BP at least seems to be 
putting its profits to good use.4
BP’s observable actions affirming a commitment to sustainability were 
reinforced with an effective media campaign. Beginning in 2000, and at a cost 
of $200 million, Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide initiated a campaign that “aspires 
to a conversational, almost confidential voice that suggests, ‘You know what oil 
companies do to the environment, and we do, too, but honestly, we’re not like 
that at all.’”2 Out went the old British Petroleum shield that had been in Britain 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
for more than 70 years, and in came the green, yellow, and white sunburst that 
seemed to suggest warm and fuzzy feelings about Earth.
Five years after the company’s successful repositioning as oil industry leader on 
environmental issues, a string of adverse events began chipping away at the 
firm’s reputation. In 2005, an explosion at BP’s Texas refinery in the United 
States resulted in 15 deaths and 170 injuries. The company was forced to settle 
1,350 lawsuits related to the refinery disaster, and hundreds of civil suits are 
still pending. In 2006, corroded pipelines caused two BP oil spills in Prudhoe 
Bay, Alaska, and 267,000 gallons of thick crude oil spread over two acres on 
the Tundra of Alaska’s North Slope. In 2007, BP agreed to pay $373 million in 
restitution and fines to settle illegal propane trading allegations, including 
alleged environmental violations centering on the Alaskan pipeline leaks and 
Texas refinery explosion. 
BP welcomed some good news in 2007 when the company inked an agreement 
with Libya providing for access to deepwater blocks for exploration. Even that 
news, however, was tainted by allegations that the deal was conditioned on the 
United Kingdom’s release of the Libyan intelligence agent, Abdel Baset al 
Megrahi, the man responsible for the destruction of Pan Am Flight 103 and the 
loss of 270 lives over Lockerbie, Scotland.
The list of adverse events continued to lengthen. In early 2009, the State of 
Alaska, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the U.S. Department of 
Transportation all filed civil lawsuits against BP’s exploration business relating 
to the 2006 Prudhoe Bay spill. 
Stakeholders’ expectations, and the reputation that BP had established for its 
unique concern for Earth, initially helped minimize the adverse effects of these 
events. BP had created some degree of reputational resilience, exemplified by 
this observation from Time magazine: “It’s also worth putting BP’s 
transgressions, alleged or otherwise, in context. No other integrated oil 
company—certainly none with $285 billion in sales—has made a bigger 
commitment to alternative energy, cutting greenhouse gases and educating the 
public about conservation.”4 A January 2007 issue of Business Week reinforced 
a positive perception of BP with the cover story, “Beyond the Green 
Corporation.” Pondering whether socially responsible policy could also add to a 
company’s bottom line, the article contended that Innovest's better-than-Exxon 
AA risk rating for BP was derived from its $8 billion commitment to alternative 
energy.5
But BP was under financial pressure. When Tony Hayward assumed the helm 
of BP in 2007, he received a mandate from the board: no more safety disasters. 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
4
He committed to increase the company’s attentiveness to safety. Just a few 
months later, Hayward made a second pledge to boost BP’s “dreadful” bottom 
line, promising to close an “$8 billion ‘profit gap’ with Shell. That, of course, 
meant cutting budgets.”6
Hayward was aware of the tension between the costs of safety processes and 
profits. The U.S. Chemical Safety Board’s 341-page report after the 2005 Texas 
City refinery fire identified one major cause to be corporate cost-cutting.
Furthermore, the company was aware of the importance of key business 
processes to its value and proudly disclosed its safety management processes to 
its shareholders. The company’s 2009 Annual Report disclosed that a key 
enabler for safe, reliable, and compliant operations was the BP Operating 
Management System, which “provides a common framework for all BP 
operations, designed to achieve consistency and continuous improvement in 
safety and efficiency. BP’s operating management system includes mandatory 
practices, such as integrity management and incident investigation, which are 
designed to address particular risks.” 
BP also asserted that these processes created value when deployed by the right 
people with the right skills and capabilities. But given the relative 
underperformance of equity, the company also acknowledged that it needed to 
improve performance. They stated that incentives were in place to create value 
for shareholders. “Our people strategy has already resulted in refreshed group 
leadership and senior management teams, recruitment focused on individuals 
with strong operational and technical expertise, and appropriate reward for 
performance at all levels” (italics ours). 
Notwithstanding those incentives, the federal Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) proposed in 2009 a record fine against BP for “failure 
to abate” previously cited hazards at Texas City.7 OSHA also cited BP for 
hundreds of new “willful” safety violations, which, according to the Center for 
Public Integrity, totaled 829 from June 2007 to February 2010—97% of the 
violations for the entire industry.6 In short, as the chairman of the federal 
Chemical Safety Board observed, BP had “yet to achieve an effective safety 
culture with regard to process safety management.”8
The BP Regional Oil Spill Response Plan—Gulf of Mexico, dated June 30, 
2009, covers all of the giant oil company’s offshore operations in the Gulf and 
is one more example of a work product developed in an environment that had 
yet to develop an effective safety culture.9

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
BP mentioned sea lions, seals, sea otters, and walruses in its plan—Arctic animals that had 
not been seen in the Gulf for millions of years.
The BP plan offered a Japanese home shopping site as the link to one of its “primary 
equipment providers for BP in the Gulf of Mexico Region [for] rapid deployment of spill 
response resources on a 24 hour, 7 days a week basis.”
In due course, lawmakers and TV comics would find fodder for incredulity and 
humor throughout.10 Three omissions were less laughable:

The plan included no information about tracking subsurface 
oil plumes from deepwater blowouts, although more oil 
might spread below the surface than at the top.

The plan included no oceanic or meteorologic data, despite 
the ocean-floor site being in a hurricane-prone region.

The plan included no measures for preventing viral and 
bacterial disease transmission to captured animals in rehab 
facilities. This had been found to be a major risk after the 
Exxon Valdez spill.
When metrics and control systems go awry and cost-cutting happens, morale 
among employees tends to decline quickly. One indication of morale decline at 
BP was an increase in complaints filed under BP’s code of conduct. This code is 
designed to ensure that all employees comply with legal requirements and 
company standards in key areas such as safety, workplace behavior, bribery and 
corruption, and financial integrity. A second indication of morale decline was 
an uptick in employee complaints under Open Talk, a BP program that enables 
employees and contractors to report confidentially safety concerns or any 
suspected breach of compliance, ethics, or the code of conduct. When 
complaints under the Open Talk program decreased from 1,064 in 2006 to 874 
in 2009, BP inferred that the risk controls in their operating management system 
were working. In fact, when normalized against a shrinking employee pool, the 
reporting rate was actually increasing. On the other hand, dismissals for 
violations fell off sharply. Slipping morale began to show elsewhere. In 2008, 
for example, only 42% of employees even bothered to respond to the survey on 
employee engagement.

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
6
Reputationally Linked Process Failure
Safety is a reputationally linked process. In the energy business, process safety 
generally comes down to a single issue: keeping hydrocarbons contained inside 
a steel pipe or tank.6 An early chapter of the official U.S. government report, 
issued less than eight months after the explosion, explains that the disaster was 
not fortuitous but institutional. The January 2011 report, Deepwater: The Gulf 
Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling, observed that “most of the 
mistakes and oversights at [the] Macondo [well] can be traced back to a single 
overarching failure—a failure of management.”11,12 All stakeholders were 
affected by the failure.
The 24/7 news cycle brought stories that outraged stakeholders of every variety. 
Many vented through various social media channels. The media saw that 
adverse BP news sold content and advertising and they produced more of the 
same. “The ink in the drink,” as the disaster was soon called, generated 
predictable reactions among every stakeholder group: customers, employees, 
suppliers, creditors, equity investors, the board, analysts, and regulators.
Customers
Both customers and potential customers of BP were shocked. Initially most 
customers seemed to withhold negative reactions.13 But three months into the 
crisis, the average consumer—and how many individuals of driving age are not 
potential consumers of BP-branded fuel products?—began to look at BP 
differently. Many had seen the logo’s yellow sun and green leaves as evidence 
that the company was “beyond petroleum” and different from other oil 
companies and expected different behavior from the firm. They were 
profoundly disappointed and felt deceived.
In 1998, Ernest Lowe and Robert Harris published a paper in Corporate 
Environmental Strategy lauding BP for “Taking Climate Change Seriously: 
British Petroleum’s Business Strategy.” Twelve years later, they added a red-
letter banner to their website:
BP’s Deep Horizon Blowout demonstrates that the company culture reported 
on in this [1998] paper has drowned in deeply polluted water. BP’s own 
employees are reporting pre-blow out decisions made on a least cost rather 
than lowest risk basis, decisions leading to the deadly explosion of the oil 
platform. This disaster is already at the scale of the Exxon Valdez oil spill, 
with oil and toxic dispersants soaking Gulf wetlands, killing birds and 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
marine life, and threatening the livelihood of tens of thousands of fisherman, 
processors, and tourist industry employees. Perhaps BP and the rest of the 
petro-industry can learn from the “golden era” described here.14
In the aftermath of the spill, BP-branded gas stations reported sales declines of 
10%–40% from Florida to Illinois.15 But BP owned just a fraction of the more 
than 11,000 stations across the United States that sold fuel under the BP banner. 
In an unfortunate demonstration of unintended consequences, the boycotts hurt 
mostly independent business owners who licensed the BP brand, and the net 
effect on BP’s revenue line was negligible because the drop in BP’s branded-
fuel sales was offset by an almost equal jump in its unbranded-fuel sales.
Brand licenses eventually come up for renewal, and a BP-branded service 
station can just as easily offer fuel and convenience products under alternative 
brands. In 2011, BP reported 2.6% fewer BP, ARCO, and Aral retail brand 
licensees and 7% lower branded-fuel sales globally than in 2009.29 
Fuel is fungible. Notwithstanding a damaged brand, BP can just as easily 
distribute fuel through resellers who will then bring white-label products to 
market. In 2011, BP reported 5.9% higher unbranded-fuel sales globally than in 
2009.
Employees
Employees, including the CEO, suffered in the usual way: loss of morale and 
turnovers. Five weeks after the explosion, CEO Tony Hayward wrote an e-mail 
to all BP employees apprising them of the particulars of the event and response. 
He closed with a direct appeal: “[My]…request of you all remains the same—to 
stay focused, and do all that you can to ensure we have safe, reliable and 
efficient operations, wherever you are working.”16 Meanwhile, the company 
was shedding 800 more employees from its U.S. operations—a net of 3.5%, 
mostly from the corporate unit. 
“Everybody is really angry,” said an employee at the London headquarters in 
St. James’s Square to the Financial Times. “There is some sympathy that this 
may be down to bad luck. But [chief executive] Tony Hayward has made the 
situation a million times worse.” The reaction of staff mirrored that of the 
outside world. The question they were asking is: Am I working for the company 
I thought I was working for, with the right values?”17
Internally, there were two major worries. The first was whether concerns about 
BP’s potential liabilities would hold back crucial investments in other parts of 

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
8
the business. But the bigger internal worry was how both the widespread 
disillusionment and potential cash crunch would impair the ability of BP to pay 
enough to retain and recruit talent.
The stress of four months of relentless crisis management took its toll on the 
CEO. When he closed an apology for the disruption to the lives of Gulf of 
Mexico area residents, he added for emphasis, “There’s no one who wants this 
over more than I do. I’d like my life back.”3 Against memories of videos of 
Hayward at polo matches and of Deepwater deaths, it was a gaffe heard round 
the world. The company gave him his life back in July, replacing him with new 
CEO Bob Dudley.
Suppliers
As one of many cost-cutting strategies in 2009, BP began to simplify supplier 
relationships. Mr. Hayward spoke of his commitment to “driving deflation into 
the supply chain”18 and reduced the number of IT suppliers from 40 to 5. 19 In 
the Gulf of Mexico, the company was drilling in cooperation with suppliers 
Halliburton and Transocean. Strategic partnerships with a few key suppliers is 
clearly better than managing many, but to succeed in any strategic 
multisourcing, governance becomes critical. With BP, merely shrinking the 
number of suppliers was inadequate when both supply-chain visibility and 
governance fell far short of the task.20 Transocean, Halliburton, and other 
partners made small safety tradeoffs that combined to create a much higher 
overall risk profile for the ultimate provider of goods to the end-customer, BP.
After the explosion, supplier-associated costs jumped as companies discovered 
that doing business with BP was riskier than previously imagined. Credit risk 
was an obvious consideration as BP’s cash flows began being channeled in a 
variety of unexpected directions (see Chapter 9). Vendors also discovered that 
BP was attempting to spread some of the costs of the fallout. After adjusting for 
declines in the wider stock market, BP’s two minority partners, Anadarko and 
Mitsui, and the rig’s owner, Transocean, lost about $35 billion in combined 
value.21 BP also sued its vendors: On April 21, BP sued Halliburton and 
Cameron International over the Gulf disaster, aiming to hold Halliburton 
accountable for “improper conduct, errors and omissions, including fraud and 
concealment.” Halliburton said it would “vigorously deny these claims.” BP 
also filed suit against Transocean Ltd., the Deepwater Horizon’s owner and 
operator. According to BP’s complaint, the former “breached its contractual 
duties, including failing to adequately maintain the rig and fix earlier engine 
problems and failing to train its crew and properly coordinate efforts to fight 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
fires on the vessel.” They also sued Cameron International over allegations that 
the blowout-prevention equipment they had supplied was a cause “in whole or 
in part” of the blowout and ensuing oil spill in the Gulf.22
The increased risk of doing business with BP ballooned production and 
manufacturing expenses. From 2008 to 2009, BP had cut its expenses from $26 
billion to $23 billion, and cut purchases from $266 billion to $163 billion. In 
2010, among the consequences of the explosion were jumps in expenses by $41 
billion to $64 billion and in purchases by $53 billion to $216 billion.10 Included 
in these additional $94 billion in costs were $40 billion BP set aside for various 
claims. As of April 2012, vendors conducting cleanup operations pocketed 
around $14 billion of BP money.
Creditors
Though BP was asset-rich, its liquidity position was challenged before the spill. 
After the spill, its credit costs rose dramatically as its credit-spread movements, 
usually measured in hundredths of a percentage point, rose to six percentage 
points over government rates. The Economist noted at the time that such 
dramatic deterioration in perceived creditworthiness can create a vicious and 
unpredictable spiral. There was a fear that counterparties to BP’s giant and 
poorly disclosed derivatives book might demand extra collateral from it, leading 
to big cash calls.20 Or not lend at all.
Tony Hayward spoke of how capital markets were “effectively closed” to BP at 
the height of the crisis. “We were not able to borrow in the capital markets 
either short or medium-term debt at all,” he said.23 Bob Dudley called it a “near-
death experience.”
The regulatory arms of the executive branch and the oversight arms of the 
legislative branch of the U.S. government, as described below, pummeled BP. 
A meeting with U.S. President Barack Obama on 16 June 2010 gave BP what it 
desperately needed to calm the credit markets, starting with a limit on its 
damages outlay. “Obama … promised to end his market-rattling assault, telling 
the world, ‘BP is a strong and viable company, and it is in all of our interests 
that it remain so.’ Said Hayward: ‘We needed political calmness. We needed to 
stop being attacked by the most powerful government in the world.’”6
The reputational benefits of this about-face by the United States were 
desperately needed. BP was not so lucky enlisting help from its home 
government. Much-needed relief from financial pressure through a parallel 
strategy involving investment by a sovereign wealth fund was thwarted by 

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
10
concurrent suggestions that BP had pressured the British government into 
commercially beneficial but ethically questionable actions. 
Nineteen days after the BP executives’ meeting with the U.S. president, on 5 
July 2010, the chairman of Libya’s national oil company disclosed that he was 
encouraging Libya’s sovereign wealth fund to take a strategic stake in BP. The 
announcement came shortly after news that Libya had agreed to allow BP to 
start drilling off shore in accordance with a 2007 agreement. While these two 
pieces of news might have opened capital markets, they were instead met by 
howls of outrage when the physician who had diagnosed former Libyan agent 
Megrahi’s terminal prostate cancer and given him three months to live—the 
grounds given for his compassionate release by the United Kingdom the year 
before—stated that on further reflection he “could survive for 10 years or 
more.”24 In fact, Megrahi succumbed to his cancer nearly 6 years later in May 
2012.
Equity Investors
In 2009, BP profits fell by 45% as Tony Hayward received a 41% increase in 
his remuneration package comprising about £4 million ($6 million) in salary, 
bonus, and share awards. Four days before the Deepwater Horizon explosion, 
BP appeared to have shrugged off fears of a shareholder revolt over its 
executive pay policy after preliminary results showed that notwithstanding the 
lobbying of PIRC, the investor body, 84% of shareholders voted in favor of its 
remuneration plans.25 
After adjusting for declines in the wider stock market, about $65 billion was 
wiped off the value of BP in the first eight weeks following the crisis. 
Shareholders reacted through both their votes and their lawyers.
At the 2010 annual general meeting, Sir William Castell—BP’s senior 
independent director and chairman of the safety committee—saw 43% of 
shareholders vote against his re-election. He stepped down from the board. BP 
Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg saw 15% of shareholders vote against him, but 
he managed to retain the confidence of the majority of investors.26
In the aftermath of the event and the loss in equity value, shareholders filed 
three derivative lawsuits in the United States against the directors and officers 
of BP.27 The lawsuits allege that the blowout, fire, and oil spill could have been 
prevented if the directors and officers of BP had paid more attention to safety 
issues. The plaintiffs allege that the directors and officers have a fiduciary duty 
to put in place and monitor systems that will detect and address those problems, 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
but the defendant BP officials only “went through the motions.” They further 
allege a pattern of accidents and other close calls should have alerted BP CEO 
Tony Hayward and other high-level employees that their cost-cutting measures 
left the company vulnerable, but they still ignored the red flags. Last, the suits 
allege breach of fiduciary duty and waste of corporate assets. 
The plaintiffs sought more than monetary damages. They also asked the court to 
force BP’s board to institute a long list of corporate governance changes aimed 
at improving accountability and transparency at BP. 
In September 2011, Judge Keith Ellison of the Southern District of Texas 
dismissed the cases, “as the English High Court is the more appropriate forum 
for this case.”28 Yet, as recently as July 2012, investors were still trying to 
revive the cases in the United States Fifth Circuit.
BP Executives and Board of Directors
After replacing CEO Tony Hayward with Bob Dudley in July 2010, the 
embarrassed board took an active interest in safety oversight. On safety, the 
board supported and challenged Bob Dudley and his executive team as they 
restructured and enhanced BP’s processes, systems, and culture. They also 
initiated a review of the way BP manages, reports, and acts on risk, including 
board oversight.29
Capital Market Analysts
Nine weeks into the crisis, Moody’s slashed BP’s credit rating by three notches, 
saying its downgrade “reflects the worsening impact expected from the oil 
pouring into the Gulf of Mexico.” Fitch, another rating agency, downgraded the 
company to close to junk levels.
Regulators
Over a 12-week span following the explosion, Congress held more than 50 
hearings and examined more than 80 bills related to the spill, including some 
that would limit BP’s future business opportunities.30 Investigations continued, 
with U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder stating on April 24, 2012, “The 
Deepwater Horizon Task Force is continuing its investigation into the explosion 
and will hold accountable those who violated the law in connection with the 
largest environmental disaster in U.S. history.” The first arrest related to the 

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
12
spill was in April 2012; an engineer was charged with obstruction of justice for 
allegedly deleting 300 text messages showing BP knew the flow rate was three 
times higher than initial claims by the company, and for knowing that the Top 
Kill effort to cap the well was unlikely to succeed, but claiming otherwise.31,32,33
Health, safety, and environment fines and penalties levied by regulators totaled 
only $77.4 million in 2011—not much more than several past years had cost.34 
Penalties and fines, however, are lagging indicators. Under the Clean Water 
Act, depending on whether the company is found grossly negligent, BP plc 
could be fined between $5.4 billion and $21.1 billion.35 The Department of 
Justice signaled that it was looking for an out-of-court settlement of $25 billion. 
BP is hoping to settle for under $15 billion. As of June 2012, $11 billion 
remained in the fund BP set aside in 2010 for all Gulf-related claims,36 but only 
$3.5 billion of that fund was allocated for penalties under the Clean Water Act. 
Those could balloon to $21 billion if the Justice Department proves gross 
negligence. The Financial Times concluded that “a gross negligence finding 
would seriously—perhaps fatally—damage” BP’s reputation.37
Reputational Value Lost: Summary
The economic consequences of BP’s reputational fall after April 2010 
underscore how much value BP had created in its reputation and how much it 
had placed at risk by not instituting the oversight or operational controls needed 
to effect a thorough cultural transformation. Relative to 2009 on a per-barrel 
basis,38 in 2011 BP spent 81% more on goods and services, 8% more to produce 
and manufacture, 41% more to explore, and 16% more to finance its operations 
(Table 2-1). In total, a reasonable estimate of the dollar value lost by BP 
amounts to $91 billion in direct and increased costs in 2010 and $124 billion in 
inflation-adjusted costs in 2011 for a total of $215 billion of additional costs 
over two years relative to 2009. With respect to enterprise value, between 10 
March 2010, and 1 June 2012, while the S&P 500 composite equity index 
climbed 9.3%, BP’s stock price dropped 35.4%. The 44% difference would add 
around $54 billion to BP’s enterprise value. It is one of the most dramatic 
examples on record of a failure of oversight and management of the elements of 
reputation.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
Table 2-1. Proportional Cost Increases (Decreases) over the 2009 Pre-Disaster BP Group P&L 
Statement
Cost Item per Barrel
2010 (%)
2011 (%)
Purchases (expense)
41.57
80.86
Production and manufacturing expense
198.63
7.92
Exploration expense
(19.00)
41.24
Finance costs
13.03
16.41
Retrospective
Following the Deepwater Horizon accident, BP entered 2011 facing a range of 
uncertainties. These included concerns about its ability to operate safely in 
deepwater; meet its financial commitments in the Gulf of Mexico; and, more 
broadly, how to recover the trust and reputational value it had lost. The 2011 
annual report reflects these concerns and presents a company that is focused on 
safety, trust, and risk management at the highest levels of the organization. 
These intangible assets are presented in an integrated operational framework. 
Innovation, safety, security, and sustainability receive joint mention under the 
heading of “Reputation and Competitive Advantage”:
Our development and application of technology represents [sic] a distinctive 
capability that is central to our reputation and competitive advantage. For 
us, technology is the practical application of scientific knowledge to manage 
risks, capture business value and inform strategy development. This includes 
the research, development, demonstration and acquisition of new technical 
capabilities and support for the deployment of BP’s know-how.
We monitor the potential opportunities and risks presented by emerging 
science, interdisciplinary innovation and new players; natural resource 
issues and climate concerns; and evolving policy concerns, including the 
current emphasis on energy security and efficiency.
In 2011, the company deployed a “multi-tiered risk-management solution” to 
manage three types of risks: strategic, safety and operational, and compliance 
and control. Under the heading of safety and operational risks came process 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
14
safety, environmental risk, physical security, product quality, cyber security, 
and crisis management and business continuity. The purposes of the “integrated 
solution” were to reduce costs, mitigate overall risks, and protect the company’s 
reputation. 
At the group level, the safety and risk management component included targets 
for recordable injury frequency, loss of primary containment, and 
implementation of change programs. Significantly, safety was now a factor in 
the executive bonus plan. This underlined the company’s strategic priorities of 
reinforcing safety and risk management at the highest executive and board 
levels. 
BP’s board considered reputation from two perspectives: the reputational risks 
to the group and the processes the company has in place to manage these risks. 
In 2011, the board reviewed external reputation data that looked at BP’s 
reputation in the United Kingdom and United States. It also discussed the 
group’s communications strategy and its reputation-management plan.
To underscore how serious BP was about reputation and its risk management, 
the annual report employed the term twenty times in the “Item 1A. Risk 
Factors” section of Form 10-K. The term also appeared liberally throughout the 
balance of the document (a total of 45 mentions over 20 different pages in the 
300-page document). The processes of rebuilding trust and reinforcing value 
creation were now focused on external reputation measured by external surveys 
and internal morale measured by internal surveys.
All these changes reflected what BP argued was an improvement in its culture 
for safety. It was a challenging argument to make in the face on ongoing 
regulatory pressures, for, as the Financial Times noted: “If the U.S. Department 
of Justice does push its accusations of gross negligence against BP to trial, 
disinterested observers can look forward to a detailed exploration of the oil 
company’s culture and management.”39
Consider This

Authenticity is important. BP aggressively promoted an 
image of the firm that, while aspirational, was at odds with 
reality. If you tell the world how great you are, you had 
better live up to your hype. Jerry Della Femina, reputedly 
an inspiration for the TV series Mad Men,40 observed, 
“Nothing kills a bad product faster than good advertising.”41

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15

Restoring a reputation entails more than marketing. 
Implementing authentic operational controls and linking 
them to reputation risk and value, as BP reported in their 
2011 annual report, was an exemplary demonstration of 
evolution in process control and risk management to reduce 
reputational volatility and stabilize enterprise value.

When trust is violated, authenticity may require a third 
party’s validation. BP’s long history of reputational crises 
will doubtless color its reputational metrics for some time 
to come. Stakeholders remain cautious about revaluing the 
company until such time as credible third parties or insurers 
validate real behavior changes from BP’s reputation 
restoration efforts.
By the Numbers
BP’s story dramatizes the measurability and magnitude of reputational value, 
and how each stakeholder impacts that value. In keeping with this book’s 
mission of showing the relationship among reputation, stakeholder behaviors 
that are reflected in measures of profit and loss, and stock price, Table 2-2 and 
all similarly placed tables at the end of each future chapter recap quantitative 
measures introduced in the preceding materials.
Table 2-2. Reputational Value Losses: Additional and Extraordinary Costs of BP’s Reputational 
Crisis Arising from Stakeholder Behaviors
Stakeholder
Effects on BP plc
Customers
2.6% fewer BP, ARCO, and Aral retail brand licensees and 7% 
lower branded fuel sales globally than in 2009
Employees
Morale: overall employee satisfaction index score (BP internal 
metric) for 2011 (62%) was below the score from 2009 (65%); 
CEO fired.
Vendors and suppliers
$94 billion in additional expenses
Production: 8% increase over 2009
Exploration: 41% increase over 2009
Creditors
Liquidity crisis; net cost of credit 16% increase over 2009; credit 
default swap spreads August 2012 about 35 basis points higher 

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
16
(70% higher) than March 2010
Investors
Two board members not re-elected; three derivative lawsuits; 
and friction over future CEO compensation
Board of Directors
Additional responsibilities; new compensation plans with 
reputation and safety-linked bonus
Analysts
Credit downgrade: S&P AA (stable outlook) before the event to 
A (stable outlook) by December 2011
Regulators
50 hearings; 80 bills; and $15–$25 billion in fines and penalties
All stakeholders combined
Net $54 billion in lost market capitalization
1 BP results hit by $US5b US writedown. Canberra Times. 31 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.canberratimes.com.au/business/mining-and-resources/bp-results-hit-by-us5b-us-
writedown-20120731-23cos.html. Accessed 4 September 2012.
2 Frey D. How green is BP? New York Times. 8 December 2002. Available at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2002/12/08/magazine/how-green-is-bp.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm. 
Accessed 17 June 2012.
3 BP CEO Tony Hayward (VIDEO): 'I’d like my life back.' Huffington Post. 1 June 2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/06/01/bp-ceo-tony-hayward-
video_n_595906.html. Accessed 14 June 2012.
4 
Fonda 
D. 
Is 
BP 
really 
that 
green? 
Time. 
29 
June 
2006. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1209454,00.html. Accessed 17 June 2012.
5 Solman G. BP: coloring public opinion? Adweek. 14 January 2008. Available at: 
http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising/bp-coloring-public-opinion-91662. Accessed 17 June 
2012.
6 Elkind P, Whitford D, Burke D. BP: 'An accident waiting to happen.' Fortune. 24 January 2011. 
Available 
at: 
http://features.blogs.fortune.cnn.com/2011/01/24/bp-an-accident-waiting-to-
happen/. Accessed 22 July 2012.
7 Aulds TJ. OSHA slaps BP with record $87M fine. The Galveston Daily News. 31 October 2009. 
Available at: http://galvestondailynews.com/story.lasso?ewcd=3a8ab45c2e06da20 Accessed 22 
July 2012.
8 Greenhouse S. BP to challenge fine for refinery blast. New York Times. 30 October 2009. 
Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/31/business/31labor.html. Accessed 22 July 2012.
9 Regional oil spill response plan – Gulf of Mexico. Public Intelligence. 20 May 2010. Available 
at: http://publicintelligence.net/bp-gulf-of-mexico-regional-oil-spill-response-plan/ Accessed 15 
September 2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
10 Mohr H, Pritchard J, Lush T. BP spill response plans severely flawed. Associated Press. 9 June 
2010. Available at: http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/37599810/ns/disaster_in_the_gulf/t/bp-spill-
response-plans-severely-flawed/#.T9pJzvGN9qI. Accessed 14 June 2012.
11 An oil spill born of complacency. Financial Times. 6 January 2011. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/2159e888-19cd-11e0-b921-00144feab49a.html#axzz1xzO61Xtp. 
Accessed 17 June 2012.
12 National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling. 
Deepwater: the Gulf Oil disaster and the future of offshore drilling. 11 January 2011. Available 
at: http://www.oilspillcommission.gov/final-report. Accessed 15 September 2012.
13 Antczak J. Gulf oil spill yet to affect consumers' gas choice. Associated Press. 5 May 2010. 
Available at: http://www.newsvine.com/_news/2010/05/05/4243815-gulf-oil-spill-yet-to-affect-
consumers-gas-choice. Accessed 14 June 2012.
14 Lowe EA, Harris RJ. Taking Climate Change Seriously: British Petroleum’s Business Strategy. 
Ph. D thesis published in Corporate Environmental Strategy. Winter 1998. Available at: 
http://www.indigodev.com/BPclim.html. Accessed 15 June 2012.
15 Some BP gas station owners believe name change to Amoco might bring back angry customers. 
Associated 
Press. 
30 
July 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.cleveland.com/nation/index.ssf/2010/07/some_bp_gas_station_owners_bel.html. 
Accessed 14 June 2012.
16 Gulf of Mexico oil spill: Tony Hayward's email to BP staff. The Telegraph. 19 May 2010. 
Available at: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/energy/oilandgas/7743054/Gulf-
of-Mexico-oil-spill-Tony-Haywards-email-to-BP-staff.html. Accessed 14 June 2012.
17 Boxell J, Crooks E. Inside BP: a giant wounded. Financial Times. 15 July 2010. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/bded3254-9048-11df-ad26-00144feab49a.html#axzz1xp9rjZI0. 
Accessed 15 June 2012.
18 Crooks E. BP pledges to keep spending plans. Financial Times. 4 February 2009. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/4f3fa228-f25c-11dd-9678-0000779fd2ac.html#axzz1xzO61Xtp. 
Accessed 16 June 2012.
19 BP: the challenges of strategic multi-sourcing. Computer Weekly. 28 August 2009. Available 
at: 
http://www.computerweekly.com/news/1280096992/BP-the-challenges-of-strategic-multi-
sourcing. Accessed 16 June 2012.
20 Operations lessons from BP. Corp Exec Board Views. September 12, 2010. Available at: 
http://cebviews.com/2010/09/12/operations-lessons-from-bp/. Accessed 16 June 2012.
21 BP counts the political and financial cost of Deepwater Horizon. The Economist. 17 June 2010. 
Available at: http://www.economist.com/node/16381032. Accessed 16 June 2012.
22 BP: Finger pointing. Mission Intangible blog of the Intangible Asset Finance Society. 29 April 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.iafinance.org/_blog/MISSION_INTANGIBLE/post/BP_Finger_pointing/. 
Accessed 
17 June 2012.
23 Crooks E. ‘Bad calls’ preceded Gulf of Mexico blast. Financial Times. 9 November 2010. 

Chapter 2 | A $54 Billion Reputation
18
Available 
at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/a51cfcbc-ec0c-11df-b50f-
00144feab49a.html#axzz1AIvCT9ip. Accessed 17 June 2012.
24 Jamieson A. Dying Lockerbie bomber 'could survive for 10 years or more.' The Telegraph. 4 
July 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/libya/7871234/Dying-
Lockerbie-bomber-could-survive-for-10-years-or-more.html. Accessed 14 June 2012.
25 BP shareholder revolt over executive pay plans shrugged off. Personnel Today. 16 April 2010. 
Available at: http://www.personneltoday.com/Articles/16/04/2010/55255/bp-shareholder-revolt-
over-executive-pay-plans-shrugged-off.htm#.UAxRskS1_-k. Accessed 22 July 2012.
26 Macallster T. BP faces shareholder revolt over Bob Dudley's pay. The Guardian. 11 April 
2012. Available at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/apr/11/bp-shareholder-revolt-bob-
dudley-pay. Accessed 22 July 2012.
27 Grimm MR, Herman HR, Herman TR. Director and Officer Insurance and the Gulf Oil Spill. 
Clausen 
Miller. 
August 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.clausen.com/index.cfm/fa/firm_pub.article/article/1abaff03-46ad-4092-a974-
7ce99b7bab0a/Director_And_Officer_Insurance_And_The_Gulf_Oil_Spill.cfm. 
Accessed 
22 
July 2012.
28 LaCroix, K. BP Deepwater Horizon derivative suit dismissed in favor of English forum. The 
D&O 
Diary. 
19 
September 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.dandodiary.com/2011/09/articles/shareholders-derivative-litiga/bp-deepwater-
horizon-derivative-suit-dismissed-in-favor-of-english-forum/. Accessed 22 July 2012.
29 BP Annual Report and Form 20-F 2011 p10.
30 Werdigier J, Mouawad J. Road to new confidence at BP runs through U.S. The New York 
Times. 
26 
July 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/27/business/27dudley.html?pagewanted=all. Accessed 14 June 
2012.
31 Rudolf J. Kurt Mix, BP engineer, faces first oil spill charges (UPDATES). Available at: 
Huffingtonpost.com. Accessed 14 June 2012.
32 Johnson K, Jervis R. Former BP engineer charged in oil spill probe. USA Today. 24 April 2012. 
Available at: http://www.usatoday.com/money/industries/energy/story/2012-04-24/bp-oil-spill-
arrest-justice-department/54504158/1. Accessed 14 June 2012
33 Lustgarten A. Feds file first criminal charges related to BP Gulf spill. ProPublica 24 April 
2012. Available at: http://www.propublica.org/article/feds-file-first-criminal-charges-related-to-
bp-gulf-spill. Accessed 14 June 2012. 
34 
BP 
Global 
HSE 
fines 
and 
penalties. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.bp.com/sectiongenericarticle800.do?categoryId=9036151&contentId=7066887. 
Accessed 17 June 2012.
35 Burdeau C. BP oil spill: fines from Clean Water Act will go to restoration. Associated Press. 8 
March 
2012. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/03/09/bp-oil-spill-fines-
restoration_n_1333019.html. Accessed 17 June 2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19
36 Hammer D. BP wants to pay less than $15 billion to settle government spill claims, London 
paper 
says. 
Times-Picayune. 
8 
June 
2012. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.nola.com
/news/gulf-oil-spill/index.ssf/2012/06/bp_wants_to_pay_less_than_15_b.html. Accessed 17 June 
2012.
37 Lex. BP–still in deep water. Financial Times. 5 September 2012. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/3/b30160b0-f75a-11e1-8e9e-00144feabdc0.html#axzz25h3VSeTG. 
Accessed 6 September 2012. According to the FT, “Lex is a premium daily commentary service 
from the Financial Times. It is the oldest and arguably the most influential business and finance 
column of its kind in the world. It helps readers make better investment decisions by highlighting 
key emerging risks and opportunities. The column long ago gave up the pretence of being the 
work of a single person, and now includes six London-based writers, four in New York and one in 
Hong Kong. Most of the team has prior industry experience at investment banks, management 
consultancies or research houses, allowing Lex to conduct the primary analysis essential to its 
intellectual independence. Lex remains the template that other financial commentary follows; its 
alumni have also founded or are running many of the newer columns inspired by Lex, including 
Reuters Breakingviews and the Wall Street Journal’s Heard on the Street. 
38 
Historical 
crude 
oil 
prices 
(table). 
Available 
at: 
http://inflationdata.com/inflation/inflation_rate/historical_oil_prices_table.asp. Updated June 14, 
2012. Accessed 23 June 2012.
39 Hill A. DoJ’s plan to put BP’s culture on trial. Financial Times. 5 September 2012. Available 
at: 
http://blogs.ft.com/businessblog/2012/09/dojs-plan-to-put-bps-culture-on-
trial/#axzz26YjLMWYP. Accessed 15 September 2012.
40 Wikepedia. Jerry Della Famina. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerry_Della_Femina. 
Accessed 22 June 2102.
41 
Famous 
quotes 
on 
advertising 
and 
copywriting. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.zagstudios.com/ZagStudios/famous_quotes_on_advertising.html. Accessed 22 June 
2012.

C H A P T E R
3
Customers
Repetition makes reputation and reputation makes customers.
—Elizabeth Arden
Setting the Stage
Customers are thoughtful people. They have choices. Customers may act on 
behalf of themselves or their households, businesses, or government offices. But 
regardless of who foots the bill, customers are intelligent decision makers. 
When they make a decision, three major factors are in play: price, quality, and 
reputation.1,2,3 Moreover, unless price is the only consideration by virtue of a 
“lowest bid” mandate, reputation will reduce customers’ sensitivity to price, 
increase sales volume, and accelerate the speed with which purchase decisions 
are made.
This chapter builds on the BP case that illustrated a complex relationship 
between customer and company and an evolving reputation. The focus is on 
how reputations are formed in the minds of customers; how reputation 
value—the economically relevant actions triggered by reputation—impacts the 
revenue line of the Profit and Loss statement; and, ultimately, how these 
customers’ behaviors impact stock price.
The BP case showed how customers responded to a lost reputation. Even 
though petroleum products are fungible commodities—automobile engines will 

Chapter 3 | Customers
2
shamelessly burn 89 octane gasoline drawn from any pump—with no obviously 
discernible features from competitive products, the costs of BP’s reputational 
crisis were that brand licenses fell off 2.7% and branded fuel sales fell off 7%. 
To illustrate the points with noncommodities, we turn to case studies on several 
key drivers of reputation. For Rolls-Royce Holdings plc, the dominant concern 
for stakeholders is safety—in this case the unerring performance of the Rolls-
Royce aircraft engines. For Zale Corporation, the dominant concern for 
stakeholders is quality of service. For Research In Motion Limited, innovation 
is the critical dimension of reputation.
Safety 
[Safety is] the state of being certain that a set of conditions will not 
accidentally cause adverse effects on the well-being of employees, the public, 
or the environment. (Table 1-1)
On 4 January 2011, an anonymous poster left an ominous query on 
Answers.com: “Is the Rolls-Royce Trent 900 engine safe?” Nine weeks earlier, 
Qantas flight QF32 from Singapore and Sydney was forced to turn back and 
make an emergency landing after an explosion in one of the aircraft’s Rolls-
Royce engines—a Trent 900. The force of the blowout damaged the body of the 
plane, an Airbus A380, and, to put it mildly, heightened the awareness of 433 
passengers and 26 crew members. It also rained debris on the Indonesian island 
of Batam below.4 A second Qantas flight, a Boeing 747 with the same type of 
Rolls-Royce Trent 900 engine, had to return to Singapore a day later, and 
shortly thereafter, Qantas reported that it found oil leaks that were “beyond 
normal tolerances” in Trent 900 engines on three additional aircraft. In a story 
headlined “Rolls-Royce’s reputation is most of its value,” Robert Cole, writing 
for Reuters’ Breakingview, noted that day: “Rolls is a business built upon its 
ability to forge awe-inspiring technology from plain metals. But it trades to a 
large extent on its reputation for the reliability of that technology and the 
sturdiness of the metals it uses.”5
Rolls-Royce
In a business in which safety is a life-and-death issue, systems for ensuring 
safety through quality are the core of reputational value creation and 
maintenance. Rolls-Royce Group plc is such a business. Rolls-Royce is iconic. 
This $19-billion integrated-power-systems company delivers reliable power that 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
is “mission-critical” to its customers. Operating in civil and defense aerospace, 
marine, and energy markets, the company serves customers in more than 120 
countries. It is a global provider of defense aero-engine products and services, 
with 18,000 engines in service for 160 customers in 103 countries. Its marine 
business has equipment installed on more than 30,000 vessels worldwide among 
more than 2,000 customers including 70 navies. The company’s energy 
business is a supplier of power systems for onshore and offshore oil and gas 
applications.
Reputation Management
Delivering “mission-critical” power to keep commercial aircraft aloft is an 
awesome responsibility. Loss of power in an A380 super carrier places at risk 
the lives of 525 passengers in a typical three-class configuration or up to 853 
passengers in an all-economy class configuration, plus crew.
Rolls-Royce both understands this responsibility and has developed systems to 
address relevant risks. Its asset preservation policy prioritizes the three greatest 
things it is protecting: reputation, profitability, and viability.6
The distinction here is Rolls-Royce’s recognition of reputational benefits of 
safety above all else—safety is the industry’s central obsession. In 1985, a 
Japan Airlines (JAL) jet plowed into Osutaka Ridge, about a three-hour distance 
by car north of Tokyo, marking what is still the world’s deadliest single-plane 
disaster. JAL executives have visited the crash site every year since then to 
remind themselves of the importance of safety to their industry.7 
Process Controls
Rolls-Royce, the second largest maker of aerospace engines behind General 
Electric, is an engineering firm. Revered by many in the community for its 
technical acumen, Rolls-Royce has long had a reputation for innovation, 
quality, safety, and overall engineering excellence. It maintains strong controls 
both internally and over its supply chain. The head of one long-term supplier 
put it this way to the Financial Times, “I think of Rolls-Royce (as) a rather 
fussy mother hen.”8
Global supply chains are complex, with multiple interrelationships across a 
wide network of organizations. While the company’s strategy is to simplify 
internal and external elements of its supply chain by building long-term 
strategic links with fewer, stronger suppliers, risk of disruption remains from 

Chapter 3 | Customers
4
financial or physical causes such as bankruptcy, natural disaster, armed conflict, 
or pandemic. Intangible asset risks (ethical, quality, safety, etc.) also arise from 
the supply chain, which inevitably flow downstream to Rolls-Royce.
All of Rolls-Royce’s procedures have teeth: the company has a reputation for 
being tough on suppliers whose performance falls below standard. On the Trent 
900 explosion, the Financial Times reported, “If this [the perpetrator of the 
fault] turns out to be a supplier, it will be crucified.”9
In its preliminary investigation into the QF32 engine explosion, Australian 
investigators, working with Rolls-Royce, Qantas, and Airbus engineers, traced 
the likely cause to a badly manufactured oil pipe that cracked, causing oil to 
leak and catch fire, leading to the engine over-revving and the turbine disc 
being flung through the side of the engine. 
While the company worked flat out to rectify the faults and to understand why 
the faults were not identified during inspections, it remained remarkably tight-
lipped about crisis management. Aside from noting the existence of a crisis 
management plan for supply chain interruption, the 2009 annual report is silent 
on the subject. “It’s as though your maiden aunt has suffered a trauma but is 
trying desperately to preserve an air of Victorian composure” said the Financial 
Times.9 The company refused to expand on a short statement on 12 November 
2010 in which Rolls-Royce said it had isolated the problem to a 
“component”—believed to be the pipe coupling—and had a program in hand to 
rectify the faults across all Trent 900 engines. 
Few familiar with its culture were surprised by the aero-engine maker’s 
unwillingness to divulge details about the investigation. First, the company is 
justifiably worried about others gaining access to its technical secrets. Second, 
with its deep engineering heritage, the predominant culture at the company is 
against making “snap judgments and early pronouncements, preferring to 
carefully establish the facts.”9
Trent 900 Explosion-and-Aftermath Timeline
By the close of markets 4 November 2010, shares in the engine's manufacturer, 
Rolls-Royce plc, fell 5.5% to 618.5 pence on the London Stock 
Exchange—their sharpest fall in 18 months9 and the lowest price since mid-
September 2010. Shares in the European Aeronautic Defence and Space 
Company (EADS), which owns Airbus, also fell.10 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
In the spirit of “kicking ’em while they’re down,” the day after the incident, 
United Technologies Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney jet-engine unit and the third 
largest aerospace engine manufacturer, filed patent-infringement complaints 
against Rolls-Royce claiming the Trent 900 infringed a patent for a swept-fan 
blade.11 
The suit was, at a minimum, strategic and designed to capture the attention of 
Boeing 787 customers. In the market for engines for the Boeing aircraft, the 
apparent low risk of the Trent was competitively advantageous. Both the recent 
history of a catastrophic failure and a pending intellectual property lawsuit 
posed new risks for a potential customer.
That same day, Qantas reported that 10 affected planes would be out of service 
for “as long as it takes,” Chief Executive Officer Alan Joyce said at a press 
briefing in Sydney. “At Qantas we are proud to put passenger safety before 
profit,” he said.12 With its fleet of A830s grounded for several weeks, Qantas 
substituted Boeing 747 aircraft.
Reputational crises attract lawyers for a wide range of issues. On 2 December, 
Qantas filed a claim to ensure it could take legal action against Rolls-Royce to 
recover passenger traffic losses caused by the explosion and the additional costs 
due to aircraft substitution. (Rolls-Royce paid Qantas $100 million within 6 
months to settle those claims.13)
That same day, Rolls-Royce informed the general public that it seemed to have 
gotten its arms around the accident’s cause. The company determined that the 
direct cause of the oil fire and resulting engine failure was a misaligned counter 
bore within a stub oil pipe leading to a fatigue fracture.14 On 10 December, 
Rolls-Royce disclosed that it would cost $500 million to repair the defects in a 
series of small metal couplings that feed oil to bearings in the Trent 900 engine.
Although the engineering problem may have been solved, the growing 
reputation crisis was in full swing. On 23 December, BBC business news 
reporter Shanaz Musafer opened a discussion with, “Have you ever played that 
game where someone says a word to you and you say the first thing that you 
associate with it? If not, try these: Toyota, BP, Rolls-Royce, or perhaps even 
Heathrow Airport.”15
Rolls-Royce Customers 
“Trent 900” was unknown to those outside of a select few in the industry and 
had not been a household word until late 2010. That’s when customers of Rolls-

Chapter 3 | Customers
6
Royce’s customers—potential airline passengers—took an extraordinary 
interest and turned to the modern-day oracle: Google Search. A Google Trends 
chart (Figure 3-1) shows a progressive decline over the years in Web searches 
for Rolls-Royce and immediately following the crisis, a marked spike in 
searches for the esoteric term, “Trent 900.” 
Figure 3-1. Google trends plot illustrating the November 2010 spike in Web searches for the 
terms “Trent 900” and “Rolls-Royce.” Data source: Google Trends.
Within days, equity investors had their say. Indirect stakeholders, airline 
passengers, had their say. And the media pundits had theirs. But 
notwithstanding Qantas’s litigation for damages, the engine manufacturer’s 
customers had been silent.
On 6 January 2011, the first customer spoke. In a compelling vote of confidence 
from British Airways plc, Europe’s third-biggest airline, CEO Willie Walsh 
agreed to buy Trent 900s for 12 A380s to be delivered starting 2013. “British 
Airways signed the A380 contract, first flagged in 2007, after Chief Executive 
Officer Willie Walsh affirmed his ‘absolute confidence’ in the Trent 900…The 
deal took years to seal because of talks over through-life servicing, a BA 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
spokesman said, declining to reveal if the carrier got a discount on the order’s 
list price of $5 billion, including seven A380s and 18 787 Dreamliners it has 
options to buy.”16
Rolls-Royce’s reputation for engineering safety had produced a miracle. “Rolls-
Royce, the world’s largest engine maker after General Electric Co., is pleased 
that one of its biggest airline clients continues to ‘trust’ in its products, CEO 
John Rose said.” In its 2011 Annual Report, Rose emphasized that no customers 
dropped Trent 900 orders, while some had reconfirmed business since 
November 2010.17 In 2006, Rolls-Royce had become the sole engine supplier to 
Airbus for the 350 series.18 And it still held that coveted distinction19 in June 
2011, when Airbus affirmed that Rolls-Royce remained the sole supplier to the 
A350 series.20
As to reputational matters, customers tend to act fast. Surprisingly, so can 
regulators. On 5 March 2011, Europe's air safety regulator lifted the 
requirement for frequent, repetitive engine inspections of Rolls-Royce engines 
fitted to the Airbus A380 superjumbo, partly out of concern the inspections 
could now be doing more harm than good. “The root cause of the [QF32] 
incident having been addressed through other adequate measures, it is 
considered prudent to cancel these inspections,” the agency said.21
Retrospective
Eight weeks out from the catastrophic failure of a mission-critical product, 
Rolls-Royce showed the reputational and economic profile of a company with 
significant reputation resilience. The media backed off, and the general public 
lost interest. Much of the credit for this display of enterprise value preservation 
goes to the company’s reputation for engineering excellence and its outstanding 
intangible asset risk management program.
If one criticism may be levied, it is about weak crisis-communications efforts. 
Many communications pundits peppered the blogosphere with the central 
message that CEO Sir John Rose should have been much more visible and 
forthcoming. 
“I'm not surprised,” explained Jonathan Salem Baskin, noted brand marketer 
and author of the Histories of Social Media and Tell the Truth. “Rolls-Royce 
focused on analyzing and fixing the problem, and was likely having 
conversations with numerous stakeholder groups involved in that operational 
reality. The world wanted the business focused on business, some outlier 

Chapter 3 | Customers
8
bloggers notwithstanding, and Rolls-Royce’s successes in its efforts were 
obviously recognized and valued.”
Eighteen months later, all was going well. In April 2012, the Reputation 
Institute reported that the three most reputable companies in Britain are Rolls-
Royce (jet engines), Dyson (vacuum cleaners), and Alliance Boots (drugs and 
prawn sandwiches).22 And customers were buying product. The commercial 
aviation section that sold Trent 900 engines, among others, reported strong sales 
in 2011. Although the costs of the repairs and indemnifications cut deeply into 
profits, future sales, deliveries, and revenues were all up substantially in the 
year following the explosion, with growth over 2009 of 10.4%, 14.0%, and 
24.3% respectively (Table 3-1).23 
Notwithstanding great sales and engineering power, Rolls-Royce had not lost 
track of what its customers value. Rolls-Royce cited “reputation” 15 times in its 
2011 annual report; the company disclosed that its sources of reputational risk 
include failures in sustainability practices, regulatory compliance, innovation 
effectiveness, ethical practices, oversight, operational controls (quality and 
safety), and IT security. The company also explained its strategy for managing 
each of the reputational risks it discloses.
Table 3-1. Percentage Changes in Rolls-Royce Commercial Aviation Section’s Orders, 
Deliveries, Revenue, and Profits for 2010 and 2011 Relative to 2009
(Relative to 2009 values)
2010 (%)
2011 (%)
Order book
3.2
10.4
Engine deliveries
0.2
14.0
Revenue
9.8
24.3
Profits
–20.5
1.2
Consider This

In the aircraft power plant business, a reputation for safety 
is a critical asset.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9

In a globally integrated manufacturing operation, such a 
reputation is the product of superior engineering design and 
risk management, which includes top-notch supply chain 
oversight and operational control.

Notwithstanding other costs associated with a reputational 
crisis, a superior reputation can preserve a company’s 
relationship with customers and protect revenues against 
“headline risks.”
Quality
[Quality is] the extent to which a product is free from defects or deficiencies; 
a service meets or exceeds the expectations of customers or clients, and both 
products and services conform to measurable and verifiable criteria. (Table 
1-1)
Zale Corporation
In 2009, Zale Corporation was one of North America’s largest specialty jewelry 
retailers.24 With about 50,000 jewelry retail stores in 2009, the jewelry industry 
employed approximately 200,000 individuals. Wal-Mart was the largest U.S. 
retailer and the next largest was Zale, with more than 2,000 stores and kiosks. 
Zale sells diamond fashion rings, semiprecious stones, earrings, and gold 
jewelry, as well as watches and gift items. It operates under three business 
segments: Fine Jewelry, Kiosk Jewelry, and All Other. During the fiscal year 
ending 31 July 2008, the Fine Jewelry segment generated approximately 88% of 
the company’s net revenues and the Kiosk 12% of total revenues. Total sales 
were $2.1 billion, with earnings of $10.8 million. In September 2008, its share 
price peaked at almost $31. Just over a year later, in December, 2009, its share 
price had plunged to $3.25 and its market cap to levels as low at $100 million. 
What happened?
In Jewelry, Reputation Is Crucial
Fine jewelers sell precious stones and metals that are worked to produce a 
product with both emotional and resale value. Since jewelry is seldom branded 
and varies widely in design and quality in the mid-market segment, purchasers 

Chapter 3 | Customers
10
require some form of “trusted expertise” in retail environments. The jeweler’s 
name is the brand: retailers with strong reputations for knowledge, integrity, and 
trust attract the most consumers.
In the fine jewelry business, the last 18 inches is crucial. That’s the space 
between a salesperson and a customer, just enough room to place the product 
(and what it represents) between two human beings and build a trusting 
relationship focused on the consumer’s aspirations, hopes, and dreams. Because 
jewelry’s intrinsic value is based on a significant amount of knowledge about 
how to evaluate quality, most customers must rely on the salespeople across the 
18-inch countertop in front of them. In the middle market, the customer must 
trust that the price is fair, a factor that includes recoverable or liquidation value 
as well. These elements are the essence of quality in fine jewelry.
Damaging Zale’s Reputation for Quality
The first Zale Jewelers opened in 1924 in Wichita Falls, Texas, founded by 
Morris Zale, William Zale, and Ben Lipshy. Their winning strategy was to 
provide quality merchandise at the lowest price in its market segment. By 2004, 
Zale enjoyed a $2.5 billion market cap. For decades Zale was known for 
offering fine jewelry assortments through convenient locations at fair prices. 
Their employees were friendly and knowledgeable. The leadership of the 
company signaled that it valued its staff by training, development, recognition, 
and compensation. The company had also signaled that it valued its customers 
by extending credit and standing behind its products through exemplary service. 
The company understood the intrinsic value of reputation. It understood why 
suppliers supply, why employees perform, and why customers buy. Customers’ 
expectations for a reliable repeatable experience in those last 18 inches were 
met with admirable regularity. 
In mid-2002, after eight years at the helm, CEO Bob Dinicola stepped down. He 
had taken Zale to what turns out to have been the apex of its financial success. 
Over the next five years, three CEOs each had his or her own different strategy 
for the business. Sadly for Zale, each strategic change diminished the customer 
experience and the company’s financial performance, and each deterioration in 
financial performance paved the way for the next CEO and more decline.
The fourth new CEO, Neal Goldberg, appointed in February 2008, set out to 
leave his own mark on Zale and more broadly the jewelry business. He was 
quoted as stating, “What I see in this business [jewelry] is a sea of sameness. 
It’s all about price and there is no romance to it. The way the goods are 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
presented is very flat. I was never inspired walking into any jewelry store to 
say: ‘Wow. Look at this presentation.’ You go into other retailers, other 
commodities and you do go, ‘Wow.’ Apple is probably the pinnacle of that.”25
It appears that Goldberg sought to transform both Zale and the business of 
selling fine jewelry. He felt that “romance”—an emotional connection typically 
associated with the psychological construct of a brand—was the critical element 
linking the product to a customer, and that successfully romancing the product 
in a store would increase the appeal of products and ultimately sales. It also 
appears that he did not understand Apple’s retail model (discussed in Chapter 
4).
His paradigm of “romance” affected all aspects of the business: product 
assortments, advertising, store layouts/design, staffing, etc. It also impacted 
quality—not of the merchandise itself, but rather of the customer experience.
Goldberg’s strategy change to enhance the romance between the product and 
the customer took precedence over the 18-inch experience between the 
salesperson and the customer. Where Zale historically had offered a customer a 
“trusted” person in the store to help him or her make the right choice, these 
knowledgeable salespeople were replaced by part-time employees to cut labor 
costs and pay for the new store designs.
Result: customers started grumbling (Figure 3-2), stopped shopping at Zale, and 
had their needs met at their arch competitor, Signet Jewelers. When Zale then 
tried to lure them back by reducing prices, they compounded the confusion. 
Heavy discounting with no other rationale for it, such as a store going-out-of-
business sale, cheapens the perceived value of the products offered.

Chapter 3 | Customers
12
Figure 3-2. Customer sentiments of Zale and Signet in 2009 (Newssift).26
Retrospective
In disappointing customers with a new branding strategy, Goldberg reaffirmed 
the lessons learned by The Coca Cola Company when it rolled out New Coke 
and enraged its loyal customer base, who defected in droves to Pepsi. Zale 
followed the script for ensuring humiliating failure: the company eviscerated its 
golden goose and Signet cleaned up.27
The revenue deterioration trend ended with the 2011 fiscal year (Figure 3-3) as 
Zale CEO Theo Killion, hired in February 2010, began to make his mark. 
“Under Killion’s guidance over the past two years, Zale’s bottom line improved 
$141 million and its reputation has improved.” His focus: making the 
customers, i.e., guests, feel valued.28 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
The message: while brand and reputation are cousins, they are not the same and 
should not be conflated. Reputation is a cognitive expectation of behavior held 
by stakeholders; brand is an emotional relationship. Unfortunately, Zale 
apparently has not yet recognized this difference. Although its annual report 
cites “reputation” four times, the company formally acknowledges IT security 
breaches as the only source of reputational risk. Future reports afford potential 
for expanded institutional self-awareness.
Figure 3-3. Stagnation followed by a rapid deterioration in revenue at Zale Corporation. Values 
are reported in relation to 2001 sales revenue and adjusted for annual inflation. Consumer 
confidence data are drawn from the June 2011 values of the University of Michigan Index of 
Consumer Sentiment.29
Consider This

Zale’s changed its strategic direction when it sought to 
engage the customer through an emotional relationship 
based on romance rather than a cognitive relationship based 
on the company’s reputation for quality. 

Chapter 3 | Customers
14

The actions to accomplish the transformation siphoned off 
resources from those that had for the better part of a century 
supported Zale’s reputation for quality. At the end, they 
subverted retail experiences and wreaked havoc on the 
company’s reputation among its customers. 

The Zale’s tale underscores the fact that brand promise and 
reputation expectation are not the same. Zale’s invested in 
the former at the expense of the latter. By damaging a 
reputation for quality valued by the customer, it lost both 
pricing power and sales volume. 
Innovation
[Innovation is] the design, invention, development and/or implementation of 
new or altered products, services, processes, systems, organizational 
structures or business models for the purpose of creating new value for 
customers and financial returns for the firm. Intellectual Property is part of 
this. (Table 1-1)
 “A reputation once broken may possibly be repaired,” observed Bishop Joseph 
Hall. “But the world will always keep their eyes on the spot where the crack 
was.”30 As the world focuses on the cracked reputation for innovation that is 
plaguing Research In Motion, their culture for value creation is called into 
question. 
Research In Motion
Buried among the headlines during the first week of November 2011 was this 
eye catcher: “RIM as ‘wounded puppy’ trails book value with faith fading.”31 
The Chief Investment Officer of a New York fund explained, “They’ve been 
losing business, there’ve been operating technology problems. There isn’t a lot 
of customer loyalty anymore.” That day, for the first time in nine years, the 
company’s market value dipped below book value.
It’s not as if Research In Motion isn’t trying. The 2010 fiscal year was the 
second year in a row the Waterloo-based BlackBerry-maker headed the list of 
the top 100 corporations in Canada for research and development spending. In 
2010, RIM actually boosted its spending on research and development by 26% 
to $1.3 billion, or about 6.8% of its revenue. 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
But while the innovation process is well financed, the process itself has failed to 
produce value. John Goldsmith, a money manager with Montrusco in Toronto, 
said the pricing collapse shows RIM has lost its competitive advantage. “RIM 
was a market leader in terms of smartphones,” he said. “There are a lot of guys 
out there able to commercialize a product at a significantly lower cost.”32 
What about the patents? In addition to its organically grown patent portfolio, 
RIM has also been actively acquiring them. When the auction of the patent 
portfolio of Canada’s previous technology giant, Nortel, ended on 30 June 
2011, the winning bid was an eye-popping $4.5 billion. Research In Motion was 
among the consortium of winning bidders comprising Apple, EMC, Ericsson, 
Microsoft, and Sony.
Goldsmith was not impressed. “The book value, is it well stated? A lot of stuff 
has happened over the past five to ten years,” he said. The technology patents 
might not be worth as much as the now-inflated book value.48
Research In Motion was a superstar as it started the hand-held computing 
revolution. In 1984, Mike Lazaridis and his co-CEO, James Balsillie, led RIM 
as it produced its first BlackBerry in 1998. With a six-line display that let users 
send and receive basic e-mail, the device changed business communications 
forever. By 2002, the BlackBerry had added voice and data capabilities, and 
RIM stood virtually alone in the nascent smartphone industry. 
A 2002 press release said it best: “RIM pioneered the market for enterprise 
wireless email in 1999 and has propelled adoption and innovation since that 
time. With over 14,000 organizations already using BlackBerry, RIM is now 
delivering the next generation of wireless enterprise solutions with converged 
voice and data services. RIM has maintained its industry leadership with the 
only complete 2.5G wireless enterprise solution ready to address the needs of 
both users and IT departments.”33
And therein lies the rub. RIM targeted the corporate IT department as its 
customer. By 2008, no less a figure than Barack Obama was musing about his 
BlackBerry addiction, and whether he could break it upon entering the 
presidential security bubble. But the U.S. government did not issue the 
president a mobile device, so he got one for himself. Like many other 
companies, and governments, RIM missed the power shift from the corporate IT 
department to the individual worker. Today, most workers do not want 
company-issued BlackBerrys: they want iPhones and the like. 
Amitabh Passi, who covered the smartphone sector for UBS, said RIM 
stumbled. “They need to introduce exciting products. They’re not there. They 

Chapter 3 | Customers
16
need to hit the time-to-market windows. They’re not there,” he said. “They need 
to rejuvenate and reenergize the brand. They’re not there. I think it’s partially a 
management issue. Partially it’s a culture issue. Partially it’s really getting a 
better sense of consumer psychology and what drives consumer decisions.”34
Can a well-funded innovation process that creates and buys many patents be 
“not there?” If you define innovation along the lines of the 2008 Report to the 
Secretary of Commerce by the Advisory Committee on Measuring Innovation in 
the 21st Century Economy, cited at the head of this section, the answer is “yes.” 
Patents are but an artifact of innovation, and their value is suspect if they do not 
create “new value for customers, and financial returns for the firm.” By that 
definition, RIM’s innovation process is failing.
“RIM is facing three major challenges,” said Pierre Ferragu of Sanford 
Bernstein. “On its historic customer base, BlackBerry is a broken brand; RIM’s 
business with corporate clients is ex-growth and under attack; and RIM’s 
premium profitability is at risk.” In other words, BlackBerrys are not generally 
seen as being “cool.”35
Retrospective
RIM’s deteriorating reputation for innovation was something many of its 
corporate customers were prepared to tolerate, if not value. Incompetence was 
another story. To stumble the day before RIM’s then-top competitor, Apple, 
rolled out a new product—the iPhone 4s—was even worse. Apple CEO Steve 
Jobs had died the day before and the iPhone quickly became known as 
“4Steve.”
The headlines hurt: “Is Steve Jobs crowing in heaven over RIM’s week from 
hell?”36 Continuing the story, The Toronto Globe and Mail noted: “RIM is in 
what charitably might be called a rough patch. Its quarterly results disappointed 
investors, to put it mildly, the launch of its PlayBook tablet was weak, and there 
are questions dogging the Waterloo, Ont., group about its management 
structure.” In the midst of the product and management crises, RIM had a major 
operational failure, what Queen’s University marketing professor John 
Pliniussen dubbed the “Blackout-Berry” as the company publicly struggled for 
“three days the same week to get its broken e-mail, instant message, and 
Internet services back up and running for millions of BlackBerry users around 
the world.”37
Never mind the millions of unhappy customers. The investors with clout were 
taking notice. “Fast-moving Jaguar Financial is breathing down the neck of 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
Research In Motion (Nasdaq: RIMM), and if the BlackBerry maker isn’t 
careful, it could see a dramatic change in its board of directors and potentially 
management as early as three months from now.” Canadian securities laws give 
investors significant power: “Investors holding a 5% stake in a 
company—either individually or as a group—are allowed to call a special 
meeting, says Chris Makuch, vice president at the Canadian office of proxy 
solicitation firm Georgeson.”38
It’s said of war that there are no winners, only survivors. Yes, Research In 
Motion out-survived Steve Jobs. But it sure isn’t winning. As of the end of 
2011, its revenue was falling faster that the decrease in product sales, indicating 
a simultaneous loss in pricing power (Figure 3-4).
RIM doesn’t appreciate the value a reputation for innovation confers upon its 
enterprise. It mentions “reputation” 27 times in its 2012 annual report. It 
discloses reputational risks with respect to failures in IT security, sustainability 
or ethical behaviors, service or product quality, and regulatory compliance. 
Inexplicably, the company did not link innovation failure with reputational risk.
Figure 3-4. Growth in RIM’s revenue, normalized to 2007 revenue and adjusted for inflation, and 
the number of devices sold each year. With damage to its reputation for innovation, its revenue is 
decreasing faster than its sales volume, indicating a simultaneous erosion of pricing power.39

Chapter 3 | Customers
18
Consider This

RIM failed to recognize that the identity and needs of its 
customers were evolving, and therefore failed to innovate 
to meet emerging customer expectations.

A reputation for innovation is a source of revenue-driven 
value. For RIM, it brought greater volumes of sales and 
increased pricing power.

When a broad range of stakeholders perceive failure, a 
firm’s once stellar reputation for innovation may be 
permanently damaged, with a resulting impact on enterprise 
value, if not overall company viability.
Guidance
Companies typically invest many years and significant capital to develop a 
reputation that is recognized and valued by customers. Reputations are formed 
in part by what customers experience as consumers of products and services, 
and in part by what customers expect to experience based on prior 
messaging—word of mouth, advertising, etc. What companies do on a tactical 
level is generally specific to the industry sector; what they do strategically to 
build a reputation can be generalized to a few principles.
Rolls-Royce built a reputation for safety through engineering controls that 
provided the company both oversight and operational control of its supply 
chain. The company’s culture reflects a deep appreciation for both the 
importance of its engineering and the value of its reputation. As a result, 
customers both expect and receive engineering excellence and safe products. It 
appears that much of what Rolls-Royce does, and the way it does it, are guided 
by its deep respect for engineering excellence and reputation protection.
Zale built its reputation for quality by delivering a trusted service that mitigated 
consumer risk for the middle-market customers of fine jewelry. In their own 
words, “Zale’s reputation for customer service for over 85 years fosters an 
image of product expertise, quality and trust among consumers.” By confusing 
“image” with actual operations and service delivery, Zale risked that reputation 
to deliver a different type of experience to its customer—one that customers 
neither appreciated nor valued.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19
Last, RIM built a reputation for innovation that it exploited into a near-
monopoly. Believing it had a lock on its customers, the company found itself 
struggling after three major stumbles. First, it had put all its marbles on the 
corporate IT customer and failed to appreciate that corporate IT was being 
disintermediated. Second, it failed to appreciate the speed at which its market 
was evolving technologically—it wasn’t getting new products to market 
quickly. Third, notwithstanding ample evidence and prior examples of sudden 
corporate death, it did not appreciate that a failure to deliver critical IT services 
was a potential death sentence. 
Each of these exemplary companies established reputations that customers 
appreciated and valued. That appreciation, often comprising an expectation of a 
benefit to come, translated into extraordinary sales, pricing power, near-
monopoly status, and fast sales cycles. Awareness of the importance of its 
reputation—and how it was established—helped Rolls-Royce rebound from a 
crisis; conversely, both Zale and RIM stumbled badly when they failed to 
understand and exploit the cultural sources of prior success. 
By the Numbers
The case studies illustrate how reputation can affect value-creating and value-
destroying actions by customers and how that reputational value is ultimately 
recognized and appreciated by stockholders (Table 3-2).
Table 3-2. Reputation Effects on Customer-Driven Revenue
P&L Effect
Stock Price Effect—Interval Gains 
(Losses)
Rolls-Royce
S&P500
01-Nov-10
0
0
15-Nov-10
(–8.7%)
1.1%
Rolls-Royce
Sustained sales 
volume and pricing 
power
28-Sep-12
41.2%
20.3%
Zale
S&P500
01-Feb-08
0
0
Zale
Precipitous decline in 
sales volume and 
pricing power; 
reversed with new 
leadership
01-Feb-10
(–87.9%)
(–21.9%)

Chapter 3 | Customers
20
28-Sep-12
227.0%
32.3%
RIM
S&P500
01-Feb-08
0
0
01-Feb-09
(–39.4%)
(–40.8%)
Research In 
Motion
Precipitous decline in 
sales volume and 
pricing power
28-Sep-12
(–86.6%)
74.5%
1 The considered purchase decision. TriComB2B/University of Dayton School of 
Business. 2011. The full research report is available at http://tricomb2b.com/about-
us/Our-2011-B2B-Research. 
2 Li K, Geng Q, Shao B Warranty. Designs and brand reputation analysis in a duopoly. 
California Journal of Operations Management. 2011;9(1):34–42. 
3 Corporate image—benefits, importance of corporate image, theory of corporate image. 
Encyclopedia of Business, 2nd ed. Available at: 
http://www.referenceforbusiness.com/small/Co-Di/Corporate-
Image.html#ixzz20h9xZKD8. Accessed 15 July 2012.
4 Family’s terror as debris from exploding Qantas superjumbo engine tears 6ft hole in 
wall of family home. Daily Mail. 5 November 2010. Available at: 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1327041/Qantas-A380-Engine-debris-tears-
6ft-hole-wall-family-home.html#ixzz20hDOf13I. Accessed 15 July 2012.
5 Cole R. Rolls-Royce’s reputation is most of its value. Reuters. 8 November 2010. 
Available at: http://blogs.reuters.com/breakingviews/2010/11/08/rolls-royces-
reputation-is-most-of-its-value/. Accessed 27 June 2012.
6 Rolls-Royce Holdings plc Annual Report 2009, p. 62.
7 Cooper C. JAL’s $8.5 billion rebirth took lessons from crash-site morgue. Bloomberg. 
13 September 2012. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-09-13/jal-s-8-
5-billion-rebirth-took-lessons-from-crash-site-morgue.html. Accessed 28 September 
2012.
8 Marsh P, O’Doherty J. Rolls-Royce scrambles to pin down problem. Financial Times. 
20 December 2010. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/3e5a2254-0c67-11e0-
8408-00144feabdc0.html#axzz20bj70q2d. Accessed 15 July 2012.
9 Mustoe H, Rothman A. Rolls falls most in a year after engine failure grounds A380s. 
Bloomberg. 4 November 2010. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-
11-04/rolls-falls-most-in-a-year-after-engine-failure-grounds-a380s.html. Accessed 15 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
21
July 2012.
10 Madslien J. Qantas emergency points spotlight at Airbus and Rolls-Royce. BBC 
News. 4 November 2010. Available at: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/11692362. Accessed 
15 July 2012.
11 Layne R, Decker S. Pratt & Whitney sues to block Rolls-Royce engines. Bloomberg. 
5 November 2010. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-11-05/pratt-
whitney-sues-to-block-rolls-royce-engines.html. Accessed 15 July 2012.
12 Easdown G. Rolls-Royce Trent 900 engine linked to three mid-air emergencies. 
Herald Sun. 5 November 2010. Available at: http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/rolls-
royce-trent-900-engine-linked-to-three-mid-air-emergencies/story-e6frf7jo-
1225948178631. Accessed 27 June 2012.
13 Koranyi B, Smith M. Rolls-Royce, Qantas settle A380 engine dispute for $100 
million. Insurance Journal. 22 June 2011. Available at: 
http://www.insurancejournal.com/news/international/2011/06/22/203682.htm. Accessed 
15 July 2012.
14 Govindasamy S. Pipe fatigue behind Qantas A380 Trent 900 failure: ATSB. 
Flightglobal. 2 December 2010. Available at: 
http://www.flightglobal.com/news/articles/pipe-fatigue-behind-qantas-a380-trent-900-
failure-atsb-350414/. Accessed 15 July 2012.
15 Musafer S. 2010: A year some companies would rather forget. BBC News. 23 
December 2010. Available at: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-11828093. 
Accessed 15 July 2012.
16 Mustoe H, Rothwell S. British Airways picks troubled Rolls engine for A380s. 
Bloomberg. 6 January 2100. Available at: http://mobile.bloomberg.com/news/2011-01-
06/rolls-royce-wins-british-airways-order-for-trent-plane-engines. Accessed 15 July 
2012.
17 Rolls-Royce counts cost of Trent 900 failure. Asian Aviation. 1 March 2011. 
Available at: http://www.asianaviation.com/articles/109/Rolls-Royce-counts-cost-of-
Trent-900-failure. Accessed 28 June 2012.
18 Kaminski-Morrow D. Rolls-Royce becomes first engine supplier for Airbus A350, 
with formal development of 'Trent XWB' powerplant. Flightglobal. 4 December 2006. 
Available at: http://www.flightglobal.com/news/articles/rolls-royce-becomes-first-
engine-supplier-for-airbus-a350-with-formal-development-of-trent-xwb-powerplant-
210894/. Accessed 27 June 2012.
19 Michaels D, Sanders P. Rolls-Royce isn't on board with Airbus’s engine plan. Wall 
Street Journal. 19 August 2010. Available at: 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704557704575437391200860352.html
. Accessed 27 June 2012.

Chapter 3 | Customers
22
20 O’Doherty J. Rolls-Royce to redesign Airbus A350 engine. Financial Times. 6 June 
2011. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/7347ad96-9057-11e0-9227-
00144feab49a.html#axzz1z39pzroC. Accessed 27 June 2012.
21 Heasley A. A380 engine inspections may be doing more harm than good. Sydney 
Morning Herald. 5 March 2011. Available at: http://www.smh.com.au/travel/travel-
news/a380-engine-inspections-may-be-doing-more-harm-than-good-20110305-
1biip.html. Accessed 11 August 2012.
22 What’s in a name? Why companies should worry less about their reputations. 
Economist. 21 April 2012. Available at: http://www.economist.com/node/21553033. 
Accessed 27 June 2012.
23 Rolls-Royce Holdings plc Annual Report 2011, p. 18.
24 Zale Corporation Company Description. Hoovers. Available at: 
http://www.hoovers.com/company/Zale_Corporation/rjyfri-1.html. Accessed 15 July 
2012.
25 Bates R. We need a compelling shopping experience. JCK. November 2008. 
Available at: http://www.jckonline.com/article/287778-
_We_Need_a_Compelling_Shopping_Experience_.php. Accessed 15 July 2012.
26 Kossovsky N. Why Zales must learn a quality lesson (case study). Intellectual Asset 
Management. 2010;40(March/April): 31–35.
27 Schumpeter. How to make a megaflop. Economist. 31 March 2012. Available at: 
http://www.economist.com/node/21551455. Accessed 15 July 2012.
28 Zale CEO accepts Visionary Merchant award. Mays Business Online (Texas A&M). 
July 2012. Available at: http://maysbusiness.tamu.edu/index.php/Zale-ceo-accepts-
visionary-merchant-award/. Accessed 29 July 2012.
29 Surveys of consumers. Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan. Available at: 
http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/main.php. Accessed 28 June 2012.
30 Joseph Hall. Wikiquote. Available at: http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Joseph_Hall. 
Accessed 15 July 2012.
31 Miller J, Walcoff M. RIM as ‘wounded puppy’ trails book value with faith fading. 
Bloomberg. 3 November 2011. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-
11-03/rim-as-wounded-puppy-trails-book-value-with-investors-confidence-shaken.html. 
Accessed 15 July 2012.
32 RIM falls below book value for first time. Profitimes. Available at: 
http://profitimes.com/value-investing/rim-falls-below-book-value-for-first-time/. 
Accessed 15 July 2012.
33 RIM outlines BlackBerry plans at PC Expo. Press release, 25 June 2002. Available at: 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
23
http://press.rim.com/newsroom/press/2002/pressrelease-816.html. Accessed 15 July 
2012.
34 Goldberg A. Can Research In Motion get back in the race? Law.com. 27 July 2011. 
Available at: http://www.law.com/jsp/law/article.jsp?id=1202506522139. Accessed 15 
July 2012.
35 Taylor P. RIM struggles to last the pace. Financial Times. 1 May 2011. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/61e899ec-7415-11e0-b788-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz20bj70q2d. Accessed 15 July 2012.
36 Is Steve Jobs crowing in heaven over RIM’s week from hell? Globe and Mail. 14 
October 2011. Available at: http://www.allvoices.com/news/10614357-is-steve-jobs-
crowing-in-heaven-over-rim146s-week-from-hell. Accessed 15 July 2012.
37 Kossovsky N. Reputation for innovation lost: RIM and Kodak (case study). 
Intellectual Asset Management. 2012; 51:(January/February): 75–82.
38 Kawamoto D. Jaguar could bag Research In Motion soon. Motley Fool. 14 October 
2011. Available at: http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2011/10/14/jaguar-could-
bag-research-in-motion-soon-.aspx#.UAL-YHC1_-k. Accessed 15 July 2012.
39 Research In Motion Annual Reports 2007-2012, composite.

C H A P T E R
4
Employees
Lose money for the firm, and I will be understanding; lose a shred of 
reputation for the firm, and I will be ruthless.
—Warren Buffet to his employees1
On or about 13 April 2009, in a small Domino’s Pizza franchise in North 
Carolina, two employees uploaded a two-minute prank video to YouTube of the 
duo offensively tampering with the food they were preparing. Within a few 
days, the power and reach of social media triggered more than a million views 
on YouTube and a “viral” spread of the subject on Twitter. No surprise that a 
Google Trends report showing a 50% increase in searches for “Domino’s Pizza” 
was not accompanied by a surge in orders for freshly baked pizza pies. A 
national study conducted by HCD Research using its Media Curves website 
found that 65% of respondents who would have previously visited or ordered 
Domino’s Pizza were less likely to do so after viewing the offensive video.2
Employees is a term for workers and managers working for a company, 
organization, or community. They are the staff of the organization, hired by an 
employer to do a particular job, and they are critical to a company’s ability to 
deliver its products and services to customers. Often they are also both the 
largest expense (payroll) and the greatest source of risk. It is usually the actions 
of employees that trigger failures in ethical practices, lapses in quality and 
safety, breaches in security, and ineptitude in innovation.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 4 | Employees
2
This chapter explains how the behavior of corporate employees impacts specific 
lines of the profit and loss (P&L) statement and helps determine a company’s 
stock price. Working backwards from there, we explain how the expectations 
employees hold about their company help shape that company’s reputation, how 
a company’s actions shape its employees’ expectations, and how a company’s 
reputation affects employees’ behavior. We illustrate the points with case 
studies: on ethics, News Corp. and Barclays plc; on innovation, Apple Inc. and 
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; and on quality, Domino’s Pizza Inc.
We’ll also explore the interrelationships among a company’s culture, reputation, 
and employees. Tony Hsieh, who sold pizza as a student3 and is now CEO of 
the online shoe and clothing shop Zappos.com, observed: “Businesses often 
forget about the culture and, ultimately, they suffer for it because you can't 
deliver good service from unhappy employees.”4 Nor, as we show in this first 
case study, can you expect employees to protect the enterprise if they are 
misdirected by incentives.
Ethics
[Ethics are] the moral principles by which a company operates; integrity is 
the act of adhering to those moral principles. Ethics are an integral part of 
governance that, along with integrity, affect the reputation value of all other 
intangible assets. Ethics are also the keystone intangible asset because they 
form the basis for trust and confidence. (Table 1-1)
For company after company, there have been rising waves of press attention 
that each crest in a “critical mass—the threshold” where seemingly little things 
trigger a major event, the “tipping point,” as Malcolm Gladwell theorizes.5 The 
cumulative effects of business process failures on the reputation of a 
corporation produce the proverbial straw on the camel’s back.
Such effects from serial transgressions are nowhere greater than in a business’s 
ethical failure. Costly ethical failures tend to have three features in common:

Failure of ethical controls resulting from misalignment of 
short-term interests among employees, management, and 
potential regulators 

Tolerance for an ethically flawed underlying business 
model and the culture of an industry

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3

An ultimately expensive, culturally driven purification 
ritual, causing a pile on of litigators, regulators, and 
bloggers
News Corp.
Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp., a U.S.-listed global media company, is the 
world’s second largest media conglomerate behind only Walt Disney, with 
operations spanning film, television, and publishing. It would be unusual to find 
someone on the face of this planet who has not been touched by one of its 
products. It produces and distributes movies through Fox Filmed Entertainment, 
and its FOX Broadcasting network boasts more than 200 affiliate stations in the 
United States. The company owns and operates more than 25 TV stations, as 
well as a portfolio of cable networks. Its publishing businesses include 
newspaper publisher Dow Jones (The Wall Street Journal) and book publisher 
HarperCollins. Through its U.K. news group, News International, it publishes 
The Times (of London) and the Sun, and published, past tense, the now-defunct 
tabloid, News of the World. 
In July 2011, News Corp., through its then-subsidiary, News of the World, was 
swept into a classic Gladwell tipping point. Two events over a span of nine 
years were the triggers. In March 2002, schoolgirl Milly Dowler, 13, 
disappeared in the London suburb of Walton-on-Thames. Her remains were 
found in September.6 Investigation of her murder, one of the most notorious of 
the decade, came to an official end on 23 June 2011 when Levi Bellfield, a 
convicted double killer, was found guilty.7
Eleven days later, on 4 July, The Guardian reported that a lawyer for Dowler's 
family, Mark Lewis, claimed that he learned from police that Milly Dowler's 
voicemail messages had been hacked, possibly by a News of the World 
investigator, while police were searching for her. The lawyer claimed that some 
of her voicemails had been deleted to make room for more messages, 
misleading police and her family into thinking Milly was still alive and 
complicating the police investigation. Lewis described the News of the World’s 
activities as “heinous” and “despicable.”8 The next day, News International 
chief executive Rebekah Wade Brooks, whose organization oversaw News of 
the World, said she was “appalled and shocked” that Milly Dowler’s phone was 
hacked. U.K. Prime Minister Cameron called it a “truly dreadful act.”6
News of the World reporters had been accused before of illegally accessing 
messages from the mobile phones of celebrities and politicians. In fact, in 2006, 

Chapter 4 | Employees
4
detectives arrested the News of the World's royal editor Clive Goodman and 
private investigator Glenn Mulcaire over allegations that they hacked into the 
mobile phones of members of the royal household. Three years later, the Press 
Complaints Commission concluded that there was insufficient evidence to 
suggest anyone at the News of the World other than Goodman and Mulcaire 
hacked phone messages, or that the paper’s executives knew what the pair was 
doing. 
It took the conviction of the child murderer to precipitate a full-blown 
reputational crisis. “Bribery, illegal wiretapping, interference in a murder 
investigation, political blackmail, and rampant disregard for both the truth and 
basic decency” is the choice phrasing Elliot Spitzer used in a 12 July 2011 
column.9 “The behavior of Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp. in Britain has 
shocked even his closest allies and cynical British journalists.” Mr. Spitzer, like 
Captain Renault in the film Casablanca, well understood how unethical 
behavior had the power to shock. The former NY State attorney general, whose 
meteoric career rested on his high-profile prosecutions of white-collar crime, 
had been the 54th governor of New York until exposure of his own ethical 
lapse—a client relationship with a high-priced prostitution ring—forced his 
resignation.
The Buildup of Straws
While various existing codes of journalistic ethics have some differences, most 
share common elements including the principles of truthfulness, accuracy, 
objectivity, impartiality, fairness, and public accountability as these apply to the 
acquisition of newsworthy information and its subsequent dissemination to the 
public. Phillip Crawley, Publisher and CEO of The Globe and Mail, describes 
his “core business as Canada’s most trusted source of news.”10 Tony Burman, 
ex-editor-in-chief of CBC News, said it this way in 2001: “Every news 
organization has only its credibility and reputation to rely on.”11 
But what about a tabloid U.K. paper like the Sun? Mainstream media outlets, 
such as the Globe or The Wall Street Journal, are generally believed to be 
dedicated to objective reporting and to honoring the tenets of ethical journalism. 
In contrast, a tabloid paper is fundamentally about spilling dirt, appealing to 
prurient interest, stirring controversy, and digging up personal laundry that 
public figures would rather keep private. Christopher Hitchens wrote that News 
of the World became a “paper where the question was not how low can poor 
human nature sink, but rather is there anything, however depraved, that a 
reporter cannot be induced to do?”12

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
Everyone knew that News of the World had been a guilty pleasure for at least 
three generations of Britons. The paper operated in a muddled gray area of 
impropriety. Its headlines and scoops regularly challenged the truth, and its 
methods of discovery were questionable. Though few readers cared enough to 
ponder the implications, victims of its coverage did, and they regularly sued the 
paper. For everyone else, its muckraking was something readers tolerated 
because they enjoyed it. 
In this environment, an ambitious executive with a lifelong passion for 
journalism saw the obvious path to success: superior muckraking. Rebekah 
Mary Wade was born in 1968 in Warrington in the north of England and grew 
up an only child. At age 20, the future Rebekah Brooks, who would become 
editor of the News of the World and The Sun, talked her way into a job with the 
features editor of The Post, a now-defunct tabloid. “I am going to come and 
work with you on the features desk as the features secretary or administrator.”13 
Within seven years, she was the deputy editor of the News of the World.
By most measures an alpha female,14 she worked hard, played carefully, and 
mastered the art of power politics in a male-dominated profession. “She’d get 
you to do things,” said a former News of the World reporter. “She had this 
charisma, this magnetic attraction. She would praise to high heaven, make you 
feel like you were on top of the world. It was only afterwards that you realized 
you were manipulated.”15
By the end of 1996, she reportedly first met Rupert Murdoch, chairman of the 
enterprise for which she worked. Taking a page from Nina Godiwalla’s 
playbook, Suits: A Woman on Wall Street, the newly minted Rebekah Wade 
Kemp understood that “doing a good job (was) expected of (her), but it’s the 
relationships that (would) help (her) succeed.”16
“Observers believe Rebekah (Wade Kemp) Brooks’s remarkably swift rise in 
the company was due not so much to her talents as a journalist but to her single-
minded ruthlessness and her dazzling, feline ability to charm. ‘Rebekah 
schmoozes in one direction only — up,’ says one of her oldest acquaintances. ‘I 
don’t know anyone who is better at love-bombing, when it matters. I wouldn’t 
think Rupert stood a chance.’”17 Commented a former News of the World 
reporter, “From the way she acted, you would think she wanted to sleep with 
you.”13 
In 2000, Murdoch fired Phil Hall, the editor of the News of the World, and gave 
his job to Wade Kemp. At just 32 she was the youngest national newspaper 
editor in the country. In a vivid demonstration of the power of the press (and of 
Rebekah Wade Kemp), she began a campaign as muckraker-in-chief to name 

Chapter 4 | Employees
6
and shame alleged pedophiles.6 Some alleged offenders found themselves 
terrorized by angry mobs. In 2003, Murdoch installed Wade as the editor of 
daily tabloid The Sun, sister paper to the News of the World and Britain's biggest 
selling daily newspaper. She told the staff on her first day it was the job she had 
“dreamed of” ever since she was a child.13 In 2009, at age 41, the soon-to-be 
Rebekah Brooks was appointed CEO of News International, the U.K. arm of 
News Corp.’s Newspapers and Information Services business. 
Within the span of about 24 months, she became one of the most powerful 
women in Britain; married the former racehorse trainer and “international 
playboy” Charles Patrick Evelyn Brooks; oversaw the closure of News of the 
World; resigned from her post with News International; and was arrested on 
suspicion of phone hacking and corruption.
An aggressive editor backed by an aggressive chairman makes for a powerful 
force in a business that rewards muckraking. Reuters reported that, according to 
a senior police officer who was asked to investigate the matter in 2009, “illegal 
voicemail hacking was ‘standard practice’ at Britain’s best-selling Sunday 
newspaper, and then covered up by executives.”18 Accusations that journalists 
working for News Corp. illegally paid police for information have also been 
brought to light. The Financial Times reported: “The Sun had a culture of 
corrupt payments to a network of public officials which was authorized at a 
senior level, the police testified at an inquiry into press standards. Deputy 
Assistant Commissioner Sue Akers said evidence showed that payments were 
‘frequent, regular and on occasion significant sums of money were involved.’”19 
As part of the fallout, Prime Minister David Cameron announced two inquiries 
relating to the scandal. One of them, led by a judge, was charged to look at the 
way the police investigated the allegations against News of the World and the 
relationship between newspapers and the police.
Along the way, the government had preferred to look the other way. After Wade 
Kemp had moved to The Sun, Andy Coulson became News of the World editor. 
Coulson was subsequently hired by Prime Minister David Cameron as his press 
secretary. “The tabloid press in Britain is very powerful, and it’s also 
exceedingly aggressive, and it’s not just News Corp.; The Mail is very 
aggressive,” said John Whittingdale, a Conservative member of Parliament who 
is chairman of the Culture, Media and Sport Committee as quoted in The New 
York Times. “They do make or break reputations, so obviously politicians tread 
warily.” 20
Politicians have always been most afraid of the two News Corp. papers, The 
Sun and its Sunday sister (until it closed), News of the World. “‘They go on little 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
feeding frenzies against various politicians,’ said Roy Greenslade, a professor 
of journalism at City University London. Until the floodgates opened, when the 
outrage over the latest phone-hacking revelations had politicians voicing disgust 
in a cathartic parliamentary session, most members of Parliament were terrified 
of crossing Mr. Murdoch.”20
It may be asking too much of the police and the government to serve as a check 
and balance on the press. Christopher Hitchens, writing for Slate, confessed, 
“Admittedly, it isn’t usually the job of these institutions to keep the press 
honest. (Indeed, I could swear that I read somewhere that the whole concept 
was the other way about.)”21
Many would agree with Hitchens, and might suggest that reputation for ethics 
could in the long term survive only in an ethical culture. “It's a very personal 
thing, but throughout my career – from my time as a teacher, to my time as a 
banker – I have seen just how important culture is to successful organizations,” 
offered Robert Diamond, CEO of Barclays plc. “Culture is difficult to define, I 
think it’s even more difficult to mandate – but for me the evidence of culture is 
how people behave when no one is watching.”22
Diamond got it partially right, as the following case study on Barclays shows. 
Culture comprises values and is evidenced, in part, by how people behave when 
no one is looking and they have an opportunity for unethical behavior. But this 
is really a definition of morality. Morality is reflected in the actions of an 
individual in the face of an unethical opportunity. 
On an institutional basis, culture means establishing behavioral norms, 
monitoring conformance, and mitigating deviations from the norms. These may 
reaffirm the moral principles of employees; they may rectify them as well. 
Employees who find the institutional culture incompatible with their own 
morals will either conform or leave. 
At least in principle, boards and management have the potential to reduce 
“opportunity for deviation” by imposing strong internal controls and 
compliance mechanisms and to reduce “motive and rationalization for deviation 
through appropriate incentive-setting, articulation of corporate values, and tone 
at the top.” They also have a legal duty. “‘That role has been acknowledged and 
incorporated into a range of regulatory, commercial, and justice guidance 
materials, including the Federal Sentencing Guidelines in the U.S., the Ministry 
of Justice Guidance pertaining to the Anti-Bribery Statute in the UK, and the 
2010 OECD Good Practice Guidance on Internal Controls, Ethics, and 
Compliance,’ noted Michael D. Greenberg, director of the RAND Center for 
Corporate Ethics and Governance (CCEG).”23

Chapter 4 | Employees
8
The Broken Back
The News of the World ethical scandal damaged every part of the Murdoch 
empire, as shown in Table 4-1.
Table 4-1. A Full-Blown Reputational Crisis Is One in Which Every Stakeholder Is Impacted
Quote
Authority
Stakeholder
“Phone-Hacking Scandal Damaged News 
Corp.’s Image”24
Claims filed by News Corp. 
shareholders led by 
Amalgamated Bank 
Investor
“I think the UK hacking scandal has the 
potential to damage The Wall Street 
Journal’s reputation.”25
Jay Ottaway, whose family 
owned 6.2% of Wall Street 
Journal publisher Dow Jones 
& Co before it was sold to 
News Corp.
Investor
“I think the benefit of the (Wall Street) 
Journal is it’s above the fray. It’s carved out 
such a strong reputation for so long,” he 
said, but added, “You cannot completely 
separate it from the muck.”23
Doug Arthur, a long time 
newspaper analyst now with 
Evercore Partners
Analyst
“Rupert Murdoch is torching the reputation 
of all of his brands.”26
Arthur Yann, vice president of 
public relations for the Public 
Relations Society of America 
(PRSA)
Media observer
“The reputation of the company we love so 
much, as well as the press freedoms we 
value so highly, are all at risk.”27
Resignation memo from News 
International chief executive 
Rebekah Brooks
Employee
“He has too much power over British public 
life. We’ve got to look at the situation 
whereby one person can own more than 20 
percent of the newspaper market, the Sky 
platform and Sky News. I think it’s 
unhealthy.”28
Opposition Labour Party 
leader Ed Miliband, calling for 
a breakup of the media empire
Regulator
“Our committee has jurisdiction to look into 
these very troubling allegations against 
News Corp. and find out whether any 
federal laws were violated such as the 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.”29
Rep. Bruce Braley (D-Iowa), 
who sits on the House 
Oversight and Government 
Reform Committee
Regulator

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
“It was totally wrong, and I regret it and 
I’ve said it’s going to be a blot on my 
reputation for the rest of my life.”30
Rupert Murdoch, Chairman of 
News Corp., testifying before 
Lord Justice Leveson 
Chairman of the 
Board of 
Directors
“Tabloids are declining to publish 
sensational stories about the private lives of 
celebrities as they fear a backlash from 
readers disgusted by the revelations of the 
Leveson Inquiry.”31
Celebrity publicist Max 
Clifford speaking to the 
London Times
Customers
Expenses Arising from Employee (In) Action
Costs to settle the growing number of claims for hacking are not insignificant. 
“News Corp. could end up paying a total of 120 million pounds in damages and 
legal fees,” said Niri Shan, a media lawyer at U.K. law firm Taylor Wessing. 
Shan based that figure on an average settlement of 30,000 pounds for each of 
the 4,000 victims identified by police.32 
Analysts projected costs in the range of $1 billion. As of April 2012, according 
to The Independent, the legal costs associated with phone hacking totaled 
approximately $37.7 million to date, while $88.2 million went to restructuring 
after News of the World was shut down in July. News Group, the subsidiary that 
owned the tabloid, also took a $254 million write-off when the paper closed.33
Other Costs
On 4 July 2012, The Huffington Post summarized34 the transformations in 
Murdoch’s empire after a 60-year journey that began with a single newspaper in 
Adelaide, Australia. During the year that followed disclosure of the Milly 
Dowler affair:

The News of the World newspaper has been closed. 

A parliamentary committee declared Rupert Murdoch “not 
fit” to lead a major international company.

A protester assaulted Rupert Murdoch with a shaving-
cream pie.

Chapter 4 | Employees
10

Rupert Murdoch has apologized repeatedly for the scandal, 
sent police after his own employees, abandoned his dreams 
of buying a lucrative satellite company, and made plans to 
cut off his beloved newspapers from the entertainment 
properties that keep him enriched.
In addition to Murdoch’s personal challenges:

Murdoch’s son James, his heir apparent, has seen his 
reputation crash and burn due to his role in the scandal.

Murdoch’s trusted deputy Rebekah Brooks has been 
arrested.

Murdoch’s trusted editor, Andy Coulson, who then became 
top communications adviser to Prime Minister David 
Cameron, has been arrested. 

More than 40 other people connected with phone hacking 
or the bribery of public officials have been arrested. 

Brooks, her husband, and Coulson are facing criminal 
trials.

The head of Scotland Yard has resigned. 

Police in the United Kingdom are running three separate 
investigations into illegal activity by the media.

The Department of Justice in the United States is probing 
News Corp.’s operations.
Most painful for Murdoch, according to Robert Monks, founder of Institutional 
Shareholder Services, the foremost proxy advisor, is that the empire Murdoch 
had amassed will likely not be passed on to the children. “The family business 
is simply kaput.”35
Unethical behavior by a handful of employees, both reporters and their 
supervisors, who pursued their craft aggressively, co-opted police, and lied to 
Parliament, operating within a small part of a media empire that generated 
around 5% of its net income, wiped out 32 times that value. Succinctly, a 
reputational crisis triggered by the behavior of employees erased 10% of the 
total News Corp. value in less than two weeks (Table 4-1). The bottom line is 
$4.4 billion lost.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
By ignoring employee deviations from ethical journalistic practices, News 
Corp. showed that it was suffering from a challenged culture—a corrupt culture 
as headlined in the Financial Times.19 
Barclays
Ironically, Barclays CEO Robert Diamond’s failure to distinguish between 
individual morality and institutional culture cost him personally. His downfall 
was precipitated by a scandal involving 14 employees at Barclays, along with a 
handful of employees at other banks, who fiddled with a reference standard 
called LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) that in 2012 underpinned $360 
trillion of global securities.36 After brewing for months, the alleged 
improprieties became widespread public knowledge in late June 2012 when 
Barclays was fined a record 290 million pounds ($453.4 million).
Days later, Diamond and the bank’s COO stepped down. In the first week, the 
reputational crisis also wiped $5 billion in market capitalization from the bank 
ranked second in the United Kingdom by assets. “Clearly there was behavior 
that was reprehensible,” Diamond acknowledged in testimony to Parliament.37 
As this volume goes to press, Barclays is conducting an internal review into 
what it called “flawed” business practices while the Serious Fraud Office is 
investigating the prospect of criminal charges.
And yes, the personal costs mounted. In addition to losing his job, Diamond 
agreed to forgo up to £20 million in bonuses and shares. And although he 
walked away with around £2 million in salary and pension payments, the 
hearings before Parliament cast a shadow. “The comments made at today’s 
hearing have had a terribly unfair impact upon my reputation, which is of 
paramount concern to me,” Diamond said.38
Employee Benefits of an Ethical Culture
Employee behavior is one of the most important determinants of an 
organization’s reputation. At an institutional level, both the behavioral norms 
and the systems designed to foster conformance speak to organizational culture. 
In an ethical culture, trust and credibility are essential for employee 
engagement, stabilizing overall culture, and in turn, its reputation.
Although trust can be difficult to define and measure, high levels of trust 
correlate with high levels of employee engagement. Research has shown that a 
10% increase in trust is equivalent to a 36% increase in monetary compensation. 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 4 | Employees
12
If a company is able to increase trust by 10%, it has the equivalent effect on 
employee life satisfaction as handing out a 36% raise in salary or bonus.39
In addition to engaging existing employees, a good ethical reputation can help 
recruit employees. According to Kelly Services, Inc. the workforce 
management services firm, “Major public issues such as a company’s reputation 
for strong ethical practices have become critical factors in choosing where to 
work, even to the point where many employees are prepared to sacrifice pay or 
promotion in order to work for organizations that are actively engaged in good 
social responsibility practices. More specifically, concerns about ethical 
behavior outweigh concerns about the environment by all generations, when 
making employment choices.”40 Key findings that can impact both recruiting 
and future salary costs include:

Almost 90% of respondents say they are more likely to 
work for an organization that is considered ethically and 
socially responsible, something that is consistent across all 
generations.

Eighty percent are more likely to work for an organization 
that is considered environmentally responsible, a figure that 
is considerably higher among people in older age groups.

In deciding where to work, an organization’s reputation for 
ethical conduct is considered “very important” by 65% of 
Gen Y, 72% of Gen X, and 77% of baby boomers.

Forty-six percent of Gen Y would be prepared to forgo 
higher pay or promotion to work for an organization with a 
good reputation, rising to 48% for Gen X and 53% for baby 
boomers.
Consider This

Organizational culture, the driver of reputation, is a force 
that can reduce the variances of otherwise unconstrained 
behaviors—but only to the extent that management and the 
board care to both monitor and enforce it. Ignorance is 
tantamount to culpability.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13

In any organization, a small group of employees may 
exercise ethically deviant behavior. Call this group 
“rogues.” 

When the unethical behavior of a group of individuals 
impacts the institution’s overall reputation—that is, when 
an institution rather than a group of employees is perceived 
to be culpable—the financial consequences can be 
catastrophic.

A strong culture that establishes organizational norms, and 
a board of directors that will support management even in 
the face of placing revenue at risk, are essential for driving 
consistently ethical behavior and mitigating the risk from 
“rogues.”
Innovation
[Innovation is] the design, invention, development and/or implementation of 
new or altered products, services, processes, systems, organizational 
structures or business models for the purpose of creating new value for 
customers and financial returns for the firm. Intellectual Property is part of 
this. (Table 1-1)
For employees seeking an experience at the cutting edge of their respective 
fields, a reputation for a culture of innovation is an attraction that facilitates 
both engagement and alignment. Engagement means lower operating costs as a 
result of less expensive recruitment and retention incentives, less turnover, less 
internal friction, and greater effectiveness. Alignment means lower risk-related 
costs because employees better conform to the company’s behavioral 
guidelines.
Apple Inc.
Profitability on tablet computers that compete with the iPad mini was the topic. 
“How does Samsung make money in tablets, when Google is partnering with 
Asus to make a product that makes no money?” asked rhetorically Shaw Wu, an 
analyst at Sterne Agee & Leach Inc.41 He had a point. Amazon loses money on 
every Kindle Fire it sells, with the aim of profiting from sales of books and 
other digital media. Microsoft, which, with Google, has long worked with 

Chapter 4 | Employees
14
Samsung as a hardware partner, was also rolling out a tablet computer under its 
own brand name.
The challenge as Wu saw it was that Apple had a huge profit advantage. The 
company had a pricing advantage with consumers and could charge more 
without sacrificing sales. Moreover, as we explore in Chapter 5, Apple was 
realizing benefits from its vendors and was able to realize a 37% margin on its 
larger iPads. Ever since the iPad went on sale in April 2010, Apple has 
dominated the tablet market—a $66.4 billion market in 2012, of which Apple 
has a 61% bite.41 
Apple understands the power of margins. The value of Apple’s reputation for 
innovation, earned by actually being innovative, is that while the most respected 
company in the world commands only 4% of the telephone handset market, it 
commands 50% of the profits.42 That’s pricing power in the extreme, a benefit 
of a superior reputation valued by customers.
For most stakeholders, Apple Inc. has exploited its reputation with innovation, 
to support tremendous margins. Equally importantly, Apple has exploited that 
reputation for innovation to engage its employees, create significant enterprise 
value, and bolster its stock price. 
Working for Apple Inc.
Apple Inc., ranked 17th in the 2012 Fortune 500 league table, was launched on 
April Fool’s day 1976 by high school chums Steven Wozniak and Steven Jobs. 
Pooling the technological expertise of the former, then with Hewlett-Packard, 
and the marketing vision of the latter, then with Atari, the two college dropouts 
promoted their garage-built hardware product to the delight of the Silicon 
Valley hobbyist market. 
By 1981, the company employed several thousand, was engaged in international 
sales, and was expanding with the aid of professional investors. That year, the 
potential for personal computers that Jobs had recognized mushroomed into 
massive demand. Waves of competition soon followed, including a market 
behemoth—IBM. 
Two major projects influenced by IBM’s presence were evolving in the 
background. On the technology side, the vision of a graphical user interface 
initially pioneered by Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center was morphing into the 
Macintosh—the anti-corporate user-friendly computer. On the business side, the 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
reality of competition set Jobs in search of a CEO who could help Apple punch 
above its weight. He recruited John Sculley, the then CEO of Pepsi. 
In 1984, Apple threw down the gauntlet. During the third quarter of the Super 
Bowl, Apple aired its famous 60-second commercial introducing the Macintosh. 
Directed by Ridley Scott, the Orwellian scene depicted the IBM world being 
shattered by a new machine.43 Jobs’ combative spirit captured the market’s 
attention and gave birth to an Apple culture that today is the underpinning of its 
success. When Sculley was less enthusiastic about the innovative technology, 
Jobs was bought out. Sculley won the battle in 1985 but lost the war.
By 1993, Sculley was out, followed by two more CEOs who came and went. In 
1997, Jobs returned to the helm, wiser and even more passionate. The company 
was reinfused with a more focused entrepreneurial culture.
Today, Apple’s success rests on a number of intangibles; foremost among them 
is a built-in fan base that ensures a steady supply of employment applicants and 
a culture that frames work as a noble mission. It’s a proven model. A 10-year 
study of the world’s 50 best businesses, including Apple, shows that founders 
who centered their businesses on a culture of improving people’s lives had a 
growth rate triple that of competitors in their categories.44 It also found that 
“The percentage of engaged employees in world class organizations is double 
that of average organizations.”45 “This is why Apple can do something unique 
in the annals of retailing: pay a modest hourly wage and no commission, to 
individual employees who typically have college degrees and who at the highest 
performing levels can move as much as $3 million in goods a year (Figure 4-
1).”46 Apple Inc.’s employees move nearly $500 per square foot of retail space 
per dollar of employee base pay. On an annual basis, the company generates 
$6,123 per square foot compared to Best Buy’s $801 and JC Penny’s $135.47
It works in reverse, too. “In the U.S. alone, Gallup estimates that the cost of 
disengaged employees in lost productivity is $370 billion per year.”48 
Figure 4-1. Apple retail employees are extremely effective moving nearly $500/sq ft retail 
space/$1 hourly base pay and dwarfing the performance of other retail operations.
Recruiting Engaged Employees
Denyelle Bruno, then an executive at Macy’s West, was one of the first hard-
core Apple fans hired for the nascent chain. Charged with building a retail sales 
force, known internally as specialists, she soon took advantage of Apple’s better 

Chapter 4 | Employees
16
reputational mousetrap, and people beat a path to the Apple door. Application 
numbers were so great that statistically it was harder to land a job at an Apple 
Store than to get into Stanford.
From the outset, Apple recruited candidates who were affable and self-directed 
rather than tech-savvy. (Technology can be taught, is the theory, while 
personality is innate.) Those innate advantages are then enhanced with role-
playing and pointers on the elaborate etiquette of interacting with customers. 
“The phrase that trainees hear time and again, which echoes once they arrive at 
the stores, is ‘enriching people’s lives.’ The idea is to instill in employees the 
notion that they are doing something far grander than just selling or fixing 
products. If there is a secret to Apple’s sauce, this is it: the company ennobles 
employees. It understands that a lot of people will forgo money if they have a 
sense of higher purpose.”46
Apple does not incentivize its sales force with commissions. According to Ms. 
Bruno, the idea was that such incentives would work against the company’s 
primary goals—finding customers the right products, rather than the most 
expensive ones, and establishing long-term rapport with the brand. It was also 
thought that commissions would foster employee competition, which would 
undermine camaraderie.
One two-pronged argument supporting Apple’s compensation strategy goes like 
this: First, “pay-for-performance rules ‘crowd out’ concern for others’ welfare 
and for ethical rules, making the assumption of selfish opportunism a self-
fulfilling prophecy. Second, industries and firms that emphasize incentive pay 
tend to attract individuals who…are more inclined to selfish behavior than the 
average.”49
Empirical evidence supports these arguments. Financial incentives work well 
for employees who are financially motivated—with the attendant risks. Bradley 
C. Birkenfeld, the UBS banker who used a variety of ruses to court American 
clients and help them dodge taxes, told Judge William J. Zloch that the bonus 
incentives were irresistible. At his sentencing hearing in 2008, he admitted 
being troubled by the ethics of his actions. “It did concern me, your honor,” Mr. 
Birkenfeld said.50 He knew he was breaking the law, he told Zloch, but did so 
because of the “incentives” UBS offered him.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
Retaining Engaged Employees
“When you’re working for Apple you feel like you’re working for this greater 
good,” says a former salesman who asked for anonymity because he didn’t want 
to draw attention to himself.46 As Apple Inc. explained to the New York Times, 
“Thousands of incredibly talented professionals…deliver the best customer 
service in the world.” The annual retention rate for Geniuses, the designation 
for Apple’s most advanced salespeople, is almost 90% while the average 
retention rate in retail sales for the year ending April 2012 was 74%, according 
to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.51
The company also offers very good benefits for a retailer, including health care, 
401(k) contributions, and the chance to buy both company stock and Apple 
products at a discount. What’s more, “Apple” can be a strong credential to have 
on a résumé. 
In a tight job market, this intangible benefit can be invaluable. It is the modern-
day analog to doing tours of duty with GE or Procter & Gamble. As P&G’s 
communications department proudly boasts, “More than 130 current and former 
chief executives at many of the world’s top companies began their careers and 
often spent many years at P&G.”52 David Wiser of Cincinnati-based search 
consultant Wiser Partners added, “P&G is still a golden ticket in terms of 
leveraging where you’ve been and where you want to go.” 
The Other Side of Engagement
And then there is Microsoft. Once, Microsoft was the cool innovator that ran 
circles around IBM. “They used to point their finger at IBM and laugh,” said 
Bill Hill, a former Microsoft manager. “Now they’ve become the thing they 
despised.”53 
It wasn’t always so. In 1975, a year before Wozniak and Jobs started selling 
hardware, Paul Allen and Bill Gates started writing software. The program was 
called BASIC—Beginner’s All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code—and that 
year it generated for the duo $16,000. It was a humble start for Microsoft, 
ranked in 2012 as no. 37 on the Fortune 500 league table. 
Microsoft’s founders saw evolving before them a computer market divided into 
hardware and software. They had established a solid reputation with the BASIC 
language that was on most computers of the day. When they were invited to 
IBM in New York to discuss developing an operating system for the mainframe 
behemoth that saw no real future in PCs, “they made what might be one of the 

Chapter 4 | Employees
18
most fateful decisions in the history of the computer industry.”54 Rather than 
developing the operating system and then selling it to IBM, they would license 
it to them. Every computer that IBM would sell would include that operating 
system, and in turn they would pay Microsoft a licensing fee. Both IBM and 
Microsoft were confident that were making the better deal.
IBM marketing muscle pushed the Microsoft operating system into the market. 
As PC use grew, Microsoft saw that Apple’s graphical user interface was the 
future. Enter Windows and the second fateful decision. Microsoft made it easier 
for third-party developers to create software that ran on Windows. Applications 
running on Windows proliferated, to the disadvantage of all other operating 
systems. The clincher, though, was Microsoft’s vision of an office suite—the 
ability to not only work with the applications simultaneously, but also to copy 
information from one and seamlessly paste it into another—while maintaining 
the proper format. That was the heart of the Microsoft monopoly known as 
Microsoft Office, and it took the company to its peak value of more than $0.55 
trillion in 2000.
The principal importance of interoperability and seamless integration remains a 
key market discriminator. Today, though, the lead provider is Apple, and 
interoperability is expected to extend across various forms of hardware, all 
enabling software, and all venues of service including cloud computing. Two 
Apple products—the iPhone and iPad—alone generate as much revenue as all 
of Microsoft’s wares combined. Microsoft “since 2000 . . . has fallen flat in 
every area it entered: e-books, music, search, social networking, etc., etc.”55 
What happened?
Change for the worst, Jobs would say. He laid it out in 2004, seven years into 
the return of Apple Inc. as an innovation powerhouse. After Jobs’ return as 
CEO after an exile engineered by former CEO John Sculley, he told 
Businessweek magazine:
People always ask me why did Apple really fail for those years, and it’s easy 
to blame it on certain people or personalities. Certainly, there was some of 
that. But there’s a far more insightful way to think about it. Apple had a 
monopoly on the graphical user interface for almost 10 years. That’s a long 
time. And how are monopolies lost? Think about it. Some very good product 
people invent some very good products, and the company achieves a 
monopoly.
But after that, the product people aren’t the ones that drive the company 
forward anymore. It’s the marketing guys or the ones who expand the 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19
business into Latin America or whatever. Because what’s the point of 
focusing on making the product even better when the only company you can 
take business from is yourself?
So a different group of people starts to move up. And who usually ends up 
running the show? The sales guy. John Akers at IBM is the consummate 
example. Then one day, the monopoly expires for whatever reason. But by 
then, the best product people have left, or they’re no longer listened to. And 
so the company goes through this tumultuous time, and it either survives or it 
doesn’t.
Q: Is this common in the industry?
A: Look at Microsoft — who’s running Microsoft?
Q: Steve Ballmer.
A: Right, the sales guy. Case closed. And that’s what happened at Apple, as 
well.”56
Losing its focus on innovation was bad for Microsoft. Fostering a culture that 
drove employees to focus on survival made things worse. Losing its reputation 
for innovation was one of many casualties.
In the August 2012 issue of Vanity Fair, Kurt Eichenwald describes how a 
corrosive management system known as “stack ranking” effectively crippled 
Microsoft’s ability to innovate. The program forced every unit to declare a 
certain percentage of employees as top performers, good performers, average, 
and poor.
“Every current and former Microsoft employee I interviewed—every one—cited 
stack ranking as the most destructive process inside of Microsoft, something 
that drove out untold numbers of employees,” Eichenwald writes. “If you were 
on a team of 10 people, you walked in the first day knowing that, no matter how 
good everyone was, 2 people were going to get a great review, 7 were going to 
get mediocre reviews, and 1 was going to get a terrible review,” says a former 
software developer. “It leads to employees focusing on competing with each 
other rather than competing with other companies.”
The differences in employee engagement, driven at Apple by a reputation for 
innovation and a culture based around the benefits of innovation, have financial 
consequences. In 2011, Apple Inc. spent 7% of its $108 billion in revenue on 
sales and general administrative expenses, while Microsoft spent 32.6% of its 
$69.9 billion on the same types of activities (Figure 4-2). This difference helps 
explain why equity investors on 6 July 2012 valued Apple 34% more than 

Chapter 4 | Employees
20
Microsoft for every dollar of net income, and why Apple Inc. on 20 August 
became “Wall Street’s all-time MVP—that’s Most Valuable Property” with the 
world’s highest ever market valuation of $624 billion.57
. 
Figure 4-2. Sales, corporate, and other general administrative costs at Apple and Microsoft as a 
% of revenue. Source: Apple and Microsoft 2011 annual reports. With engaged employees, Apple 
is able to spend significantly less of its revenue on sales and administrative activities.
Consider This

Recruiting employees who share an institution’s culture 
tends to create an aligned workforce that is more productive 
and less costly.

A consistent, credible reputation, once earned and 
appreciated, will ensure a steady supply of committed and 
engaged employees.
Goldman Sachs Group
Standing at London’s St. Paul’s Cathedral, Goldman Sachs International adviser 
Brian Griffiths stated: “The injunction of Jesus to love others as ourselves is an 
endorsement of self-interest…. We have to tolerate the inequality as a way to 
achieving greater prosperity and opportunity for all.”58 “The lady doth protest 
too much, methinks,” you say? Remember, it was not 20 years ago that the 
intellectual challenge, power, risk, and reward of investment banking was an 
alluring siren’s song to a generation of some of the most creative, aggressive, 
and intellectually gifted young adults on the face of this planet. 
In financial services today, no institution has a better reputation for attracting 
the best of the best than Goldman Sachs. In the 1970s, which was a turbulent 
period when some firms thrived and many others withered on the vine, 
Goldman was at the center of cutting-edge financial and policy innovation.59 
The firm exuded Gordon Gekko–levels of bravado: “We make the rules, pal. 
The news, war, peace, famine, upheaval, the price per paper clip. We pick that 
rabbit out of the hat while everybody sits out there wondering how the hell we 
did it.”60

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
21
Its innovative bankers were once dubbed “billionaire boy scouts” because of 
their talent for making fortunes while maintaining a guilt-free, cherubic image.59 
“Becoming a partner at the firm remains the dream of most ambitious financial 
executives, while joining its ranks remains the goal of most wannabe bankers 
the world over.”61 In short, over the past 30 years, Goldman has emerged as the 
iconic innovative bank. Goldman has the “banking equivalent of the celebrity 
‘it’ factor.”62
The Company
The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. (NYSE: GS)——the company changed its 
name from Goldman, Sachs & Co. after it went public in 1999——has been 
active in the capital markets sector of the financial services industry for more 
than 100 years. The company operates as a leading global investment banking 
and securities firm with two main divisions. The first division is Global Capital 
Markets, which includes investment banking, financial advisory services, 
trading, and principal investments. The second division is Asset Management 
and Securities Services, a business unit responsible for investment advisory 
services. Goldman Sachs’s clients include corporations, financial institutions, 
governments, and wealthy individuals. The company operates more than 40 
offices across the globe. 
The company was founded by Marcus Goldman, a Bavarian school teacher, 
who immigrated to the United States in 1848. After supporting himself for some 
years as a salesman in New Jersey, Goldman moved to Philadelphia, where he 
operated a small clothing store—he was in the “rags business.”
After the Civil War he moved to New York City, where in 1869 he began 
trading in promissory notes. Goldman would assume the credit risk borne by 
merchants in lower Manhattan, purchasing at a discount customers’ promissory 
notes from jewelers on Maiden Lane and from leather merchants in an area of 
the city called “the swamp.” Goldman would then sell these jewelry and leather-
collateralized loans to commercial banks at a lesser discount. 
The Goldman story is the epitome of rags to riches. In the early 1880s, 
Goldman’s son Henry expanded the firm’s range of credit exposures and set up 
operations in Providence, Hartford, Boston, and Philadelphia. In 1887, 
Goldman, Sachs expanded internationally through a relationship with the 
British merchant bank Kleinwort Sons. For the next 100 years, the partnership 
expanded into international commercial finance, foreign-exchange services, and 
currency arbitrage. As business operations became driven by innovations of 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 4 | Employees
22
increasing complexity, leveraged transactions demanded an ever larger balance 
sheet.
In early May 1999, the company listed on the New York Stock Exchange, 
raising $3.6 billion. In 2002, then CEO Henry Paulson, who would go on to be 
the U.S. Treasury Secretary under President George W. Bush, laid out the 
company’s strategy, declaring, “We want to be the premier global investment 
bank, securities, and investment management firm. We want to have a 
disproportionate share of the business of the most important clients in the most 
important markets.” Businessweek magazine memorialized those words, adding: 
“The company must gain a lock on providing financial advice to marquee 
corporations, government authorities, and superrich individuals in the world's 
major economies—the U.S., Germany, Britain, Japan, and China.”63 Within 
four years, Paulson’s strategy had propelled the firm “to the top spot in global-
equities underwriting and M&A advisory. The trading unit that included fixed 
income, currency, and commodities generated record net revenues of $5.6 
billion, while equities trading added another $1.74 billion. The company 
generated an annual profit of more than $3 billion, nearly surpassing its 
earnings at the height of the bull market.”64
Innovation at Goldman Sachs
When John Havens assumed command of Citigroup’s securities and investment 
business after the 2008 crash, he looked around at his competitors and 
concluded that Goldman Sachs became a global powerhouse by offering 
corporate clients smart ideas, innovative products, and flawless execution.65 Bill 
Cassano, vice president in the economic derivatives group at Goldman Sachs, 
concurred: “Financial innovation over the last 25 years has all been about taking 
the risks that are embedded in assets, isolating them and making them 
transferable so you can hold the asset, but not hold the risk that isn’t part of the 
reason you're investing.”66 There’s money to be made in capturing certain 
reward while selling uncertain risk.
To strip reward from risk and capture it to the benefit of clients, Goldman Sachs 
has been introducing financial innovations for more than a century. Initial 
public offerings are one such model. In the early 20th century, Goldman Sachs 
established itself as a major player in the initial public offering (IPO) market. 
Selling shares to the public was innovative; buying them back and structuring 
retirement options, as Goldman did in the early teens, was even more 
innovative.67 Since it was already expert in buying and selling credit, selling and 
buying equities came naturally—and thus Goldman Sachs found itself in 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
23
investment banking in the 1930s. In the 1950s, it became a pioneer of certain 
types of hedging strategies, the precursors to the complex derivative trades that 
many argue helped to bring about the global financial crisis in 2008. 
Innovation is a process driven first and foremost by people. “Our assets are our 
people, capital and reputation.”68 That quote on page 2 of the 2011 Annual 
Report makes explicit the link between employees and reputation at Goldman.
Innovation is cultural. Goldman Sachs was one of the first financial institutions 
to recruit MBA graduates from the world’s leading business schools, helping it 
earn a reputation as hiring only the very brightest and most capable. Innovation 
is enshrined in the firm’s credo—the 5th of the 14 Principles:69
5. We stress creativity and imagination in everything we do. While 
recognizing that the old way may still be the best way, we constantly strive to 
find a better solution to a client’s problems. We pride ourselves on having 
pioneered many of the practices and techniques that have become standard 
in the industry. 
Financial Success Metrics
In 2006, Goldman Sachs made more money than any other Wall Street 
investment bank in history. Its staff shared in a $16 billion bonus pool. The 
bank was at the top of the global M&A adviser rankings for yet another year, 
and it was named bank of the year in the International Financing Review (IFR) 
awards.
The bank won praise for the way it has developed its private equity and hedge 
fund business—and for the way it combines its roles as adviser and financier 
with that of co-investor. Goldman was also named equity house of the year and 
won a new category: Leveraged finance house of the year. That award, 
introduced to reflect the increasing variety and complexity of financing 
associated with leveraged buyouts may or may not turn out to be a good win for 
Goldman.70 It occurred just as the doom-mongers predicted rising defaults for 
the next year, a contraction of risk appetite, and an end to the ample global 
liquidity seen in 2006.
The bank even won an “award” for the way it engineered the exit of one of its 
corporate directors who had become an embarrassment. Andrew Hill for the 
Financial Times wrote about how Goldman Sachs distanced itself from BP’s 
Lord Browne: “It is rare, for one thing, that Goldman Sachs offers an innovation 
to the world of business without charging a fee for it. But next time a company 

Chapter 4 | Employees
24
chairman wants to hint to a distinguished director that time is up, he need only 
slide a piece of paper across the boardroom table with two words on it: ‘John 
Browne.’”71
Fast forward to 2010, and reputational resilience is still evident. 
Notwithstanding the terrible bruising suffered by the industry in general and 
Goldman Sachs in particular, the BBC was still paying tribute to “the world's 
most revered commercial financial institution.” Goldman Sachs topped the 
industry league tables for financial advice, with 22.8% of the market share and 
$555 billion in deals72 (Figure 4-3a). Goldman’s average deal size was 15% 
larger than the average of its peers; and its total deal value was 42% greater than 
the average of its peers. Goldman Sachs’ was also the favorite counterparty of 
the U.S. Federal Reserve. The company received 22.1% of the Fed’s Treasury 
dealings. The next two major traders, Citigroup and Credit Suisse, received 
14.5% and 10.2% respectively.73 In 2011, notwithstanding a profound 
slowdown in banking activity, Goldman continued to lead in IPOs (Figure 4-
3b).74 Last, at the end of Q1 of 2012, Goldman Sachs led merger and acquisition 
advisory services, with 29% of the $1.08 trillion in deals.75 
For all its faults, challenges, and public missteps, customers still prefer 
Goldman Sachs and they reward the firm with bigger and better deal 
opportunities, on which Goldman (generally) effectively delivers. Said William 
Barker of Brand Finance to the Financial Times, “My guess is that their 
customers are probably very happy with them.”76 As one analyst noted, 
“Nobody is going to stop doing business with Goldman Sachs. They’re just not 
going to do it—because Goldman is just better than everybody else. And that’s 
the bottom line.”77 To underscore that point, on 29 September 2012, Barron’s 
magazine cover featured Goldman Sachs in a story titled, “Built to Win.”78

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
25
Figure 4-3a. 2010 Financial Advice League table showing Goldman Sachs’ advice helped shape 
more deal value, and that the average value of each deal was greater than that of its closest 
competitors.
Figure 4-3b. 2011 Financial Advice League table showing Goldman Sachs’ services helped raise 
more capital more deal value, and that the average value of each deal was greater than that of its 
closest competitors.

Chapter 4 | Employees
26
Enmity from Non-Stakeholders
Goldman Sachs’s reputation for innovation and ubiquity, as well as its superior 
return among the biggest banks, has made it a target for much of the anger and 
frustration arising from the global economic chaos. This is best illustrated by 
the colorful descriptor penned by Matt Taibbi in Rolling Stone magazine in July 
2009.79
In an article titled, “The Great American Bubble Machine,” Taibbi charges: 
“From tech stocks to high gas prices, Goldman Sachs has engineered every 
major market manipulation since the Great Depression – and they're about to do 
it again.” He then characterizes Goldman Sachs as “a great vampire squid 
wrapped around the face of humanity, relentlessly jamming its blood funnel into 
anything that smells like money.”
The following month, the Financial Times reported that research it 
commissioned from Brand Asset Consulting comprising a survey of 17,000 
Americans found that Goldman’s stature—as measured by several gauges of 
brand strength—had suffered in 2008 and 2009.75 A similar finding was 
reported in early 2010 by Harris Interactive in their 2009 Reputation Quotient 
survey, which placed Goldman Sachs near the bottom of a list of 60 highly 
visible companies. As an aside, Chapter 9 presents survey data showing that 
Goldman’s peers were more favorably disposed to the company.
Passion and Engagement from Employees
Despite the slide in Goldman Sachs’ reputation among the general public, 
among its employees the company remains an icon. The company seeks to 
recruit diverse, driven, and innovative team players who have an interest in 
financial markets, management, and process design. And rather than operate a 
company of individual stars, it operates a star company.
This is important. Even in investment banking, where many firms coddle top 
performers, corporate culture is valued by employees. According to Vault 
Finance, a 2010 survey of financial service employees showed the following:

Percentage of respondents who say firm culture was the 
single most important factor in deciding to accept their 
firm’s offer over others: 35

Percentage who say prestige was the most important factor: 
18

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
27

Percentage who say compensation was the most important: 
980
Goldman’s culture helps explain why it is a fixture of Fortune’s 100 Best 
Companies to Work For list, a survey-based study involving around 250,000 
employees globally. In 2011, Goldman Sachs moved up a slot to no. 23. While 
that’s lower than its 9th place ranking before the financial crisis, Goldman is 
one of only 13 companies to have earned a spot on the list every year since it 
debuted in 1998.81
The same perceptions go for potential employees. The bonuses and profits that 
led Goldman Sachs to be labeled a “great vampire squid” are cited by business-
school students as proof of the company’s strength. And they want to work 
there. In annual surveys by Universum Group, a Stockholm-based marketing 
company, as reported by Fortune, Goldman Sachs ranked no. 3 or no. 4 among 
approximately 6,000 MBA candidates at more than 50 business schools 
worldwide (Figure 4-4).
Figure 4-4. MBA students consistently rank Goldman Sachs as their choice investment bank 
employment opportunity, and as one of the top five employment opportunities consistently. 
Source: Universum Group annual surveys.

Chapter 4 | Employees
28
It’s not just the fringe benefits nor is it the money. Goldman, for instance, 
doesn’t offer employees free cafeteria chow like Google, ranked the no. 4 
choice by existing employees in 2011. It does not provide complimentary 
recreation and fitness areas like the no. 1 company on the list, SAS. Even 
Goldman’s compensation, though higher than that of many companies, isn’t 
dramatically different from that of other investment banks. (As one former low-
level Goldman strategist puts it, “Their compensation system pays you $1 more 
than whatever is your threshold for leaving Goldman Sachs.”80)
It’s the culture—what many call corporate brand—and what we believe at 
Goldman Sachs comprises its reputation for innovation. As Stefan Stern who 
writes on management for the Financial Times, summarized: “When it comes to 
retaining good people or attracting new ones, your image and reputation count.”82
Last, as every senior executive appreciates, engaged and motivated employees 
produce more and turn over less. We’ve seen that Goldman outproduces. What 
about turnover?
Among financial service companies ranked as one of the top 100 places to 
work, Goldman turnover was 9.4%; overall industry turnover rates are 10.7%. 
The 12% lower turnover rate at Goldman translates to lower direct and indirect 
costs associated. Direct costs that would appear in the Selling, General and 
Administrative (SG&A) sections of the P&L statement include advertising, 
headhunter fees, temporary work, overtime pay, signing bonuses, relocation 
costs for new employees, and training costs. Indirect costs that would appear 
subtly in the Revenue line of the P&L statement include customer service 
disruption, emotional costs, loss of morale, burnout/absenteeism among 
remaining employees, loss of experience, continuity, and “corporate memory.”
Goldman Sachs understands explicitly that a good reputation among employees 
makes for a good corporate reputation and fosters greater productivity and 
above-average returns.
Goldman Sachs has one reputation. It can be affected by any number of 
decisions and activities across the firm. Every employee has an equal 
obligation to raise issues or concerns, no matter how small, to protect the 
firm’s reputation. We must ensure that our focus on our reputation is as 
grounded, consistent and pervasive as our focus on commercial success.83
Goldman Sachs also benefits from this empirically (Figure 4-6). Over the 
trailing three years, costs in its investment banking division to generate $1 were 
consistently lower and no less than 4% lower than the average of its peers 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
29
(Figure 4-5). The exception is the 2011 cost/revenue ratio at JP Morgan Chase 
which, while better for that year, was offset by an $5.8 billion trading loss in 
2012.84 
Figure 4-5. Operating costs as a % of revenue generated in the investment banking segments of 
Goldman Sachs and selected peers illustrating how employee engagement reduces costs. Source: 
Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan Chase, Morgan Stanley and UBS 2011 Annual reports. JP Morgan 
Chase, while apparently an exception to the rule in 2011, may have taken risks that manifested 
only in 2012.83
Also, as of mid-July 2012, for every $1 in expected net income, equity investors 
valued Goldman Sachs more than its six closest competitors: 15% more than JP 
Morgan Chase, 19% more than Morgan Stanley, 22% more than UBS, 34% 
more than Citigroup, 64% more than Credit Suisse, and 78% more than 
Deutsche Bank.85 
Figure 4-6. Equity investors value Goldman Sachs more. For every $1 of expected future net 
income, equity investors give Goldman Sachs anywhere from a 15% to a 78% premium over its 
closest competitors. 

Chapter 4 | Employees
30
Retrospective
Goldman Sachs is an iconic firm respected for its innovation (and the cerebral 
power behind it). This reputation, and the culture surrounding it, is one that is 
valued by its employees, and it has enabled the company to sustain its 
reputation and reap the benefits. 
In the capital markets sector, a reputation for innovation is an important 
differentiator. Goldman Sachs is well aware of the importance of reputation to 
its value and its ability to compete successfully. 
Goldman continues to dominate notwithstanding the great public enmity, 
increased regulatory scrutiny, and general slowdown, all of which have been 
adversely impacting the industry as a whole.
Consider This

Even in industry segments in which compensation is a 
central motivator, corporate culture is both a competitive 
differentiator and a primary motivator. 

Engaged and motivated employees outperform their peers, 
and in most businesses, that is the key to financial success 
and market domination.

Stakeholders own a firm’s reputation. When customers, 
clients, and the company are all authentically on the same 
page, all will benefit from the value generated.
Quality: Domino Pizza Redux
[Quality is] the extent to which a product is free from defects or deficiencies; 
a service meets or exceeds the expectations of customers or clients, and both 
products and services conform to measurable and verifiable criteria. (Table 
1-1)
The prank impugning the quality of Domino’s pizza recorded and uploaded to 
YouTube on Easter Sunday, 2009, jeopardized Domino’s $490 million in 
domestic revenues and $1.4 billion spent on brand-building during the 
preceding five years and precipitated a 10% fall in market capitalization in the 
period immediately following. Trading volume surged. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
31
Yet according to an earnings call transcript by Seeking Alpha, the company lost 
no more than 2% in domestic same-store sales for the second quarter of 2009. 
Within one year, Domino’s equity value was higher than it had been in years. 
Tim McIntyre, vice president of communications at Domino’s, who helped 
shepherd the company through the viral video incident, is on the lecture circuit 
advising directors that their duties of oversight include social media. Is there a 
connection? Might it be the $2 million insurance payment the company received 
following the event? Or perhaps the stock surge is due to the December 2009 
launch of new crust, new sauce, and new cheese? After all, quality is a major 
driver of intangible asset and reputational value in the food sector. 
The company did roll out an aggressive campaign to restore its reputation. How 
effective was it? Simple answer: its returns beat those of two of the three most 
highly ranked firms in the restaurant sector from that period.
Process: The Secret Sauce
While many might attribute the rebound to excellent marketing, a more 
satisfying explanation for Domino’s reputation resilience was evidence of 
substantive business processes that engaged its employees to create a quality 
product, and a communications effort that allowed stakeholders to appreciate its 
value. 
Those quality processes are systems that improve managerial motivation, 
provide time for managerial oversight, and incorporate technology that 
enhances quality while reducing opportunities for adverse human intervention, 
malicious or otherwise. 
Domino’s greatest reputation risk lurks in and among the employees of the 
franchisees. Its strategy to mitigate that risk comprises two creative HR-focused 
processes. First, it requires that every franchise owner be 100% committed to 
the business—no outside (distracting) revenue opportunities. Domino’s wants 
the fortune of its franchise owners to depend on the success of the franchise. 
Second, it provides vertically integrated dough manufacturing and supply chain 
systems that allow the franchise owner to dedicate more time to human resource 
management rather than engage in the “back-of-store” activity typical of the 
industry. 
Domino’s is also constantly innovating to increase quality. It has led the 
industry with a sturdier corrugated pizza box, a mesh screen that helps cook 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 4 | Employees
32
pizza crust more evenly, and, introduced in 1998, the Domino’s HeatWave hot 
bag that keeps pizzas hot during delivery. 
Consider This

In a business in which quality means meeting customers’ 
expectations for high levels of product or service, processes 
and controls that drive product quality by engaging 
employees are proven sources of enterprise value.

Risk management processes that anticipate and head off 
crises can reduce volatility. Authentic processes that isolate 
rogue activities for what they are—rogues—foster 
reputational resilience.
Guidance
From the perspective of employees, companies’ reputations manifest in 
corporate culture. Culture is what employees experience in their day-to-day 
operations—the human environment within which instructions are conveyed, 
goals are set, operations are monitored, and results are rewarded or punished. 
These experiences establish employee expectations that then inform employee 
actions ranging from ethical decisions to sales execution to, well, making 
fabulous pizza.
Culture comes from the top. News Corp.’s top leadership came from the rough-
and-tumble world of Australian journalism. Within tabloid press, an especially 
seedy part of the Murdoch empire, an unholy alliance between a capable 
executive and the head of the enterprise’s center of governance lubricated an 
already slippery slope. Bad behavior was rewarded. There was no internal 
governor to arrest its proliferation. Consequently, when the ethical problem was 
exposed, the enterprise had no defense and was found culpable. The full costs 
are yet to be determined.
Barclays is a similar story. The cost is in the range of half a billion dollars in 
fines, a few jobs, and the CEO’s reputation. The bad behavior—a cultural 
failure—does not seal the case for more regulation in the financial sector. On 
the contrary. If a regulator enforces culture, “You get a police state with 
compliance on the surface and subversion underneath.”86

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
33
As destructive as rogue employees can be to an enterprise’s value, engaged 
employees can create significant value. Apple’s culture is a reflection of the 
values of its founders. Its strong culture attracts employees whose behavior 
reinforces its reputation for innovation. While that has created significant value 
by reducing operational costs and boosting revenues, the future will be one in 
which professional management is at the helm. The world will be watching to 
see if the culture of innovation will long outlive its original creator.
Microsoft went through the transition to professional management, and the 
cultural effects on the employees have been well documented. Innovation has 
been one of many casualties.
Goldman Sachs stands in contrast to Barclays. It has been pilloried in the press, 
reviled by the general public, parodied by modern-day gonzo journalists, and 
yet…its customers, employees, and prospective employees hold it in high 
regard. And this consistently translates to market domination. Say what you 
wish, but Goldman Sachs’ reputation is incredibly resilient.
Domino’s shows that employee engagement and a reputation for quality is a 
consequence of operational controls and properly designed incentives. It shows 
that authentic controls can protect reputation by enabling a company to distance 
itself from rogues.
Each of these exemplary companies established reputations that employees 
understood, valued, and exploited. Awareness of the importance of its 
reputation—and how it was established—helped Apple and Goldman Sachs 
dominate their sectors and helped Domino’s rebound from a crisis. Conversely, 
ethical failures poisoned the reputations and accelerated the falls from grace at 
News Corp. and Barclays.
There are practical steps a company can take to prevent employees from 
exploiting control weaknesses and placing an enterprise’s reputation at risk. 
Supervisors can ask boards to provide evidence of healthy culture, such as 
functional whistleblowing practices, customer surveys, and employee 
engagement surveys. The enterprise can invest in systems for challenging 
“group think” at the board level and technology solutions that provide 
management and boards with both operational controls and oversight 
dashboards. Last, a company might consider reputational value insurances 
where underwriting assesses reputational practices and culture and signals to all 
stakeholders that the organization is in operational control.

Chapter 4 | Employees
34
By the Numbers
These case studies illustrate how reputation can affect value-creating and value-
destroying actions by employees, and how those economic effects either impact 
SG&A expenses or create one-time extraordinary charges (Table 4-2).
Table 4-2. Effect of Reputation on Employee-Associated Costs
P&L Effect
Stock Price Effect
News Corp.
More than $360 million in fees and 
write-downs
$4.4 billion lost
Barclays
$452 million (£290 million) in one-
time extraordinary charges 
$5.77 billion (£3.7 billion) lost
Apple
Store sales are 280% more efficient 
than the average of a reference group.
SG&A costs are 65% lower than at 
Microsoft
Apple 270% 3-year returns 
Microsoft: 32%; Nasdaq: : 
50%; Google: 39%
Goldman Sachs
Average deal size 15% larger than the 
average of its peers; total deal value 
42% greater than the average of its 
peers. 
Operating costs per $/revenue no less 
than 4% lower than average of rivals
Forward P/E multiples 
15%–78% greater than all 
major rivals
1 Russell D. Be ruthless with reputation. PR Week. 3 November 2011. Available at: 
http://www.prweek.com/uk/league_tables/1100806/dean-russell-fleishman-hillard-
ruthless-reputation/. Accessed 3 July 2012.
2 Domino’s brand takes a hit after YouTube™ “prank” video. HCD Research. 17 April 
2009. Available at: http://www.mediacurves.com/NationalMediaFocus/J7329-
Dominos/. Accessed 3 July 2012
3 Hsieh T. Wikipedia. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Hsieh. Accessed 
2 July 2012.
4 Hsieh T. Available at: 
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/t/tonyhsieh412218.html. Accessed 2 July 
2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
35
5 The tipping point. Wikipedia. Available at: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Tipping_Point. Accessed 3 July 2012.
6 Chandrasekhar I, Wardrop M, Trotman A. Phone hacking: timeline of the scandal. The 
Telegraph. 13 June 2012. Available at: 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/phone-hacking/8634176/Phone-hacking-
timeline-of-a-scandal.html. Accessed 3 July 2012.
7 Hughes M. Levi Bellfield found guilty of abducting and murdering Milly Dowler. The 
Telegraph. 23 June 2011. Available at: 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/crime/8594367/Levi-Bellfield-found-guilty-
of-abducting-and-murdering-Milly-Dowler.html. Accessed 3 July 2012.
8 Davies N, Hill A. Missing Milly Dowler’s voicemail was hacked by News of the 
World. The Guardian. 4 July 2011. Available at: 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2011/jul/04/milly-dowler-voicemail-hacked-news-of-
world. Accessed 3 July 2012.
9 Spitzer E. Prosecute News Corp. Slate.com. 12 July 2011. Available at: 
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/the_best_policy/2011/07/prosecute_ne
ws_corp.html. Accessed 3 July 2012.
10 Thomson Reuters expands Lipper content through the acquisition of The Globe and 
Mail’s Canadian mutual fund database. Press Release. 1 June 2012. Available at: 
http://thomsonreuters.com/content/press_room/financial/2012_06_01_thomson_reuters_
expands_lipper_through_aquisition. Accessed 4 July 2012.
11 Burman T. Wikipedia. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Burman. 
Accessed 4 July 2012.
12 Hitchens C. Scandal sheets. Slate. 11 July 2011. Available at: 
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/fighting_words/2011/07/scandal_sheet
s.html. Accessed 4 July 2012.
13 Andrews S. Untangling Rebekah Brooks. Vanity Fair. February 2012Available at: 
http://www.vanityfair.com/business/2012/02/rebekah-brooks-201202. Accessed 4 July 
2012.
14 Ward RM, DiPaolo DG, Popson HC. College student leaders: meet the alpha female. 
Journal of Leadership Education. 2009; 7(3):100–117.
15 Groth A. How Rebekah Brooks became one of the most powerful women in Britain. 
Business Insider. 9 January 2012. Available at: http://articles.businessinsider.com/2012-
01-09/strategy/30606586_1_hacking-scandal-rebekah-brooks-powerful-women. 
Accessed 11 August 2012.
16 Thakor M. Suits: a woman on Wall Street. Huffington Post. 3 March 2011.  Available 
at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/manisha-thakor/suits-a-woman-on-wall-

Chapter 4 | Employees
36
str_b_830698.html. Accessed 4 July 2012.
17 Levy G. Rebekah Brooks, the schmoozer hated by Murdoch’s wife and daughter. 
Daily Mail. 17 July 2011. Available at: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-
2015257/Rebekah-Brooks-hated-Rupert-Murdochs-wife-Wendi-daughter-
Elisabeth.html#ixzz1zfHoTi8L. Accessed 4 July 2012.
18 Dmitracova O. Hacking was “standard practice” at Murdoch paper: police. Reuters. 
10 July 2011. Available at: http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/07/10/us-newscorp-
police-idUSTRE76902K20110710. Accessed 4 July 2012.
19 Fenton B. Inquiry told of corrupt culture at Murdoch tabloid. Financial Times. 27 
February 2012. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/c53a70cc-613d-11e1-a738-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz1zYqkZk8R. Accessed 4 July 2012/
20 Lyall S. For years, the tabloids’ sting kept British politicians in line. The New York 
Times. 9 July 2011 Available at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/10/world/europe/10britain.html?pagewanted=all. 
Accessed 4 July 2012.
21 Hitchens C. In Britain, the Guardian takes on Rupert Murdoch’s cynical view of what 
newspaper readers want to read. Slate. 11 July 2011. Available at: 
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/fighting_words/2011/07/scandal_sheet
s.html. Accessed 11 August 2012.
22 Diamond R. TODAY business lecture 2011. BBC Radio 4. 4 November 2011. 
Available at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9630000/9630673.stm. 
Accessed 3 July 2012.
23 Kossovsky N. Another British piñata. Intellectual Asset Management. 2011; 
49:(Sept/Oct) 44–53.
24 Strupp J. Shareholder lawsuit: phone-hacking scandal damaged News Corp.’s image. 
Media Matters for America. 11 July 2011. Available at: 
http://mediamatters.org/blog/2011/07/11/shareholder-lawsuit-phone-hacking-scandal-
damag/174682. Accessed 3 July 2012.
25 Saba J, Melvin J. Murdoch’s newspaper crisis causes jitters in U.S. Reuters. 14 July 
2011. Available at: 
http://us.mobile.reuters.com/article/article/idUSTRE76C7HP20110714?irpc=932. 
Accessed 3 July 2012. 
26 Yann A. PRSA: Rupert Murdoch is torching the reputation of all of his brands. 
Ragan’s PR Daily. 12 July 2011. Available at: 
http://www.prdaily.com/crisiscommunications/Articles/PRSA_Rupert_Murdoch_is_tor
ching_the_reputation_of_8872.aspx. Accessed 3 July 2012. 
27 Phone hacking: Rebekah Brooks resignation statement. The Telegraph. 17 July 2011. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
37
Available at: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/phone-hacking/8639598/Phone-
hacking-Rebekah-Brooks-resignation-statement.html. Accessed 3 July 2012.
28 . Harrison M. Murdoch makes fresh apology as Brooks is arrested by U.K. Police. 
Bloomberg Businessweek. 17 July 2011 Available 
at:http://mobile.businessweek.com/news/2011-07-17/murdoch-makes-fresh-apology-as-
brooks-is-arrested-by-u-k-police.html. Accessed 3 July 2012.
29 Yager J. Dem asks Issa to investigate News Corp. The Hill. 14 July 2011.  Available 
at: http://thehill.com/homenews/house/171539-dem-calls-on-issa-to-investigate-news-
corp. Accessed 3 July 2012.
30 Sabbagh D. Rupert Murdoch apologises, and says there was a ‘cover-up’ at the NoW. 
The Guardian. 26 April 2012. Available at: 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/apr/26/rupert-murdoch-apologises-leveson-
inquiry. Accessed 29 August 2012.
31 Leveson inquiry: hearings – day 18. #pressreform. 15 December 2011. Available at: 
http://pressreform.blogspot.com/2011/12/leveson-inquiry-hearings-day-18.html. 
Accessed 29 August 2012.
32 Browning J, Morales A. Murdoch makes fresh hacking apology as Miliband urges 
News Corp. breakup. Bloomberg. 17 July 2011. Available at: 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-07-17/news-corp-pledges-compensation-co-
operation-over-phone-hacking.html. Accessed 4 July 2012. 
33 Spanier G. Cost of hacking to Murdoch’s empire so far: £239,000,000. The 
Independent. 6 April 2012. Available at: 
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/cost-of-hacking-to-murdochs-empire-so-
far-239000000-7622359.html. Accessed 6 August 2012.
34 Mirkinson J. Phone hacking: a year after Milly Dowler scandal, there is no end in 
sight to crisis. Huffington Post. 4 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/04/phone-hacking-milly-dowler-
scandal_n_1649200.html. Accessed 4 July 2012.
35 Stern G. Has News Corp’s board restored confidence? B2C. 9 July 2012. Available 
at: http://www.business2community.com/finance/has-news-corps-board-restored-
confidence-0214626. Accessed 6 August 2012.
36 Armstrong P. Diamond’s exit shows Libor only what each bank says it is. Bloomberg. 
4 July 2012. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-07-03/diamond-s-
exit-shows-libor-only-what-each-bank-says-it-is.html. Accessed 4 July 2012.
37 Westbrook J, Vaughan L. Diamond apologizes for ‘reprehensible’ Barclays Libor 
behavior. Bloomberg. 4 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.sfgate.com/business/bloomberg/article/Diamond-Apologizes-for-
Reprehensible-3683997.php. Accessed 4 July 2012.

Chapter 4 | Employees
38
38 Crowley K, Mustoe H, Moshinksy B. Diamond offers to rebut ‘unfair’ charges he 
misled Parliament. San Francisco Chronicle. 11 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.sfgate.com/business/bloomberg/article/Diamond-Offers-to-Rebut-Unfair-
Charges-He-3697627.php. Accessed 11 July 2012.
39 Huang H.Well-being and trust in the workplace. Helliwell JF,  NBER Working Paper 
No. 14589 December 2008.
40 Social responsibility key to attracting top talent. Kelly Services wire story. 28 
October 2009. Available at: 
http://ir.kellyservices.com/releasedetail.cfm?releaseid=419383. Accessed 6 July 2012.
41 Burrows P, Satariano A. Apple said to plan smaller IPad to vie with Google Nexus. 
Bloomberg. 4 July 2012. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-07-
03/here-comes-nexus-7-nightmare-the-ipad-mini.html. Accessed 6 July 2012.
42 Huygens C. Nokia vs. Apple: yearning for a bite. Mission Intangible. 17 February 
2011.  Available 
at:http://www.iafinance.org/_blog/MISSION_INTANGIBLE/post/Nokia_vs_Apple_Ye
arning_for_a_bite/. Accessed 12 July 2012
43 Company history: 1983–1985. Available at: http://www.apple-history.com/h3. 
Accessed 11 July 2012.
44 Zwilling M. 10 Ways to build a business culture like Apple. Forbes. 3 March 2012. 
Available at: http://www.forbes.com/sites/martinzwilling/2012/03/03/10-ways-to-build-
a-business-culture-like-apple/. Accessed 6 July 2012.
45 Savitz E. It’s time to occupy IT. Forbes. 1 June 2012. Available at: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2012/06/01/its-time-to-occupy-it/. Accessed 6 
July 2012.
46 Segal D. Apple’s retail army, long on loyalty but short on pay. The New York Times. 
23 June 2012.  Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/24/business/apple-store-
workers-loyal-but-short-on-pay.html?_r=1&ref=business&pagewanted=all. Accessed 6 
July 2012.
47 Jopson B. Apple’s success a stretch for US retailers. Financial Times. 10 August 
2012. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/bd72f41a-e1b5-11e1-92f5-
00144feab49a.html#axzz23GQOLxlr. Accessed 11 August 2012.
48 Mancini J. It’s time to occupy IT. Forbes. 1 June 2012. Available at: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2012/06/01/its-time-to-occupy-it/. Accessed 30 
September 2012.
49 Klein P. Can say on pay increase social responsibility? Forbes. 3 July 2012.  
Available at: http://www.forbes.com/sites/csr/2012/07/03/can-say-on-pay-increase-
social-responsibility/?goback=.gde_2955795_member_130388605. Accessed 7 July 
4

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
39
2012.
50 Browning L. Ex-UBS banker pleads guilty in tax evasion. The New York Times. 20 
June 2008. Available at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/20/business/20tax.html?_r=2&scp=1&sq=Birkenfeld
&st=nyt&oref=slogin. Accessed 7 July 2012.
51 Bureau of Labor Statistics. Job openings and labor turnover survey. News Release.. 
19 June 2012. Available at: http://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.htm/. Accessed 7 July 
2012.
52 Monk D. For execs leaving Procter & Gamble, job market remains rosy. Business 
Courier. 13 April 2012. Available at: http://www.bizjournals.com/cincinnati/print-
edition/2012/04/13/for-execs-leaving-procter-gamble.html?page=all. Accessed 7 July 
2012.
53 Microsoft’s downfall: inside the executive e-mails and cannibalistic culture that felled 
a tech giant. Vanity Fair. 3 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2012/07/microsoft-downfall-emails-steve-
ballmer.print. Accessed 7 July 2012.
54 Garvis M. A brief history of how Microsoft (and others) changed the world… Part 1. 
7 July 2011. Available at: http://garvis.ca/2011/07/07/a-brief-history-of-how-microsoft-
and-others-changed-the-world-part-1/. Accessed 7 July 2012. 
55 Allen FE. The terrible management technique that cost Microsoft its creativity. 
Forbes. 3 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/frederickallen/2012/07/03/the-terrible-management-
technique-that-cost-microsoft-its-creativity/. Accessed 7 July 2012.
56 Carmody T. Why Tim Cook is the best choice to run Apple. Wired. 25 November 
2011. Available at: http://www.wired.com/business/2011/08/why-tim-cook/. Accessed 7 
July 2012.
57 Apple becomes most valuable company ever. AP Wire Service. 20 August 2012. 
Available at: http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-505123_162-57496461/apple-becomes-
most-valuable-company-ever/. Accessed 30 September 2012.
58 Chittum R. Bloomberg: Moneychangers in the Temples. Columbia Journalism 
Review, 4 November 2009. Available at: 
http://www.cjr.org/the_audit/bloomberg_moneychangers_in_the.php. Accessed 7 
October 2012.
59 A Brief History of Goldman Sachs, the most hated bank in the world. Business 
Insider. 8 March 2012. Available at: http://articles.businessinsider.com/2012-03-
08/wall_street/31134859_1_squid-costumes-goldman-sachs-great-vampire-
squid#ixzz20PiCnaRb. Accessed 12 July 2012.

Chapter 4 | Employees
40
60 “Wall Street’s Gekko” film icons and culture. The Popular History Digest. Available 
at: http://www.pophistorydig.com/?tag=wall-street-movie-history. Accessed 12 July 
2012.
61 Anderson R. Goldman Sachs’ 150-year reputation on the line. BBC News. 27 April 
2010. Available at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8646264.stm. Accessed 12 July 2012.
62 Tett G. ‘BlackRock envy’ replaces Goldman allure. Financial Times. 14 June 2012. 
Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/c1d6fc24-b63e-11e1-8ad0-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz20Po3aOx1. Accessed 12 July 2012.
63 Thornton E. Wall Street’s lone ranger. Businessweek. 3 March 2002. Available at: 
http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2002-03-03/wall-streets-lone-ranger. Accessed 
14 July 2012.
64 Hank Paulson 1946— biography, Encyclopedia of Business, 2nd dd. Available at: 
http://www.referenceforbusiness.com/biography/M-R/Paulson-Hank-
1946.html#ixzz20baZp4QJ. Accessed 14 July 2012.
65 Pimlott D. Havens aims to win hearts, minds and wallets. Financial Times. 13 
October 2008. http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/e69f863a-994a-11dd-9d48-
000077b07658.html#axzz20Po3aOx1. Accessed 12 July 2012.
66 Hughes J. Customising risk in Chicago. Financial Times. 28 October 2005. 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/2d6aa8d4-474f-11da-b8e5-
00000e2511c8.html#axzz20Po3aOx1. 12 July 2012.
67 The Goldman Sachs Group Inc. History International directory of company histories, 
Vol. 51. St. James Press, 2003. Available at: 
http://www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories/the-goldman-sachs-group-inc-
history/. Accessed 12 July 2012
68 Goldman Sachs 2011 Annual Report, p. 2.
69 Goldman Sachs Business Principles. Corporate Website. Available at: 
http://www.goldmansachs.com/who-we-are/business-standards/business-
principles/index.html. Accessed 30 September 2012.
70 Thomas H. More plaudits for Goldman. Financial Times. 18 December 2005. 
Available at: http://ftalphaville.ft.com/blog/2006/12/18/1469/more-plaudits-for-
goldman/. Accessed 12 July 2012.
71 Hill A. The John Browne: dignified new way to separate. Financial Times. 11 May 
2007. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/eda58376-ff59-11db-aff2-
000b5df10621.html#axzz20Po3aOx1. Accessed 12 July 2012.
72 Goldman Tops League table. New York Times Dealbook. 3 January 2011.  Available 
at: http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2011/01/03/goldman-tops-league-table/. Accessed 12 
July 2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
41
73 Harding R. Federal Reserve ♥♥♥ Goldman Sachs. Financial Times. 28 September 
2012. Available at: http://blogs.ft.com/money-supply/2012/09/28/federal-reserve-
%E2%99%A5%E2%99%A5%E2%99%A5-goldman-sachs/#axzz27xj8fQRs. Accessed 
30 September 2012.
74 De la Merced MJ. Facebook said to be planning for I.P.O. filing on Wednesday. New 
York Times Dealbook. 31 January 2012. Available at: 
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/01/31/facebook-plans-to-file-5-billion-i-p-o-on-
wednesday/. Accessed 12 July 2012.
75 Robinson G. Goldman Sachs: king of the dealmakers. Financial Times. 2 April 2012. 
Available at: http://ftalphaville.ft.com/blog/tag/goldman-sachs/page/30/. Accessed 12 
July 2012.
76 Farrell G. Goldman Sachs’ reputation tarnished. Financial Times. 2 August 2009. 
Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/ae3d459a-7f8e-11de-85dc-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz20bj70q2d. Accessed 14 July 2012.
77 PR problems at Goldman Sachs don’t keep away clients. Los Angeles Times. 6 April 
2010. Available at: http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/money_co/2010/04/goldman-sachs-
not-being-hit-where-it-hurts.html. Accessed 14 July 2012.
78 Santoli M. Built to win. Barron’s, 29 September 2012. Available at: 
http://online.barrons.com/article/SB50001424053111904414004578018594042856164.
html?mod=BOL_hpp_highlight_top. Accessed 30 September 2012.
79 Taibbi M. The great American bubble machine. Rolling Stone. 9 July 2009. Available 
at: http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-great-american-bubble-machine-
20100405. Accessed 12 July 2012.
80 Stott P. Goldman Sachs: why reputation matters. 28 April 2010. Available at: 
http://vaultcareers.wordpress.com/2010/04/28/goldman-sachs-why-reputation-matters/. 
Accessed 12 July 2012.
81 Cendrowski S. What’s so great about working at Goldman? CNN Money. 27 January 
2011. Available at: 
http://money.cnn.com/2011/01/27/news/companies/goldman_sachs_culture.fortune/inde
x.htm. Accessed 12 July 2012.
82 Stern S. Why you should pay attention to your employer brand. Financial Times. 1 
September 2009. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/5a15b366-9691-11de-
84d1-00144feabdc0.html#axzz20Po3aOx1. Accessed 12 July 2012.
83 Goldman Sachs Annual Report 2010, p. 30.
84 Silver-Greenberg J. JPMorgan says trading loss tops $5.8 billion; profit for quarter 
falls 9%. The New York Times. 13 July 2012. Available at: 
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/07/13/jpmorgan-reports-second-quarter-profit-of-5-
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 4 | Employees
42
billion-down-9/. Accessed 31 July 2012.
85 Yahoo Finance’s summary of Capital IQ and Thomson Reuters Forward P/E data. 
Available at: http://finance.yahoo.com/q/ks?s=. Accessed 14 July 2012.
86 Hill A. Corporate culture: lofty aspirations. Financial Times. 15 July 2012. Available 
at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/d1b4b71a-ccde-11e1-9960-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz20bj70q2d. Accessed 15 July 2012.

C H A P T E R
5
Suppliers
The complexity of supply chains puts your reputation in the hands of the 
lowest common denominator.
—John Hurrell1
Just as a steel chain is only as strong as its weakest link, so it is with a supply 
chain. A chain with uniformly strong links reduces risk and provides important 
benefits to the whole enterprise; but a broken link jeopardizes all.
The strongest chain is one in which each supplier considers his or her 
downstream buyer to be his or her preferred customer. As a 2005 survey made 
explicit: 75% of the respondent suppliers regularly put their preferred customers 
at the top of allocation lists for materials or services in short supply; 82% said 
that these customers consistently get first access to new product or service ideas 
and technologies; and 87% of the suppliers offer cost reduction opportunities to 
their most-preferred customers first.2 A supplier to Volvo explained:
…preferred customers are receiving better prices than their other customers. 
They also place their best employees and mechanics with their preferred 
customers primarily, and respond quicker to the needs of their preferred 
customers.3
Such benefits translate to financial gains that vary in size depending on the 
dynamics of the buyer/supplier relationship. All things being equal, the benefits 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
2
of becoming a “customer of choice” have the potential to deliver value 
equivalent to an additional 2%–4% of savings off of the company’s total spend 
base, according to the Procurement Strategy Council.4
This chapter explores the role of reputation in establishing “preferred customer” 
status. It looks at how expectations that suppliers hold about a company help 
shape that company’s reputation; how a company’s actions in managing ethics, 
innovation, quality, safety, sustainability, and security shape suppliers’ 
expectations; what behaviors and benefits result; and how strategies for 
leveraging reputation to build “customer-of-choice” positions create enterprise-
wide benefits that turn into shareholder value.
At one time, companies such as Ford operated under one roof, sourcing raw 
materials and producing finished goods through an assembly line. Then as 
assemblies begat subassemblies and supply companies, major manufacturers 
such as Toyota set them up just outside their gates in what became Toyota City. 
As logistics and coordination improved, the path from raw material to finished 
good evolved and extended into a global “supply chain”—the collection and 
distribution of all the inputs to the production process.5 Boeing’s 777 jet, for 
example, is assembled from 3 million parts sourced from more than 500 
suppliers around the world.6
Supply chains have transformed business, reducing labor costs and eliminating 
warehousing, and they have elevated logistics management to a fine art and 
information technology to a vital global utility. As supply chains became an 
increasing source of both value and risk to the penultimate buyer, they also 
radically transformed the business-to-business relationships between buyers and 
their suppliers. As a source of competitive advantage, maintaining oversight 
and control of the supply chain to ensure quality at every step has become an 
overarching concern.
In general, two variables exist in types of relationships between a buyer and a 
seller in the supply chain: (1) importance of the supply to the buyer’s aggregate 
revenue and (2) scarcity of the supply. 78 
When supplies are important to the business model, but generally easy to 
obtain, a buyer can push down costs and pit one supplier against another. But 
when supply is scarce and sources are limited to few suppliers, the buyer will 
generally prefer a close relationship with a select number of suppliers. For 
companies that emphasize quality, such as McDonald’s, Coca-Cola, Toyota, 
and Peets, the supply chain relationship tends to follow the closer/fewer model.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
When supplies are not especially important points of differentiation in the 
business, the purchasing strategy may follow one of two paths. When the 
products are not readily available, a buyer may try to create alternative sources, 
but when there are alternative sources, the buyer’s strategy is to reduce 
administrative (transactional) costs. Known well to students of Coase’s 
theorem, these transactional costs can radically alter the total cost of product 
acquisition and supply chain operations. 
One company’s transactional cost, however, may be another company’s profit 
margin. On the other hand, squeezing a supplier too hard can transform a 
relatively low-value item into a source of extraordinarily high risk.
Reputation Risks in the Supply Chain
The supply chain is a system that creates a complex matrix of 
“interconnectedness.” And a weak link can create havoc.
Lead paint on children’s toys, melamine in a variety of food and consumer 
products, and tainted pharmaceuticals are examples of remote suppliers creating 
headline risks for iconic firms. The physical movement of goods from sellers to 
buyers, the financial information linked to the transactions that relate to the 
goods purchased, and the business chain process are so rapid and multifarious 
that today’s business processing systems cannot properly integrate the 
information. 
The systems in use, which in the case of many multinationals comprise several 
generations of computer hardware and software, were not designed to support 
the current level of global sourcing and distribution. In many ways, this is 
similar to the failure of systems in the banking sector to identify risk in certain 
modern complex financial instruments. 
With computer system variances and multiple unrelated businesses supporting 
the global supply chain, inefficiencies are inherent to the system and risks are 
rampant. The inability of disparate computer systems to extract, transform, and 
associate data leaves management without full operational control and exposes 
almost all businesses to an unacceptable range of quality and ethical product 
perils, credit risks, compliance failures, theft, fraud, and reputational risk.
A report by Mactavish, a consultancy, concluded: “The network of corporate 
risks is far more systemic than was the case even 5–10 years ago as companies 
operate in an ever more complicated and interconnected value chain.”1 Among 
other risks, the Mactavish report identified systemic supply chain disruption 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
4
caused by company failures and a plethora of efficiency measures throughout 
the trading system that are reducing resilience and increasing product quality 
risks.
Iconic firms such as Toyota are invariably the ultimate and most visible bearers 
of supply chain risk. Regardless of where that risk originated in the chain, it is 
Toyota’s reputation that takes the hit. 
Mitigating the operational risks in the supply chain and reducing the risk that an 
operational event will mature into a reputational event is a two-step process. 
The first consists of basic mainstream managerial strategies—establishing 
systems that improve visibility and foster control. A 21st-century supply chain, 
however, requires visibility and control on a scale and scope not yet 
successfully tackled by any one company. Four challenges stand in the path of 
success: 

Operational Inflexibility. Internal information systems in 
most companies are optimized for inventory management, 
transactional processing, and balance sheet–oriented 
financial reporting. These systems often are composed of 
entrenched legacy systems that do not easily associate new 
types of information vital to efficient control of supply 
chain operations. 

Security. Concerns over IT system security make it difficult 
for most companies to acquire supply chain information 
that is external to their information systems. 

External/Internal Linkage. Associating external data with 
internal data to provide a coherent view of operations, 
operational risks, and reputational risks is exceedingly 
difficult. 

Siloed Structures. Enterprise software solutions have 
broken down the IT barriers separating most operational 
departments. However, most corporate departments 
overseeing enterprise-wide issues such as safety, security, 
ethics, and risk still operate in technology silos.
The challenges in no way reduce the substantial potential benefits, which 
include overall cost reduction, cost avoidance, revenue enhancement, improved 
stakeholder service, improved risk management, regulatory risk mitigation, 
market differentiation, and, ultimately, increased enterprise value (Table 5-1). 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
These potential benefits continue to spur innovative solution frameworks. The 
Global Trademaster Company, a company in which this book’s author has an 
economic interest, is one of many emerging solutions.
Table 5-1. Operational and Reputation Benefits Arising from Improved Supply Chain Visibility 
and Control.
Category of Benefit
Type of Benefit
Cost Reduction
Reduced repetitive data entry
Decreased inventory
Increased opportunity for sourcing
Lower insurance rates based on risk distribution resulting from 
aggregation and analysis of anonymized supply chain data
Improved supply chain performance at operating level
Cost Avoidance
Improved planning due to a more stable planning environment
Improved supply and distribution channel performance
Potential Green Lane (accelerated border crossing) based on proven 
transparency and reliability of reporting from the participant’s 
supply and financial chain transactions
Revenue Enhancement
Enhanced transparency of end-to-end supply chain enabling more 
effective marketing based on predictability of delivery
Improved market intelligence
Better system status and performance using third-party metrics
Improved turnover of inventory 
Improved Service
Improved velocity resulting from analysis to resolve choke points 
and closer integration with manufacturers and carriers
Greater control for supply chain managers
Better visibility into the supply chain for operators and customers 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
6
Neutral provision of data on the supply chain 
Risk Management
Legal Compliance
Improved resilience resulting from visibility and ability to re-route 
shipments to alternative ports not affected by terrorists or natural 
disasters
Better security through increasingly better known suppliers
Regulatory Mitigation
Influence over forthcoming regulatory activities and better insight 
into regulatory objectives and plans
Enhanced reputation with Customs and Border Protection & 
Department of Homeland Security 
Market Differentiation
Market signaling of a superior (more secure) offering
Enterprise Value 
Appreciation
Enhanced reputation value arising from operational improvements 
in processes that ensure safety, security, and quality and potentially 
capture conformance data on ethics and sustainability
The second step in reducing supply chain risks, which reduces the risk that an 
operational event will mature into a reputational event, is one of engaging 
supply chain partners. Cases involving McDonald’s, Yum! Brands, Coca-Cola, 
Pepsi, Toyota Motors, and Peet’s Coffee illustrate a range of potential 
strategies.
Quality: McDonald’s and YUM!
[Quality is] the extent to which a product is free from defects or deficiencies; 
a service meets or exceeds the expectations of customers or clients, and both 
products and services conform to measurable and verifiable criteria. (Table 
1-1)
Quality products and services are key success factors for the two largest fast-
food franchises: McDonalds Corporation and Yum! Brands. Their reputations 
for quality are due in no small part to the support they receive from their 
suppliers. The consequences of their differing supply chain engagement 
strategies are the centerpiece of this section. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
McDonald’s Corporation
McDonald’s Corporation began humbly in 1955 with three restaurants, several 
milk-shake mixers, the two McDonald brothers, and a visionary appliance 
salesman named Ray Kroc. Six years into the venture, brothers Dick and Mac 
exited with $2.7 million. In 1963, Kroc’s growing enterprise had sold a billion 
burgers, realized net income in excess of $1 million, and was quickly becoming 
an American icon, Two years later, the company went public. 9
Today, operating in 119 countries around the world, McDonald’s Corporation is 
the global icon of fast-food franchises and restaurants. McDonald’s branded 
restaurants serve a menu at various price points. As of December 31, 2011, 
McDonald’s had 33,510 restaurants: 27,075 franchised or licensed and 6,435 
operated by the company.10
McDonald’s and its franchisees purchase food, packaging, equipment, and other 
goods from numerous independent suppliers. From its beginning, the company 
understood the crucial importance of fresh ingredients and nearly on-time 
delivery and has focused strongly on the supply chain on which those depend. 
By exercising close oversight and operational control of its supply chain, the 
company has established and strictly enforces product specifications with high 
quality standards. A quality-leadership board, composed of the company’s 
technical, safety, and supply chain specialists, provides strategic global 
leadership for all aspects of food quality and safety. The company conducts 
ongoing product reviews and on-site supplier visits working out of quality 
centers around the world. In addition, the company works closely with suppliers 
to encourage innovation, ensure best practices, and drive continuous 
improvement. By leveraging scale, supply chain infrastructure, and risk 
management strategies, the company also collaborates with suppliers toward a 
goal of achieving competitive and predictable food and paper costs over the 
long term.
Independently owned and operated distribution centers, approved by the 
company, distribute products and supplies to most McDonald’s restaurants. 
Restaurant personnel are trained in the proper storage, handling, and preparation 
of products and in the delivery of customer service.
McDonald’s oversight extends to the corporate arena. When RHM, the U.K. 
food group, was divesting itself of its Golden West subsidiary, a provider of 
burger buns, tomato ketchup, and soft drink syrups, the two firms bidding to 
acquire RHM first had to be approved by McDonald’s.11 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
8
McDonald’s restaurants once offered a menu that was substantially uniform the 
world over in order to meet customers’ expectations of a substantially uniform 
experience—a quality experience—anywhere in the world. Today, McDonald’s 
delivers the same standard quality experience to an international smorgasbord 
of menus designed to cater to different national tastes. McDonald’s calls this 
value proposition “remaining a trusted brand.”12 It is called here “protecting 
McDonald’s reputation for quality.”
Consistency does not mean McDonald’s is not open to change. The company 
works hard to identify, implement, and scale innovative ideas that meet 
customers’ changing needs and preferences. Suppliers play a central role in 
innovation. It was a McDonald’s supplier, after all, that perfected the frozen 
French fry and the famous secret sauce for the Big Mac. And it was suppliers 
who saved the day by figuring out how to get chicken into Asia when the other 
restaurants ran out during the avian flu crisis.13 McDonald’s also engages 
suppliers in research activities that benefit the company, its franchises, and 
suppliers.
In recent years, McDonald’s has recognized that sustainability has become an 
important ingredient in its reputation recipe. It works closely with suppliers to 
more quickly conform to much anticipated climate change–associated 
regulations and other government-led initiatives.
The company’s approach to its relationship with suppliers reflects its ethical 
culture and the innovations Kroc brought to the business. From the Harvard 
Business School case study on McDonald’s supply chain:
Unlike most contemporary fast-food franchisers who profited significantly by 
marking up the goods they required their franchisees to buy, Kroc aligned 
McDonald’s interests with its franchisees’ by profiting from excellent 
restaurant operations. He refused all gifts and special favors offered by 
suppliers; instead, he focused exclusively on securing the consistent supply, 
excellent quality, and volume pricing that would facilitate success in the 
restaurants. 
Kroc and his staff made other supply chain innovations. Unlike other food 
retailers at the time, McDonald’s established strict standards for the 
ingredients and appearance of each product; McDonald’s staff often visited 
suppliers without warning to ensure their compliance. Kroc terminated those 
suppliers that could not consistently provide high quality and dedicated 
service but he rewarded those that did with loyalty and volume. In effect, he 
made his suppliers partners in his quest for fast-food greatness.14

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
Kroc’s goal continues into the present: “being a company the public can trust”15 
is borne out, for most of its stakeholders, by fulfilled expectations for quality 
products as well as ethical behavior and other operational drivers of reputation. 
Trust and commitment are the foundation of supply chain management.16 Both 
parties are involved; they understand that the relationship and behaviors of each 
will work to mutual benefit. Trust is conveyed through faith, reliance, belief, or 
confidence in the supply partner and includes a willingness to forgo 
opportunistic behavior. Trust is an expectation that one’s supply chain partner 
will act in a consistent manner, will do what he or she says he or she will do, 
and will maintain the reputation of both partners.
The highest corporate levels of McDonald’s are charged with trust assurance. 
The company brings corporate board–level oversight and operational control to 
its reputation through the Corporate Responsibility Committee, which advises 
on all policies and strategies that affect product safety, workplace safety, 
employee opportunities and training, diversity, and environment and sustainable 
supply chain initiatives. One step below the corporate board of directors, five 
corporate-level operational committees monitor and manage reputationally 
relevant issues on a day-to-day basis.16 These committees have helped 
McDonald’s implement authentic changes to its supply chain operations, 
wherever they are regarded “as beneficial for the McDonald’s brand” even 
when they involve additional costs.17
Since 2007, consumers and suppliers have been expecting more authentic 
transparency and accountability from businesses.18 According to Ben Boyd, 
Executive Vice President of Edelman, the public relations firm, the most 
important corporate reputation factors in the 2011 annual survey were:

Maintains “transparent and honest practices.”

“Offers high-quality products or services.”

“Is a company I can trust.”19
Collaboration with supply chain partners minimizes risk and maximizes 
transparency. Rick Blasgen, chief executive of the Illinois-based Council of 
Supply Chain Management Professionals, says, “You have to trust your partners 
with information that in the past you might have considered proprietary.”19
The comfort afforded by reputation holds in check one’s fear of self-serving 
behavior on the part of the others in the supply chain.20 Commitment is the 
mutual belief that the trading partners are willing to devote energy to sustaining 
this relationship21 and will not act in ways that might adversely affect overall 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
10
supply chain performance. Trading partners throughout the chain become 
integrated into their major customers’ processes and more tied to their 
overarching goals.22 The bottom line is: trust, transparency, and collaboration 
are essential for the most value to be realized from a supply chain.
A classic fable is illustrative. A pig and a chicken are walking down the road. 
Chicken says, “Hey Pig, I was thinking we should open a restaurant!” Pig 
replies, “Hm, maybe, what would we call it?” Chicken responds, “How about 
‘Ham-n-Eggs’?” Pig thinks for a moment and says, “No thanks. I’d be 
committed, but you’d only be involved!”23
Yum! Brands, Inc.
Yum! Brands may not be instantly recognized by most people as a quick-
service restaurant company even though it has approximately 37,000 outlets in 
more than 120 countries and territories. But the brands it operates sure are: 
KFC, Pizza Hut, and Taco Bell. It was already a big company in 1977 when it 
was named Tricon Global Restaurants, Inc., and spun off from PepsiCo.
Under the trademarked aegis of Colonel Sanders, Yum! Brands has been 
cooking big time ever since. China typifies “the Kentucky Fried 
Chickenification of the middle classes in the world’s emerging economies.”24 A 
key to their success, explained R. J. Hottovy, an analyst at Morningstar, “is that 
they built up their supply chain and their distribution system quickly, and that is 
giving them a real competitive advantage.”25 Yum!’s China operations, for 
example, increased from 2% of operating profits in 1998 to 33% in 2009.25
From the outset, Yum! Brands has operated under a worldwide code of conduct 
that set behavioral standards for many of the reputationally relevant processes 
of corporate life. A set of polices governs a spectrum of reputationally related 
processes and stakeholder relationships.
In Yum!’s operations, programs that foster sustainable practices are given major 
emphasis. Yum! regularly collaborates with its brand leadership teams, 
franchisees, Unified Foodservice Purchasing Co-op, suppliers, and consultants 
to help better manage environmental programs and responsibilities. In addition, 
several markets across the globe are including environmental sustainability as 
part of Yums! proprietary Supplier Tracking and Recognition (STAR) audit 
system, recognizing suppliers who have made improvements in this area.
Many premium suppliers of Kids Meal branded products practice environmental 
principles throughout their organizations and with their factory partners. Such 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
initiatives include the use of environmentally friendly materials whenever 
possible, including water-based paints, soy-based inks, use of recycled paper for 
packaging and paper premiums, and the use of nonphthalate plasticizers and 
lead-free material. Also, key supplier factory partners have implemented 
initiatives to reduce energy, pollution, and waste.
McDonald’s vs. Yum!
There are major strategic differences in how these casual-dining giants 
approach their businesses. On capital structure, Yum! is more heavily leveraged 
than McDonald’s. On marketing, the company is the brand at McDonald’s, 
whereas at Yum! the corporate enterprise is secondary to the company’s several 
brands. 
Yum! benefits from the lower cost structure associated with its China focus. 
McDonald’s appears to be controlling its global supply chain costs better 
through better overall supplier engagement. McDonald’s supply chain is a well-
oiled machine that turns over inventory 150 times per year and outpaces Apple 
Inc., the second most active supply chain, by a factor of 3 (Figure 5-1). In 2011, 
its second year in the Gartner annual Supply Chain Top 25, McDonald’s ranked 
8th in a survey of best supply chain operators.25 
The Gartner survey “identifies the companies that best demonstrate leadership 
in applying demand-driven principles to drive business results.”26 Apple ranked 
no. 1, an achievement led by Tim Cook, soon thereafter appointed Apple CEO. 
The centrality of that operation to overall corporate value has led some to opine 
that Cook’s appointment “may have been one of (Steve) Jobs’ most astute 
moves.”27 
In the 2012 survey, Apple retained its no. 1 spot. McDonald’s climbed to no. 3 
just behind Amazon. Yum! Brands didn’t make it to the top 50.

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
12
Figure 5-1. Supply chain excellence. Among the most highly ranked firms recognized for their 
supply chain excellence by Gartner in 2011, McDonald’s ranked 8th but had a transactional 
volume of more than 140 turns per year—outdistancing its closest competitor, Apple Inc., which 
ranked no. 1.25,26
McDonald’s has other badges of distinction valued by its suppliers. McDonald’s 
ranked 49th on Corporate Responsibility Magazine’s 2010 Best Corporate 
Citizen 100 league table compared to Yum!’s 62nd, and McDonald’s trounced 
Yum! in the 2010 Newsweek Green Rankings 79th to 337th.28,29 For other 
customers who value evidence of sustainability practices, McDonald’s 
reputation 
and 
credibility 
lend 
substantial 
weight 
to 
professional 
recommendations.30 They gain some of McDonald’s reflected glory.
The value of a multi-stakeholder strategy and better supplier relationships to 
McDonald’s is lower overall supply chain operating costs—and that makes a 
difference in the bottom line and its stock price. In the contest to win the hearts 
and minds of analysts and investors, all things being equal, McDonald’s 
consistently appears to pay less in food and paper goods per dollar of labor 
costs than Yum! (Figure 5-2). In 2009, the cost advantage was about 6%. In 
2011, McDonald’s cost advantage climbed to more than 10%. 
As for the bottom line, in mid-July 2012, McDonald’s trailing 12-month profit 
margin of 20.26% was about 10% higher than Yum!’s 11.69%. This cost 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
advantage helps explain why equity investors priced McDonald’s 48% higher 
than Yum! for every trailing month dollar of sales.
Figure 5-2. Cost of food and paper relative to cost of labor at McDonald’s (MCD) and Yum! 
Brands (YUM) operations. McDonald’s pays 10% less for food and paper goods per dollar in 
wages than its closest fast foods competitor, Yum! Brands.31
Retrospective
The secret sauce of McDonald’s success is found in the long-term transparent 
relationships the company has forged with its suppliers. Numbers never tell the 
whole story, but they provide interesting color. Some of McDonald’s deep 
collaborative relationships with its suppliers have lasted more than 25 years. 
McDonald’s obsession with quality—a reliable, repeatable, trustworthy, and 
engaging casual dining experience—is transparent, and it is a value that extends 
to its dealings with its suppliers. Suppliers have long recognized McDonald’s 
obsession with quality as an authentic manifestation of its corporate culture and 
the underpinning of its reputation. Its suppliers appreciate and value its efforts 
to deliver consistently that which matters most to its stakeholders. They bestow 
the coveted status of preferred customer on McDonald’s, whose bottom line 
benefits.

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
14
Consider This

Quality, the consistent delivery of products and services 
that meet expectations, is a foundation for trust and an 
authentic reputation.

In supply chains, trust and an authentic reputation help 
establish long-term relationships, reduce transaction costs, 
and secure customer-of-choice status.

Customers-of-choice receive myriad benefits that speak to 
the bottom line.
Safety: Coke and Pepsi
[Safety is] the state of being certain that a set of conditions will not 
accidentally cause adverse effects on the well being of employees, the public, 
or the environment. (Table 1-1)
With combined market capitalizations in excess of $US quarter trillion (Table 
5-2), the two beverage companies sell many millions of cans of soda each day. 
The risks of food safety scares are well appreciated and feared by the two giants 
in the soft drink producers and bottlers industry: PepsiCo Inc. (NYSE:PEP) and 
The Coca-Cola Company (NYSE:KO). 
Table 5-2. Several key metrics of comparison between PepsiCo Inc. and The Coca-Cola 
Company
PepsiCo Inc.
The Coca-Cola 
Company
Main Exchange
NYSE
NYSE
Market Capitalization March 
2012 ($US billion)
98.2
157.5
Profit Margin (ttm)
9.69%
18.42%
Operating Margin (ttm)
15.60%
23.41%
Equity Short % of Float
0.5%
0.6%

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
Employees
297,000
146,200
Data source: Yahoo Finance and Google Finance.
A study in March 2012 by the Center for Science in the Public Interest showed 
that high levels of the chemical 4-methylimidazole, part of caramel coloring, 
were found in both Pepsi and Coke products. Pepsi products, regular Coca-
Cola, and Diet Coke had levels high enough to require a warning notice in the 
state of California. “Coke and Pepsi, with the acquiescence of the FDA, are 
needlessly exposing millions of Americans to a chemical that causes cancer,” 
said CSPI executive director Michael F. Jacobson. “The coloring is completely 
cosmetic, adding nothing to the flavor of the product. If companies can make 
brown food coloring that is carcinogen-free, the industry should use that.”32
Commenting on the allegation, Douglas Karas, FDA spokesman, said that 
“FDA has no reason to believe there is any immediate risk from the substance. 
A consumer would have to drink more than a thousand cans of soda in a day to 
match the doses administered in studies that showed links to cancer in rodents.”33
Then a new safety sheriff rode into town. The American Cancer Society wrote 
four months later to U.S. Health Secretary Kathleen Sebelius and drew parallels 
between the hidden dangers of the world’s favorite beverages and the formerly 
hidden dangers of the world’s second-favorite vice product— tobacco. The 
Society called for a comprehensive safety review along the lines of the U.S. top 
doctor's landmark report on the dangers of smoking in 1964.34
Defining Experience
In June 1999, more than 100 Belgian children were hit by sudden illness, with 
symptoms of nausea and headaches, after drinking Coca-Cola products. Almost 
immediately, the Belgian Health Ministry banned the sale of all Coca-Cola 
beverages and ordered the withdrawal of a range of suspect soft drinks 
produced by the company in Belgium, France, and Holland, where exports from 
the Belgian plants are widely sold.
The Coca-Cola Company did not appreciate the magnitude of the storm 
looming over the safety of its products. The company first declared, “After 
thorough investigation, no health or safety issues were found” and attributed the 
problems to others. They blamed a “defective” supply of the carbon dioxide gas 
used at its Antwerp plant and also claimed that a wood treatment agent used on 
transportation pallets had caused an “offensive odor on the outside bottom of 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
16
the can.”35 The manufacturers of the gas, Swede Aga Gas, denied Coca-Cola’s 
claims of “bad” CO2, saying that the gas was perfectly normal, and that it could 
provide it with samples of the batch delivered to Belgium.
The company’s assertion that it had pinpointed the problem, noting that there 
was no serious health risk, lacked credibility. Germany refused Coca-Cola 
imports from Belgium, Saudi Arabia erected barriers, and The Netherlands and 
Spain raised alerts. Aggravating Coca-Cola’s situation, the problems fed into 
Europe-wide food sensitivity. 
Coca-Cola’s slow response to a contaminated product lot is an object lesson in 
the cost of failure to localize a food-safety incident and deal with the 
consequences of a perceived systemic problem. Recall costs to the company 
were estimated at $200 million. Costs to the distributor, Coca-Cola Enterprises, 
were estimated at $130 million. But the real cost—reputational value 
losses—expressed as the losses to the value of the global brand, at that time 
estimated at $83.8 billion, was $11 billion.
It is generally understood by today’s business leaders that the average cost of an 
adverse reputational event is about 7% of market capitalization.36 Coca-Cola’s 
1999 experience arising from the failure of a quality process was even more 
expensive at 11%. Coca-Cola learned valuable lessons, and these are apparent 
in the firm’s current risk disclosures.
The Coca-Cola Company
The Coca-Cola Company defines itself narrowly as a beverage company. It 
originated in 1886 when Atlanta-area pharmacist John Pemberton was 
experimenting with powerful stimulants, including cola nuts and coca leaves, to 
add to soda water. The inspiration for his work and that of fellow pharmacists 
was said to have come from observations of Bolivian Indian workers who 
chewed coca leaves to ward off fatigue and by West African workers who 
chewed cola nuts as a stimulant. Pemberton’s formula and brand were bought in 
1889 for $2300 by Asa Candler, who incorporated The Coca-Cola Company in 
1892.
Pemberton’s work and Candler’s marketing were, by any measure, 
inspirational, and today the company owns or licenses and markets more than 
500 nonalcoholic beverage brands, primarily sparkling beverages but also a 
variety of still beverages, such as waters, enhanced waters, juice drinks, ready-
to-drink teas and coffees, and energy and sports drinks. It owns and markets 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
four of the world's top five nonalcoholic sparkling beverage brands: Coca-Cola, 
Diet Coke, Fanta, and Sprite.
From a sales and distribution perspective, The Coca-Cola Company is unique in 
not being directly exposed to retail behemoths. In general, the company and/or 
subsidiaries only produce syrup concentrate, which is then sold to various 
bottlers throughout the world who hold a Coca-Cola franchise. Coca-Cola 
bottlers, who hold territorially exclusive contracts with the company, produce 
the finished product in cans and bottles from the concentrate in combination 
with filtered water and sweeteners. The bottlers then sell, distribute, and 
merchandise the resulting Coca-Cola product to retail stores, vending machines, 
restaurants, and food service distributors. It is the world’s largest beverage 
distribution system.
As a franchise leader, the financial health and success of its bottling partners are 
critical to the company's success. The Coca-Cola Company works with its 
bottling partners to identify system requirements that enable the team to quickly 
achieve scale and efficiencies, and the company shares best practices with all its 
bottling partners. The company also designs business models for sparkling and 
still beverages in specific markets to ensure that it shares the value created by 
these beverages with its bottling partners. 
One notable exception is in the United States, where the company acquired the 
domestic bottling operation and is responsible for the manufacture and sale of 
fountain syrups directly to authorized fountain wholesalers and some fountain 
retailers.
Among Coca-Cola’s intangible assets underpinning its reputation is product 
safety. This has become a driving focus that allows the company to charge a 
price premium for its sugar water, a focus attributable to the heightened 
sensitivity sparked by the 1999 Belgian incident. The company now 
acknowledges, “Our success depends on our ability to maintain consumer 
confidence in the safety and quality of our products.” 
The company is also sensitive to global ethics issues with a number of 
transparent commitments to respect all human rights. These are apparent in its 
Human Rights Statement and Workplace Rights Policy and Supplier Guiding 
Principles, its participation in the United Nations Global Compact and its 
LEAD program, and its participation in the Global Business Initiative on 
Human Rights.
There is no doubt that reputation risk is top-of-mind. The company is one of the 
355 S&P 500 Composite Index constituent members to overtly disclose over the 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
18
past year the materiality of reputation risk to its operations: “If product safety or 
quality issues, or negative publicity, even if unwarranted, damage our brand 
image and corporate reputation, our business may suffer.”37
Reputation risk disclosures from their most recent annual report highlight the 
importance of maintaining customer confidence in the safety and quality of its 
products, and effectively managing its supply chain.
Last, in a disclosure involving operations other than the production of 
consumable products, the company noted the growing risks of cyber-security 
breaches. “If we are unable to protect our information systems against service 
interruption, misappropriation of data or breaches of security, our operations 
could be disrupted and our reputation may be damaged.”37
PepsiCo Inc.
In a very competitive business, PepsiCo is one of Coca-Cola’s primary 
competitors in many countries including the United States. Formed in 1965 
through the merger of beverage and snack businesses, its origins trace back to 
the late 1890s when Caleb Bradham, a New Bern, North Carolina, pharmacist, 
formulated a cocktail to sooth upset stomachs (excess pepsin) without making 
any overt medical claims. He named the business Pepsi Cola and incorporated 
in Delaware in 1919. 
PepsiCo, Inc. is a global food and snack as well as beverage company. The 
snack business traces its roots through Frito-Lay, Inc., which was formed by the 
1961 merger of two companies first formed in 1932: the Frito Company, 
founded by Elmer Doolin, and the H. W. Lay Company, founded by Herman 
W. Lay.
Today, PepsiCo is a leading global food and beverage company with hundreds 
of brands that are household names throughout the world. Either independently 
or through contract manufacturers or authorized bottlers, PepsiCo makes, 
markets, sells, and distributes a variety of foods and beverages in more than 200 
countries and territories. Globally recognized brands include Quaker Oats, 
Tropicana, Gatorade, Lay’s, Pepsi, Walkers, Gamesa, and Sabritas.
In addition to Coca-Cola, other significant Pepsi competitors include, but are 
not limited to, Nestlé, Dr. Pepper Snapple Group, Inc., Groupe Danone, Kraft 
Foods Inc., and Unilever. In certain markets, competition includes beer 
companies. The company also competes against numerous regional and local 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19
companies and, in some markets, against retailers that have developed their own 
store or private label beverage brands. 
While competing on two fronts with both beverages and foods might appear to 
be inefficient, as analysts have suggested, Pepsi reaffirmed as recently as 
February 2012 its commitment to remaining an integrated food and beverage 
company. Indra Nooyi, the PepsiCo CEO, declared the group “financially and 
operationally benefits” from its “Power of One” strategy, which was devised 
last year to bring its food and drink operations in the United States closer 
together. She told analysts that the idea of splitting the company in two has been 
“taken off the table.”38
For Pepsi, two operational issues stand out. From a sales and distribution 
perspective, PepsiCo is heavily exposed to Walton family stores. In 2011, sales 
to Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (Wal-Mart), including Sam’s Club (Sam’s), 
represented approximately 11% of PepsiCo’s total net revenue. Its top five retail 
customers represented approximately 30% of its 2011 North American net 
revenue, with Wal-Mart (including Sam’s) representing approximately 18%. 
These percentages include concentrate sales to independent bottlers that were 
used in finished goods sold by them to these retailers.
Its largest competitor is The Coca-Cola Company, but its beverage, snack, and 
food brands compete against global, regional, local, and private label 
manufacturers and other discount-price competitors. Pepsi charges a price 
premium for its sugar water—a capability enabled by the value-add of the 
company’s intangibles. Of the six major intangible assets comprising business 
processes underpinning reputation, Pepsi emphasizes sustainability (Table 5-2). 
In 2011, PepsiCo earned a place on the prestigious Dow Jones Sustainability 
World Index for the fifth consecutive year, the North America Index for the 
sixth consecutive year, and in the Food and Beverage Supersector was ranked 
number one.
Reputation risk is top-of-mind for Pepsi. “Any damage to our reputation could 
have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of 
operations.”39
The disclosure details how failures in ethical controls, quality, safety, 
innovation, security, and sustainability could each damage PepsiCo’s 
reputation. 
Most of the disclosures focus on business processes that would be of concern to 
consumers of the company’s products and they conclude with the 
acknowledgment that damage to PepsiCo’s reputation or loss of consumer 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
20
confidence in products for any reason could result in decreased demand for 
products and could have a material adverse effect on the business, financial 
condition, and results of operations, as well as require additional resources to 
rebuild the company’s reputation.
Implications for Reputation Management
The Pepsi-Coke rivalry is legendary. Although some suggest the feud really 
heated up with the Pepsi Challenge in 1975, the brands have been fighting each 
other for more than a century. For many, this battle for the hearts, minds, and 
palates of the global consumer has been all about brand.
Today, it is about more. A brand is a promise that creates expectations. Those 
expectations create an impression among stakeholders we encapsulate in the 
term reputation. 
Unlike the marketing-driven communications of the brand wars, reputation-
shaping communications travel through a range of nontraditional channels. In 
our 
social 
media–dominated 
environment, 
informal, 
incidental, 
and 
nontraditional channels of communication are more likely to be used to report 
to stakeholders on a firm’s ethics, quality, innovation, safety, security, and 
sustainability practices. As outlined in Table 5-1 and as implied in the list of 
reputation risks disclosed by each of the firms, many operational decisions 
produce outcomes that communicate something about the firm to its 
stakeholders.
In 2010, both Pepsi and Coca-Cola took full ownership of their North American 
supply chain partners, explaining that they needed more flexibility and direct 
control of production, distribution, and new product innovation cycles. PepsiCo 
was first to do so, acquiring both Pepsi Bottling Group Inc. and PepsiAmericas 
Inc. for $7.8 billion. Coca-Cola followed later with its acquisition of the North 
American operations of Coca-Cola Enterprises for $15 billion. 
Creating Reputation Value
It cannot be overstated that many improvements in the process underpinning 
reputation create visible improvements on the profit and loss (P&L) statement 
that translate to additional enterprise value. Hence today’s cola wars, whose 
battles for the hearts and minds of stakeholders are being waged by the 
operational teams that manage the supply chain; ensure ethical conformance; 
drive innovation; ensure quality; and drive safety, security, and sustainability. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
21
They are also being waged at the level of the board of directors through superior 
oversight, risk management, and the perpetuation of a corporate culture that is 
obsessed with delighting the firm’s stakeholders.
Retrospective
McDonald’s understood the value of a committed and integrated supply chain 
from the outset. The Coca-Cola Company learned the lesson through trial by 
fire. But once learned, as with the food icons, the economic effects of the 
different relationships the beverage companies have with their supply chains 
appear on the P&L statement. Mirroring the benefits realized from closer 
operational integration and trust, Coke’s costs for producing and distributing 
products at The Coca-Cola Company are lower than Pepsi’s (Figure 5-3).
Figure 5-3. Combined costs for production and distribution represented as a fraction of revenues. 
Notwithstanding PepsiCo’s Power of One strategy, The Coca-Cola Company consistently spends 
less on making and distributing its products than it arch rival.40
Consider This

Management of complex supply chains is a source of 
competitive advantage.

Authentic integration and commitment to supply chain 
oversight and management, sources of real value, are 
benefits of a reputation for ethical collaboration.

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
22

Once burned, never again.
Toyota Motor Corporation
Echoing observations in the food and beverage industries, a recent study of the 
automobile supply chain showed that supplier trust in the buyer creates value. In 
a sample of 344 supplier–automaker exchange relationships in the United 
States, Japan, and Korea, perceived trustworthiness substantially reduced 
transaction costs. The most trusted automakers spent significantly less in face-
to-face supplier interaction time on contracting and haggling when compared to 
the least trusted automaker. This translated into procurement (transaction) costs 
that were five times lower for the most trusted automaker.41 In January 2010, 
Toyota learned how those costs multiply when that trust is broken.
In the automotive industry, Toyota Motor Corporation is an iconic firm. 
Commencing operations in 1933 as the automobile division of Toyota 
Industries Corporation (formerly, Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, Ltd.), 
Toyota became a separate company on August 28, 1937. In 1982, the Toyota 
Motor Company and Toyota Motor Sales merged into one company, the Toyota 
Motor Corporation of today. 
Toyota’s automotive operations include the design, manufacture, assembly, and 
sale of passenger cars, minivans, and commercial vehicles, such as trucks, as 
well as related parts and accessories. Toyota also provides financing services to 
dealers and their customers for the purchase or lease of Toyota vehicles, and 
provides retail leasing through the purchase of lease contracts originated by 
Toyota dealers.
As of March 31, 2009, Toyota operated through 529 consolidated subsidiaries 
and 229 affiliated companies through 53 overseas manufacturing companies in 
27 countries and regions. The company also has an extensive supply chain 
through which raw materials are transformed into parts and subassemblies by 
unaffiliated companies.
In fiscal 2009, Toyota sold 7.56 million vehicles in more than 170 countries and 
regions, and the company had net revenues of ¥20,529.5 billion ($208.9 billion) 
and a net loss of ¥436.9 billion ($4.4 billion) (see Table 5-3).

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
23
Table 5-3. Key Financial Performance Indicators for Toyota as of End of February, 201042
Performance Indicator
Value
Market Cap (intraday)
$114.66 billion 
Profit Margin (ttm)
–3.89% 
Revenue (ttm) $US
$190.76 billion 
Qtrly Revenue Growth (yoy)
10.20% 
Gross Profit (ttm)
$21.11 billion 
EBITDA (ttm)
$8.89 billion 
The Toyota Supply Chain
Toyota purchases parts, components, raw materials, equipment, and other 
supplies from several competing suppliers located around the world. Toyota 
collaborates with its suppliers to encourage technological innovation, cost 
reduction, and other competitive measures. During fiscal 2009, no single 
supplier accounted for more than 5% of Toyota’s consolidated purchases of raw 
materials, parts, and equipment, with the single exception of an affiliate of 
Toyota, Denso Corporation, which supplied approximately 10% of Toyota’s 
purchases. 
Toyota procures parts and components locally in the country of the production 
site as well as in third-world countries. In order to realize timely and efficient 
distribution through an increasingly complex system at the same time keeping 
total costs at a minimum, Toyota developed a standardized system of global 
distribution and supports the operation of the system at each production base. 
This system is at the heart of Toyota’s famous manufacturing process (Table 5-
4).
Table 5-4. An Overview of the Automobile Industry Supply Chain
Process Step
Value 
Added
Example
Design
High
Demand-driven process of satisfying consumer wants and 
needs. Yield prototypes or “concept” cars.

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
24
Raw Materials
Low
These include rubber, glass, steel, plastic, and aluminum.
Parts
Medium
Tires, windshields, and air bags are examples of parts.
Assembly
Medium
An unenviable gray zone with subassembly and major 
assembly steps subject to the greatest pressures to cut costs.
Marketing
High
Marketing is a major basis for consumers’ perceived values.
Distribution and 
Sales
High
First step of the customer experience.
As Toyota acknowledged in its 2009 annual report, its “ability to continue to 
obtain supplies in an efficient manner is subject to a number of factors, some of 
which are not in Toyota’s control. These include the ability of its suppliers to 
provide a continued source of supplies and the effect on Toyota of competition 
by other users in obtaining the supplies.” 
Parts and assembly are among the lowest sources of added value and the 
greatest potential sources of cost savings. Appropriately, Toyota is working to 
improve profitability and enhance operating efficiencies by continuing to pursue 
aggressive cost reduction programs.
Design changes to achieve the reduction in the number of platforms used in 
vehicle production are one approach. Because platforms are the essential 
structures that form the base of different vehicle models, by using a common 
platform for the production of a greater number of models, Toyota decreases the 
substantial expenditures required to design and develop vehicles.
Toyota also continues to focus on other methods of increasing the commonality 
of parts and components used in different models. Steps include reducing model 
variations and the number of parts used in each model. A common global 
database to enable plants in different areas of the world to purchase parts and 
materials from the most competitive sources is utilized in order to increase the 
efficiency of procurement from outside suppliers. 
Toyota’s Business Philosophy
Harmony, honor, and a near fanatical devotion to quality have characterized the 
company’s business philosophy for nearly half a century. The values of 
harmony and honor were memorialized in 1962 in a pact between management 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
25
and labor that created a unique cooperative work environment present nowhere 
else in the industry. The four-point “Labor and Management Resolutions for the 
21st Century” were summarized as follows in the unedited translation:43

“As a global company, we will endeavor for the progress of 
the world economy, and at the same time contribute to 
international society.

The relationship between labor and management shall be 
based upon mutual trust and respect.

In order to create a company environment in which workers 
can fully utilize their potential and additional value can be 
obtained, we, labor and management will endeavor to 
faithfully perform the roles entrusted to us, while standing 
on common ground.

We will contribute to the realization of a truly affluent 
society and life for working people, taking into 
consideration the future of Japan as a whole.”
This unique team approach, in turn, enabled a cooperative company-wide effort 
to reduce the costs of defects and waste in accordance with the quality 
principles of Edward Deming. In 1965, Toyota won the Deming Application 
Prize for quality control. In 1992, Toyota issued a seven-point credo. Key 
intangible values addressed include honor, respect, safety, quality, and 
innovation. The last three are among the six major business processes that drive 
reputation value.
The Perfect Storm
The largest automobile assembler in the world operated for 50 years with 
business processes that ensure harmony, honor, and quality for all under its 
direct corporate control. But it faced increasing cost pressures as the U.S. and 
European markets became saturated and price-sensitive Asian markets came on 
line. Then more cost pressures came as the global financial markets melted 
down. Toyota management created further cost pressures in pursuit of market 
share and its obsession with outgrowing General Motors. Rather than sow 
discord in its own labor force, Toyota pursued two cost reduction strategies: (1) 
standardize parts across a greater range of vehicles and (2) squeeze parts 
suppliers aggressively. 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
26
Lean supply chain strategies are coming back to haunt manufacturers. 
Manufacturers simply don’t have the tools to manage the suppliers they 
depend on.
—Jim Lawton, General Manager,
Dun & Bradsteet Supply Management Solutions
Toyota’s aggressive tactics following 2008, its first year of loss in 59 years, 
drove suppliers’ profits down to negligible levels. Toyota slashed production 
and even hired private detectives to identify suppliers at risk for bankruptcies 
who would need to be quickly replaced. Bloomberg quoted Kazushi Kawabata, 
president of Toyota supplier Comco Holdings, as saying: “The suppliers are 
totally in Toyota's grip.”44
On the software front, information systems began to exert a greater influence on 
vehicle safety than the underlying mechanical systems. Experts voiced fears that 
old-style quality controls over manufacturing were outdated and inadequate for 
cyber risks.
Things started failing. Lacking adequate oversight and visibility in post-
production follow-up, problems associated with common components began to 
crop up globally and go unobserved. The “dots were not connected” until third 
parties began to bring pressure to bear. The results: headline risks were realized, 
and failed components forced the recall of more than 8 million vehicles. 
Toyota’s reputation sank, and the financial consequences of the recall began 
manifesting.
Adding to the woes were concerns of ethical lapses, consequences that 
potentially included civil and possibly criminal penalties. Internal Toyota 
memos tell how the automaker saved more than $100 million by negotiating 
with U.S. federal regulators to stop an investigation into accelerator complaints 
in exchange for a product recall in September 2007.45
Ethics, safety, and quality—a headline risk-trifecta. The thing about headline 
risks and reputation perils, of course, is that they can snowball. Toyota was 
facing 
both 
headline-generating 
criminal 
probes 
and 
Congressional 
investigations into its safety problems. Both were overshadowed by the myriad 
class-action lawsuits filed. Moreover, automobile insurers were preparing to 
subrogate past auto accident claims involving Toyota vehicles. This is the “pile-
on of the trial lawyers and regulators and the mommy-bloggers,” said Chris 
Gidez, Director of Risk Management and Crisis Communications at the 
marketing firm Hill and Knowlton.46

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
27
In late January 2010, Toyota’s stock price tanked, taking with it approximately 
$25 billion in market capitalization. On the credit side, five-year credit default 
swaps (CDSs) on Toyota Motor Corp. debt were quoted at 95–115 basis points 
(bps) early February, up 38 bps from the month before. The equivalent CDS on 
Honda Motor Corp. was quoted at about 82 bps according to Markit. In 
addition, in early February Toyota Motor’s five-year CDSs briefly dropped 
below AA-rated Japan’s sovereign five-year CDSs for the first time on data 
going back to 2007.
Although the recall notice didn’t come until late January, Toyota sales for the 
month fell 16%, to their lowest level in more than a decade, while sales of other 
cars were rising by 6%. And Toyota’s market share fell to 14%, dropping from 
17% for 2009. According to Kelley Blue Book, which tracks tens of thousands 
of new and used-car transactions each week based on data from manufacturers, 
dealers, and wholesalers, prices for new Toyotas moved lower and were closer 
to dealer invoices.
Reputation loss was also affecting Toyota’s pricing power for vehicles not 
affected by the recall—used cars. Data from Kelley Blue Book showed prices 
for used Toyotas fell by 1.5% in the first week after the recall, and by the third 
week, another 1.5% drop.47
Retrospective
This case study on risk and reputation management looks at what happened 
when executives at an iconic firm in the automobile industry, Toyota, subverted 
their culture, and in doing so, lost visibility and control of the human behaviors 
impacting critical elements of their supply chain. It traces how Toyota’s famed 
standard for supply chain management excellence was compromised by senior 
management’s focus on other metrics—growing market share, aka profit 
without purpose. The quality and safety failures arising were then compounded 
by potential ethical lapses in internal assessment and reporting. The impact is 
quantified in metrics memorializing the costs of damaging three major pillars of 
reputation value: quality, safety, and ethics.
Risk lurks at the periphery of vision. That which is not seen or is ignored, and 
thus not controlled or managed, can wreak havoc when it impacts a critical 
source of intangible asset and reputation value. Supply chains sweep in 
worldwide risk from suppliers, licensees, franchisees, and other partners and it 
all lands at the doorstep of the large iconic global assemblers, retailers, and 
distributors. When risk manifests and is headline-grade, the financial impact can 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
28
be substantial or even catastrophic. All companies that depend on a supply 
chain are exposed.
Toyota faces headline risk highlighting ethics, safety, and quality issues. Equity 
costs as of February 2010 were in the $25 billion range. Pricing power dropped 
around 3%. Market share fell another 3% for 2010, and sales in January 2010 
fell 16% to their lowest level in a decade.47 
Operating costs are difficult to estimate—it was in Toyota’s effort to control 
them that risk arose. Adding to future expected operating costs will be 
regulatory costs, possible fines and penalties, litigation costs, insurance 
subrogation costs, and inferior vendor terms. Credit default swap pricing is up 
almost 30% foreshadowing higher credit costs. All told, the estimated early 
reputational impact was an immediate $2 billion cost to earnings and a $25 
billion cost to market capitalization (Table 5-5). 
Table 5-5. Toyota’s Reputation Losses: Income Statement Impact.47
P&L Entry
Description
$US
Billions
Revenue
Lost sales
26.75
Lost pricing power
4.21
New lost gross profit
0.90
Operating Expenses
Nonrecurring
0.50
Other Expenses
Additional interest expense
0.07
Additional depreciation expense
0.54
Net Cost
Cost to earnings
2.01

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
29
Supply chain–based headline risks will continue to haunt iconic global firms. 
Outsourcing has created dependencies that currently exceed management’s 
capacity to oversee and control, and these risks will persist until the global 
supply chain evolves a complementary information management system. 
Increasingly, suppliers are analyzing the cost to serve their key accounts. In 
some cases, they are de-prioritizing, or even de-selecting, high–cost-to-serve 
customers. Removing burdens on suppliers from unnecessary cost-to-serve 
situations improves end-to-end supply chain economics for all concerned and 
helps to secure customer of choice status. 
Consider This

The network of corporate risks is far more systemic than 
ever as companies operate in an ever more complicated and 
interconnected supply chain. 

Reputational risk exacerbates operational risk. It can 
threaten the future of companies wounded by operational 
failures. 

Controls mitigate risk. An integrated view of operational, 
financial, and reputational risk can give management and 
corporate boards the level of visibility they, and their 
stakeholders, now demand.
Sustainability: Peet’s Coffee & Tea Inc.
[Sustainability is] the making, using, offering for sale or selling products and 
services that meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability 
of future generations to meet their own needs. (Table 1-1)
Peet's Coffee & Tea is a small specialty coffee roaster and marketer of fresh-
roasted coffee and tea. It was named for Alfred Peet, who founded the company 
in Berkeley, California, in 1966 and who later mentored Starbucks’ co-founder 
Gerald Baldwin, who subsequently sold the Starbucks chain and bought Peet’s. 
Baldwin served as Peet’s chief executive officer for about 23 years and remains 
a board member after more than four decades.
In late July 2012, investors were wagering that rival bidders would attempt to 
top a near $1 billion takeover offer that already ranks as the most expensive 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
30
U.S. beverage deal. Including net cash, the $941 million offer valued the owner 
of specialty cafes and grocery products at 21 times earnings before interest, 
taxes, depreciation, and amortization, the richest multiple for an American 
maker of nonalcoholic drinks in deals larger than $500 million, according to 
data compiled by Bloomberg.48 The expected winning bidder was Starbucks, 
with its market value of $36 billion (Table 5-5). Peet’s “is perceived actually as 
a more premium offering than Starbucks on the grocery shelf, and they have 
consistently been able to charge $1 more per 12-ounce bag on the grocery 
shelf... That is something that Starbucks covets.,” said Nick Setyan, a Los 
Angeles-based analyst at Wedbush.49 Sales of beans through grocery stores 
generated net revenues of 22.5%; Peet’s coffee sold through one of its 196 retail 
stores generated margins of only 4.5%. The pricing power has been something 
that Starbucks coveted and may be willing to pay 32 times expected forward 
earnings. Starbucks traded late July 2012 at 20.36 times forward earnings.50 
Table 5-5. Several Key Metrics of Comparison Between Peet’s Coffee & Tea Inc. and Starbucks 
Corporation
Peet’s Coffee & Tea 
Inc.
Starbucks Corporation
Main Exchange
NDAQ
NDAQ
Market Capitalization August 
2012 ($B)
0.99
33.2
Profit Margin (ttm)
4.14%
10.67%
Operating Margin (ttm)
7.34%
13.25%
Equity Short % of Float
35.5%
1.1%
Employees
811
149,000
Data source: Yahoo Finance and Google Finance.
The secret to Peet’s value is its supply chain management strategy, all focused 
on relationships on the delivery-to-customer end of the chain. Peet’s distributes 
through a network of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, and club stores 
through a direct store delivery (DSD) selling and merchandising system in 
which DSD route sales representatives deliver directly to their stores anywhere 
between one and four times per week, properly shelve the product, rotate the 
stock to ensure freshness, and forge store-level selling relationships. Peet’s also 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
31
ships directly to certain customers, offering them fresh-roasted coffee shipped 
directly from its roastery to their doors and a wider selection of coffees than is 
available in their retail stores or at grocery store partners. 
Through its customer service representatives and coffee experts, the customer 
service team provides in-depth coffee information to guide customers through 
their coffee explorations. Data compiled by Bloomberg indicate that sales from 
Peet’s grocery-store business increased more than 92% in three years to $98.9 
million in 2011.
On the supplier side, Peet’s competes with procurement giants. In addition to 
Starbucks, JM Smucker Co.—the $8.4 billion maker of Folgers coffee—and the 
$70-billion–market-valued Kraft Foods Inc.—which sells Maxwell House and 
Yuban brand coffee products—have significant buying power and could 
leverage that power to become preferred customers. But Peet’s relationships top 
all.
In coffee-producing countries, the coffee crop undergoes weather-related 
changes in quality. Furthermore, as a trade commodity, coffee prices can 
fluctuate depending on weather conditions in various coffee-producing 
countries, economic and political conditions affecting those countries, foreign 
currency fluctuations, the ability of coffee-producing countries to agree on 
export quotas, and world economic conditions that make commodities more or 
less attractive investment options.
Peet’s procures coffee from 23 countries, with a large percentage of coffee 
coming from Central and South America from more than 30 different exporters, 
brokers, and growers. They purchase only high-quality Arabica coffee beans, 
which are considered superior to beans traded in the commodity market. 
Arabica beans tend to trade on a negotiated basis at a substantial premium 
above commodity coffee prices, depending on the supply and demand at the 
time of purchase. 
Peet’s access to high-quality Arabica beans depends on its relationships with 
coffee brokers, exporters, and growers, with long-term relationships helping 
ensure a steady supply of coffee beans. Peet’s believes that its reputation built 
over 45 years gives them access to some of the highest-quality coffee beans 
from the finest estates and growing regions around the world. They are also 
occasionally offered opportunities to purchase unique and special coffees.
Given their common heritage, it’s not surprising that both Peet’s and Starbucks 
emphasize sustainable practices that inure to the benefit of their suppliers. 
Peet’s website provides details on the company’s “commitment to sustainable 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
32
business practices.” Starbucks, to help ensure sustainability and future supply of 
high-quality green coffees and reinforce its leadership role in the coffee 
industry, operates Farmer Support Centers in Costa Rica and Rwanda, among 
other locations. These Farmer Support Centers are staffed with agronomists and 
sustainability experts who work with coffee farming communities to promote 
best practices in coffee production designed to improve both coffee quality and 
yields.
Starbuck’s reputation is closely associated with its Corporate Social 
Responsibility programs, balancing profitability with a social conscience. This 
umbrella program provides social benefits to many stakeholders and 
encompasses the sustainability programs.
By the Numbers
The case studies in this chapter illustrate how reputation can affect value-
creating and value-destroying actions by vendors and suppliers (Table 5-6).
Table 5-6. Effects of Reputation on Supplier and Vendor-Associated Costs
P&L Effect
Stock Price Effect
Automotive sector: 
customer of choice 
status
2%–4% lower cost of goods sold
Increase
McDonald’s: supply 
chain engagement 
strategy
10% lower adjusted costs for food and 
paper goods than Yum! Brands
10% higher profit margin
48% premium over Yum! 
Brands for every trailing 
month of dollar sales
Coca-Cola: supply 
chain engagement 
strategy
4% lower cost of sales, bottling, and 
distribution than Pepsi
2009: crisis erased 11% of 
market cap
2011: 13% greater equity value 
per expected $1 of net income 
than Pepsi
Toyota: supply chain 
operational event 
evolving into a 
reputational event
Credit default swap prices up 
0.6%–0.7%
16% fall in monthly sales
14% fall in annual market share
3% fall in secondary market pricing 
$25 billion lost

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
33
power (inventory value)
Total P&L impact of $2 billion
Peet’s
Higher pricing power for store-bought 
coffee beans
Shares at pending acquisition 
currently priced at a 50% 
premium to expected earnings 
relative to Starbucks
1 Davies PJ. John Hurrell (Chief Executive, Association of Insurance and Risk Managers) 
quotation from “Not out of the woods yet.” Financial Times. 12 February 2010. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/146fea72-17ef-11df-a74d-00144feab49a.html#axzz20ybGaDCE. 
Accessed 18 July 2012.
2 Lindwall C, Ellmo A, Rehme J, Kowalkowski C. Increasing customer attractiveness through 
upstream brand equity. The International IPSERA workshop on Customer attractiveness, supplier 
satisfaction and customer value. 25–26 November 2010. Available at: 
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:liu:diva-63092. Accessed 17 July 2012.
3 Skogman L, Tiselius K. Developing strategic supplier relationships at Volvo Powertrain. 
Master of Science thesis in the Master Degree Program Supply Chain Management 2012. 
Department of Technology Management and Economics, Division of Industrial Marketing. 
Chalmers University of Technology. Report No. E2012:029. 
4 Bew R. The new customer of choice imperative: ensuring supply availability, productivity gains, 
and supplier innovation. 92d Annual International Supply Management Conference, Las Vegas, 
May 2007.
5 Supply-chain management. Economist. 6 April 2009. Available at: 
http://www.economist.com/node/13432670. Accessed 20 July 2012.
6 Boeing 777 Facts, 777 Family. Available at: 
http://www.boeing.com/commercial/777family/pf/pf_facts.html. Accessed 20 July 2012.
7 Van de Rijt J, Sanema SC. A conceptual model for interactions between suppliers and buyers: 
from uni-faced to multi-faced B2B sales organizations. Paper presented at the International 
IPSERA Workshop on Customer Attractiveness, Supplier Satisfaction and Customer Value, 
November 2010, University of Twente. 
8 Kraljic P. Purchasing must become supply management, Harvard Business Review 1983; 
September–October: 109–117.
9 A brief history of McDonald’s. Available at: 
http://www.mcspotlight.org/company/company_history.html. Accessed 18 July 2012.
10 McDonald’s Corporation. Google Finance. Available at: 
http://www.google.com/finance?cid=22568. Accessed 18 July 2012.
11 Urry M. RHM receives two Golden West bids. Financial Times. 26 March 2005. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/eb54ac20-9d9d-11d9-a227-
00000e2511c8.html#axzz20ybGaDCE. Accessed 18 July 2012.
12 McDonald’s Corporation 2011 Annual Report (Form 10K), p. 8.

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
34
13 Vitasek K, Manrodt V. What five great economists can tell us about Outsourcing. Supply Chain 
Management Review. July/August 2012 pp 18-25.
14 Goldberg RA, Yagan JD. McDonald’s Corporation: managing a sustainable supply chain. 
Harvard Business School. 16 April 2007. Case 9-907-414. 
15 McDonald’s 2009 Worldwide Corporate Responsibility Report. p. 14. Available at: 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/93473994/1/Corporate-Governance-Ethics. Accessed 18 July 2012.
16 Lee HL, Billington C. Managing supply chain inventories: pitfalls and opportunities. Sloan 
Management Review. 1992; Spring: 65–73.
17 Fletcher C. McDonald’s pledges sustainable Filet-O-Fish in Europe. Bloomberg. 8 June 2011. 
Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-06-07/mcdonald-s-pledges-sustainably-
sourced-filet-o-fish-in-europe.html. Accessed 18 July 2012.
18 Jackson A-L, Feld A. Domino’s ‘brutally honest’ ads attract sales as consumer spending falters. 
Bloomberg. 17 October 2011. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-10-
17/domino-s-brutally-honest-ads-offset-slowing-consumer-spending.html. Accessed 19 July 
2012.
19 Taylor P. Supply chain is a strategic discipline. Financial Times. 25 January 2011. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/eb1cf8ca-2749-11e0-80d7-00144feab49a.html#axzz20ybGaDCE. 
Accessed 18 July 2012.
20 Nooteboom B, Berger H, Noorderhaven N. Effects of trust and governance on relational risk. 
Academy of Management Journal. 1997; 40(2):8–38.
21 Dion P, Banting P, Picard S, Blenkhorn D. JIT implementation: a growth opportunity for 
purchasing. International Journal of Purchasing and Materials Management. 1992; 28 (4):33.
22 Spekman RE, Kamauff JW, Myhr N. An empirical investigation into supply chain 
management: a perspective on partnerships. International Journal of Physical Distribution & 
Logistics Management. 1998; 28(8):630–650.
23 The Chicken and the Pig. Wikipedia. Available at: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Chicken_and_the_Pig. Accessed 18 July 2012.
24 Foley S. How Yum! Brands is conquering the world. Bloomberg Businessweek. 14 July 2010. 
Available at: http://www.businessweek.com/globalbiz/content/jul2010/gb20100714_088544.htm. 
Accessed 19 July 2012.
25 Taylor P. Supply chain leaders identified. Financial Times. 25 July 2011. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/509f9722-b6db-11e0-a8b8-00144feabdc0.html#axzz20ybGaDCE. 
Accessed 18 July 2012.
26 Gartner supply chain top 25. Gartner Research. Available at: 
http://www.gartner.com/technology/supply-chain/top25.jsp. Accessed 20 July 2012.
27 Plimmer G. Supply-chain experts arrive at the top. Financial Times. 26 October 2011. 
Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/718ad57c-ef76-11e0-941e-
00144feab49a.html#axzz20ybGaDCE. Accessed 18 July 2012.
28 100 best corporate citizens. Corporate Responsibility Magazine. Available at: 
http://www.thecro.com/content/100-best-corporate-citizens. Accessed 20 July 2012.
29 Green Rankings 2010: U.S. Companies. Daily Beast. Available at: 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
35
http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2010/10/18/green-rankings-us-companies.html. 
Accessed 20 July 2012. 
30 Salminen RT, Arpalo J, Pekkarinen, O, Jalkala A, Mirola T. Characteristics of a good customer 
reference for a process equipment supplier. 2008. Presentation of the RELI project – Developing 
Reference-based Business. Available at: http://www.tbrc.fi/eng/projects/?PCID=32&PID=58. 
Accessed 20 July 2012.
31 Data source: Compiled from the respective 2009, 2010, and 2011 annual reports for 
McDonalds Corporation and YUM! Brands. 
32 Lab tests find carcinogen in regular and Diet Coke and Pepsi. Center for Science in the Public 
Interest. 5 March 2012. Available at: http://www.cspinet.org/new/201203051.html. Accessed 20 
July 2012.
33 Consumer group claims soda-cancer link. Bloomberg 5 March 2012. Available at: 
http://www.chron.com/news/article/Consumer-group-claims-soda-cancer-link-3383014.php. 
Accessed 20 July 2012.
34 Cancer group asks U.S. to study sugary drinks, obesity. Reuters. 4 July 2012. Available at: 
http://in.reuters.com/article/2012/07/03/usa-obesity-soda-cancer-idINL2E8I3AO120120703. 
Accessed 20 July 2012.
35 Hays CL. Coke Products Are Ordered Off the Shelves in Four Countries. New York Times. 16 
June 1999. http://www.nytimes.com/1999/06/16/business/coke-products-are-ordered-off-the-
shelves-in-four-countries.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm. Accessed 10 October 2012.
36 Greenberg MD. On breaking the log jam: the how and why of corporate reputation leadership. 
Corporate Finance Review. 2012; 17(1):11–17.
37 The Coca-Cola Company Annual Report, 2011.
38 Russell M. In the spotlight – PepsiCo's plans beg more questions. Just Food. 10 February 2012. 
Available at: http://www.just-food.com/analysis/in-the-spotlight-pepsicos-plans-beg-more-
questions_id118218.aspx. Accessed 31 August 2012.
39 PepsiCo. Annual Report, 2011.
40 Data source: Compiled from the respective 2009, 2010, and 2011 annual reports for The Coca-
Cola Company and PepsiCo.
41 Dyer JH, Chu W. The role of trustworthiness in reducing transaction costs and improving 
performance: empirical evidence from the United States, Japan and Korea. Organization Science. 
2003;14 (1): 57–68.
42 Compiled from Yahoo Finance company statistics. 
http://finance.yahoo.com/q/ks?s=TM+Key+Statistics. Accessed February 2010. 
43 Labor–management relations. Toyota. Available at: 
http://www.toyota.co.jp/en/environmental_rep/03/jyugyoin.html. Accessed 1 September 2012.
44 Kitamura M, Horie M. Toyota partmakers in Japan hire detectives to hunt bankruptcies. 
Bloomberg. 1 May 2009. Available at: 
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aGcEKX2DBZ4M&refer=japan. 

Chapter 5 | Suppliers
36
Accessed 10 August 2010.
45 Memos show regulators cut short Toyota probe in 2007. Reuters. 22 February 2010. Available 
at: http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/02/22/retire-us-toyota-nhtsa-idUSTRE61L4TC20100222. 
Accessed 10 August 2010.
46 McDonald C. Toyota, Tylenol recalls 'Worlds Apart,' crisis mgt. expert says. Property Casualty 
360. 5 February 2010. Available at: http://www.propertycasualty360.com/2010/02/05/toyota-
tylenol-recalls-worlds-apart-crisis-mgt-expert-says. Accessed 10 August 2012.
47 Kossovsky N. Foggy supply chain claims another victim (case study). Intellectual Asset 
Management. 2010; 41(May/June): 19–27.
48 Barinka A. Peet’s seen tempting Starbucks to top richest Java bid: real M&A. Bloomberg. 31 
July 2012. Available at: http://www.sfgate.com/business/bloomberg/article/Peet-s-Seen-
Tempting-Starbucks-to-Top-Richest-3752232.php. Accessed 1 August 2012. 
49 Franklin M. Could Starbucks Acquire Peet's Coffee? The Daily Meal, 30 July 2012. Available 
at: http://www.thedailymeal.com/could-starbucks-acquire-peets-coffee. Accessed 10 October 
2012.
50 Yahoo Finance, SBUX, Key Statistics. Available at: 
http://finance.yahoo.com/q/ks?s=SBUX+Key+Statistics. Accessed 2 October 2012.

C H A P T E R
6
Creditors
A man I do not trust could not get money from me on all the bonds in 
Christendom.
—J. P. Morgan1
John Pierpont Morgan, patriarch of the banking dynasty, famously asserted that 
credit was based on trust. Knowing whom he was lending to was more 
important than either cash or property collateral, he explained to Congress in 
1912. In today’s commercial relationships, trust still denotes an expectation of 
behavior that is the foundation for commercial credit.
One hundred years after Morgan’s statement, superior reputations that foster 
trust are still associated with better credit terms. Today, when it is no longer 
clear exactly who “owns” any given security, when buyer and seller usually 
never meet, and where there is never any apparent opportunity for trust to 
develop, reputations matter even more to borrowers and creditors.2 Risk is the 
issue. High trust, or reputation, translates into lower credit risk. Lesser 
reputation means higher credit risk. 
Yet today most of the finance literature focuses on the “hard” aspects of credit 
risk, including such quantifiable elements as repayment history and credit 
ratings, which tend to constrict the meaning of reputation. Neglect of the 
intangibles may explain why the literature has not been very successful on the 
subject of pricing credit risk. Prior studies have been able to explain only a 
small fraction of the variation in credit spreads.3,4,5,6 Reliance on hard 

Chapter 6 | Creditors
2
information, such as balance sheet and market data, ignores such intangible 
factors as firm reputation—that which J. P. Morgan considered essential. Alan 
Greenspan spoke of this issue when he lamented, “I am … distressed at how far 
we have let concerns for reputation slip in recent years.”7
Volkswagen AG
The Volkswagen Group’s August 2012 acquisition of Porsche illustrates how 
reputation can trump oversimplified quantitative world views. The largest 
carmaker in Europe, the VW Group aspires to surpass both General Motors and 
Toyota and become the largest carmaker in the world. In 2011, it delivered 8.3 
million vehicles, up by 1 million from the year before. Sales revenue increased 
by 25.6% to €159.3 billion ($212 billion), and operating profits rose to €11.3 
billion ($15 billion)—a new record.
The Group, better known to generations of aging hippies as the manufacturer of 
the Beetle and the Microbus, consisted of ten brands from seven European 
countries: Volkswagen Passenger Cars, Audi, S￿KODA, SEAT, Bentley, 
Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles, Scania, MAN, Bugatti, and Lamborghini. 
Each brand has its own character and operates as an independent entity to meet 
the specific needs of different market segments and countries.
On 3 August 2012, Volkswagen added to its stable of brands Porsche 
Zwischenholding GmbH as the 11th in the VW Group. In the lead up to the 
deal’s closing, credit markets held differing opinions about the economic 
benefits of adding Porsche’s reputation to the Group. On 9 July 2012, 
Bloomberg reported that VW had committed to spending €4.46 billion ($5.5 
billion) of cash to add to its 49.9% stake and complete its acquisition of Porsche 
SE, and that it also took on €2.5 billion ($3.2 billion) of debt along with the 
50.1% of the iconic sports carmaker that it didn’t already own. Moody’s was 
dubious, commenting that the cash payment created a deterioration in VW’s 
leverage ratio, with adjusted net debt–to-earnings ratio rising to 0.7 times from 
0.4 times before the transaction. Fitch was more optimistic, affirming its 
existing ratings and revising Volkswagen’s outlook to Positive from Stable.8
But investors, more attuned to reputation, were unabashedly enthusiastic. They 
concluded that the acquisition of a premium brand made Volkswagen more 
creditworthy and they pushed VW’s bonds to record highs. VW’s €1.25 billion 
bonds with a face value of 2.75% rose in price, cutting the yield to 1.3%. Credit 
default swaps (CDSs) protecting the company’s debt were the most traded of 
any corporate contracts globally in the week through June 29 and fell the most 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
compared with other European auto firms in July, according to Credit Market 
Analysis (CMA), a part of S&P Capital IQ.9
Reputation Matters
There are a few academic studies that quantify the relationship between credit 
costs and the six business pillars that underpin reputation. These pillars are 
among the categories of corporate investments that have no visibility on 
traditional balance sheets yet represent essential “economic competencies”—a 
term used by Charles Hulten, professor of economics at the University of 
Maryland.10 Bauer and Hann showed that credit costs correlate with reputation-
associated operational risks in safety and sustainability.11 Using information on 
the environmental profile of 582 U.S. public corporations between 1995 and 
2006, and controlling for numerous credit risk determinants, they showed that 
firms with questions about their environmental performance pay a premium on 
the cost of debt financing and have lower credit ratings. The corporate activities 
underlying this sustainability connection were related mainly to regulatory and 
climate change issues. In contrast, firms with a reputation for proactive 
environmental engagement are charged a lower cost of debt. 
Commitments to innovate and execute practices with environmental benefits are 
also associated with lower bond spreads, as observed for firms in industries both 
that are traditionally low and high in environmental risk. Also, the relevance of 
corporate environmental management has increased over recent years as a result 
of the growing climate change concerns and investors’ awareness of associated 
regulatory risks. 
Scott Mitchell, Chairman of Open Compliance and Ethics Group (OCEG), a 
not-for-profit performance management think tank, argues that the Enron and 
WorldCom scandals forced investors to consider extra-financial factors. 
“Creditors are looking for high financial performance, but with a degree of both 
responsibility and integrity.” Companies that are seriously committed to driving 
principled performance through integrated governance, risk, and compliance 
activities based on publicly vetted tools and resources invariably end up with 
better reputations.12
Reputational risk should not be conflated with moral risk. All other things being 
equal, there is no evidence that companies operating in the alcohol, gaming, or 
adult entertainment industries—so-called sin industries—face a higher cost of 
debt or a lower bond rating. However, the tobacco industry does because of 
additional regulatory risks.13 In October of 2011, S&P reminded corporate 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 6 | Creditors
4
boards and managers that its analysts take corporate safety measures into 
account when rating creditworthiness.14 While they may not have the tools to 
estimate improved cash flows from enhanced reputations, the credit ratings 
agencies are not unaware of the risks to cash flows from the failure of any of the 
six business processes underpinning reputation enumerated in Table 1-1.
A few academic studies do quantify the relationship between credit costs and 
reputation directly. Each year, Fortune magazine surveys industry experts along 
dimensions such as the quality, integrity, and character of a firm’s managers; 
the innovativeness of the firm; the quality of its products; and the firm’s ability 
to attract, retain, and train talented workers. They use these as important factors 
for gauging reputation. Their ranking of “Most Admired Companies,” described 
further in Chapter 9, is used by academics in a number of disciplines as a 
measure corporate reputation.15,16
Another survey-based ranking of the world’s “Most Respected Companies” is 
published by Barron’s. Unlike the Fortune survey, Barron’s limits its survey 
respondents to professional money managers. In May and June 2012, 116 
investors nationally scored each of the world’s 100 largest companies on a scale 
of 1 to 5. One key question asks the degree they respect, or don’t, the world’s 
largest companies. 
Research based on these reputation scorings consistently shows that a favorable 
reputation correlates with lower expectations for adverse credit events—a 
benefit factored into credit pricing. In a 2011 study, using the Most Admired 
Company rankings as a proxy for reputation, Anginer et al. found a robust 
inverse relationship between a firm’s reputation as measured by the Fortune 
survey and the credit spread on its bonds: 17 A higher reputation score was 
associated with lower monthly credit spreads. A half-point (0.5) improvement 
in the reputation score, or moving up one quintile in the Fortune reputation 
rankings, reduced the cost of debt capital by 10–20 basis points (bps), even 
taking into account all other firm-level and macro-level variables affecting 
credit risk.
In the pricing of CDSs also, firms with superior reputations benefit. Marc 
Lucier, a director of Deutsche Bank, reported in 2009 that companies with 
higher reputation rankings tend to have lower credit costs, reflected in lower 
spreads of CDSs. The converse is also true: 49% of the variance in the average 
relative CDS cost was explained by the average reputation rankings.18
A 2012 study for this book using the Barron’s survey data as the proxy for 
reputation showed that lower CDS prices correlated with higher levels of 
“respect.” In an analysis of 30 of the world’s largest companies, two variables, 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
the Barron’s respect scores and the Total Debt/earnings before interest, taxes, 
depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) ratio, explained 15% of the variance 
in pricing of CDSs. Controlling for the Debt/EBITDA ratio, the Barron’s 
Respect score explained 12% of the CDS pricing variance, and a move one full 
notch up the Respect scale moved the 3 August 2012 CDS price down 15.6 bps 
(Figure 6-1).
Figure 6-1. Correlation of CDS prices 3 August 2012 with the Barron’s Respect Score. The debt 
of companies with better reputations can be insured at a lower cost.
In addition to better pricing, superior reputations are associated both with larger 
credit tranches and better terms. A study of 181 deals with a median value of 
$408 million showed that the General Partner’s reputation is significantly 
related to leverage and deal structure.19 The study found that reputable private 
equity groups pay narrower bank and institutional loan spreads, have longer 
loan maturities, and rely more on institutional loans.20
Conversely, reputational damage can lower credit ratings and increase credit 
costs. After its reputational crisis, BP was briefly unable to borrow money at 
any price. Two days after Carnival Corp’s. Costa Concordia cruise ship 
capsized, Standard & Poor’s issued a bulletin saying that costs associated with 
the disaster would negatively affect Carnival’s 2012 operating performance, 
including “any investment associated with restoring the reputation of the Costa 
brand, which is one of Carnival’s largest and most well-known.”21 And the 
failure of MF Global, the financial derivatives broker, and the ensuing legal, 

Chapter 6 | Creditors
6
regulatory, and reputational damage, led Standard & Poor’s to reduce the 
ratings of the parent, CME Group Inc.22
Security: The Johnson & Johnson Case
[Security is] the degree of protection a company offers against events 
undertaken by actors intentionally, criminally or maliciously, for purposes 
that adversely affect the firm. Because fear is the great disruptor of life and 
commerce, it is useful to think of security, the most ethereal of the intangible 
assets, as “absence of fear.” (Table 1-1)
There was nothing Johnson & Johnson could have done to signal more 
convincingly its ethical culture than its enterprise-wide behavior during the 
1982 Tylenol poisonings. At that time, Tylenol was the undisputed leader in the 
painkiller field, accounting for a 37% market share. Had Tylenol been a public 
corporation, profits would have placed it in the top half of the Fortune 500.
The recounting of the security crisis the company endured forged a powerful 
linkage between the words “corporate ethics” and Johnson & Johnson. During 
the fall of 1982, a malevolent person or persons replaced Tylenol Extra-
Strength capsules with cyanide-laced capsules, resealed the packages, and 
deposited them on the shelves of at least a half-dozen pharmacies and food 
stores in the Chicago area. By the end of the crisis, seven people had purchased 
the tainted capsules, ingested them, and died.
Having learned about the developing crisis from a phone query by a Chicago 
reporter, Johnson & Johnson Chairman James Burke charged a seven-member 
strategy team with two goals: protecting people and saving the product.23 The 
company’s first actions were to alert consumers nationwide immediately 
through the media not to consume any Tylenol product. After two more 
contaminated bottles of Tylenol were found, Mr. Burke ordered a national 
withdrawal of every capsule.
The crisis generated unprecedented news coverage. More than 100,000 separate 
news stories ran in U.S. newspapers and garnered hundreds of hours of national 
and local television coverage. The company’s post-crisis study revealed that 
more than 90% of the U.S. population had heard of the Chicago deaths within 
the first week of the crisis. Two news clipping services found more than 
125,000 clips on the Tylenol story, and one of them claimed that the story had 
received the widest U.S. news coverage since President John F. Kennedy’s 
assassination.24

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
Extensive coverage enabled the company to communicate to its stakeholders 
what it was doing to mitigate the disaster and restore its reputation—actions 
proving that ethical behavior was a cultural standard at Johnson & Johnson. 
Figure 6-2. Analysis of the 167 articles appearing in the business media during the 12 months 
preceding 15 May 2009 concerning Johnson & Johnson and reputation show an overwhelming 
positive sentiment, with a positive to negative ratio of 8.38. Source: Newssift.com, a Financial 
Times service. 
When the dust had settled, the central message stakeholders received was that 
the company was moral, revered its customers, and was itself a victim of a 
wanton act of terrorism. Its reputation was secured for the next quarter-century. 
Surveys consistently ranked the firm at or near the top of almost every 
reputational ranking, and press coverage tended to be favorable (Figure 6-2). 
The company’s low CDS costs reflected the benefits of its long-term superior 
reputation and perceived superior creditworthiness (Figure 6-3).

Chapter 6 | Creditors
8
Figure 6-3. Firms with superior reputations tend to face lower credit costs. Shown are the 
company and two peers, and their respective costs of credit as measured by the ratio of their CDS 
price relative to the average CDS price of the S&P 500. Source: Kossovsky N. J&J, a credo and a 
reputation (case study). Intellectual Asset Management. 2010; 39: (January/February): 30–34.
 
Guidance
Creditors are obviously at an informational disadvantage, since there is no way 
they can fully comprehend the motives or anticipate the potential behaviors of a 
borrower. They are forced to depend upon the body of information beyond 
direct knowledge that is encapsulated in the word “reputation.”
Hypothesizing in 1982 what J. P. Morgan knew empirically in 1912, Milgrom 
and Roberts suggested that reputations would play a role in credit 
relationships.”25 Along this same line of thought, Berger and Udell suggested 
that older firms accessed credit more easily than younger firms because enough 
time had passed to establish the firm’s public reputation, thereby mitigating 
asymmetric information problems.26
Looking at consistency of repayment alone is inadequate for distinguishing 
healthy firms with similar repayment records. Firms may adopt a wide range of 
other actions that influence how their creditworthiness is perceived. A firm 
may, for example, hire quality managers or take a conservative approach to risk 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
management, leading it to be perceived as a high-quality firm in terms of its 
credit risk. These and other qualitative features are factored into the bond rating 
agencies rankings.
While we prefer the term “reputation,” qualitative features not present on 
standard corporate financial statements are also known in financial circles as 
“non-financial” or “extra-financial” information. In its 1996 Measures that 
Matter study, Cap Gemini Ernst & Young, a global accountancy, established 
that non-financial performance plays a critical role in how public companies are 
valued, accounting for as much as 35% of institutional investors’ valuation.27 In 
2005, PwC, another global accountancy, reported controlled experiments 
showing that extra-financial data and intangible asset value calculations swayed 
40% of analysts to change their target valuations of public companies. That 
same year, Thomson Extel, the publishing group, reported that 6% of buy-side 
brokerages devoted material resources to extra-financial data to determine 
intangible asset value. A year later, that figure was updated to 32% of buy-side 
brokerages.28
More investment managers also seem to be collecting extra-financial 
information. In 2007, Vigeo, a provider of extra-financial data, reported that 
they had been retained by ABP Fund, which had €200 billion ($280 billion) in 
assets under management. Also, in 2007, the Enhanced Analytics Initiative, 
international extra-financial investment information cooperative, reported that 
its membership had a total of US$2.4 trillion of assets under management. 
Today, that increased attention to extra-financial information has grown to 
encompass, among others, groups with investment strategies informed by 
corporate environmental, social, and governance practices under the rubric of 
socially responsible investing.
In 2000, Cap Gemini Ernst & Young declared “the market at once demands and 
relies on non-financial information in company evaluations and valuation 
decisions.”29 As seen with the VW case, 12 years later some investors are still 
comfortable factoring extra-financial information into the pricing of equities or 
debt. 
Anecdotally, 
select 
members 
of 
the 
professional 
credit 
community—regional bankers—may be similarly inclined. 
The credit experience of Pittsburgh-based Littlearth Productions, a women’s 
accessories manufacturer, is illustrative. A licensee of the National Football 
League, Littlearth’s products, sold under the Pro-Fan-ity brand, are made for the 
female sports enthusiast. The company’s globally distributed operations and 
supply chain call for levels of working capital augmented through lines of 
credit. Robert J. Brandegee, CEO, attributes the strength of his banking 

Chapter 6 | Creditors
10
relationships to the intangible value of his license. “The bank is willing to work 
with us when we are not quite in ‘formula’ because they know how much we 
will sell this upcoming NFL season,” he says. His bank manager, like many 
citizens of Pittsburgh—a “drinking town with a football problem”29—is an 
enthusiast of the local professional team, the Steelers. Rob adds, “His 
understanding of the emotional power of our brand is a benefit that makes all of 
the difference for us in terms of our ability to grow through conventional 
financing!”
But other members of the stakeholder community of creditors, even if they are 
sports fans, are often not moved this way. The fact that such different comfort 
levels exist for something as fundamental as credit risk explains, in part, why 
the Nobel Committee has awarded two separate prizes in 1996 and 2001 for 
work in the field of markets with asymmetric information. 
Economists as far back as Adam Smith30 observed that, as interest rates rise, the 
best borrowers drop out of the market. However, it was the work of Michael 
Spence, who along with George Akerlof and Joseph Stiglitz was awarded the 
Nobel Prize in Economics, that explained how credit rating agencies and 
insurers 
helped 
translate 
extra-financial 
information—reputation—into 
information that can be appreciated and valued by all stakeholders.31
Because reputation is difficult to value, commercial insurances can be unusually 
valuable in signaling information about credit risk related to reputation risk 
arising from operational risk. The art is in the detail. The strongest signals on 
creditworthiness come from insurances that indemnify policyholders against 
reputational value loss and that incentivize better reputation risk management.
In 2011, both AIG and Zurich Financial Services, in cooperation with Aon, 
introduced reputation insurances that primarily provide indemnifications for 
crisis communications expenses. In 2012, Kiln Group in cooperation with Steel 
City Re introduced a different type of product—Reputational Value Insurance. 
Reputational Value Insurance protects against first-party loss to a company’s 
reputation arising from a failed business process and consequential adverse 
media attention. Evidence of reputation risk control is a condition of 
underwriting the insurance, and loss limits are indexed to reputational value 
metrics.32 Insurances are discussed further in Chapter 8.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
Consider This

Reputation is an umbrella term for the extra-financial 
information on intangible assets that lenders can factor into 
their assessment of the creditworthiness of a borrower.

Among the largest companies, a better reputation can 
enhance the creditworthiness of a borrower and the benefits 
can persist for years.

Insurances are among the most cost-effective instruments 
for signaling reputation-driven enhanced creditworthiness. 
Properly designed reputation insurances can help 
stakeholders appreciate and value a company’s state of 
reputation risk control.
By the Numbers
Table 6-1. Effects of Reputation on Credit Costs
P&L Effect
Stock Price Effect
VW Group
Corporate bond yield dropped to 
record low of 1.3%.
Funding advantage of at least 400 bps 
over its main European rivals.33
85% 3 yr ROE compared to 
33% for world markets, 20% 
for DAX
Johnson & Johnson
Post-crisis CDS prices lower by 5–10 
basis points than peers and as low as 
5% of the average for all S&P 500 
companies.
Equity price resilience
Multiple studies
Credit spreads for the World’s Most 
Admired Companies are ~0.75% 
lower than the prices for those with 
the worst reputations.
CDS prices for the World’s Most 
Respected (Largest) Companies are 
~0.60% lower than the prices for 
those with the worst reputations.
Increase

Chapter 6 | Creditors
12
1 Surowiecki J. The trust crunch. The New Yorker. 20 October 2008. Available at: 
http://www.newyorker.com/talk/financial/2008/10/20/081020ta_talk_surowiecki. Accessed 2 
August 2012.
2 Authers J. A return to vision of J. P. Morgan. Financial Times. 29 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/e6e6a57c-d7d2-11e1-80a8-00144feabdc0.html#axzz22O9ypWmI. 
Accessed 2 August 2012.
3 Collin-Dufresne P, Goldstein RS, Martin JS. The determinants of credit spread changes, Journal 
of Finance. 2001; 56:2177–2207.
4 Duffee GR. Estimating the price of default risk. Review of Financial Studies. 1999; 12:197–266.
5 Amato J, Remolona E. The credit spread puzzle, BIS Quarterly Review. 2003; 51–63.
6 Elton EJ, Gruber MJ, Agrawal D, Mann C. Explaining the rate spread on corporate bonds. 
Journal of Finance. 2001; 56:247–277.
7 Goodman PS. Taking hard new look at a Greenspan legacy. The New York Times. 8 October 
2008. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/09/business/economy/09greenspan.html?pagewanted=all. 
Accessed 2 August 2012.
8 Fitch affirms Volkswagen at 'A–' on Porsche acquisition. Press Release. Reuters. 5 July 2012. 
Available at: http://in.reuters.com/article/2012/07/05/idINWNA042820120705. Accessed 3 
August 2012.
9 Benjamin H. Porsche joins Bugatti to spur VW bonds record: corporate finance. Bloomberg. 9 
July 2012. Available at: http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-07-08/porsche-joins-bugatti-
to-spur-vw-bonds-record-corporate-finance. Accessed 3 August 2012.
10 Hulten C. Agnostic blessings: how to count intangibles. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 3 
December 2010. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 15 September 2012. 
11 Bauer R, Hann D. Corporate environmental management and credit risk. Working paper, 
European Centre for Corporate Engagement, June 30, 2010. Available at: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1660470 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1660470. Accessed 3 August 
2012 
12 Mitchell SL. How reputation drives principled performance. Mission Intangible Monthly 
Briefing, 1 April 2011. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings.
13 Dassen S. Sin companies and credit risk. Master’s Thesis. Maastricht University, Faculty of 
Economics and Business Administration, Maastricht, 24 May 2011.
14 Chapelle T. S&P emphasizes safety as factor in credit scores. Agenda. 24 October 2011. 
15 Davies G. Corporate reputation and competitiveness. New York: Psychology Press, 2003.
16 Fombrun, CJ, Gardberg NA, Sever JM. The reputation quotient: a multi-stakeholder measure of 
corporate reputation. Journal of Brand Management. 1999; 7: 241–255.
17 Anginer D, Warburton AJ, Yildizhan C. Corporate reputation and cost of debt. Available at: 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1873803 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1873803. Accessed 3 
August 2012
18 Lucier M. Quantifying the financial impact of reputation. In Building and enforcing intellectual 
property value 2010. IP Media Group, 2010; 15–20.
19 James C. Buyout financing: the changing role of banks in deal financing. Available at: 
www.frbsf.org/csip/research/200710_Chris_James.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2012.
20 Demiroglu C, James CM. The role of private equity group reputation in LBO financing. 
Journal of Financial Economics. 2010; 96(2):306–330
21 Reputation risk in focus at credit rating agencies. Business Insurance. 26 February 2012. 
Available at: http://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20120226/NEWS06/302269975. 
Accessed 2 August 2012.
22 Polansek T. S&P cuts CME Group rating due to MF Global risk. Reuters. 10 February 2012. 
Available at: http://www.porknetwork.com/pork-news/SP-cuts-CME-Group-rating-due-to-MF-
Global-risk-139044309.html?view=all. Accessed 2 August 2012.
23 Crisis communications case study: Tylenol. BCMpedia. Available at: 
http://www.bcmpedia.org/wiki/Crisis_Communications_Case_Study_Tylenol. Accessed 12 
August 2012.
24 Case study: the Johnson & Johnson Tylenol crisis. Crisis Communication Strategies. DoD Joint 
Course in Communication. Available at: 
http://www.ou.edu/deptcomm/dodjcc/groups/02C2/Johnson%20&%20Johnson.htm. Accessed 12 
August 2012.
25 Milgrom P, Roberts J. Predation, reputation, and entry deterrence. Journal of Economic Theory. 
1982; 27:280–312.
26 Berger AN, Udell GF. Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm finance. Journal of 
Business. 1995; 68:351–382. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/296668. Accessed 3 August 
2012
27 Measuring the future: the value creation index. Cap Gemini Ernst & Young Center for Business 
Innovation, 2000; 3.
28 Kossovsky N. Accounting for intangibles: from IP to CEO. Patent Strategy & Management. 
2007; 8(7):3–4.
29 Pittsburgh. Urban dictionary. Available at: 
http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=pittsburgh&page=2. Accessed 1 September 
2012.
30 Smith A. An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations. London: Strahan & 
Cadell, 1776.
31 Spence AM. Consumer misperceptions, product failure and producer liability. Review of 
Economic Studies. 1977; 44:561–572.
32 Steel City Re. Protecting reputation value. Available at: 
http://www.steelcityre.com/protecting_value.shtml. Accessed 1 September 2012.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 6 | Creditors
14
33 Tait N, Kirk S. Lex in depth: Volkswagen. Financial Times. 5 September 2012. 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/8723e25e-f761-11e1-8c9d-00144feabdc0.html#axzz25h3VSeTG. 
Accessed 6 September 2012.

C H A P T E R
7
Equity Investors
Given the recent reputational, legal and regulatory risks … we believe the 
board is in need of independent leadership.
—Class A Equity Investors of News Corporation1
Equity investors express their expectations mostly by buying or selling shares. 
Through these direct behaviors, they establish stock prices and earnings 
multiples. Firms with superior reputations benefit from higher multiples on 
earnings. Poor reputations tend to result in higher stock price volatility and 
greater vulnerability to headline risks. In a reputational crisis, any firm may 
experience a collapse in stock price. 
Recently, investors have begun voicing their expectations with increasing 
frequency through their proxies. Some of their expectations may reflect social 
values; many others are reactions to financial performance alone. In very recent 
years, investors have become far more active in their expression of 
disappointment, through voting against board members and against 
management plans, with increasing attention to “Nay on pay.”2 Also, increased 
numbers of these shareholders are taking their displeasure to the courts. 

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
2
Individual corporate executives and board members may also suffer personal 
reputation damage when their companies endure an adverse reputational event.
Investors are not yet storming the Bastille, but their concerns about the 
reputations of their companies are being taken very seriously. The following 
studies illustrate some of the widely varied examples of growing shareholder 
influence on corporate behaviors and their reputations.
Facebook Inc.
Most equity investors buy stocks that they expect to be able to sell at a higher 
price within a reasonable period. Before Facebook’s initial public offering 
(IPO), Reuters reported that it was already oversubscribed with one week left. 
For the “IPO of the Decade,” analysts expected that the upper end of the 
projected price range of $28 to $35 would be raised. In turn, Facebook would 
raise more than the expected $10.6 billion, and shares could be expected to rise 
once the IPO was complete.3 Expectations were high. Just ten weeks later, the 
shorts were high.
This historic 18 May 2012 Facebook Inc. IPO did not go as many had expected. 
Facebook shares, which opened up 11%, closed just above their $38 IPO price. 
More than 576 million shares changed hands, setting a trading volume record 
for U.S. market debuts.4 Most investors had expected a first-day pop, but five 
days later, Facebook equity was hemorrhaging value (Figure 7-1).

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
Figure 7-1. Time series chart showing Facebook’s stock price from its May launch through early 
August. Within 10 weeks, Facebook equity had shed 47% of its IPO value. Source: Yahoo 
Finance.5
The company had priced its IPO at the top end of its target range and increased 
the size of the offering, becoming the first U.S. company to go public with a 
valuation greater than $100 billion. On 2 August, after less than three months, 
that valuation dipped briefly to $42.8 billion. At a valuation of 122 times 
historic earnings, those expectations arguably still could be irrationally 
exuberant.
When the stock was still above $30, long before the magnitude of the mismatch 
between equity investor expectations and broad market behavior became 
apparent, Vanity Fair published a tongue-in-cheek indictment of all potentially 
culpable parties, namely, everyone6:
The Underwriters…
…for lowering their expectations of earnings just before the IPO, and 
informing only a select number of larger clients.

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
4
Your Stupid Cell Phone…
…for enabling mobile advertising that is less lucrative to Facebook and 
worrying the underwriters.
The Media…
…for propping up Facebook and confusing a terrific social-media service 
with a hot stock. The journalists should have been savvy enough to see 
through Wall Street’s foolish promises.
General Motors…
…for yanking its advertising from the site just before the IPO. 
Barack Hussein Obama…
…Why not?
NASDAQ…
…when on IPO, day, a glitch “delayed Facebook’s market debut by roughly 
half an hour, and later delayed order confirmations.” 
Facebook.com…
…for alleged “registration and prospectus (that) were materially false.”
Not everyone was disappointed in Facebook Inc.’s huge drop. Some European 
investors bought structured products benefiting from the stock’s decline.7 A put 
warrant that predicted Facebook would be at $22 by March 2013 cost 6 euro 
cents ($0.07) to buy in the week after Facebook went public. On 6 August, the 
warrant was worth 36 euro cents, a return of more than 500%.
Reputation and Information Processing
Equity investors have the luxury of assessing the expected benefits of the 
drivers of value on customers, employees, vendors, and creditors and then 
determining if the current stock price is reasonable, too high, or too low. Major 
macroeconomic events, regional microeconomic events, and specific corporate 
events can all reset current expectations. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
The Facebook IPO illustrates a confusion between reputation and brand that can 
impact stakeholder behavior. Reputation, which is an expectation of behavior 
held by stakeholders, should not be conflated with brand, which is an emotional 
construct. Corporate reputation creates a powerful aggregation of information 
that draws from an enormous and diverse array of sources. In general, the 
process of its formation is cognitive and provides a framework through which 
investors process current events. Brands, on the other hand, can create an 
emotional attachment that obscures reality and undermines rational choice.
Consider how investors processed news about Facebook just before its IPO. 
James Gorman, CEO of Morgan Stanley, the lead underwriter, disclosed that he 
“had unprecedented retail demand” and “people calling in from every part of 
the country.” Gorman confirmed that 26% of the shares were placed in the 
hands of individual investors.8 Individual investors who were users of the 
product were often passionate supporters. Retail investors had always been key 
to Facebook’s IPO strategy, in part because it had more than 900 million users 
globally. “We want to dump a lot of money into Facebook,” said one aspiring 
investor, citing peers’ activity on the site as evidence of its longevity. “You’re 
on Facebook half your day, if not more. It’s a necessity. It’s water, it’s death, 
and now it’s Facebook.”9 Such passion drove extraordinary expectations and 
created a company brand that acted as a powerful news filter. “The demand is 
insane,” said one retail broker to the Financial Times. “You could write that 
Facebook was the worst company in the world, and retail would still want the 
stock.”10 
Writing about the rush for shares at the IPO of Arsenal, an English football 
club, the Financial Times observed in 2010 that investors’ willingness to pay an 
“ego premium” can add roughly 25% to a company’s sale price.11 That would 
put the fair value of Facebook at $32 per share, all other things being equal.
While only a few were overtly disparaging the firm, there was ample 
information to properly determine more factually grounded, business-oriented 
expectations about Facebook’s advertising-linked revenue model. Two weeks 
before the IPO, Marin Software, a digital marketing platform that processed 
more than $100 million worth of spending on Facebook, found the cost per 
click for Facebook’s standard ads, which made up an estimated three-quarters 

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
6
of the social network’s advertising revenues, had fallen 26% over the prior year.12 
A full month before the IPO, Facebook published quarterly numbers that 
showed the rate of revenue growth was slowing, seasonality factors were 
kicking in, and costs were soaring. The net effect for the first quarter of 2012 
was a 36% slump in the company’s operating profit margin, down from 53% 
the year before.13
Ignoring reality is never a good strategy for investors. But when adverse events 
obscure reality, a good reputation can provide visibility to investors and dispel 
fear, uncertainty, and doubt. 
Recall that Johnson & Johnson emerged in 1982 from its crisis with an 
unimpeachable reputation for ethics. Not often appreciated is that a second 
Johnson & Johnson Tylenol poisoning had also occurred. While the first attack 
in 1982 caused significant financial damage, the second in 1986 didn’t. The 
primary differences between the two events were that by 1986, Johnson & 
Johnson had strengthened its control over the security processes that ensured 
safety in its products, and it had established a stellar reputation for ethical 
behavior. 
With its ethical reputation, Johnson & Johnson’s contentions were credible: that 
it was in control of its supply chain, that the poisoning was a rogue criminal act, 
and that all other products were safe. Equity investors took the cue.
After the initial event in 1982, the company’s market value fell by $1 billion, or 
30% of its equity value, and took 2.5 years to equilibrate; during the course of 
the 1986 event, the company recovered its lost reputational value as equity 
investors boosted its stock price by 30% (Figure 7-2). 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
Figure 7-2. Time series chart of return on equity. A: Johnson & Johnson (JNJ), June 1982 
through June 1985. The stock took 2.5 years to recover value from the fall 1982 Tylenol crisis. 
Following the incident, J&J invested time and effort into strengthening its reputation resilience by 
improving the underlying business processes that previously had allowed the product tampering 
to occur. B: Johnson & Johnson June 1985 through June 1988. There was no meaningful adverse 
impact of a second Tylenol crisis in 1986. In fact, the stock price actually rose and outperformed 
the S&P 500 by 30%. Source: Kossovsky N. Mission Intangible: Managing risk and reputation to 
create enterprise value. Intangible Asset Finance Society/Trafford, 2010. Reproduced with 
permission.

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
8
The company’s diligence in ensuring the safety and security of all its business 
processes was communicated so effectively that it bolstered J&J’s reputation 
among consumers, and the company recovered 70% of its market share within 
five months of the crisis. Investors’ concerns receded in less than two months, 
and the company outperformed the S&P 500 index over the course of the year. 
Subsequent research revealed that many consumers were so reassured by the 
steps that J&J had taken that, instead of deserting Tylenol, they actually 
switched to it from other painkillers.
Conversely, a bad reputation can exacerbate bad news. So it was for Knight 
Capital Group. In the summer of 2012, the entire financial services sector was at 
a reputational low point with customers and regulators, as well as other 
stakeholders. For a financial services company, it was a bad time to have a 
reputational crisis arising from an operational failure.
On 1 August 2012, Knight, a major market maker in global equities, watched 
briefly as its electronic systems began trading for themselves. According to The 
New York Times, technical problems “led the firm’s computers to rapidly buy 
and sell millions of shares in over a hundred stocks for about 45 minutes after 
the markets opened. Those trades pushed the value of many stocks up, and the 
company’s losses appear to have occurred when it had to sell the overvalued 
shares back into the market at a lower price.”14 Knight Capital’s tab for the bad 
trades: $440 million. 
Knight’s safety system, like BP’s blowout protector on the Deepwater Horizon, 
failed. Two days later, with its stock price down from $10.50 to below $3 at the 
start of trading, Knight’s reputation as a safe platform for U.S. equity trades was 
in tatters. Customers, employees, and regulators all wondered why it took the 
firm so long to stop trades that were losing $10 million per minute. “Even just a 
minute or two would have been surprising to me. On these time scales, that is an 
eternity,” said David Lauer, a one-time trader at a high-speed firm. “To have 
something going on for 30 minutes is shocking.”15 The losses threatened the 
stability of the firm, and Knight Capital acknowledged that its capital base, the 
money it used to conduct its business, had been “severely impacted” by the 
event and that it was “actively pursuing its strategic and financing 
alternatives.”14

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
Meanwhile, the regulators—soon to be followed by the litigators—were joining 
the bloggers in outrage. “Existing rules make it clear that when broker-dealers 
with access to our markets use computers to trade, trade fast, or trade 
frequently, they must check those systems to ensure they are operating 
properly,” SEC Chairman Mary Schapiro said two days after the event. “And, 
naturally, we will consider whether such compliance measures were followed in 
this case.”16 
Five days after the business process failure at Knight, and with adverse 
publicity mushrooming, Wall Street bailed out one of its own. A group of 
investors led by Jefferies, the investment bank that structured the deal; 
Blackstone; Getco; Stephens; Stifel Financial; and TD Ameritrade acquired 
control and about 70% of Knight for around $1.50 a share.17 
Operational failures from computer system malfunctions are risks that 
companies like Knight Capital Group routinely disclose in their annual reports.
Capacity constraints, systems failures and delays may occur in the future and 
could cause, among other things, unanticipated problems with our trading or 
operating systems…decreased levels of client service and client satisfaction, 
and harm to our reputation. If any of these events were to occur, we could 
suffer substantial financial losses, a loss of clients…litigation or other client 
claims, and regulatory sanctions or additional regulatory burdens.18
It is not clear what, if any, systems Knight Capital had in place to mitigate those 
risks. Nor is it clear that the company contemplated a precipitous failure. But 
the data show that controls that mitigate reputational risks arising from 
operational values do more than protect against losses. When companies make 
operational improvements in reputational risk management in a way that can be 
appreciated and valued by equity investors, value is added.
Constituent members of the S&P 500 index were scanned in the winter of each 
year for firms that appeared to have latent reputation value as suggested by their 
Steel City Re Corporate Reputation Rankings. The algorithm underpinning the 
RepuStars Variety Corporate Reputation Index, calculated by Dow Jones 
indexes, was used to accomplish this. Portfolios of up to 57 companies were 
l
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
10
structured each year and the one-year returns were compared with the baseline 
S&P 500 index returns (Figure 7-3). On average, those companies filtered for 
latent reputation value outperformed the broader market by 6.5% annually over 
the 10-year study period. 19
Figure 7-3. Re-based one-year returns on equity among S&P 500 index constituent members 
identified by the RepuStars Variety algorithm (RepuSPX) as having as-yet unrealized reputation 
value. The average value is 6.5%. The baseline levels of return are the S&P 500 index. Source: 
Mission: Intangible blog of the Intangible Asset Finance Society. Reproduced with permission.20
Consider This
From the perspective of equity investors: 

Reputation, a cognitive expectation of behavior held by 
stakeholders, should not be conflated with brand, an 
emotional construct.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11

Superior reputations can mitigate the reputational 
consequences of adverse events.

When a corporation operates in an industry sector held in 
low esteem, it is even more vulnerable to a reputational 
stumble.

Unexpected gains (or losses) in reputational value among 
major companies can be expected on average to add (or 
subtract) 6%–7% to (from) the market capitalization.
WPP plc
In May 2011, WPP plc, the world’s largest marketing services group, teamed up 
with both Aon, one of the world’s largest insurance brokers, and Zurich 
Financial Services, a leading insurer, to create a supersized reputation 
restoration insurance product: $100 million for advertising, lobbying, and public 
relations.21 WPP’s role in the product is to act as a kind of loss adjuster for the 
policy, advising on and directing spending for a crisis-hit company. In a vividly 
ironic twist, one year later, the CEO of WPP, Sir Martin Sorrell, was facing his 
own reputational crisis.
A proposed 56% pay boost for Sorrel on top of a prior year’s substantial turn 
toward global retrenchment was inconsistent with shareholders’ evolving 
expectations of meeting certain economic responsibilities. One evolving notion 
is that a CEO cannot lose a lot of money for shareholders and expect to be 
rewarded. WPP was not unaware of this expectation. Adding insult to injury, in 
January 2012, a consortium of the conglomerate’s communications companies 
announced at Davos that “major global brands have more work to close the gap 
between their performance in the marketplace and their citizenship.”22
As is almost always the case, a failure of a business process was at the bottom 
of the WPP reputational crisis. Board governance failed thrice. The first was not 
processing shareholder concerns effectively. A second was failing to understand 

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
12
that the politics of pay in the United Kingdom had changed. Last, according to 
The Telegraph, they were relying too heavily on compensation consultants.23
All of this may be true, but the simple answer is that the reputation of the firm 
had been deteriorating. “If you look at the long-term performance in general in 
the media industry, it has been dismal,” said Sanford C. Bernstein analyst 
Claudio Aspesi. When investors are disappointed with the performance of their 
companies, they look to the CEO. “So scrutiny over what management teams 
have done to justify their pay packages is entirely appropriate,” added Aspesi.23
The reputations of companies and CEOs are often conflated. Serial studies over 
10 years by Weber Shandwick’s Chief Reputation Strategist, Dr. Leslie Gaines-
Ross, suggest that executives believe that 50% of a company’s reputation is 
attributable to the CEO. In a May 2012 update, 66% of the general public said 
that their perceptions of top leadership also affected their opinions of company 
reputations from a great deal to a moderate degree. Only 7% said that there is 
no link between the two.24
On 13 June 2012, 60% of WPP investors voted against the remuneration 
packages of directors, including Sorrell. The nay vote came on the heels of a 
protest vote from 40% of investors in 2011. “We’re disappointed by the result 
of the vote,” Sorrell said in an e-mail. “But the shareowners have spoken.”25
Jeffrey Rosen, head of WPP’s remuneration committee, said: “If we take 
anything away from this, it is that we should have a more continuous program 
of dialogue with shareholders.” Twenty-two percent of shareholders thought the 
time for dialogue had passed and voted against Rosen’s reappointment. Two 
other directors had even higher votes against.25 Only 2% voted against Sorrell’s 
reappointment—it was his pay level that they rejected.
Given the linkage between CEO and the company reputation, scrutiny does not 
reveal a pretty picture of the reputations of CEOs. Gaines-Ross reported in 2009 
that in the wake of the global financial meltdown of 2008, only 14% of 
American executives held a positive view of chief executives,26 and among the 
general public, probably an even lower percentage. Added Gaines-Ross: 
“Companies and leaders fall, often trip a second time as they institute 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
change but, on the third try, you definitely lose investor and customer patience. 
After a third attempt or three sequential mishaps, your reputation gets a scarlet 
R.”27
The investor rebellion at WPP was one of the biggest since 2009, when 90% of 
Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc shareholders turned down the pension plan 
for the lender’s former chief, Fred Goodwin. Goodwin, who had built the Royal 
Bank of Scotland into one of the world’s largest banks, also led the bank to ruin 
within four years, posting the biggest loss in U.K. corporate history—£24 
billion ($38 billion). The British government had to spend £45 billion ($71 
billion) bailing out and nationalizing RBS for an 82% stake. 
Leading the bank to near-collapse and then walking away with a fat pension so 
infuriated the British public that Goodwin was stripped of his knighthood in 
January 2012. Having “brought the honors system into disrepute,” in the words 
of the Huffington Post, “he found himself in the company of British spy 
Anthony Blunt, Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, and Romanian dictator 
Nicolae Ceausescu.”28
Say-on-Pay and Other Vocalizations
Evolving legislation in the United States and United Kingdom has given 
shareholders a greater voice in corporate governance, but like many politically 
initiated shifts in power, the instigators are voters. Shareholders who have 
regularly rubber-stamped management-inspired proposals on governance and 
pay are increasingly becoming voters and taking issue with executive pay 
programs.
Sir Francis Bacon, a liberal-minded reformer of his day, famously wrote that 
knowledge is power.29 Because of social media, shareholder/voters today are 
more aware than ever, and they are exercising their newly found powers to 
some effect. Even at historically docile Japanese companies, shareholder 
meetings the summer of 2012 were marked by a flurry of proposals from 
investors challenging management by opposing board appointments, for 
example, or simply expressing anger at executives.30

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
14
WPP’s dissenting shareholders had ample company. In 2012, more than 30% of 
investors in “the Pru,” the UK’s largest insurer, opted to vote against the 
company’s pay plan. Sixteen percent of shareholders voted against the CEO pay 
package at Aberdeen Asset Management. At Aviva, chief executive Andrew 
Moss resigned from the company after shareholders rejected the insurance 
group’s pay policies. Nearly 50% of shareholders of William Hill, the United 
Kingdom’s biggest bookmaker, voted against the firm’s remuneration report. 
Shareholders at Trinity Mirror, the newspaper company, prompted the 
resignation of CEO Sly Bailey after a quarter of the firm’s shareholders 
pressured the board to reduce her pay.
Angry over domestic energy prices, nearly 12% of shareholders voted against 
remuneration packages at Centrica, the owner of British Gas. Cookson, the U.K. 
materials technology company, took a beating at the annual general meeting 
after 32% of its shareholders voted against the re-election of the entire board 
following its decision to award £20 million ($32 million) in shares to directors. 
According to the Daily Telegraph, dissenters included Lord Myners, the Labour 
peer and chairman of Cevian, a 14% investor in the firm. Nearly 32% of votes 
cast at the annual general meeting opposed the directors’ remuneration report. 
Financial institutions are favored targets of shareholder rage. After dismal 
returns, around 15% of shareholders rejected the remuneration report of Man 
Group, the U.K. hedge fund firm, piling more pressure on chief executive Peter 
Clarke to resign. At Barclays, even before the LIBOR (London Interbank 
Offered Rate) scandal became public, anger at Bob Diamond's pay package 
spilled out into open mutiny at the bank’s annual general meeting when 27% of 
investors voted against it. UBS was hit with a 36.84% rejection of its 
compensation report and Credit Suisse with a 31.6% rejection. Across the pond, 
in an almost unprecedented revolt, 55% of the Citibank’s shareholders rejected 
a $49 million pay package for its chief executive, Vikram Pandit.31 “The only 
surprise about this vote was that so many shareholders still voted in favor. 
Citigroup’s stock has declined more than 90 percent in the last five years, and 
the company has been a prime example of mismanagement in the years leading 
up to the financial crisis.”32

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
Rage and anger here are being driven by a perception that the bankers have 
skewed values. “The majority of people feel it’s just a culture of greed,” 
explained one executive coach.33 Or perhaps not sharing the benefits of that 
greed. Proxy advisory groups such as Institutional Shareholder Services and 
Glass Lewis have been credited with influencing many of the successful nay 
campaigns of 2012. But they have not been successful when a bank’s reputation 
among shareholders, economic returns, and executive pay has been generally 
aligned.
Shareholders in the United States who are not themselves activists actually have 
little in common with Occupy Wall Street protesters. Except in fairly 
extraordinary circumstances, it appears they don’t much care about how much 
people get paid, as long as earnings and share prices keep rising.34 The banks 
have deservedly received outsized attention because of persistent headline risk 
brought on by pockets of truly bad behavior in the financial sector, but 
compensation has otherwise not been a major battleground.
Correlating Respect and Pay
Using the Barron’s Respect data introduced earlier as a proxy for a firm’s 
reputation among its shareholding professional investors, the data show that 
greater respect goes hand in hand with greater CEO salary in the financial 
sector. Barron’s Respect scores explained 27% of the variance in salary levels 
among CEO’s of the world’s largest financial institutions, and each additional 
full notch of additional Barron’s Respect translated to an additional $800,000 in 
salary (Figure 7-4).
Three companies stood apart from the model. Berkshire Hathaway had the 
second highest mean Barron’s Respect score among the largest financial 
institutions, just behind Visa. Visa’s CEO’s nominal salary was $4.23 million 
and was low relative to the respect earned from investors. Berkshire’s CEO, one 
of the five wealthiest men in the world, took home only $490,000 in salary, an 
exceptionally low salary nominal salary that is heavily supplemented with 
contingent compensation. At the other end of the spectrum, Citigroup had the 
second lowest mean Barron’s Respect score, just above AIG. While AIG’s 

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
16
CEO’s salary was $3.02 million, and his compensation package was approved 
by 99.19% of the votes cast, Citigroup’s CEO’s nominal salary was 
significantly above the trend line at $7.02 million; his compensation package 
was approved by only 45% of the votes cast.
Figure 7-4. Correlation between CEO base pay level ($ millions) and Barron’s Respect score. In 
financial services, being respected by investors translates into better pay, and when within reason, 
into harmonious annual general meetings. Source: Salary data drawn from most recent annual 
reports as published by Yahoo Finance. Available at: http://finance.yahoo.com/. 
Again using the Barron’s Respect data as a proxy for a firm’s reputation, the 
data show that greater respect does not explain CEO salary in the Consumer 
Non-Durables sector (Figure 7-5). Exemplary companies are Altria Group, 
Procter & Gamble, PepsiCo, Diageo, L’Oreal, SAB Miller, LVMH Moët 
Hennessy, Kraft Foods, and Coca-Cola. Barron’s Respect scores explained 
none of the variance in salary levels among CEOs of the world’s largest food, 
beverage, and related products companies.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
Figure 7-5. Correlation between CEO base pay level ($ millions) and Barron’s Respect score. In 
the consumer non-durables section, being respected by investors does not translate into better pay. 
Source: Salary data drawn from most recent annual reports as published by Yahoo Finance. 
Available at: http://finance.yahoo.com/. 
 It is the goal of this volume to present the data rather than speculate on the lack 
of any correlation. However, this is not to say that investors are completely 
indifferent to the pay of executives at non-financial companies. Shareholders 
have disapproved executive compensation systems at some U.S. companies 
such as Big Lots (31% approval), Cooper Industries (30%), Simon Property 
Group (27%), Pitney Bowes (35%), and Chiquita Brands (20%). Outsized pay 
for performance is the dominating issue. According to Towers Watson, the 
compensation consultancy, companies whose shareholder returns were 
consistently in the bottom quartile over five years were about nine times more 
likely to fail their say-on-pay votes than neutral performers. 35
Companies that outperform can pretty much do what they want, even when the 
CEO is barely known. Benefitting from Apple’s stellar reputation, CEO Tim 
Cook’s $378 million 10-year package was approved with 83% of the votes cast. 
“If a company is doing well,” said Doug Friske, a Towers Watson’s consultant, 
j

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
18
“shareholders have no problem with pay that recognizes that.”35 But not always. 
Proxy advisor ISS recommended against the compensation package at the Walt 
Disney Company, a firm with a good reputation among all stakeholders. The 
company protested that it “had (reported a) record financial performance in 
Fiscal Year 2011…(with) total shareholder return more than four times greater 
than that of the S&P 500 during Mr. Iger’s more than six years of leadership.” 
But with Disney, a company widely respected, the issue for the powerful proxy 
advisor wasn’t pay or performance—it was governance. ISS recommended 
against voting for the members of Disney’s Governance and Nominating 
Committee as a result of appointing its CEO as Chairman of the Board as part 
of a reasoned CEO succession strategy. ISS is generally opposed to CEOs 
serving jointly as their own boss as chairpersons. ISS has also recommended 
against Disney’s position on say-on-pay.36 The package squeezed by with 57% 
of the votes cast.
ISS had recommended a vote against pay packages at 14% of the companies it 
assessed in 2012, up from 12% last year. Shareholder support was 30% lower at 
companies with a negative say-on-pay assessment from ISS.37
“Even if we haven’t seen widespread shareholder revolt,” Friske said, “there’s 
definitely been a change in boardroom attitudes. Maybe it’s not a shareholder 
spring, but perhaps we can call it a shareholder thaw.”35
Nevertheless, executive compensation systems put to a say-on-pay vote 
continue to be approved by shareholders of most companies, often by large 
majorities. Semler Brossy, a compensation advisor, reported in June 2012 that 
at midyear say-on-pay votes in the Russell 3000 found only 40 of 1,594 
corporations, or 2.5%, had failed. Ninety percent of the large companies won at 
least 70% approval from shareholders in such votes, according to another 
consultancy, Davis Polk.37 Though the press talked up a “shareholder spring,” 
the failure rate of approximately 2% for the first half of 2012 was comparable to 
the rates for 2011.38

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19
Then there is litigation. Shareholders who express their feelings through their 
proxies and are ignored by their companies can sell their equity, of course, but 
they have recourse to that more explicit communication channel as well.
When, over shareholder protests, the board at Cincinnati Bell Inc. bumped up 
the compensation of the top executives by up to 80% despite a 68% drop in 
2010 net earnings, they were sued, becoming the first company to garner a “no” 
vote for executive compensation under Dodd-Frank—a distinction of sorts.39 
The lawsuit was brought by Illinois-based NECA-IBEW Pension Fund, a Bell 
shareholder, and accused Cincinnati Bell Inc.’s outside directors of breaching 
their duty to investors and the company’s top executives of “unjust enrichment” 
over pay raises. The suit sought return or impoundment of the pay increases and 
implementation of internal controls preventing excessive compensation to the 
company’s top executives.
“Companies may not have to abide by shareholder advisory say-on-pay votes 
mandated under the Dodd-Frank Act,” the Wall Street Journal noted in June 
2011, “but lawyers specialized in securities class action suits have already 
brought a half dozen suits against directors and executives for ignoring their 
results.”40 A number of firms have tried to settle the claims quickly. Among 
those that have settled are KeyCorp and Occidental Petroleum. Others that have 
faced suits were Beazer Homes, Hercules Offshore, and Umpqua Holdings, and 
law firms had pending investigations at Dex One, Masco Corp., and Stanley 
Black & Decker, among others. “In addition to legal fees,” the Journal stated, 
“the suits could impact companies more widely in areas like the cost of director 
and officers’ liability insurance, and how much compensation consultants 
charge.”
Guidance
Many Facebook investors, enthralled with the company and its brand, took the 
plunge and bought high, only to sell low. Professional investors with less 
emotional engagement, and wary of the market’s reputation for disappointing 
investors caught up in the new, new thing, were more prudent. Innovation may 
make for good companies; it may not necessarily make for good investments.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
20
Investors in Johnson & Johnson in the late 1980s invested in a good company. 
The company’s culture had been tested by fire in 1983. Its security systems 
were tested in 1986 and proven to be better than anyone had imagined. 
Shareholders found a company in which risks previously felt to be inherent in 
the sector had been eliminated through superior processes. Appreciation of that 
reduction in risk helped shareholders better value the firm and discover an 
additional 30% in enterprise value.
Paul Liebman, a compliance attorney who notably has worked for both the 
largest public and private companies in the United States, ExxonMobil 
Corporation and Koch Industries, recounted a story of Charles Koch’s 
investment philosophy. “Koch,” he said, “only wanted to own businesses that 
operated legally, ethically, safely, and profitably.” Liebman, who was at the 
time Chief Compliance Counsel at Dell, a technology company, added, “If 
anyone of those four were missing, then he didn’t want to be involved.”41 Most 
equity investors, at the end of the day, are similarly inclined.
Despite their enhanced influence with management and board composition, 
investors’ message to management remains stable: create value and 
shareholders will reward management. Lose value and shareholders will support 
management as long as management’s reputation for eventually rewarding 
shareholders remains intact. 
Frederick D. Lipman, head of the Association of Audit Committee Members, 
Inc., points out that Warren Buffet takes the contrarian position that stock price 
is not really controlled by the executives of his companies, so he sees no reason 
to either reward or punish them for its volatility.42 
The investors’ message also comes with a warning. Lose value, signal disregard 
for shareholders, and cause shareholders to expect little from management, and 
they will fight on pay or seek the removal of management and/or the board. For 
lost reputation, even Buffet will be ruthless.43

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
21
Consider This

Because the reputations of CEOs and the companies they 
lead are often conflated, investor behaviors toward one are 
shaped by the other.

Empowered by recent legislation, shareholders are using 
conversations on CEO pay as one behavior to express their 
beliefs. 

When either a company or a CEO has a good reputation, 
shareholders will support most strategies.
By the Numbers
These discussions illustrate how reputation can affect shareholder behavior, and 
how those behaviors affect the executive team’s freedom to operate, set 
compensation, and execute their business strategies (Table 7-1).
Table 7-1. Effect of Reputation on Investor-Associated Behaviors
Operations Effect
Stock Price Effect
Facebook Inc.
Irrational exuberance conflating brand 
with reputation
50% loss on equity
500% gain on equity 
derivatives
Johnson & Johnson
Market share growth from unexpected 
reputational boost even in the face of 
an adverse event
30% boost in projected market 
cap
S&P500
Unexpected reputational boost
Average annual market cap 
boost of 6.5% over 10-year 
study period 
Financial institutions
Correlation of investor respect metric 
with CEO salary: $800,000 per full 
notch up
N/A

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
22
All companies
Consistent bottom quartile ROE are 
nine times more likely to fail “say-on-
pay”
N/A
1 Rushton K. Rupert Murdoch faces shareholder revolt at News Corporation AGM. The 
Telegraph. 18 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/media/9410035/
Rupert-Murdoch-faces-shareholder-revolt-at-News-Corporation-AGM.html. Accessed 6 August 
2012.
2 Myles D. Stronger say-on-pay means shareholder spring to stay. IFLR. 26 July 2012. Available 
at: http://www.iflr.com/Article/3066760/Corporate/Stronger-say-on-pay-means-Shareholder-
Spring-to-stay.html. Accessed 4 August 2012.
3 Facebook IPO demand above expectations. 24/7 Wall Street. 11 May 2012. Available at: 
http://247wallst.com/2012/05/11/facebook-ipo-demand-above-expectations/. Accessed 7 August 
2012.
4 Oreskovic A. Historic Facebook debut falls short of expectations. Reuters. 18 May 2012. 
Available at: http://news.yahoo.com/facebook-prices-top-range-landmark-ipo-005337198--
sector.html. Accessed 7 August 2012.
5 http://finance.yahoo.com/q/hp?s=FB+Historical+Prices
6 Weiner J. Who’s to blame for the Facebook I.P.O. disaster? Blame must be assigned! Vanity 
Fair. 23 May 2012. Available at: http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2012/05/Whos-to-
Blame-for-the-Facebook-IPO-Disaster-Blame-Must-Be-Assigned. Accessed 7 August 2012.
7 Marsh A. Facebook bears garner 500% profit from structured product bets. Bloomberg. 6 
August 2012. Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-08-06/facebook-bears-garner-
500-profit-from-structured-product-bets.html. Accessed 7 August 2012.
8 Demos T. Gorman calls Facebook investors ‘naive.’ Financial Times. 31 May 2012. Available 
at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/d84a2ab0-ab64-11e1-b675-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz22rXUquye. Accessed 7 August 2012.
9 Demos T. Retail demand for Facebook risks inflating IPO. Financial Times. 16 May 2012. 
Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/1f8d58f0-9ed8-11e1-a767-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz22rXUquye. Accessed 7 August 2012.
10 Darila M, Santa M. Retail brokers stop accepting orders on Facebook shares. World Business 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
23
Press. 17 May 2012. Available at: http://wbponline.com/Articles/View/5026. Accessed 7 August 
2012.
11 Lex. Psychic income. Financial Times. 20 August 2010.  
12 Bradshaw T, Dembosky A. Facebook’s premium ad prices still rising. Financial Times. 6 May 
2012. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/77a89c04-9774-11e1-83f3-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz22rXUquye. Accessed 7 August 2012.
13 Waters R. Facebook gives the bulls pause for thought. Financial Times. 24 April 2012. 
Available at: http://blogs.ft.com/tech-blog/2012/04/facebook-gives-the-bulls-pause-for-
thought/#axzz22sWPhcYk. Accessed 7 August 2012.
14 Popper N. Knight Capital says trading glitch cost it $440 million. The New York Times. 2 
August 2012. Available at: http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/08/02/knight-capital-says-trading-
mishap-cost-it-440-million/. Accessed 7 August 2012.
15 Silver-Greenberg J, Popper N, de la Merced MJ. Trading program ran amok, with no ‘off’ 
switch. The New York Times. 3 August 2012. Available at: 
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/08/03/trading-program-ran-amok-with-no-off-switch/. 
Accessed 7 August 2012.
16 Chairman Schapiro statement on Knight Capital Group trading issue. Press Release. US 
Securities and Exchange Commission, 3 August 2012. Available at: 
http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2012/2012-151.htm. Accessed 4 October 2012.
17 Mackenzie M, Alloway T. Outside investors take control of Knight. Financial Times. 6 August 
2012. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/616e6ea6-dff8-11e1-a96a-
00144feab49a.html#axzz22rXUquye. Accessed 7 August 2012.
18 Knight Capital Group Annual Report, 2011, pp. 19–20.
19 Greenberg MD. On breaking the log jam: the how and why of corporate reputation leadership. 
Corporate Finance Review. 2012; 17(1):11–17.
20 Huygens, C. Reputational value symmetry. Mission: Intangible, 4 February 2012. Available at: 
http://www.iafinance.org/_blog/MISSION_INTANGIBLE/post/Reputational_Value_Symmetry/. 
Accessed 13 October 2012.
21 Davies PJ. Insurance for groups to restore reputations. Financial Times. 8 May 2011. Available 
at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/8a61e98a-79a3-11e0-86bd-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz22rXUquye. Accessed 8 August 2012.

Chapter 7 | Equity Investors
24
22 Global corporate reputation index finds major brands lag citizenship qualities. Press Release. 
WPP. 27 January 2012.
23 Reece D. Sir Martin Sorrell's pay in dock but it’s WPP board who should take the blame. The 
Telegraph. 13 June 2012. Available at: 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/comment/damianreece/9330589/Sir-Martin-Sorrells-pay-in-
dock-but-its-WPP-board-who-should-take-the-blame.html. Accessed 8 August 2012.
24 Gaines-Ross L. CEO reputation still going strong. CEO.com. 3 May 2012. Available at: 
www.ceo.com/flink/?lnk=http%3A%2F%2Freputationxchange.com%2F2012%2F05%2F03%2Fc
eo-reputation-still-going-strong%2F. Accessed 8 August 2012.
25 WPP investors vote against pay package of CEO Martin Sorrell. Bloomberg. 13 June 2012. 
Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-06-13/wpp-investors-vote-against-pay-
package-of-chief-martin-sorrell.html\. Accessed 8 August 2012.
26 Gaines-Ross L. Resetting CEO reputation. Huffington Post. 11 November 2009. Available at: 
www.huffingtonpost.com/dr-leslie-gainesross/resetting-ceo-reputation_b_354147.html. Accessed 
8 August 2012.
27 Gaines-Ross L. Timing is everything in reputation. reputationXchange. 8 August 2012. 
Available at: reputationxchange.com. Accessed 8 August 2012.
28 Lawless J. Ex-RBS CEO Fred Goodwin stripped of knighthood. Huffington Post. 31 January 
2012. Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/huff-wires/20120131/eu-britain-rbs/. 
Accessed 8 August 2012.
29 Knowledge is power. Sir Francis Bacon, Religious Meditations, Of Heresies, 1597. Cited in 
The Quotations Page. Available at: http://www.quotationspage.com/quote/2060.html. Accessed 
10 August 2012.
30 Tabuchi H. Japanese shareholders starting to show their teeth. The New York Times.27 June 
2012. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/28/business/global/japanese-shareholders-
starting-to-show-their-teeth.html?pagewanted=all. Accessed 10 August 2012.
31 The shareholder spring: investor revolts in 2012. Financial News. 8 August 2012. Available at: 
http://www.efinancialnews.com/gallery/in-pictures-shareholder-revolts/3. Accessed 8 August 
2012.
32 Davidoff SM. Furor over executive pay is not the revolt it appears to be. New York Times. 1 
May 2012. Available at: http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/05/01/furor-over-executive-pay-is-
not-the-revolt-it-appears-to-be/. Accessed 3 September 2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
25
33 Schuffham M, Bart K. Credit Suisse and Barclays investors revolt over pay. Reuters. 27 April 
2012. Available at: http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/04/27/us-barclays-creditsuisse-agm-
idUSBRE83Q0VP20120427. Accessed 10 August 2012.
34 Gongloff M. Bank shareholders' executive pay revolt no match for big returns. Huffington Post. 
7 May 2012. Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/05/07/say-on-banker-
pay_n_1496133.html. Accessed 10 August 2012.
35 Brady D. Say on pay: boards listen when shareholders speak. Bloomberg Businessweek. 7 June 
2012. Available at: http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-06-07/say-on-pay-boards-listen-
when-shareholders-speak. Accessed 10 August 2012.
36 Quinlivan S. Disney at odds with ISS again: Making sense of Dodd-Frank. 1 March 2012. 
Available at: http://dodd-frank.com/disney-at-odds-with-iss-again/. Accessed 10 August 2012.
37 Frankel A. Shareholder spring? Not so much, new study says. Reuters. 8 June 2012. Available 
at: http://blogs.reuters.com/alison-frankel/2012/06/08/shareholder-spring-not-so-much-new-
study-says/. Accessed 10 August 2012.
38 Sandler RJ. Mid-season update on the 2012 proxy season. Harvard Law School Forum on 
Corporate Governance and Financial Regulation. 7 June 2012. Available at: 
http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/corpgov/2012/06/07/mid-season-update-on-the-2012-proxy-season/. 
Accessed 10 August 2012.
39 Cincinnati Bell settles 'say on pay' shareholder suit. Business Courier. 21 December 2011. 
Available at: http://www.bizjournals.com/cincinnati/news/2011/12/21/cincinnati-bell-settles-say-
on-pay.html. Accessed 10 August 2012.
40 Chasan E. Say-on-pay turns into sue-on-pay. Wall Street Journal. 30 June 2011. Available at: 
http://blogs.wsj.com/cfo/2011/06/30/say-on-pay-turns-into-sue-on-pay/. Accessed 10 August 
2012.
41 Liebman P. How reputation drives principled performance. Mission Intangible Monthly 
Briefing, 1 April 2011. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society. 
Available at: http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
42 Lipman FD. Intangible incentives: compensation and corporate performance. Mission 
Intangible Monthly Briefing. 13 January 2012. Audio recordings available from the Intangible 
Asset Finance Society, http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
43 Russell D. Be ruthless with reputation. PR Week. 3 November 2011. Available at: 
http://www.prweek.com/uk/league_tables/1100806/dean-russell-fleishman-hillard-ruthless-
reputation/. Accessed 3 July 2012.

C H A P T E R
8
Boards of 
Directors
This has now turned into a reputation matter, a financial squeeze for BP, and 
a political matter, and that is why you will now see more of me. As this is 
now turning to a different type of crisis, that is where I come in.
—Carl-Henric Svanberg, Chairman BP1
Elected by shareholders, the board of directors in a stock corporation is the 
highest management authority. Its most critical duties are to select and 
compensate senior management, protect the assets of the corporation, and 
approve strategy—the company’s approach to marshaling and deploying 
resources to meet corporate objectives. Each of these duties leads to corporate 
actions that establish a company’s reputation among its various stakeholders. 
Governance is the umbrella term for process that boards use to execute their 
duties. Culture, an expression of corporate values, gives tone to 
governance—often called the tone at the top—and is ultimately reflected in 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
2
reputation.2 Bob Diamond, Barclays’ former chief executive, directly referred to 
“culture” 50 times as he testified for three hours before a House of Commons 
committee about the U.K. bank’s role in the industry-wide rigging of 
benchmark interest rates.
Writing tongue-in-cheek for the Financial Times, Andrew Hill observed:
There is a lot of it about. Culture was the “secret sauce” at Goldman Sachs, 
of which there is now “virtually no trace”, according to Greg Smith, a 
disgruntled former employee of the US investment bank. The “ingrained 
conventions of Japanese culture” were behind the crisis at the tsunami-hit 
Fukushima nuclear plant, says the man chairing the probe into the disaster. 
British pharmaceutical group GlaxoSmithKline has made “a culture of 
putting patients first” a priority, having clamped down on aggressive selling 
and marketing of blockbuster drugs that this month resulted in a $3 billion 
settlement with the US government.3
Today, governance needs to demand a culture sensitive to corporate reputation. 
As shown earlier, the ability of a company to bring products and services to 
market and generate greater revenues and lower costs is directly linked to a 
company’s reputation. “An executive team’s understanding of this aspect of 
business is central to their stewardship of the company’s assets,” observed Aron 
Cramer, President and CEO of BSR, a corporate social responsibility 
consultancy.4 
Ultimately, the board is where the buck stops with regard to corporate culture. 
Eternal vigilance must be a watchword, since even the top performers can fall 
from grace. In fact, they are often the most at risk, since their behaviors tend to 
become unconscious and automatic and may reduce the ability of the 
organization to adapt to changes in the business environment. 
Oversight is a board-level responsibility, but it is undeniably a managerial 
process. This chapter shows how sensitivity to what’s at stake in reputation risk 
can inform board-level actions. To both remain informed and enable 
stakeholders to appreciate and value their efforts, boards will find the tools 
introduced in this chapter particularly helpful as they select and compensate 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
senior management, protect the assets of the corporation, and approve strategy 
in the context of corporate reputation.
Say-on-Pay: Compensation Committee
Heading the list of the top 10 compensation committee agenda items for 2012 
published by Pearl Meyer & Partners, the executive compensation firm, is the 
charge to “understand your company’s pay-for-performance linkage.”5 “The 
starting point is to really understand company strategy and the key metrics that 
drive it,” advises Simon Patterson, Managing Director.6 “Use industry-relevant 
performance metrics that support the short- and long-term business objectives 
of the company and creation of shareholder value,” adds John L. Anderson, lead 
senior executive compensation consultant at Meridian Compensation Partners.6 
Ann Murray, partner at McKenna Long & Aldridge LLP, a law firm, warns that 
boards need to act defensively and anticipate shareholder reaction. “Failed” say-
on-pay votes triggered derivative litigation against directors in about 20% of the 
cases in 2011.7
The case studies that follow show how sensitivity to reputation evolved to 
become a central pillar of corporate strategy; it represents 11% of the CEO’s 
bonus compensation at UBS and is factored into compensation at both JP 
Morgan 
Chase 
and 
Goldman 
Sachs. 
Metrics 
that 
report 
on 
reputation—especially reputational value metrics—have a clear role in 
supporting the board’s execution of its duties of compensating key executives 
and driving shareholder value. 
There are also compelling personal reasons. “Personal reputation risk, being 
sued, being challenged by regulators, being challenged by shareholders” are just 
a few of the risks faced by compensation committee members, said Dennis 
Whalen, executive director of KPMG’s audit committee institute.8 Reputational 
value metrics can help boards explain their compensation packages to 
stakeholders, and they can help protect the directors’ personal reputations and 
wealth.

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
4
UBS
Formed in 1998 from the merger of two Swiss giants, SBC and Union Bank of 
Switzerland, UBS in 2012 celebrated 150 years of banking services. It is today a 
world-class wealth manager, the biggest universal bank in Switzerland, and the 
second largest institutional asset manager globally. 
2011 was a challenging year for the industry as a whole. Markets had ongoing 
concerns surrounding eurozone sovereign debt, the European banking system, 
the U.S. federal budget deficit, and economic growth issues—all of which 
affected client confidence. Activity levels were subdued as investors sought out 
safe-haven investments and remained on the sidelines of markets for most of the 
second half of the year.9 
At UBS, although profits were depressed, they were present until a surprise $2.3 
billion loss was acknowledged in September 2011. That’s when UBS revealed 
that a rogue trader had lost a quantity of money so large that it potentially wiped 
out profits for the entire quarter.10 The trader, Kweku M. Adoboli, made 
speculative bets with the company’s own money on various benchmarks. 
“Concealed” through “fictitious trades,” those positions violated the firm’s risk 
limits. The firm was surprised once more by a loss it had not anticipated, and 
throughout the financial community, there was an exasperated cry, as Douglas 
Adams, the science fiction humorist, might have written, “Oh no, not again.”
In 1998, UBS had an inauspicious start as Europe’s biggest bank, losing in the 
year of its formation CHF750 million ($520 million) and heading the league 
table for the largest single loser in the collapse of Long-Term Capital 
Management, the infamous U.S. hedge fund.11 Among the casualties was 
Chairman Mathis Cabiallavetta, who, after a tenure of only 4 months, “fell on 
his sword” and resigned.12 
The 21st century brought more drama. While the go-go years of the early aughts 
were good for USB, it was UBS’s announcement disclosing that it was the first 
Wall Street firm to suffer heavy losses that marked the end of that period of 
irrational exuberance and the beginning of the 2007 subprime mortgage crisis. 
By December, UBS reported writedowns for the year of CHF21.6 billion ($18 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
billion).13 UBS turned to the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation 
(GIC) and an unnamed investor from the Middle East for SFr19.4 billion ($17.2 
billion) to shore up its balance sheet.14 By March 2008, the writedown had 
grown to $37 billion, the biggest single-year loss of any company in Swiss 
history, and Chairman Marcel Ospel reluctantly stepped down.15 
Before a full year had passed, UBS was expensing $780 million more in 
disgorgement of profits, interest, penalties, and restitution of unpaid taxes to the 
U.S. government.16 The payments were part of a deferred prosecution 
agreement on charges of conspiring to defraud the United States by impeding 
the Internal Revenue Service and for failing to register with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) as a broker/dealer and investment adviser for 
U.S. citizens. The UBS case became a centerpiece in a U.S. crackdown on 
offshore tax evasion.17 With less than 1 year on the job, Chairman Peter Kurer 
agreed to step down.18
On 26 February 2009, UBS lured Oscar Grubel, a Board member at Winterthur 
Group, out of retirement to take over as CEO. Having spent his entire career in 
the banking sector, he understood the ramifications of the reputational crisis at 
UBS. Speaking to the company’s 65,000 staff 30 months later, “From my first 
day on the job, I placed the reputation of the bank above all else.”19 A few 
months later, at the 2009 Annual General Meeting of UBS, Kaspar Villiger was 
elected to the Board of Directors and was soon after appointed Chairman of the 
Board. He served as Finance Minister and Head of the Swiss Federal 
Department of Finance for 8 years, until he stepped down at the end of 2003. 
After leaving government, he was elected to the boards of Nestlé, Swiss Re, and 
the Neue Zürcher Zeitung, from which he resigned in 2009 when he took on the 
UBS chairmanship.20 Gruber and Villiger embarked on a major effort to 
transform UBS’s culture into one that recognized and mitigated reputational 
risk.
At the same time, leaders of the G20 were holding their second summit for the 
year in Pittsburgh, where they endorsed the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) 
Principles for Sound Compensation Practices and their Implementation 
Standards.21 The FSB, established in London after the 2008 global banking 
crisis and successor to the Financial Stability Forum formed after the 1998 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
6
global banking crisis, includes members of most key groups of finance 
ministries, central bankers, and international financial bodies. 
FSB concluded that the banking behaviors triggering the two major crises were 
promoted by incentives that centralized reward but socialized risk. Convinced 
that a short-term bonus culture had triggered excessive risk taking before the 
financial crisis, they have pushed banks to align their payment structures better 
with risks and institutional performance.22 The FSB proposed that compensation 
structures be adjusted to account for all types of risk, “including difficult to 
measure risks such as liquidity risk and reputation risk.”21 Another suggestion, 
being implemented in the United States, is to link banks’ pay plans to payments 
made into governments’ deposit insurance schemes.23
Grubel and Villiger recognized they had to strengthen UBS’s risk culture. They 
used the FSB standards for making the cultural changes stick by linking 
reputation risk to compensation. The language and emphasis on reputational 
factors in the company’s annual reports reflects these changes. One indicator is 
that the number of citations of the word reputation doubled to 42 mentions 
between the 2008 and 2009 annual reports (Figure 8-1).

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
Figure 8-1. Number of mentions of the word reputation in UBS annual reports, 2008–2011.
More substantive are the changes in the language of the risk disclosures, risk 
management principles, and compensation-linked incentives. With each passing 
year after the crisis of 2007–2008, the prominence of reputation risk grew as the 
drivers of the risk became better defined. At the same time, reputation risk 
increasingly became a driver for the compensation of most senior executives. 
The clearest insight into board values and thinking is the corporate annual 
report. The following table details the subtle but definite shift in language over 
recent years toward a reputational focus (Table 8-1).
Table 8-1a. Evolving Prominence of Reputation as a Disclosed Strategic Risk Factor in UBS’s 
Annual Reports 
Order in List 
of Risk 
Factors
Nature of Risk
2008
Last of 11
“UBS’s reputation is critical in maintaining its relationships 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
8
with clients, investors, regulators and the general public.”
2011
Second of 17
“Damage to our reputation can have fundamental negative 
effects on our business and prospects. Our reputation is 
critical to the success of our strategic plans. We recognize(d) 
that restoring our reputation …(is) essential to maintaining 
our relationships with clients, investors, regulators and the 
general public, as well as with our employees.”
Table 8-1b. Evolving Prominence of Reputation Protection in Discussions of Risk Management 
and Control Principles in the Company’s Annual Reports
“Five pillars/key principles support our efforts to achieve 
an appropriate balance between risk and return”
2008
“#5- Protection of UBS’s reputation depends, among other things, on the 
effective management and control of the risks incurred in the course of its 
business. All employees should make the protection of UBS’s reputation 
an overriding concern.”
2011
“#2-Reputation protection through a sound risk culture characterized by a 
holistic and integrated view of risk, performance and reward, and by full 
compliance with our standards and principles, particularly our Code of 
Business Conduct and Ethics.”
Table 8-1c. Evolving Prominence of Reputation in the Letter from the Chair of the Human 
Resources and Compensation Committee in the Company’s Annual Reports
Reputatio
n Factor
Highlights
2008
No
The final amount awarded to executives depends on their achievement of 
performance targets linked to long-term, risk-adjusted value creation. 
Three year claw-back structure for all cash bonus awards to “alter the 
UBS corporate culture.”
2011
Yes
“While a number of improvements were made to strengthen how we 
identify key risk-takers and measure their performance, no specific 
changes were made to the overall framework in 2011. It thus offers 
stability and continuity, as well as the necessary features.
Group Executive Board compensation factors:
Group and divisional performance information, including risk-adjusted 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
profitability and other financial and non-financial factors such as 
leadership effectiveness, strategy execution, and reputational impact.
Risk Committee’s involvement in compensation matters:
…to ensure that compensation plans are aligned with our business 
strategy, and that policies are designed to enhance risk awareness 
and…the possibility of reputational risk.”
Within 4 months of disclosing the September 2011 losses, Chairman Kaspar 
Villiger announced his decision to step down a year early, leaving UBS to face 
its fifth chairman in 14 years.24 His work, however, was not done. Over the next 
few months, he would take two more opportunities to impact UBS’s evolving 
culture of reputation risk awareness and management that would propel UBS 
ahead of the 2009 FSB standards. And he would do so with the new head of 
UBS’s Human Resources and Compensation Committee, Ann Godbehere.
A financial sector veteran, Godbehere had been on the board with Villiger since 
2009, and was known to him before then when she was CFO at Swiss Re. She 
had done significant repair work as interim chief financial officer and executive 
director of Northern Rock post-nationalization prior to joining the board at 
UBS. She has been a non-executive director of British American Tobacco plc 
since 2011, non-executive director of Atrium Underwriting Group Limited and 
Ariel Group Limited since 2007, non-executive director of Prudential plc since 
2007, and chairman of its audit committee since 2009.25
On 15 November 2011, UBS appointed a new CEO who affirmed the 
importance of reputation management. Chatting with the media on his first 
official day on the job, Sergio Ermotti, the former UniCredit Deputy Chief 
Executive Officer who just joined UBS in April, said, “No profit is worth more 
than our reputation as a bank.”26 With only 1 week before his end of tenure, on 
23 April 2012, UBS Chairman Kaspar Villiger pushed both the benefits and 
costs of reputation right to the top. “The idea behind this is that you try to 
evaluate the CEO according to what’s necessary for executing the company’s 
strategy in the long term. There are nine criteria in total, of which some shall be 
qualitative. Reputation is one of them. It will count more than one ninth.”27

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
10
The existing framework allows UBS “on one hand, to motivate our employees 
by rewarding strong performance, and on the other hand, to withdraw or reduce 
incentives where performance has been weak or where employees act against 
the interests of the firm…We will keep our framework under review to ensure 
that it continues to meet our key goal of aligning employee and shareholder 
interests,” Ann Godbehere said in the lender’s annual compensation report for 
2011.27 “The CEO is very much in agreement with this,” Villiger said. “I would 
find it important that this would be done by more people.” 
At Barclays Bank, the new chairman, David Walker, said in August 2012 that 
he was undertaking a top-to-bottom review of the embattled business, telling a 
British newspaper that he wasn’t wedded to any of his predecessor's policies.28 
Charged with rebuilding Barclays’ reputation in the wake of the LIBOR 
(London Interbank Offered Rate) scandal, Walker said finding a new chief 
executive was his number one priority, though a rewrite of the bank’s pay 
policy was also in the cards. Walker, who led a review of banking culture for 
the Labour government in the aftermath of the 2008 banking crisis, framed the 
governance priorities: “The board absolutely does not need a clearout, but it 
does need to be supplemented. Three significant roles have gone – the 
chairman, the chief executive, and the chairman of the remuneration 
committee.”29
Linking Compensation to Reputation
Linking CEO compensation to corporate reputation is a natural extension of the 
FSB recommendations. While it is not clear all CEOs are taking as kindly to it 
as UBS’s Ermotti, most are resigned to it. When questioned by Representative 
Barney Frank at a House hearing on the JP Morgan Chase losses of 2012, CEO 
Jamie Dimon said he did not know if he would be the subject of potential 
clawbacks by the board of directors that determines his compensation. “I can't 
tell my board what to do,” Dimon told Frank.30
Although the CEO’s compensation at JP Morgan Chase is not tied to reputation 
explicitly, reputation is a factor in the company’s compensation plan. It’s worth 
considering, since in the opinion of many, JP Morgan Chase is still having a 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
reputational crisis as this volume goes to press. The onslaught of regulators, 
litigators, and bloggers triggered by a $2 billion hedging loss in the spring of 
2012 suggests that something went wrong. 
Consider the conflicting interests of regulators, shareholders, management, 
corporate directors, and employees on the matter of incentive pay clawbacks. 
Similar to the UBS model and others conforming to the FSB recommendations, 
according to Bloomberg, JP Morgan Chase “can cancel stock awards or demand 
they be repaid if an employee ‘engages in conduct that causes material financial 
or reputational harm,’” JPMorgan said in its annual proxy statement. 
The same goes for Goldman Sachs. “Equity awards should be subject to vesting 
and other restrictions over an extended period of time. A clawback should also 
exist for cause, including any individual misconduct that results in legal or 
reputational harm.”31 JP Morgan Chase adds the teaser, “The company will 
claw back pay if it’s appropriate. . .”32
“Appropriate” is a squishy word. The market wants to know what formula will 
be used to convert the magnitude of the alleged damage into the magnitude of 
clawbacks, and when, after the alleged damage was precipitated, the magnitude 
of the damage will be assessed. Remember that millions of dollars of 
compensation and bonus pay are at risk. Bloomberg reported that “New York 
City Comptroller John Liu said that JP Morgan should tell shareholders it will 
‘aggressively claw back every single dollar possible from the executives 
responsible for the $2 billion loss.’” Employees subject to the clawback will 
probably have other opinions.
JP Morgan Chase’s corporate directors will find little comfort in subjective 
measures of reputation, caught as they are between regulators on one hand and 
litigators on the other—employees and investors tend to speak through 
litigators. This means that the company’s directors’ and officers’ insurance 
carriers are no doubt wishing that the directors would turn to objective measures 
and establish standards before they effect a clawback. More generally, every 
corporate board of directors that has identified reputation to be material to their 
company’s business should be seeking a solution to their need for objective 
reputation metrics, if only to preempt future issues.

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
12
Fund managers and financial advisers, given the prevalence of concern about 
reputation risk, would also like objective measures. Auditors would no doubt 
appreciate objective measures as well, not only in the context of controls, but 
also because reputation has now been identified as a driver of liquidity. Even 
communications professionals would likely find better ways to shape the stories 
surrounding JP Morgan Chase—and every other publicly traded client 
company—if they had objective measures of reputation.
Reputational value metrics today are essential managerial and oversight tools. 
They objectify what would otherwise be subjective decisions at risk for being 
second-guessed. Moreover, they apprise the market of the status of an asset 
increasingly felt to be a vital part of a company’s value.
Many different stakeholders today need quantitative reputational value metrics 
for a wide range of core business activities. Since companies have already 
disclosed the materiality of reputation risks, they have opened the door to 
reputational management. In our culture, we tend to manage that which we can 
measure. As the JP Morgan Chase clawback issue shows, the need to adopt 
quantitative measures of reputation is a time-sensitive matter for many 
stakeholders.
Consider This

Linking reputation and compensation at the highest levels 
of a corporation is at the top of today’s best practices for 
driving a reputation-focused risk culture throughout the 
organization.

Linking compensation and clawbacks to a company’s 
reputation requires reputational value metric systems to 
monitor, measure, and report reputation.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
Asset Protection
Accountants may struggle with the valuation of reputation, but most corporate 
directors have long accepted that it is a vital corporate asset. Leslie Gaines 
Ross, chief reputation strategist for Weber Shandwick, a public relations 
agency, explained to Forbes: “In certain industries, it's 90% trust and 
reputation, like in the financial services industry…It’s like health care 
companies, or pharmaceutical companies, airlines. If you don’t trust an airline, 
you’re not going to fly it.”33 In other words, in certain industries, a lost 
reputation is tantamount to a fatal enterprise-level wound. 
Unlike other corporate assets, however, reputation is damaged through the 
interplay of a failed business process, adverse publicity, and stakeholder 
expectations. Above and beyond implementing business process controls, 
protecting corporate reputation value may include waging an active battle with 
activists for the hearts and minds of stakeholders. 
In the Harvard Business Review article, “Reputation Warfare,” Gaines Ross 
wrote: “Companies trying to protect their good names are increasingly coming 
under assault from small-scale antagonists: dissatisfied customers, disgruntled 
employees—virtually anyone with a personal computer and an ax to grind.”34 It 
is a battle well known to the Walt Disney Company, whose “brand asset” is 
valued at $29 billion. 35
Modern communication strategies—empower your team, respond promptly, and 
embrace social media—are all fine and good, but as shown in the study below, 
asymmetric warfare demands additional strategies. They are, according to 
Gaines-Ross, stockpiling credentials for future use, avoiding disproportionate 
show-of-force, and finding sympathetic third parties to serve as “force 
multipliers.”
To stockpile credentials, companies need to establish an authentic reputation—a 
goal whose value has been demonstrated throughout this volume. To show 
force—marketing and legal muscle—proportionately, companies need a 
scorecard to measure the reputational impact of an attack. Reputational value 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
14
metrics, discussed at length in Chapters 9 and 12 and earlier in this chapter, can 
inform show-of-force strategies.
There’s much to be said about the value of sympathetic third parties, but in the 
court of public opinion, the opinions of such third parties are discounted 
because they are known to be, well, sympathetic. There’s more to be said about 
the value of dispassionate third parties. In the next section, the value of 
insurances, a staple of markets with asymmetric information, is explored in the 
context of a dispassionate communications strategy. After all, as an editorial in 
Corporate Board Member helpfully reminded its readers, “The most important 
insurance is sleep insurance–knowing that your personal and corporate assets 
are covered in the event of a crisis.”36 
The Walt Disney Company
Robert A. Iger was celebrating his 14th month as CEO of The Walt Disney 
Company when he received a fax from Hong Kong just in time for Christmas 
2006. The cover memo concluded ominously, “We look forward to discussing 
with you the improvement of labor conditions in Disney supplier factories in 
China and elsewhere on or before December 22.”37 Attached to the five-page 
memo was a 31-page report entitled, A Second Attempt at Looking for Mickey 
Mouse’s Conscience: A Survey of the Working Conditions of Disney’s Supplier 
Factories in China.
Iger had risen through Disney’s ranks on the Capital Cities/ABC Television side 
of the company and previously had served as President and COO. Since January 
2000, he had been deeply aware of the ethical labor challenge in China, and, in 
December of that year, CBC Marketplace received reports from human rights 
activists documenting the unethical practices in Disney factories in China. 
CBC’s broadcast that month described a report called The Secret Life of Toys 
alleging sweatshop conditions. Although the major toy distributors employed 
inspectors to monitor labor conditions, the monitoring was felt to be flawed. 
According to Jenny Chan, “In a recent report on child labour, UNICEF revealed 
that young factory workers in developing countries are often hidden in closets 
or stuffed into boxes when monitors arrive to inspect the premises.”38
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
The letter’s author had launched the Hong Kong–based labor watchdog group, 
Students & Scholars Against Corporate Misbehavior (SACOM), in 2005. 
SACOM’s inaugural report, the 32-page Looking for Mickey Mouse’s 
Conscience: A Survey of the Working Conditions of Disney’s Supplier Factories 
in China, called attention to 10 international labor standards violations:

High occurrence of occupational injuries and accidents

Violations of women workers’ rights

Wages well below the local legal minimum

Nontransparent and problematic wage calculations

Long working hours

Terrible work environment on the shop floor

Poor living environment

Horrible food

False trails of factory inspection

Restrictions on resignation with 45 days of wages held in 
security
During the first year of Iger’s tenure as CEO, SACOM went on a media 
offensive. It made an 11-minute documentary film, Those with Justice—A 
Disney Factory in China, jointly produced with Sweatshop Watch, “to visualize 
the collective struggles of the workers based in Shenzhen,” released through 
press conferences in Hong Kong and New York in coordination with the 
National Labor Committee, currently known as the Institute for Global Labour 
and Human Rights headquartered in Pittsburgh. It had earned its stripes by 
exposing alleged Disney-associated labor violations in Bangladesh in 2004.39
In January 2006, SACOM successfully nominated The Walt Disney Company 
for the Public Eye Award 2006 in the category “social rights” (human and labor 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
16
rights). The Public Eye Awards, according to the group’s promotional materials, 
“mark a critical counterpoint to the annual meeting of the World Economic 
Forum (WEF) in Davos. Organized since 2000 by Berne Declaration and 
Friends of the Earth (in 2009 replaced by Greenpeace), Public Eye reminds the 
corporate 
world 
that 
social 
and 
environmental 
misdeeds 
have 
consequences—for the affected people and territory, but also for the reputation 
of the offender.”40 The 2006 Award, which Disney shared with Citigroup, the 
banking conglomerate, stated:
Serious labor and human rights violations by Walt Disney subcontractors 
tarnish the carefree image that the entertainment giant tries to present to us 
through its films and cartoon figures. However the company does not publish 
the names of its suppliers in China and therefore prevents the verification of 
working conditions through independent inspectors. SACOM calls on Walt 
Disney to publish the names of its suppliers and to allow independent NGOs 
to make regular inspections of their operations.
SACOM organized a coalition of the committed. The growing list of strategic 
partners of SACOM included the National Labor Committee, United Students 
Against Sweatshops, Writers Guild of America—West and East, Sweatshops 
Watch, Clean Clothes Campaign—Austria, and Réseau-Solidarité—France. In 
August 2005, the media campaign against Disney broke into the mainstream. 
One of the videos produced by SACOM landed at the Cable News Network 
(CNN). Disney said in a statement that its officials “have conducted 
approximately 20 ILS audits at these factories since 1998.”41
In fact, by August 2005, The Walt Disney Company’s labor standards 
department was liaising with some 6,000 licensees and vendors and had 
conducted more than 40,000 audits since 1996. Jim Leung, Walt Disney 
Company Regional Director of International Labour Standards, met with 
SACOM and other Hong Kong–based labor coalitions, followed by three more 
meetings by early January 2006. Nevertheless, the December 2006 SACOM 
report “revealed gross violations of Chinese labour laws and international codes 
of conduct relating to work safety and compensation at seven factories that 
manufactured Disney merchandise in southern China,”42 and closed with a 
demand that Disney order its factory representatives to:

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17

Consult with SACOM and concerned labor groups to 
provide workers with training programs 

Work out a detailed timetable for participatory training 

Support democratic elections run by workers for the 
establishment of Workers’ Committees 

Collaborate with workers in factory monitoring for the long 
term
Frustrated with the results of its efforts to effect changes at factories producing 
its goods, Disney pulled its business. Disney released a statement that it had 
been working with both the licensee and the factory for many months and that 
“notwithstanding multiple offers by Disney to help the licensee and factory to 
improve standards, the licensee has chosen to walk away.’’42 Because Disney 
represented 80% of the factory’s business, 5 weeks after SACOM’s deadline for 
action, the 800 workers at Huang Xing Light Manufacturing factory in 
Shenzhen in southern China were dismissed and the factory closed. SACOM 
criticized Disney’s actions as “cut and run.” Said Chan: “This is the worst 
response to workers’ rights violations. Disney must take responsibility for the 
labour rights violations carried out by its suppliers.” 
Wal-Mart, with well publicized labor issues at around the same time, was losing 
an estimated 6% top-line sales from potential customers who refused to shop at 
the retailer out of ethical considerations. It is not clear what economic effects 
conscience-consumerism and the SACOM campaign had at that time on The 
Walt Disney Company. But Disney clearly recognized that it was going to be 
criticized for supporting exploitative factories, and also for abandoning 
exploitative factories. That criticism targeted the authenticity of the Disney 
brand, and placed the company’s reputation at risk.
Reputation Protection
The strong consumer brand that underpins Disney’s value is based on a 
reputation for child-friendly family value–based entertainment. Disney’s board 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
18
of directors has long appreciated that Disney’s reputation confers pricing power, 
enhances sales volume, helps control employee- and supplier-related expenses, 
and helps reduce the cost of capital. 
Matthew Ryan, Disney Senior Vice President, Brand, Franchise, & Customer 
Relationship Management, explained in 2001, “a strong consumer brand like 
Disney is invaluable in attracting the right kind of people to the company: 
people come to Disney because they love the brand and want to contribute to its 
legacy…Everyone who works here knows the high standards the Disney brand 
requires, and that compels our employees whether they are front-line cast 
members or senior executives, to think through all decisions from the 
perspective of brand impact. We have a culture that encourages creativity and 
wise risk-taking, but the cardinal rule we have is to never do anything that will 
harm the brand.”35
By late 2005, Disney’s kind of leadership in corporate reputation protection was 
becoming widespread. Enterprise risk managers from multiple companies were 
increasingly responding to the dark side—reputation risk—as a threat to 
survival. The Economist Intelligence Unit (EUI) produced a report entitled 
“Reputation: Risk of Risks” based on surveys of 269 risk managers in 
companies of varied size.43 The following were the key findings:

Corporate reputation is a prized and highly vulnerable corporate 
asset.

Reputation risk is the single most significant threat to global 
business operations.

Companies struggle to categorize—let alone quantify—reputational 
risk.
In 2007, the Conference Board, the business membership, and research 
association recommended that boards of directors should:44

Reach a common understanding of the concept of corporate 
reputation and tie its discussion to a comprehensive analysis of the 
firm’s stakeholder base.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19

Become familiar with management’s rationale for prioritizing 
stakeholder relations and be persuaded that the selected relations 
are instrumental to achieving the firm’s long-term objectives.

Discuss and understand the nature of reputation risk as an effect of 
certain business operational incidents, not a separate and distinct 
category of uncertainties.

Oversee the design and implementation of a strategic, top-down, 
and holistic risk management program where all business events 
with potential consequences on the firm’s reputation capital are 
identified and measured.

Consider adhering to The Conference Board Road Map to Risk 
Governance 
to 
embed 
reputation 
risk 
oversight 
into 
a 
comprehensive risk management program.
In 2009, the Conference Board returned to the subject of reputation risk,45 
reporting on a survey of 148 executives from companies around the world. 
Fifty-nine percent indicated that assessing the perceptions and concerns of 
stakeholders was an extremely or very significant issue, making it the highest-
ranked challenge. McKinsey & Company, a management consultancy, asserted 
that companies had to step up their reputation management efforts: “A 
company’s reputation has begun to matter more now than it has in decades. 
Companies and industries with reputation problems are more likely to incur the 
wrath of legislators, regulators, and the public.”46 It’s not just talk. “Reputations 
are built on a foundation not only of communications but also of deeds: 
stakeholders can see through PR that isn’t supported by real and consistent 
business activity.”
A 2009 Blue Ribbon Report on Risk Governance from the National Association 
of Corporate Directors (NACD) issued a regulatory conversation on 
requirements for a board-level risk committee with the conclusion that 
delegating to a committee is part of the problem, and recommended that the 
whole board should take ownership of risk oversight.47 The Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO), a joint 
initiative of five accounting societies, produced its own rather audit-centric 
template.48 In November 2009, the International Standards Organization (ISO) 
released ISO 31000:2009–Risk management–Principles and guidelines 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
20
(US/EU/Other). This standard provides principles, framework, and a process for 
managing any form of risk in a transparent, systematic, and credible manner 
within any scope or context.49 Also in 2009, Standard & Poor’s began 
integrating enterprise risk management issues into credit ratings.50
With reputation risk slowly being appreciated as a consequence of operational 
risk, more corporate boards began to understand its materiality. A brief surge 
after the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation showed that 99 (20%) of the S&P 500 
constituent members disclosed the materiality of reputation risk, but the annual 
count tapered to a low of 32 (6%) in 2007, and by 2009, the number had risen 
only slightly to 11%. That year, new rules by the U.S. SEC on required 
disclosures about corporate risk management shifted responsibility for 
enterprise risk to the level of the board.51,52 By the next year, the fraction was up 
to 32%; and, as of June 2012, 71% of the S&P 500 index constituent members 
disclosed that reputation risk was material to their business (Figure 8-2).

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
21
Figure 8-2. Proportion of S&P 500 companies disclosing reputation risks in section 1A of their 
annual 10K SEC filing.
For members of corporate boards, reputation risk is personal. Under 
longstanding precepts of corporate law, the business and affairs of a corporation 
are managed by its board of directors. The board has authority to appoint 
officers who assume day-to-day management functions under the direction of 
the board. Directors and officers, in turn, are bound by fiduciary duties to 
shareholders, generally entailing affirmative, open-ended obligations to act in 
the best interest of the corporation and its shareholders. 
There are two categories of fiduciary duties: the duty of care and the duty of 
loyalty. As Cathy Reese explains in Corporate Finance Review53:
The duty of care requires that directors and officers exercise disinterested 
due care in decision making, and act on an informed basis…Further, 
corporations can indemnify officers and directors against personal liability 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
22
for losses that the corporation incurs resulting from decisions made in 
breach of the duty of care. 
The duty of loyalty requires that directors and officers serve the interests of 
the corporation and its shareholders with undivided allegiance. Unlike the 
duty of care, corporations are not permitted to indemnify officers and 
directors against personal liability for breaches of the duty of loyalty.
Provided a director did not breach the duty of loyalty by “standing on both 
sides” of a transaction in order to benefit personally, Delaware’s Business 
Judgment Rule provided assurance that courts would not second-guess the 
wisdom or the propriety of their decisions, even if they turn out in retrospect to 
have been improvident. That safe harbor has been offering directors and officers 
increasingly less shelter as the implications of two decisions separated by a 
decade have been appreciated by the market.
The Delaware court’s review of In re Caremark International Inc. Derivative 
Litigation in 1996 established the duty of oversight as one expression of the 
duty of care and ruled that directors should be held liable for directorial 
indecision as well as the directorial decision.54 “Specifically, the court said that 
the board, including officers, could be held liable for ‘unconscionable failures 
of the board to act in circumstances in which due attention would arguably have 
prevented the loss’—so that's a failure of the board to act—‘or in circumstances 
in which loss eventuates not from a decision but from unconsidered in action.”55 
This duty of oversight applies to all corporate assets, including reputation. Ten 
years later, the Delaware Supreme Court upped the ante by formally approving 
the directors’ duty of oversight but upgrading its importance to an expression of 
the duty of loyalty. “The court is essentially saying in these oversight liability 
cases that you can't avail yourself of the Business Judgment Rule if you exercise 
no judgment,” added Reese.
To underscore that point, in December 2010, a shareholder group filed suit 
against the board as well as managers of Johnson & Johnson, the once-
venerated health care conglomerate, for an unspecified amount alleging failure 
to uphold their duty of oversight, breaching their duty of loyalty, and allowing 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
23
adverse events to proceed that inevitably “destroyed the company’s hard earned 
reputation.” 
The suit followed nearly 2 years of adverse publicity arising from the failure of 
one business process or another: ethical breaches, quality failures, and safety 
recalls by the bucketful. The depth and breadth of the failures affirms a certain 
this-is-not-your-father’s-Buick sensibility about Johnson & Johnson today.
According to Tony Chapelle, who reports for the Financial Times' Agenda 
Week: “Governance experts say that J&J’s board should step in and more 
closely oversee the company’s business processes in three vital areas: quality, 
safety and ethics.” In the spring of 2012, Warren Buffet’s Berkshire Hathaway 
joined in the conversation by cutting its investments in Johnson & Johnson by 
almost two-thirds to $700 million.56
A 2012 review compiled 18 case studies of companies that suffered various 
crises between 1999 and 2009.57 The high-profile companies were selected so 
that there was full maturity in the consequences, explained Professor Alan 
Punter, one of the authors. The companies included AIG, Arthur Andersen, BP, 
Cadbury Schweppes, Enron, Firestone, Northern Rock, and Société Générale. 
Said Punter, “The consequences were fairly severe, and that’s just the 
measurable ones”58:

In 7 cases out of the 18 cases studies, the company 
collapsed and/or faced a government rescue (AIG, Arthur 
Andersen, Enron, Independent Insurance, Land of Leather, 
Northern Rock, and Network rail).

In 11 cases, the chairman or CEO lost his job. 

In 16 cases, the company and/or senior executives were 
fined. 

In 4 cases, senior management or board members were 
jailed.

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
24
Corporate directors, when asked, readily disclose their personal concerns about 
reputation risk. A 2012 survey by the accounting and audit firm Eisner and 
Amper reported that around 70% of corporate directors identified reputational 
risk as the most important risk to their boards, noting that reputational risk had 
overtaken compliance risk as the number one concern. The study observed that 
“this percentage skyrockets with the addition of their concerns about the 
elements of reputational risk which include IT risk, product risk, outsourcing 
risk, privacy and data security, and risk due to fraud.”59 Similarly, a 2011 
Lloyd’s Risk Index review of 500 C-suite board level executives showed that 
reputational risk had risen to the 3rd ranking, up from 9th in 2009.60
Managing reputation risk is first an operational concern. By direction of the 
board, several companies have created operational units focused on reputational 
risk. Goldman Sachs’ firm-wide business practice committee (and subordinate 
regional and divisional committees) monitor and oversee reputational and 
operational risk events affecting the firm. Scenario analysis is one of the tools 
they use, employing operational risk expertise within its broader risk 
management framework. According to its global co-heads of operational risk 
management, Mark D’Arcy and Spyro Karetsos, now Principal, Enterprise Risk 
and Control, Vanguard: “While it is not our responsibility to quantify 
reputational risk, there is an internal process that measures our exposure to 
those risks that are difficult to quantify, one of which is reputational risk.” 61
Capital One Financial established a department of corporate reputation and 
governance almost a decade ago. Led by the company’s general counsel (who 
reports directly to CEO Richard Fairbank), the department includes the legal, 
corporate affairs, regulatory affairs, audit, and government affairs functions of 
the firm. “We built a discipline for including reputation risk assessments into 
business decision-making across the enterprise,” said Richard Woods, Capital 
One’s senior vice president of corporate affairs.62
According to Willis, the insurance brokerage and intermediary, 95% of major 
corporations in the last 20 years have suffered at least one serious reputation-
damaging event based on a survey of 600 publicly held companies. The 
research used precipitous and sustained loss of market capitalization as a proxy 
for reputation loss, and showed that these companies had faced 1,853 crisis 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
25
events, of which 50% were due to a failure of the company’s strategy or 
business model.63 
For risks to asset value that cannot be otherwise mitigated, there are insurances. 
Starting in 2011, a number of companies began offering insurance products for 
reputation risk. Two principal types of coverage are available, all in the $100 
million limit range. First are communications solutions, offered by underwriters 
in cooperation with PR/Communications groups, which provide outsized 
indemnifications for crisis communications expenses. Underwriters include 
AIG, Zurich/Aon, and Willis. Second is a reputation value loss policy, offered 
solely by underwriters in cooperation with Steel City Re, the parent firm of the 
author. This provides indemnifications for losses due to business process 
failures that generate adverse publicity. Losses are indexed to an independent 
measurable parameter—changes in the companies’ reputational value metrics.
Under a parametric system, claim payments are triggered by the occurrence of a 
specific event that can be objectively verified, such as a hurricane reaching a 
certain wind speed or an earthquake reaching a certain ground shaking 
threshold. Underwriting and claims management are greatly simplified.64
Losses under Reputational Value Insurance are capped at the lesser of policy 
limits or fractions of the policy limits depending on the value of the 
parameter—the magnitude of change of the insured’s reputational value 
metrics. 
Insurance is available only to companies that demonstrate they are in control of 
the business processes whose failures are likely to generate adverse media 
coverage and reputational events. A useful analogy for the constraint is in fire 
insurance, a common property insurance product, where measures such as 
sprinklers and fire extinguishers are required as a condition of underwriting the 
policy.
Three examples illustrate companies that should consider insurance for 
reputational value risk:

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
26

When a company has achieved iconic status or is a brand 
leader, its stakeholders possess elevated expectations. On 
the downside, its detractors have a more vulnerable target. 
Iconic firms are preferred targets for activists whose claims, 
even if libelous, attract significant media attention. 
Reputational Value Insurance provides a means of 
independently and credibly refuting false claims, because 
the insurance fosters reputation-enhancing behaviors and 
actually protects against losses caused by rogue activities.

A company may be in a commercial sector that has 
overarching reputational challenges, where management 
wishes to differentiate the business from its peers. In a 
reputationally challenged sector, qualifying for 
Reputational Value Insurance provides an independent and 
credible means for signaling exceptional status.

When a company is recovering from a reputational event, 
management wishes to signal rehabilitation. The three-step 
process that is required by the insurance enables 
stakeholders to recognize that risks going forward are 
greatly reduced. Qualifying for Reputational Value 
Insurance informs stakeholders that the business is 
rehabilitated.
Reputational Value Insurance can be a visible part of the management of 
reputation risk because it can be readily observed, understood, and valued by all 
stakeholders.
Since the 2006 letter, SACOM has expanded its range of corporate targets. 
According to Chan, “Our objective hasn’t changed. We still want Disney and 
other corporations to bear their social responsibility and fulfill their obligations 
to ensure that workers are properly treated and labour laws are followed.”42 
SACOM’s Disney Project “promises to persist in monitoring and disclosing any 
violations of labor laws in Disney’s supplier factories in China, [and hopes]… 
to awaken the conscience of Disney.”65 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
27
John R. Lund, senior vice president of Disney Parks Supply Chain Management 
for Disney Destinations LLC, epitomizes the company’s conscience. Before 
2008, when Lund took the top supply chain job at Disney Destinations, the 
Disney arm that oversees theme parks, resorts, and cruise lines around the 
globe, the company’s supply chain operations focused on cost containment. 
Now, supply chain operations focus on all six reputational pillars. The company 
works with suppliers it considers to be of high integrity, and has formed 
stronger relationships with fewer suppliers. “We have reduced the number of 
vendors by over 50 percent in the last four years,” Lund said. He believes that 
supply chains can drive shareholder value by improving operating income, asset 
utilization, and the company’s reputation. “The reputation of a company is 
fundamentally affected by the choices you make in running a supply chain,” he 
said.66
Consider This

Reputation is a valuable corporate asset that takes years to 
build and could take only moments to destroy.

An authentic corporate culture of reputation protection 
engages employees with all the associated financial 
benefits; it helps build reputational resilience.

An authentic corporate culture of reputation protection 
expresses itself in every aspect of the company’s 
operations; reputational metric scorecards help guide the 
“show of force” (the deployment of marketing and legal 
muscle).

Insurances can help stakeholders better appreciate and 
value the otherwise opaque state of the operational controls 
for reputation risk protection.

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
28
Business Strategy
The board’s duties and responsibilities, for which they are accountable, include 
reviewing, approving, and guiding corporate strategy.67 Operational surprises 
can play havoc with business strategy and they occur with alarming frequency. 
They can draw management’s attention and resources away from core 
objectives. When they involve reputational risks, they can draw board attention, 
reduce revenues, and raise expenses as various stakeholders are adversely 
impacted. 
More than two thirds of the 618 companies surveyed by Willis admitted they 
were caught off guard by an operational surprise “somewhat” to “extensively” 
in the last 5 years, and an even higher percentage for large organizations and 
public companies.68 Yet when asked whether they saw proprietary advantages 
in integrating risk management with strategy, only 15% felt “mostly” or 
“extensively” while more than half replied “minimally” or “not at all.”
Because the reputation of a business is a critical factor in determining its value, 
it is at the board level where risk management must be integrated with strategy, 
and where a culture for reputation risk awareness must reside.69 Brand-centered 
firms such as Disney, McDonald’s or Apple brought the founders’ innate sense 
for the value of reputation into the boardroom, where it is integrated into 
business strategy. Rolls-Royce and Goldman Sachs have evolved this sense of 
reputational risk awareness. The studies below describe in greater detail how 
three companies—Standard Chartered plc, a financial services firm; Diageo plc, 
a beverage firm; and Anglo American plc, a mining concern—have integrated 
reputation risk management into board-level strategic oversight.
Standard Chartered plc
Although the British Empire isn’t as global as it used to be, that hasn’t stopped 
Standard Chartered, a company that traces its roots back more than 150 years, to 
the heyday of the Empire.70 This U.K.-based banking group, familiarly known 
as Stanchart, operates primarily in Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, within 
some of the world's fastest-growing economies, as well as in Europe and the 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
29
Americas. With more than 1,700 offices in more than 70 countries, the company 
operates through two business segments: consumer banking (deposit accounts, 
loans, cards, and investment products) and wholesale banking (capital markets, 
cash management, international trade, custody, and clearing services). 
Differentiating Standard Chartered from the many banks that had experienced 
reputational crises in the past 5 years, non-executive Chairman Sir John Peace 
wrote: “We are different because we have a cohesive and distinctive global 
culture with a strong emphasis on values and leadership. Here for good, our 
brand promise powerfully sums up who we are and what we stand for.”71
Standard Chartered has two dedicated board-level committees addressing 
reputation risk: the Board Risk Committee (BRC) and the Brand and Values 
Committee (BVC). 
The Board Risk Committee, whose membership consists exclusively of non-
executive directors of the Group, is responsible for oversight and review of 
prudential risks including but not limited to credit, market, capital, liquidity, 
operational, and reputational factors. These are the traditional “hard factors” of 
finance. The group’s Chief Risk Officer reports to this committee.
Added in 2010, the Brand and Value Committee addresses the softer factors. 
Summarizing the committee’s second year of operations, Chairman Paul 
Skinner wrote: “The Committee continues to make good progress on its key 
priorities including, but not limited to, the main themes of brand, 
customer/client focus, reputational risk, sustainability and culture and values.”
According to Standard Chartered’s 2011 annual report:71
At each Committee meeting, the most significant and forward-looking 
reputational risks facing the Group are considered and reviewed. A ‘heat 
map’ is presented that sets out the forward-looking reputational risk from the 
lenses of multiple external stakeholders such as Socially Responsible 
Investors (SRIs) and Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs). The 
Committee has sought and received assurance from management that the 
mechanisms in place for monitoring reputational risk remain robust and 
reporting to the Committee remains fit for purpose.

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
30
The board oversees layers of operational controls where reputation risk 
management is defined at both the strategic and tactical level.
The GRC provides Group-wide oversight on reputational risk, sets policy 
and monitors material risks. The Group Head of Corporate Affairs is the 
overall Risk Control Owner for reputational risk. The BRC and BVC provide 
additional oversight of reputational risk on behalf of the Board.
At the business level, the Wholesale Banking Responsibility and Reputational 
Risk Committee and the Consumer Banking Reputational Risk Committee 
have responsibility for managing reputational risk in their respective 
businesses.
At country level, the Country Head of Corporate Affairs is the Risk Control 
Owner of reputational risk. It is their responsibility to protect our reputation 
in that market with the support of the country management team. The Head 
of Corporate Affairs and Country Chief Executive Officer must actively:
• Promote awareness and application of our policies and procedures 
regarding reputational risk
• Encourage business and functions to take account of our reputation in all 
decision-making, including dealings with customers and suppliers
Diageo plc
Diageo plc is the leading premium spirits business in the world by volume, net 
sales, and operating profit. The company produces and sells 8 of the world’s top 
20 spirits brands and is one of the few international drinks companies that span 
the entire alcohol beverage market, offering beer, wine, and spirits. Diageo’s 
well-known brands include Smirnoff vodka, Bailey’s cream liqueur, Johnnie 
Walker Scotch whisky, José Cuervo tequila, Tanqueray gin, Captain Morgan 
rum, Guinness beer, and wines from Sterling Vineyards and Beaulieu Vineyard.72
Diageo’s products are sold in more than 180 markets around the world. In many 
countries, there are cultural stigmas associated with its products, and in most 
countries antisocial behavior is associated with socially irresponsible 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
31
consumption of its products. Protecting its reputation is central to its ability to 
enjoy the active support of “customers, consumers and suppliers, together with 
the confidence of their other stakeholders,” wrote its non-executive Chairman 
Dr. Franz B. Hume. “There can be no compromise on our values and standards 
of integrity. In the last three years we have devoted much time and energy to 
ensure that all our employees understand that Diageo must have complete 
compliance with the high standards of behaviour laid out in our Code of 
Conduct.”73
The company’s corporate governance report shows reputational risk awareness 
and the importance of internal controls and risk management in engineering 
resilience into the system:
Diageo’s aim is to manage risk and to control its business and financial 
activities cost-effectively and in a manner that enables it to: exploit 
profitable business opportunities in a disciplined way; avoid or reduce risks 
that can cause loss, reputational damage or business failure; support 
operational effectiveness; and enhance resilience to external events…. Risk 
management and internal control processes encompass activity to mitigate 
financial, operational, compliance and reputational risk.
Enterprise-level reputational concerns map into its supply chain management 
strategies:
Responsible sourcing is critical to maintaining Diageo’s positive reputation 
and meeting customers’ and consumers’ demands. To this end, Diageo 
manages social and ethical risk, ranging from labour and human rights to 
commercial integrity, through a four-stage screening and auditing process. 
Diageo’s expectations of business ethics and sustainability are made clear to 
suppliers. Minimum compliance and ethics standards as well as aspirational 
goals are set out in Diageo’s Partnering with Suppliers Standards. 
Additionally, Diageo plays a leading role in AIM-PROGRESS, the 
collaborative consumer goods sector forum working to improve processes 
and standards in a more effective way through member organisations’ supply 
chains.
In the year ended 30 June 2011, Diageo launched its Sustainable Agriculture 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
32
Sourcing Guidelines and subsequently worked to determine how the 
guidelines could help support broader sustainable development, focusing 
first on cream. As a part of this initiative, Diageo helped its main cream 
supplier in Ireland create their sustainability programme, including an 
advisory committee, on which Diageo sits along with members of the private, 
independent and public sectors, to help drive sustainability performance in 
the Irish dairy farming industry.
Anglo American plc
Anglo American's name might be a little misleading—it has never been 
American.74 Founded in 1917, the U.K.-based company owns significant stakes 
in global producers of platinum (75% of Anglo Platinum) and diamonds (45% 
of De Beers S.A.). Anglo American also has interests in ferrous and base metals 
and industrial minerals. It ranks among the world’s largest iron ore producers 
and is also a leading copper producer. It is one of the world’s largest coal 
miners and exporters of metallurgical coal, a key raw material in steel 
production, and also produces thermal coal, used to generate electricity. The 
founding Oppenheimer family no longer controls Anglo American. 
“Good governance,” writes non-executive chairman Sir John Parker, “is not 
merely following a set of rules, but ensuring that the highest standards of 
behaviour begin at board level and flow throughout the organisation.”75
“The management of risk is critical to the success of Anglo American,” writes 
David Challen, Chairman of the Audit Committee. “The Group is exposed to a 
variety of risks which can have a financial, operational, or reputational impact. 
Effective management of risk supports the delivery of the Group’s objectives 
and achievement of sustainable growth….Understanding our key risks and 
developing appropriate responses is critical to our future success. We are 
committed to a robust system of risk identification and an effective response to 
such risks.”75
The company in their annual report of 2011 recognizes the direct link between 
employee behavior and reputation among various stakeholders.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
33

We are committed to our people, who determine how effectively we 
operate and build our reputation with our investors, partners, and 
fellow employees every day, and whom we require to uphold our 
values.

Effective management of occupational health protects our people, 
enhances productivity, and helps maintain our license to operate 
and our global reputation.
Anglo American pays significant attention to the reputational impact of nearly 
every operational risk. 

Operational performance and project delivery impact. Failure to 
meet project delivery timetables and budgets may affect operational 
performance, delay cash inflows, increase capital costs and reduce 
profitability, as well as have a negative impact on the Group’s 
reputation.

Infrastructure impact. Failure to obtain supporting facilities may 
affect the sustainability and growth of the business, leading to loss 
of competitiveness, market share and reputation.

Failure of rail or port facilities may result in delays and increased 
costs as well as lost revenue and reputation with customers. Failure 
to procure shipping costs at competitive market rates may reduce 
profit margins.

Business Integrity impact: Potential impacts include prosecution, 
fines, penalties and reputation damage.

Failure to achieve expected standards of health, safety and 
environment performance in joint ventures impact: higher costs or 
lower production may result and have a bearing on operational 
results, asset values or the Group’s reputation.
Culture and Strategy
Family-owned enterprises are the clearest examples of organizations with 
inbuilt cultural strength. Partnerships are also, historically, fierce guardians of 
strong cultures.3 Critics of Goldman Sachs have pinned some of the blame for 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
34
the perceived decline in its old-fashioned values on its 1999 transformation 
from a partnership to a publicly listed company. 
But while creating a culture—say, at a startup—is relatively easy, sustaining a 
healthy one as the company grows is more of a challenge. An exemplary 
company whose culture survived for years after transforming from a family 
business to a public company is Johnson & Johnson. The Johnson & Johnson 
Credo protected its culture and its intense focus on the pillars of its reputation, 
and guided management during its security crisis of 1983.
Penned by then CEO Robert Wood Johnson shortly before the company’s initial 
public offering in 1944, the Credo represents Johnson’s philosophy about 
running a business. The Credo is an active part of the corporate culture and is 
referenced repeatedly in the Company’s major operating and reporting 
documents. It is a statement of “corporate social responsibility” that was crafted 
some 40 years before the concept was popularized.
The Credo is written in the first-person plural and recognizes the company’s 
obligations to its stakeholders. The first paragraph sets an unambiguous ethical 
tone from the top:76
“We believe our first responsibility is to the doctors, nurses, and patients, to 
mothers and fathers and all others who use our products and services. In 
meeting their needs, everything we do must be of high quality.” 
The Credo calls for the need to “reduce our costs in order to maintain 
reasonable prices” and to give suppliers and distributors “an opportunity to 
make a fair profit.” Employees must be respected and treated with dignity, 
fairly compensated, and “we must provide competent management, and their 
actions must be just and ethical.”
The Credo also acknowledges issues of sustainability and corporate citizenship: 
“Our final responsibility is to our stockholders. Business must make a sound 
profit. We must experiment with new ideas. Research must be carried on, 
innovative programs developed, and mistakes paid for.” And, in its last line, the 
Credo modestly addresses what many have argued is the primary obligation of 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
35
business, “When we operate according to these principles, the stockholders 
should realize a fair return.”
The Credo and the company’s positive reputation obviously served it well at 
that time. But the company’s current saga suggests it may have mislaid the 
powerful Credo of its founder. The current challenges illustrate a dictum that no 
corporate leader can afford to neglect. Sustaining an excellent corporate 
reputation is a never-ending responsibility. It requires unrelenting vigilance and 
attention to all the processes that create reputation. Resting on laurels is not an 
option.
Consider This

A mission statement can reveal much about a company’s 
culture.

The structures and processes of governance are the board-
level signs of a company’s culture. 

A culture that incorporates reputation into its governance 
increases the likelihood that the operational benefits can be 
realized.

Reputational metrics and reputational insurances are 
indications that a company embraces a culture for 
reputation risk management and overall business strategy.
Guidance
Corporate governance that demonstrates authentic oversight of the pillars of 
reputation—ethics, 
quality, 
innovation, 
safety, 
sustainability, 
and 
security—creates value. A recent study by Mercer Investment Consulting found 
that 46% of institutional asset owners now take environmental, social, and 
corporate governance analysis into consideration when making investment 
decisions. And institutional investors demonstrate a willingness to pay a 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
36
premium of 12%–14% for the shares of well-governed companies in North 
America and Western Europe, and even higher premiums for the shares of well-
governed companies in emerging markets, a McKinsey & Company study 
reports.77 
The economic performances of Diageo and Anglo American over the trailing 12 
months illustrate the rationale. Diageo returned 46% while the S&P 500 
Beverage Index returned 17.25% (Figure 8-3a);78 and Anglo American lost 12% 
while the S&P/TSX Global Mining Index lost 20% (Figure 8-3b).79 
Figure 8-3a. Trailing 12-month returns for Diageo plc and the S&P 500 Beverage Index. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
37
Figure 8-3b. Trailing 12-month returns for Anglo American plc and the iShares S&P/TSX Global 
Mining Fund. 
Three out of four business leaders believe corporate reputation is substantially 
driven by internal corporate culture, yet only 5% think their organization’s 
culture is strong enough to preclude reputational crisis, according to a recent 
survey of 100 business leaders and HR professionals conducted by MWW 
Group.80 Standard Chartered found itself in a reputational crisis in August 2012. 
The matter came to a head on 14 August when the British bank agreed to pay 
New York’s top banking regulator $340 million to settle claims that it laundered 
hundreds of billions of dollars in tainted money for Iran and lied to regulators.81
Until the moment of the crisis, Standard Chartered was returning 20% for the 
trailing 12 months while the S&P Global Financials Sector Index as returning 
9.35% (Figure 8-4).82 Within a few weeks, the major loss of market cap was 
significantly restored and the trailing 12-month returns were greater than the 
reference group by the time of the settlement. As discussed more generally in 
Chapter 10, Standard Chartered’s “good fortune” with regulators can be 
attributed to its board’s good faith response and management of the crisis. 
“Effectively the bank’s decision to opt for a fast settlement of the charges 
allowed it to escape from sinking sand.”83 By the numbers, as this book is fond 
of noting, the bank’s quick actions reduced the magnitude of the potential fine. 
The bank’s payment of $340 million was less than the mid-2012 payment of 

Chapter 8 | Boards of Directors
38
$619 million by ING, the Dutch bank, for sanctions breaches, while HSBC has 
set aside $700 million to cover expected fines for money laundering failures.84 
But if an institution’s reputation is sullied, those responsible must go. “A big 
issue is the failure of oversight, which means Standard Chartered needs to act 
over the make-up of the board,” said one top-20 shareholder. “They may need 
to act quickly over this to prevent a loss of credibility.”85
The good news for companies assailed by allegations of bad behavior is that, 
while it may take as long to create a good culture as it does to establish a good 
reputation, a strong set of values is usually harder to destroy. Standard 
Chartered plc, a case in point, is an example of rapid action informed by an 
appreciation of the value of reputation. All bets are off, however, should the 
company itself be dismantled or taken over.3
Figure 8-4. Trailing 12-month returns for Standard Chartered plc and the iShares S&P Global 
Financials Sector Fund. 
UBS is rebuilding a culture that is part of the company’s heritage. It has taken a 
leadership role in its sector by being the first to publicly and specifically link its 
CEO’s compensation to the firm’s reputation.
Disney has a very strong brand-centric culture and a reputation for family 
values that it is protecting through operational changes in areas many would not 
consider important to a brand—back office and supply chain operations. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
39
Johnson & Johnson, a reputational bellwether for more than a quarter century, 
shows the magnitude of reputational resilience a strong culture can create. In the 
past few years, the culture of Robert Wood Johnson has been diluted by more 
modern notions that have tolerated, well, greater ethical flexibility. And the 
chickens have come home to roost as the company faces up to $2 billion in 
costs to settle hip implant claims86 and another $2.2 billion for aggressive 
product marketing that triggered three False Claims Act lawsuits.87 
In their 1982 book, In Search of Excellence—one of the first attempts to 
identify and explain the correlation between a positive corporate culture and 
strong performance—Tom Peters and Robert Waterman pointed out that 
“poorer-performing 
companies 
often 
have 
strong 
cultures, 
too, 
but 
dysfunctional ones.”3 The present chapter illustrates practical steps boards can 
take to build strong, positive, and reputationally sensitive cultures through 
oversight of executive compensation, asset protection, and business strategy.
By the Numbers
Table 8-2. Enterprise-Level Reputation Risks, Board Actions, and Value Created
Risk, Board Action, or Result
Measure
Average change in the number of mentions of the word reputation in 
UBS’ annual report after the 2009 reforms
52% increase
Fraction of CEO bonus at UBS linked to measures of reputation
11%
Most recent annual rate of disclosure of corporate reputational risk
50% per year increase
Fraction of board members who rank reputation as their firm’s topmost 
concern
70%
Fraction of major corporations that have had at least one major 
reputational event over the past 20 years
95%
Average trailing 12-month economic returns of Anglo American, 
Diageo and Standard Chartered relative to their benchmark indexes 
(prior to the 1 August crisis)
18% superior returns

C H A P T E R
9
Analysts
Budd Beach, an analyst at Raymond James, asked what [Wal-Mart] 
executives thought the effect [of allegations of corruption in its Mexican 
operations] on the company’s reputation was. ‘We will be a better company 
because of this,’ Mr. Duke, the CEO, responded.
—The New York Times, 1 June 20121
Reputation is a consequence of corporate behavior that motivates stakeholders 
to behave in ways that either reward or punish the corporation. Reputation value 
is the measure of reward or punishment. This chapter compares and contrasts 
measures of both the impression and the expression of reputation value that may 
be useful to financial analysts. Featured are the methods of Transparent Value, 
Fortune, Barron’s, Harris Interactive, Reputation Institute, and Steel City Re, 
the author’s employer. Consistent with Bernstein’s maxim—“the plural of 
‘anecdote’ is not ‘data’”—these measures are useful alternatives to scattershot 
extra-financial reputation information.2
-

Chapter 9 | Analysts
2
Reputation Value
“Congratulations, Mr. Carnegie, you are now the richest man in the world.”3 
Thus in 1901, banker J. P. Morgan sealed his purchase of Carnegie’s steel 
company and memorialized for eternity proof that Andrew Carnegie knew how 
to create value. Not that anyone had doubts. At the time Morgan bought 
Carnegie’s assets to create U.S. Steel, the company produced more of the metal 
than all of Great Britain.
Carnegie’s formula was transparent. “I think Carnegie’s genius was first of all, 
an ability to foresee how things were going to change,” says historian John 
Ingram. “Once he saw that something was of potential benefit to him, he was 
willing to invest enormously in it.”4
Here’s the catch. He knew both where to look and how to develop winning 
strategies. On knowing where to look, he said, “As I grow older, I pay less 
attention to what men say, I just watch what they do.” As to strategy, Carnegie 
was a believer in the wisdom of crowds—stakeholders, actually. He called it “a 
mastermind group.”
Carnegie elaborated on this in 1908 to newspaper columnist Napoleon Hill: 
“Well, if you want to know how I got my money, I will refer you to these men 
here on my staff; they got it for me. We have here in this business a master 
mind. It is not my mind, and it is not the mind of any other man on my staff, but 
the sum total of all these minds that I have gathered around me that constitute a 
master mind in the steel business.”5 
Steel City Re’s approach to measuring reputational value and establishing a 
reputational value ranking rests on combining these two principles. Steel City 
Re watches what stakeholders are expected to do by watching Carnegie’s 
mastermind watch stakeholders. Before one can determine what stakeholders 
are expected to do, one has to channel Carnegie and know where the 
mastermind would watch what they do.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
In August 2012, Bloomberg reported that there were two thoughts as to whether 
Boeing would or would not stick to its scheduled development of its 787 
airframe.
The development of a stretch version of the Dreamliner, called the 787-10X, 
continues as well, Boeing Commercial Airplanes President Ray Conner 
wrote in a message to employees. The Seattle Times reported, citing 
unidentified people familiar with the matter, that Boeing had slowed down 
the development process.6
Boeing’s statements and the conflicting comments of insiders present two 
alternate realities that will impact each of its major stakeholders. For example, 
customers who may have been expecting the availability of the modified 787 by 
a certain date may choose to move to a different platform or upgrade existing 
platforms to extend their life spans a bit longer. Employee pools may shift in 
number, skill set, and geographic location based on Boeing’s production 
schedules. Supply chains, and the vendors that feed them, will be activated, 
accelerated, or deactivated depending on the actual changes being implemented 
by Boeing. Watching the stakeholders and “what they do” can provide 
indications of Boeing’s actual intentions.
As Carnegie proved, there is value in watching what they are doing. A company 
established in 2003 was based on that premise. 
Transparent Value, LLC articulated its dedicated goal: seeking to deliver 
sustainable investment returns across global equity markets by introducing a 
new way to measure the equity value of publicly traded companies. Transparent 
Value, LLC provides a range of financial market services based on an analysis 
of what stakeholders are doing. Using patent-pending processes, their 
investment methodology fused the insights of fundamental analysis with the 
transparency of a disciplined, rules-based stock selection and portfolio 
construction process.
In May 2009, Guggenheim Partners, LLC, a diversified financial services firm, 
acquired a controlling interest in Transparent Value and its subsidiaries. 
Guggenheim, with $125 billion in assets under management, made “substantial” 

Chapter 9 | Analysts
4
investments in infrastructure and to seed the funds that replicated Transparent 
Value indexes, according to Julian Koski, their founder.7 Today, Transparent 
Value’s analysis of what “they are doing” feeds a proprietary algorithm that 
calculates the probability that what is being done will enable management to 
deliver the business performance expected by shareholders as reflected in 
current stock price. Transparent Value calls its proprietary measure the 
Required Business Performance Probability (RBP Probability) metric.8
Their analytical process starts with a company’s current stock price and most 
recent financial statements from which they determine expected cash flows, 
and, from there, the level of sales needed to support the current stock price. 
Then they statistically determine, using management’s past business 
performance and an analysis of supply chain activity, the probability that there 
will be sufficient products sold at the expected prices to meet expectations.
Transparent 
Value 
observes 
company 
behaviors, 
calculates 
investor 
expectations, and then determines the probability that the former will meet the 
latter. When investor expectations are materially ahead of what a company 
appears to be capable of delivering, Transparent Value interprets the finding as 
risky investor behavior. It reports that behavior with a metric called the 
Behavioral Risk Indicator. Investor behavior in advance of the Facebook IPO, 
reviewed in Chapter 7, is an example of what Transparent Value would consider 
material Behavioral Risk.
“RBP tells us the revenue required at the most granular level, such as how many 
iPods Apple has to sell, or how many stores Starbucks has to open, or how 
many packages FedEx has to ship to support the price of its stock,” Koski 
explains.9
Beyond analyzing probabilities of meeting investor expectations, Transparent 
Value also invests in companies with the highest RBP Probabilities in select 
benchmark indexes while avoiding those companies in the benchmark that they 
believe have the highest likelihood of disappointing and underperforming 
relative to other companies. The logic is mathematically sound: if you can avoid 
investing in the worst relative performers, you should outperform the 
benchmark index. “Avoiding losers isn’t a glamorous business,” Koski admits, 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
and companies that fit Transparent Value’s winner profile tend to be a plain 
Jane. “I noticed that in my family’s portfolio, it had always been the unsexy 
names that made money. Unsexy is better than sexy, but only in stock 
picking.”7
Transparent Value provides investment strategies for a range of mutual funds 
generally investing in large capitalization companies. Two exemplary funds, the 
Market and Value funds Transparent Val DJ RBP US LC Mkt Idx I 
(MUTF:TVIMX) and Transparent Val DJ RBP US LC Val Idx I 
(MUTF:TVVIX) respectively, both underperformed the S&P 500 Composite 
Equity Index over the trailing 12 months from 4 October 2012 with mean 
monthly returns of 1.80% and 2.05% compared to the S&P 500’s mean monthly 
return of 2.09% (Table 9-1).
Table 9-1. As of 4 October 2012, Trailing 12-Month Portfolio Characteristics of Exemplary 
Strategies Informed by Required Business Performance Probability Metrics (Risk-Free Rate 
[RFR] = 1.17%)
S&P 500
TVIMX
TVVIX
Mean monthly return
2.09%
1.80%
2.05%
Standard deviation
5.61%
4.76%
5.99%
Compound monthly 
return
1.94%
1.70%
1.88%
Annualized return
25.03%
21.63%
24.54%
Annualized standard 
deviation
19.42%
16.50%
20.75%
Excess return (RFR)
23.86%
20.46%
23.37%
Sharpe ratio
1.23
1.24
1.13
Sortino ratio (0%)
58.41%
57.69%
53.91%
Portfolio beta 
(relative to S&P 500)
—
0.69
0.93
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 9 | Analysts
6
Portfolio alpha 
(relative to S&P 500)
—
0.35%
0.11%
Portfolio correlation 
to S&P 500
—
0.82
0.87
Coefficient of 
determination
—
0.48
0.86
Transparent Value watches what people do and then uses its proprietary models 
to estimate the probability that those actions will meet the expectations of 
investors implied by the stock price. Steel City Re also watches what people do. 
However, it relies on the other Carnegie tool, the mastermind, to watch what 
people do in the expectation of what other people are going to do. For this, Steel 
City Re looks to decision markets.
Decision markets (also known as predictive markets, information markets, 
prediction markets, idea futures, event derivatives, virtual markets, or 
Carnegie’s mastermind) are markets created for the purpose of making 
predictions.10 They have two key features: each participant makes a prediction 
independent of influences from any other participant, and the market rewards 
the participant who made the prediction that most closely approximates the 
future outcome. Markets may reward participants in two ways: indirectly, 
through accolades and other external acknowledgments that eventually 
favorably impact employment and compensation, or through an immediate prize 
or award. In decision markets that trade future contracts whose value is the 
reward, current market prices can be interpreted as predictions of the probability 
of the event or the expected value of the parameter.10
Participants cannot have conflicted interests wherein they may be motivated to 
offer a prediction other than their best guess in order to purposefully distort the 
market’s outcome—an unfortunate condition that existed and distorted the 
outcome of LIBOR (London InterBank Offered Rate), the product of a decision 
market currently supervised by its sponsor, the British Bankers’ Association 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
(BBA).11 Nevertheless, the market behind the BBA’s LIBOR provides 
meaningful insight into a key decision market in the world of finance. 
The BBA’s LIBOR is a benchmark giving an indication, or expectation, of the 
average rate at which a leading bank can obtain unsecured funding in the 
London interbank market for a given period in a given currency. Absent 
manipulation, it therefore represents the lowest real-world cost of unsecured 
funding in the London market. 
Individual LIBOR rates are the end-product of a calculation based upon 
submissions from a bank panel, made up of the largest, most active banks in 
each currency LIBOR is quoted for. The panel comprises the decision market. 
The panel watches what the panelists do in the expectation of what global bank 
lending officers are going to do.
Every decision market participant on the panel is asked to base their LIBOR 
submissions on the following question:
At what rate could you borrow funds, were you to do so by asking for and 
then accepting inter-bank offers in a reasonable market size just prior to 11 
am?12
LIBOR is based as much on actual transactions as it is on expectations of future 
transactions. Since not all banks will require funds in marketable size each day 
in each of the currencies and maturities they quote, it would not be feasible to 
create a suite of LIBOR rates if this was a requirement.
However, a bank will know what its credit and liquidity risk profile is from 
rates at which it has dealt and can construct a curve to predict accurately the 
correct rate for currencies or maturities in which it has not been active.
In markets that trade future contracts, people who buy low and sell high are 
rewarded for improving the market prediction, while those who buy high and 
sell low are punished for degrading the market prediction. Graefe and 
Armstrong reported recently that the simple averages of forecasts, the method 
BBA uses to calculate LIBOR, and more structured prediction markets with 
futures contracts such as the Iowa Election Markets, The simExchange, 

Chapter 9 | Analysts
8
Hollywood Stock Exchange, NewsFutures, and the Popular Science Predictions 
Exchange, produce outcomes with similar accuracy.13
Steel City Re draws data from prediction markets that capture the expected 
behaviors of stakeholders that impact the profit and loss (P&L) statement. There 
are four equally weighted families of data that comprise the pillars of the Steel 
City Re Reputational Value Metrics: the CRR, a measure of ranking joined 
arithmetically, and the RVM, a non-financial measure of value joined 
geometrically. These four families of expectation data report on the various 
P&L elements discussed in prior chapters: stakeholder behaviors responsible for 
revenue, stakeholder behaviors responsible for expenses, equity investor 
behaviors, and a measure of the alignment of the various stakeholders’ 
expectations.
The reputational value metrics comprise purely algorithmic arithmetic and 
logarithmic transformations of those data that are purchased by Steel City Re 
from a publicly traded commercial vendor. Steel City Re does not create the 
markets, nor does it influence the decisions reached by the markets. There is 
one integrated algorithm and it transforms the published data in a repeatable 
manner. The automated process is monitored to ensure that the outputs are 
reliable. Steel City Re neither adds nor subtracts information from the 
calculation. 
The calculations generate non-financial measures of value that are recorded as 
the RVM scaled in a non-financial unit, the Gerken Unit, named after a co-
founder of the company. Steel City Re also calculates values that are ordered by 
rank to generate the CRR scaled four significant digits as a percentile unit 
(Table 9-2).
Table 9-2. Properties of Steel City Re Reputational Value Metrics
RVM
CRR
Unit
Gerken
Percentile
Component joining 
method
Geometric
Arithmetic

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
Range
Generally –1.0 ≤ x ≤ 2.5
0.0000 ≤ x ≤ 1.0000
Median
0.4301 (23 August 2012)
0.5001
Primary use
Volatility and risk
Relative value
In April 2009, Steel City Re first made available these objective algorithmically 
generated reputational value metrics to support a range of executive 
management needs.14 The metrics helped corporate boards and senior 
management better communicate with stakeholders, quickly assess stakeholder 
reactions to major strategic initiatives, enhance oversight including 
compensation decisions, and better mitigate and manage crises. Steel City Re’s 
reputation metrics have also inspired an investment strategy called RepuStars.15 
The RepuStars Variety Corporate Reputation Index (INDEXDJX: REPUVAR), 
a stock selection strategy, is calculated and published by S&P/Dow Jones 
Indexes. The RepuSPX, a similar strategy applied only to the constituent 
companies of the S&P 500 Composite Index, is privately managed by 
Technology Option Capital, a financial modeling advisory company.
The Steel City Re reputational value metrics are calculated through a 
proprietary algorithm that quantifies the expectations held by stakeholders that 
produce economically relevant behaviors. The behaviors directly impact 
company revenues and operating costs. Expectations of these behaviors 
therefore impact expectations of company value. Usually captured by stock 
price, this value may sometimes deviate.
At times, stakeholders may reasonably disagree and hold different expectations. 
When equity stakeholders have low expectations, while other stakeholders have 
high expectations, there are value opportunities. 
The selection algorithm underpinning the RepuStars strategy is designed to 
identify these value opportunities. For REPUVAR, the algorithm selects up to 3 
companies from each of 19 commercial sectors companies in which value 
opportunities are implied by a high reputation value and a low stock price. 
REPUVAR is denominated in U.S. dollars. The components trade on U.S. 

Chapter 9 | Analysts
10
exchanges and are screened for price and market cap. The benchmark index is 
the S&P 500 Composite Equity Index. 
For RepuSPX, the algorithm selects up to 8 companies from members of the 
S&P 500 composite equity index from each of 19 commercial sectors where 
value opportunities are implied as previously. 
REPUVAR underperformed, while RepuSPX outperformed the S&P 500 
Composite Equity Index over the trailing 12 months from 4 October 2012, with 
mean monthly returns of 2.18% and 3.04% compared to the S&P 500’s mean 
monthly return of 2.09% (Table 9-3).
Table 9-3. As of 4 October 2012, Trailing 12-Month Portfolio Characteristics of Exemplary 
Strategies Informed by Steel City Re’s Corporate Reputation Metrics (Risk-Free Rate [RFR] = 
1.17%)
S&P 500
REPUVAR
RepuSPX
Mean monthly return
2.09%
2.18%
3.04%
Standard deviation
5.61%
6.60%
6.35%
Compound monthly 
return
1.94%
1.98%
2.85%
Annualized return
25.03%
26.20%
36.48%
Annualized standard 
deviation
19.42%
22.86%
21.99%
Excess return (RFR)
23.86%
25.03%
35.31%
Sharpe ratio
1.23
1.09
1.61
Sortino ratio (0%)
58.41%
49.88%
80.64%
Portfolio beta 
(relative to S&P 500)
1.11
1.04
Portfolio alpha 
(relative to S&P 500)
-0.13%
0.87%

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
Portfolio correlation 
to S&P 500
0.94
0.92
Coefficient of 
determination
1.23
1.11
Other Reputation Metrics
Because reputation has often been conflated with brand, the evolution of 
reputation measurement and management has been heavily influenced by the 
analytical framework and measurement tools of market research. As Forbes 
magazine explains, “We live in a world where word of mouth is the No. 1 driver 
of sales and competitive advantage—and because there’s a strong correlation 
between a company’s reputation and consumers’ willingness to recommend it, 
businesses need to focus on building those strong bonds with stakeholders.”16 
Most prominent among the tools used to quantify reputation is the market 
opinion survey and its product, a reputation score.
Fortune
Fortune magazine, working in cooperation with the Hay Group, has been 
producing since 2001 what they believe is the “definitive report card on 
corporate reputations.”17 For the 2012 U.S.-based list of Most Admired 
Companies, Hay Group, a global management consultancy, began with the 
Fortune 1000, the 1,000 largest companies ranked by revenue. The 10 largest 
were selected for each of 58 industries. To create the 58 industry lists in 2012, 
Hay asked executives, directors, and analysts to rate companies in their own 
industry on nine criteria, from investment value to social responsibility. The 
nine axes of ranking are:

Innovation

People management

Chapter 9 | Analysts
12

Use of assets

Social responsibility

Management quality

Financial soundness

Long-term investment

Product quality

Global competitiveness
The participant list is compiled in July–September and the surveys sent out 
annually in October. A second reminder mailing goes out toward the end of 
November, and all surveys are due back to the Hay Group by mid-December at 
the latest. Raters are asked to evaluate each eligible company on each attribute 
by assigning a score from 0 (“Poor”) to 10 (“Excellent”). For the purposes of 
the industry rankings, a company’s overall score is determined through a simple 
average of the individual attribute scores. Companies that rank in the top half of 
their industry are defined as “most admired” within their industry.18
Discussing the 2012 data, Mel Stark, vice president and regional reward 
practice leader at Hay Group, said, “Over the past 15 years, we have seen the 
composition of the World’s Most Admired Companies (WMAC) list change, 
but the attributes that enable those companies to excel have remained the same.”19 
According to Hay Group’s research, the four critical factors for organizational 
success are the things they do:

Executing and enabling strategy

Building structures and processes to sustain long-term 
performance

Achieving success through people

Placing a high value on leadership and talent

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
WMAC companies behave differently from their peers. Hay Group reports that 
94% of WMAC feel that their efforts to engage employees have reduced 
turnover vs. 67% of peers, and 81% of WMAC use performance measures to 
encourage leaders to think short term and into the future vs. 43% of peers.20 
Fortune notes, tongue in cheek, “The only thing harder than gaining admiration 
from peers in the corporate world is maintaining it” (Table 9-4). Three of the 
Most Admired Companies—GE, P&G, and Berkshire Hathaway—have stayed 
in the top slot of their industry sector every year they were included in the 
survey.21 A rather exclusive group we would add.
Table 9-4. 2012 Fortune’s Most Admired of the 1000 Largest U.S. Companies: Top 10
2011 Ranking
2012 Ranking
Company
1
1
Apple, Inc
2
2
Google
7
3
Amazon.com
6
4
The Coca Cola Company
12
5
IBM
8
6
FedEx
3
7
Berkshire Hathaway
16
8
Starbucks
5
9
Procter & Gamble
4
10
Southwest Airlines

Chapter 9 | Analysts
14
Barron’s
Barron’s is a member of The Wall Street Journal family of companies owned 
by Dow Jones, and in turn, by News Corp. Barron’s surveys professional money 
managers annually about the respect they accord the world’s 100 largest 
companies. A more narrowly defined survey population than that used by 
Fortune and Hays Group in their Most Admired list, participants are asked to 
select one of four statements reflecting their view of each company: Highly 
Respect, Respect, Respect Somewhat, or Don’t Respect. A point value is 
assigned to each response, with the highest accorded to Highly Respect, and a 
mean score is tabulated for each company. In the case of ties, the higher ranking 
goes to the company with the most Highly Respect votes (Table 9-5).22
When asked to rank the factors they consider most important in determining 
respect for corporations, 24% of the managers this year offered “strong 
management” while 20% said “sound business strategy.” Both are observable 
behaviors that underpin management’s reputation and about 50% of a 
company’s reputation. Eighteen percent felt ethics were foremost in their minds 
in terms of respect. Revenue and profit growth was the top concern for only 9% 
of respondents. 
Barron’s notes that while “The Most Respected Companies” rankings 
historically haven’t been predictive of stock-trading patterns, the collective 
opinions of professional investors can serve as one component of evaluating 
companies. 
Table 9-5. 2012 Barron’s Most Respected of the 100 Largest Companies: Top 10
2011 Ranking
2012 Ranking
Company
1
1
Apple, Inc
4
2
IBM
5
3
McDonald’s
2
4
Amazon.com

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
NR
5
Caterpillar
7
6
3M
13
7
United Parcel Service
8
8
The Coca Cola Company
19
9
Nestlé
17
10
Intel
Harris Interactive
In contrast to Barron’s survey of money managers, Harris Interactive, a leading 
global independent research organization, surveys the general public. Formerly 
known as the Harris Poll, Harris Interactive has used since 1999 the Harris 
Reputation Quotient (RQ) to measure the reputations of the most visible 
companies in the United States. The Annual RQ process begins with a 
Nominations Phase and is followed by a Ratings Phase, where they measure the 
reputation of the most visible companies in the United States.
For the Nominations Phase, which is used to identify the companies with the 
most “visible” reputations according to the general public, respondents are 
asked to name companies that stand out as having the best and worst reputations 
overall. For the 2012 survey, two open-end questions were asked of about 4,600 
people online:
Of all the companies that you’re familiar with or that you might have heard 
about, which TWO – in your opinion – stand out as having the BEST 
reputations overall?
Of all the companies that you’re familiar with or that you might have heard 
about, which TWO – in your opinion – stand out as having the WORST 
reputations overall?
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 9 | Analysts
16
Nominations from the surveys were tallied with subsidiaries and brand names 
were collapsed within the parent company. The nominations were then summed 
to create a total number of nominations for each company, and the final list 
comprised the 60 most visible companies in the United States as of October 
2011.
The RQ Ratings Phase is also driven by survey of the general public. For two 
weeks in December 2011, approximately 13,000 respondents ranked more than 
60 companies on 20 different attributes comprising six major reputational 
categories and the scores were compressed arithmetically to values where 80 or 
greater is excellent, and 50 or lower is “critically” poor.23 The categories are:

Social Responsibility

Vision and Leadership

Financial Performance

Emotional Appeal

Products and Services

Workplace Environment
The 13th annual Harris RQ survey comprising the survey results of December 
2011 were reported in February 2012 (Table 9-6). In summary, wrote the 
market research firm, “It’s a complicated world for corporate America as 
consumer perceptions grow increasingly negative. With the erosion of trust in 
corporate leadership, consumers have higher expectations and are demanding 
more information and transparency from companies with which they plan to 
spend their hard-earned dollars.” Companies with which the general public is a 
stakeholder only indirectly, and therefore likely to be impacted by their 
“critically” poor reputational standing only through shareholder or regulatory 
action, included three major financial sector firms.
Over the lifespan of the RQ study, twelve companies have received scores 
below 50, and the vast majority of these, like Enron, MCI (formerly 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
WorldCom), Adelphia, and Global Crossing, are now defunct. The 2012 RQ 
survey shows the reputations of Bank of America, Goldman Sachs and AIG in 
an equally challenging place. The general public believes that Bank of 
America has been more concerned with operational and financial recovery 
than with customers and rates the bank low in levels of trust, ethics, and 
customer service. In order to rebuild their reputation, Bank of America will 
need to engage beyond this functional rebound.24
Table 9-6. 2012 Harris Interactive Reputation RQ Ranking of the 60 Most Visible Companies: 
Top 10
2011 Ranking
2012 Ranking
Company
5
1
Apple, Inc
1
2
Google
15
3
The Coca Cola Company
8
4
Amazon.com
7
5
Kraft Foods
10
6
The Walt Disney Company
2
7
Johnson & Johnson
17
8
Whole Foods Market
16
9
Microsoft
13
10
United Parcel Service
Reputation Institute
Similar to the Harris approach, the Reputation Institute, a global management 
advisory organization, surveys the general public to generate its branded 
corporate reputation rankings, RepTrak (Table 9-7). Founded in 1997, surveys 
of the Reputation Institute’s RepTrak calculate reputational scores on the basis 

Chapter 9 | Analysts
18
of seven drivers of reputation that collectively influence the four “brand-like” 
emotional foundations of reputation: Admiration, Trust, Good Feeling, and 
Overall Esteem. The seven key dimensions that drive corporate reputation in the 
RepTrak system are: 25 

Products/Services

Innovation

Workplace

Governance

Citizenship

Leadership

Financial Performance
The RepTrak System evaluates the degree to which a particular dimension 
affects the emotional bond between a particular stakeholder group and a 
company, and it determines which dimensions have the highest impact on 
support and recommendation. It works across stakeholders providing a 
single lens to measure and manage reputation.25
For the 2012 study of U.S. companies, the largest companies based on revenue 
data from the Forbes Global 2000 list were filtered for firms that were engaged 
in general public-facing commercial activities and/or had a reasonable amount 
of familiarity with the general public. Survey results from 10,200 respondents 
were then tallied and values normalized to allow for multiyear longitudinal 
studies. 
Reported in cooperation with Forbes magazine, the 2012 study showed that the 
influence of perceptions of the enterprise on its overall reputation has continued 
to increase over the years. In the Reputation Institute survey, governance drove 
15.6% of a company’s reputation with consumers, followed by corporate 
citizenship (14.2%). These dimensions were second only to Products & 
Services (17.7%).

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19
Table 9-7. 2012 Reputation Institute Reptrak150 Ranking of U.S. Companies: Top 10
2011 Ranking
2012 Ranking
Company
15
1
General Mills
2
2
Kraft Foods Inc.
3
3
Johnson & Johnson
5
4
Kellogg’s
1
5
Amazon.com
6
6
United Parcel Service
25
7
The Coca Cola Company
46
8
Apple, Inc.
28
9
Pepsi Co.
20
10
Procter & Gamble
Explaining the data, Kasper Ulf Nielsen, Reputation Institute’s executive 
partner said, “People’s willingness to buy, recommend, work for, and invest in a 
company is driven 60% by their perceptions of the company and only 40% by 
their perceptions of their products.”16 The data trend, notes the Institute, speaks 
to our current environment—a “Reputation Economy”—where a company’s 
value is being driven by who they are, not just by what they do.
Although the distinction between who they are and what they do may not be 
apparent to survey respondents, they, too, ranked four companies in 2012 in the 
“poor” reputation group with scores below 40 on the RepTrak scales. Those 
companies were Halliburton, Goldman Sachs, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac. 

Chapter 9 | Analysts
20
Table 9-8. Characteristics of the Overlapping RepTrak and RQ Public Survey Measures
2012 RepTrak 150
2012 Harris RQ 60
Mean
67.24
70.79
Standard error
1.57
1.39
Median
71.26
73.19
Standard deviation
10.88
9.66
Sample variance
118.28
93.27
Kurtosis
0.07
0.19
Skewness
–0.89
-0.91
Minimum
36.95
46.18
Maximum
83.30
85.62
Guidance
There is a hunger for reputation metrics. “Evidence is accumulating to show 
that reputation is (emphasis in the original) directly associated with superior 
corporate performance over time, in ways that likely yield benefit both to 
investors and executives.”26 In a culture that manages what it can measure, and 
invests according to modern portfolio theory, metrics are essential.
None of the providers of survey data, or Steel City Re with its algorithmic 
metrics, suggests that reputational metrics alone are good stock picking tools. 
“Surveys tend to be backward-looking,” says Charles Bobrinskoy, research 
director at Ariel Investments in Chicago. “People look at who has accomplished 
a lot and rank them highly. As investors, we have to say, ‘Is all of it in the stock 
today?’ Conversely, he says, it is important to ask whether a widely hated stock 
just might be an opportunity.22 That question is explicit in both the RepuStars 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
21
and Required Business Performance investment strategies that are informed by 
the Steel City Re and reputation metrics.
The Fortune Most Admired survey data and Barron’s Most Respected survey 
data appear to capture the perceptions of investor and business professional 
stakeholders—peers—while both Harris Interactive and the Reputation Institute 
reputation scores capture the perception of the general public comprising a mix 
of customers, vendors, employees, or simply interested parties that vote and 
may influence regulators. The Steel City Re metrics capture the integrated 
views of all stakeholders. 
Figure 9-1. Plot of the RQ (y-axis) scores and RepTrak (x-axis) scores for the 2012 metrics. 
There is a 94% correlation between the RepTrak and RQ public survey measures, while the 
coefficient of determination (R2) is 88%.
There is a 94% correlation between the scores for the 48 companies found both 
on the 2012 RepTrak150 list and the 2012 Harris Interactive RQ 60 list (Figure 
9-1). This not surprising in light of some common history between the two 
measures. In 2006, Harris Interactive Inc.; Charles J. Fombrun, founder of the 

Chapter 9 | Analysts
22
Reputation Institute; and Reputation Institute, Inc. entered into an agreement 
whereby Harris Interactive acquired all of Fombrun’s right, title, and interest in 
(1) the trademarks “Harris/Fombrun Reputation Quotient,” “Reputation 
Quotient,” and “RQ,” (2) every corporate measurement tool to which those 
trademarks refer or have referred, and (3) all data generated from application of 
such measurement tools. The agreement also contains certain restrictions on the 
ability of the parties to provide future specified reputation-related services for a 
period of 24 months, and also contains mutual releases of prior claims. The 
Harris Interactive paid Fombrun $525,000 as consideration for the trademark 
rights transferred and the exclusive right to use the standardized methodology 
dating back to 1999 developed by Harris Interactive and Fombrun to measure 
corporate reputation.27
On the other hand, among the 128 companies for which there are overlapping 
metrics, there is only a 21% correlation between the Reputation Institute’s 
RepTrak metrics reflecting public opinion and the companies most admired by 
their peers as reported to Fortune (Figure 9-2). The most notable outliers: 
Goldman Sachs and Halliburton, which both scored above 7 among their 
peers/Most Admired and below 40 among the general public/RepTrak. Among 
the 43 companies for which there are overlapping metrics, there is a 67% 
correlation between the Barron’s Most Respected rankings provided by 
professional money managers and Fortune’s Most Admired rankings from a 
wider cut and larger group of business professionals.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
23
Figure 9-2. Plot of the WMAC scores (y-axis) and RepTrak scores (x-axis) for the 2012 metrics. 
There is a 21% correlation between the Reputation Institute RepTrak public survey and the 
Fortune Most Admired professional survey measures while the coefficient of determination (R2) 
is only 5%.
Studies on corporate reputations dating back more than a decade have 
emphasized the plurality of perceptions and representations around a company, 
referring to “corporate reputations” as a multifaceted rather than as a monolithic 
concept.28 The poor correlation between two distinct communities of 
stakeholders, the general public as captured by the RepTrak metrics and the 
business community as captured by the Most Admired metrics, show that this 
remains true in 2012. 
Theoretical work argues that stakeholders tend to pay attention to actions that 
are perceived as salient to their specific interests and values, and make 
inferences about corporate dispositions (their trustworthiness, reliability, social 
responsibility, etc.) based on observed actions that are interpreted as reflections 
of the former.29 Empirical research exploring the drivers of reputation among 
specific 
categories 
of 
stakeholders, 
however, 
is 
relatively 
scarce, 

Chapter 9 | Analysts
24
notwithstanding the recent emergence of multi-stakeholder investment 
strategies.
A relatively recent study looked at the dimensions that affect the judgment of 
securities analysts, key influencers whose evaluations and behavior affect 
collective perceptions of critical resource-holders such as institutional as well as 
retail investors.30 Results from a survey of 75 analysts operating on the Milan 
Stock Exchange by Gabioneta et al. indicate that securities analysts tend to 
judge companies mainly on their financial performance, the configuration of 
their governance structures, the quality of their financial disclosure, and the 
quality of their leadership and of their prospects for the future.31
The Gabioneta study indicated that four dimensions of corporate reputation— 
namely Financial Performance, Vision & Leadership, Financial Disclosure, and 
Corporate Governance following the framework of the Reputation Institute— 
displayed a high correlation with the overall disposition of securities analysts 
toward a company. These four dimensions of corporate reputation, however, as 
suggested empirically by the 2012 survey data, did not seem to have a direct 
effect on analysts’ behavior—that is, on the content of the recommendations 
they issue. Instead, their influence appears to be mediated by what we termed a 
company's “emotional appeal”—in other words, the extent to which a company 
is trusted, liked, admired, and respected by the respondent. 
Another study suggested that analysts might view reputation in the context of a 
corporate financial statement. Under this paradigm, it was suggested, reputation 
could be parsed on the balance sheet as both an asset and a liability. On the 
asset side is the increased value of the implicit claims sold by the firm now and 
in the future, while on the liability side is the present value of honoring these 
claims in the future. For example, consider a durable-good producer that has 
built a reputation for superior post-sales service. The present value of the price 
premiums that the firm receives on sales of its product as a result of the 
reputation would be an asset. The liability would be the present value of the cost 
of providing superior after-sales service in the future.32
Such a perspective is of academic interest but not necessarily operationally 
useful to an analyst. This volume has suggested that reputation is best viewed as 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
25
influencing the magnitude of line items on the profit and loss statement, as 
reflecting stakeholder impressions of governance, and as will be shown in 
Chapter 10, influencing regulatory burden. The data in this chapter indicate that 
what companies do creates different observable quantifiable reputations among 
different stakeholders. These can be measured through surveys and algorithms, 
and the various measures of reputation can inform secondary actions among 
stakeholders ranging from selecting stocks to improving marketing strategies 
To be sure, these various approaches to measuring and quantifying corporate 
reputations vary rather widely. One major point of differentiation among the 
measures is timeliness. Surveys done well take time; overnight surveys, the 
staple of election season, yield widely disparate outcomes even on narrowly 
defined questions. 
The two algorithmic measures are more responsive to market timing. 
Transparent Value’s metrics rank discrepancies between equity investor 
expectations and the likelihood that operations will meet those expectations. 
High probabilities of failure can serve as early warnings of securities to avoid. 
Steel City Re’s metrics report reputation ranking, value, volatility, and direction 
of change. Because they reflect the expectations of a broad range of 
stakeholders, they can help management and boards get timely early warnings 
of adverse public reactions to policy decisions and perceptions of operational 
risks—one of the most compelling applications of decision markets.33
The greatest consumers of metrics are stakeholders who extract the 
informational content therein to produce more metrics: market forecasts. More 
than any other market segment, analysts will find leading indicators in these 
extra-financial measures of corporate reputational value (Table 9-9).
Consider This

Based on what companies do, quantitative measures of 
reputation report stakeholder perceptions that eventually 
translate to actions with material economic consequences. 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 9 | Analysts
26

Depending on how the data are captured, from whom they 
are captured, and how they are processed, reputation 
metrics may be leading indicators of customer behavior, 
investor behavior, or multi-stakeholder behavior. In any 
case, they represent the “wisdom of crowds.”

Different stakeholders may assign significantly different 
reputational values to the same company, thereby enabling 
certain reputation metrics to inform equity selection 
strategies.
By the Numbers
Table 9-9. Characteristics of Several Measures of Reputation
Type
Description
Insight
Expert 
Transparent Value’s Required Business 
Performance Probability Metrics 
primarily for large cap companies. 
Captures equity investor expectations.
RBP: 0 < x < 100%
Algorithmic
Two exemplary large cap funds 
informed by Transparent Value metrics, 
Market (TVIMX) and Value (TVVIX).
TTM returns TVIMX: 21.63%
TTM returns TVVIX : 24.54%
TTM returns SPX: 25.03%
Algorithmic
Steel City Re Corporate Reputation 
Ranking and Reputation Value Metrics 
for approximately 7,000 public 
companies. Captures multi-stakeholder 
expectations.
Ranking: 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.0000
Value: ~1.0 ≤ x ≤ 2.5
Algorithmic
Two exemplary equity indexes informed 
by the Steel City Re metrics, RepuStars 
Variety (REPUVAR), and 
RepuStarsSPX.
TTM returns REPUVAR: 26.20%
TTM returns RepuSPX: 36.48%
TTM returns SPX: 25.03%
Survey
Fortune/Hay Group Most Admired 
metrics for the 1,000 largest companies. 
Captures business and financial 
Admired: 0 ≤ x ≤ 10

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
27
professional stakeholder expectations.
Survey
Barron’s Most Respected metrics for 
the 100 largest global companies. 
Captures financial professional 
stakeholder expectations.
Respected: 1 ≤ x ≤ 4
Survey
Harris Interactive Reputation Quotient 
metrics. 
Captures 
general 
public 
stakeholder expectations.
RQ: ~40 ≤ x ≤ 90
Survey
Reputation Institute RepTrak metrics. 
Captures general public stakeholder 
expectations.
RepTrak: ~30 ≤ x ≤ 90
Survey
Correlation of reputation rankings from 
the general public with rankings from 
the professional business community
21%
1 Clifford S. The annual shareholders’ meeting for Wal-Mart, like its stock, is buoyant. The New 
York Times. 1 June 2012. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/02/business/wal-mart-
board-challenges-rebuffed.html?_r=2&ref=business. Accessed 12 August 2012.
2 Bernstein IS. Metaphor, cognitive belief, and science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 
1988;11:247–248.
3 Available at: http://scotland.stv.tv/greatest-scot/nominees/118993-andrew-
carnegie-1835-1919/. Accessed 4 May 2012.
4 Available at: 
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/carnegie/peopleevents/pande01.html. Accessed 4 
May 2012.
5 Hill N. The wisdom of Andrew Carnegie as told to Napoleon Hill. Napoleon Hill Foundation, 
2005.
6 Ray S. Boeing’s Conner sticking to 777 jet’s upgrade plan. Bloomberg. 23 August 2012. 
Available at: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-08-24/boeing-s-conner-sticking-to-777-jet-
s-upgrade-plan.html\. Accessed 24 August 2012.

Chapter 9 | Analysts
28
7 How Julian Koski’s maverick stock picking method led to a merger with Guggenheim. RIA Biz. 
10 January 2012. Available at: http://www.riabiz.com/a/10528703/how-julian-koskis-maverick-
stock-picking-method-led-to-a-merger-guggenheim. Accessed 26 August 2012.
8 Transparent value. Available at: http://www.transparentvaluefunds.com/index.aspx?q=i. 
Accessed 25 August 2012.
9 Guggenheim Partners launches three transparent value mutual funds. Press Release, 3 May 
2010. Available at: 
http://www.transparentvaluefunds.com/news/Guggenheim%20Press%20Release.pdf. Accessed 
25 August 2012.
10 Prediction markets. Wikipedia. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prediction_market. 
Accessed 25 August 2012.
11 Jones H. UK sets out terms of urgent Libor review. Reuters. 30 July 2012. Available at: 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/07/30/us-britain-libor-idUSBRE86T08320120730. Accessed 
25 August 2012.
12 The basics. BBALibor™. Available at: http://www.bbalibor.com/bbalibor-explained/the-basics. 
Accessed 25 August 2012.
13 Graefe A, Armstrong JS. Comparing face-to-face meetings, nominal groups, Delphi and 
prediction markets on an estimation task. International Journal of Forecasting. 2011; 
27:183–195.
14 Steel City Re. Intangible Asset Management: reputation metrics. Available at: 
http://www.steelcityre.com/finance_management_index.shtml. Accessed 28 August 2012.
15 Technology Option Capital. Guide to RepuStars. Available at: 
http://www.steelcityre.com/documents/SOP4004GuidetoRepuStarsv720120229.pdf. Accessed 28 
August 2012.
16 Smith J. The world's most reputable companies. Forbes. 7 June 2012. Available at: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/jacquelynsmith/2012/06/07/the-worlds-most-reputable-companies/. 
Accessed 28 August 2012.
17 How we pick them. World’s most admired companies. Fortune. 2012. Available at: 
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/most-admired/2012/faq/. Accessed 28 August 2012.
18 Hay Group. How we identify and rank the Most Admired. Available at: 
http://www.haygroup.com/ww/best_companies/index.aspx?id=1582. Accessed 29 August 2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
29
19 FORTUNE magazine World’s Most Admired companies. Press release, 1 March 2012. 
Available at: http://www.haygroup.com/ww/press/details.aspx?id=33038. Accessed 28 August 
2012.
20 Hay Group. Media fact box. Available at: http://www.haygroup.com/Fortune/media-fact-box/. 
Accessed 29 August 2012.
21 Most admired industry stars. World’s most admired companies. Fortune. 2012. Available at: 
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/most-admired/2012/longest-streaks/?iid=smlrr. 
Accessed 28 August 2012.
22 Santoli M. Barron’s cover: The world’s most respected companies. Barron’s. 25 June 2012. 
Available at: 
http://online.barrons.com/article/SB50001424053111903882904577478993057727490.html#artic
leTabs_article%3D1. Accessed 28 August 2012.
23 The 2012 Harris Poll Annual RQ® Public Summary Report. Available at: 
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/vault/2012_Harris_Poll_RQ_Summary_Report.pdf. Accessed 
28 August 2012.
24 Google slips into second as Apple soars to coveted top spot with highest reputation score in 
history, according to 13th Annual Harris Poll RQ® Study. Press release, 13 February 2012. 
Available at: 
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/NewsRoom/PressReleases/tabid/446/ctl/ReadCustom%20Defau
lt/mid/1506/ArticleId/960/Default.aspx. Accessed 28 August 2012.
25 Reputation Institute. The RepTrak™ system. Available at: 
http://www.reputationinstitute.com/thought-leadership/the-reptrak-system. Accessed 28 August 
2012.
26 Greenberg M. On breaking the logjam: the how and why of corporate reputation leadership. 
Corporate Finance Review. 2012; 17(1):11–17.
27 Purchase/Sale Agreement between the Company, Charles J. Fombrun and Reputation Institute, 
Inc., dated as of May 15, 2006. Available at: 
http://apps.shareholder.com/sec/viewerContent.aspx?companyid=HPOL&docid=4435474. 
Accessed 28 August 2012.
28 Dowling GR. Creating corporate reputations: identity, image, and performance. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2001.
29 Sjovall AM, Talk AC. From actions to impressions: cognitive attribution theory and the 
formation of corporate reputation. Corporate Reputation Review. 2004; 7(3):269–281.

Chapter 9 | Analysts
30
30 Fombrun CJ. Corporate reputations as economic assets. In Hitt M, et al . (Eds.), Handbook of 
strategic management. Oxford: Blackwell, 2002.
31 Gabbioneta C, Ravasi D, Mazzola P. Exploring the drivers of corporate reputation: a study of 
Italian securities analysts. Corporate Reputation Review. 2007;10(2): 99. 
32 Dobson J. Introducing ethics into the finance curriculum: a simple three-level Guide. Journal of 
Financial Education. 2008; Spring: 1–17.
33 Hanson R. The Policy Analysis Market (and FutureMAP) Archive. George Mason University. 
Available at: http://hanson.gmu.edu/policyanalysismarket.html. Accessed 2 September 2012.

C H A P T E R
10
Regulators
By Michael D. Greenberg, JD, 
PhD1
We do want to have regulators who set the rules. For example, there has to 
be transparency. One of the things that’s clear about JP Morgan Chase and 
was true about AIG: they didn’t know what their losses were. If the rules that 
we had talked about had been in place, and they will be shortly, then they 
would not have been surprised by losses that were first ‘a tempest in a 
teapot,’ and then $2 billion, and then $5 to 6 billion. That’s our job: to put 
rules in place that govern the way things work.
—Barney Frank2
Regulators serve as the long arm of government, acting to set and enforce legal 
standards that apply broadly to define the landscape of industry and commerce. 
Federal and state regulators serve to monitor corporate behavior in many 
different ways. Notable examples range from the regulation of pollution by the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), to the oversight of domestic aviation 
activity by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), to the supervision of 
securities markets and the capital formation process by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC). 

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
2
In each instance, U.S. regulators establish and enforce rules that bound and limit 
the scope of legitimate corporate behavior. Some aspects of regulation (as in the 
case of the SEC) help to structure basic commercial and financial activities, 
setting a blueprint for how business itself will be conducted. Other aspects of 
regulation touch on more operational or peripheral elements of business 
enterprise, but that nevertheless are closely tied to reputation risk—as illustrated 
by regulations that target product quality, or workplace safety, or corporate 
ethical culture.3 
In all such instances, government standard-setting and enforcement activity 
imposes a set of obligations with which firms neglect to comply at their own 
peril. More deeply, regulators also help to generate a set of normative social 
expectations for what responsible and reputable corporate behavior ought to 
look like. Then too, regulators are themselves consumers of reputational 
information: the enforcement decisions that regulators make, in particular, can 
easily be influenced by the reputation of firms that fall under regulatory 
scrutiny. In sum and for a variety of reasons, regulators are an important 
reputational stakeholder group for corporations to consider. 
At the outset, it’s important to recognize that the relationship between 
regulators and the private sector is complex. Deep questions can be asked about 
the appropriate scope of regulation, how regulators can and should carry out 
their functions, and whether or not particular areas of regulation are truly 
enhancing of social welfare. Meanwhile, many narrow silos of regulatory 
activity, such as Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) oversight of the 
nuclear power industry, or Food and Drug Administration (FDA) oversight of 
the new drug development process, are highly technical and detailed in their 
own right, and demand close scrutiny simply to understand their intent, much 
less the specific requirements (and corresponding risks) actually being imposed 
upon industry. 
More broadly and in a somewhat different vein, the relationship between 
regulators and business enterprises is not a one-way street. Businesses can and 
do influence regulatory policy and enforcement activity, even as regulators 
monitor and shape the behavior of the private sector. Here again, another set of 
normative questions arises, regarding what sort of influence and access 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
corporations ought to have, in connection with the regulatory process. It is 
notably beyond the scope of this chapter to delve deeply into any of these 
questions about regulation, other than by acknowledging that the relationship 
between regulators and corporations is complicated and reciprocal, and 
particularly so when it comes to the influence and impact of corporate 
reputation.
For current purposes, the main focus of this chapter is to illustrate three basic 
ideas about regulators, corporate reputation risk, and material economic costs. 
First, regulators are indeed a major stakeholder group when it comes to 
corporate reputation. Regulators are both influenced by reputation in the 
decisions that they make and influencers of reputation through their own 
enforcement activities. Second, some elements of regulatory policy are 
particularly aimed at strengthening the pillars of corporate reputation, and at 
driving companies to pursue stronger reputational performance. Finally, some 
of the most catastrophic instances of corporate reputational crisis have involved 
prominent roles on the part of regulators. Where companies fail to comply with 
substantive regulatory requirements, or to engage effectively with regulators, 
major reputational damage can sometimes ensue as a result. We reflect on 
several examples in the text that follows.
Rewards and Enhanced Reputations
Regulators can reward businesses for behaviors associated with reputation-
building or -sustaining processes. In the cases that follow, Morgan Stanley was 
rewarded for behaviors that fostered an ethical environment, notwithstanding 
the action of a rogue, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services was 
charged to begin rewarding hospitals for delivering quality services.
Morgan Stanley: Prosecution Declined
Chapter 8 of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations (FSGO) 
provides a set of standards to deter and punish organizational crime, while 
recognizing and encouraging effective compliance programs within firms. The 

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
4
FSGO is a regulatory enforcement document, in several important ways. It 
notably provides benchmarks for federal judges in criminal sentencing, but has 
also been influential with regard to Justice Department policy on prosecuting 
corporate crime, and in deferred prosecution agreements entered into by 
enforcement authorities. 
Perhaps more important, the FSGO has incentivized a range of positive 
compliance and ethical culture behaviors on the part of corporations, such that 
firms become entitled to more lenient treatment from judges and prosecutors for 
having undertaken the behaviors. In this vein, a major amendment to the FSGO 
in 2004 set out a specific corporate obligation “to promote an organizational 
culture that encourages ethical behavior and compliance with law.” This is an 
example of a regulatory standard that ties directly to corporate reputational 
performance, and to efforts by companies to fortify their reputations by 
improving their values, norms, and internal controls. When instances of 
corporate crime do indeed occur, fulfillment of FSGO standards can in principle 
help both to protect a firm’s reputation and to secure more lenient treatment on 
the part of enforcement authorities.
The prosecution of Garth Peterson, a former managing director for Morgan 
Stanley in China who was sentenced in federal court on 16 August 2012, 
showcases the point.4 Peterson, an executive involved in Morgan Stanley’s 
China-based practice, perpetrated a fraudulent real estate deal in Shanghai that 
circumvented the company’s internal controls, and that netted Peterson and his 
co-conspirators millions of dollars in illicit gains. Peterson’s actions were 
subsequently found to have violated the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(FCPA), which forbids U.S. nationals and corporations from bribing foreign 
officials. Under the provisions of FCPA, Morgan Stanley itself could potentially 
have been subject to criminal sanction for Peterson’s misconduct. Federal 
prosecutors, however, chose not to follow that course, noting instead that 
Peterson “used a web of deceit to thwart Morgan Stanley’s effort to maintain 
adequate controls designed to prevent corruption.” They concluded that because 
“Morgan Stanley constructed and maintained a system of internal controls, 
which provided reasonable assurances that its employees were not bribing 
government officials, the Department of Justice declined to bring any 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
enforcement action against Morgan Stanley related to Peterson’s misconduct. 
The company voluntarily disclosed this matter and has cooperated throughout 
the Department’s investigation.”5 
How does the Morgan Stanley case relate back to corporate reputational risk? 
The answer is that Morgan Stanley was broadly following both FSGO standards 
and the requirements of FCPA, through its internal controls designed to prevent 
bribery. The Justice Department investigation of Peterson ultimately exonerated 
Morgan Stanley of any wrong-doing, and held up Morgan Stanley’s internal 
controls and cooperation as an example of good conduct on the part of the 
company. Thus, Morgan Stanley avoided the potential for significant fines and 
penalties under the FCPA, while enhancing its own reputation for honesty with 
the Department of Justice, and perhaps with other reputational stakeholder 
groups as well. The outcome of the Peterson case represents a potential 
reputational crisis that was avoided by the company. It also reflects a series of 
management controls and internal investments that were made by Morgan 
Stanley, at least in part, in response to regulatory standards for corporate 
compliance programs, the latter being embedded in the FSGO, and 
subsequently adopted by the Department of Justice in its criminal enforcement 
efforts. 
The costs avoided by Morgan Stanley were material. Drawing on DOJ 
published statistics for all FCPA settlements reached and fines imposed during 
1998–2010, the average associated costs in criminal and other penalties in that 
period was $69.4 million. Higher costs were associated with guilty pleas, and 
lower with deferred prosecution agreements (Table 10-1).6
Table 10-1. Top Ten Foreign Corrupt Practices Act Settlements, 1998–2010. DPA=Deferred 
Prosecution Agreements.
Company 
Name
Year
Amount of 
Settlement (in 
Millions)
Disposition
Siemens
2008
$800 
Guilty Plea
KBR/Halliburton
2009
$579 
Guilty Plea
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
6
BAE
2010
$400 
Guilty Plea
Snamprogetti 
Netherlands
2010
$365 
DPA
Technip S.A.
2010
$338 
DPA
Daimler AG
2010
$185 
Guilty Plea; DPA
Panalpina
2010
$82 
Guilty Plea; DPA
ABB Ltd
2010
$58 
Guilty Plea; DPA
Pride
2010
$56 
Guilty Plea; DPA
Shell
2010
$48 
DPA
The willingness of the Department of Justice to decline prosecution because of 
existing controls illustrates how challenging it can be to police rogues. In part, 
the argument goes, this is because every individual under the right 
circumstances has his price. “The commercialism of the last two decades has 
displayed a distinctive kind of boundlessness, emblematic of a world in which 
everything is for sale,” writes political philosopher Michael J. Sandel.7
When he was an Illinois attorney, the story goes, Abraham Lincoln represented 
a poor widow who was suing the president of the local bank and asking for $5 
in damages. Struggling then to earn a living, Lincoln would become the 16th 
president of the United States on the basis of, among other things, his reputation 
for propriety and ethics.
The bank president, a pillar of his community, is alleged to have visited 
Lincoln’s office and, in the presence of Lincoln’s partner, offered Abe a bribe to 
throw the case. Lincoln is reported to have said, “No, the lady deserves her day 
in court.” The banker responded that it would be humiliating if he lost to this 
widow, so he raised his bribe to $25. Lincoln refused. “$50,” said the banker. 
Abe refused again. 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
The banker stood up, started reaching for his wallet and said, “Mr. Lincoln, you 
drive a hard bargain. I’ll give you $100 cash right now.” Abe jumped up, 
grabbed the banker and threw him out the door, pitching him into the mud 
outside. Lincoln’s partner was astonished. “Abe, he tried to bribe you three 
times and you didn’t mind. Then the fourth time you just seem to blow up,” he 
said. Abe responded, “He was getting too close to my price.”8
Hospital Reputation: Quality Encouraged
Responding to the mandates of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) enacted regulations in 2011 to 
establish a “Value-Based Purchasing Plan” for hospital services, which ties 
hospital reimbursement under Medicare to a series of performance metrics, the 
latter notably including patient survey feedback describing the quality of 
patients’ own experiences in hospital.9 In a related vein, CMS issued a 2012 
final rule under the ACA designed to reduce 30-day readmission rates at 
hospitals, under which Medicare would penalize hospitals through reductions in 
their reimbursements of up to 1% during the 2013 program year, based on 
hospitals’ failure to meet specified targets in their own readmission rates.10 It 
was anticipated that approximately 2,200 hospitals will be immediately affected 
by the new rule on readmission rates, collectively facing financial penalties of 
$300 million. In out years under the new CMS regulation, the potential 
reimbursement penalties for faulty hospital readmission rates will grow 
substantially from the initial $300 million base figure. 
CMS rules under the ACA provide another example of the reciprocal 
relationship between regulatory action and corporate reputation. On one hand, 
the use by CMS of patient feedback in determining hospital reimbursement 
rates is fundamentally a reputation-driven process, and one that involves a 
regulator drawing on patient survey metrics in order to make basic decisions 
about whether to reward or punish specific institutions. Financial penalties 
based on high hospital readmission rates, meanwhile, correspond to a different 
high-profile regulatory intervention, and one that will likely generate a 
reputational impact of its own on targeted institutions (in parallel with the 
adverse revenue effect). In sum, new CMS rules for the reimbursement of 

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
8
hospitals are at once influenced by hospital reputations, and at the same time are 
likely to become significant influencers of those reputations. All controversy 
concerning the reasonableness of the new CSM rules set aside, there is one 
thing that can be said with confidence about the rules: They seem almost certain 
to drive a new reputational focus among hospitals, as the latter seek to protect 
their reimbursements by responding effectively to the CMS reimbursement 
regime.
Punishments and Diminished Reputations
Regulators can punish businesses for failures in reputation-building or 
-sustaining processes. Punishments may come in the form of penalties, fines, or 
prohibitions from doing business. Punishments may also come in the form of 
denials of requests for relief. In the cases below, BP was penalized for a host of 
failures; and, for its business process failures, Knight Capital was denied relief.
BP: Failures Punished
As we’ve already discussed at length in Chapters 1 and 2, the BP Deep Water 
Horizon drill rig disaster is an example of a highly material reputational crisis 
event. The Deep Water catastrophe involved multiple levels of operational 
problems and challenges in the lead-up to the spill, but one notable dimension 
involved regulatory standards and monitoring, and their relationship to the spill. 
Prior to 2011, off-shore oil drilling in the United States was generally subject to 
the oversight of the Minerals Management Service (MMS), an agency within 
the U.S. Department of the Interior.11 In the decades prior to the Deep Water 
Horizon event, regulatory policy concerning offshore oil drilling and 
transportation had notably seesawed between intervals of intense scrutiny and 
stronger regulation (as in the aftermath of the Exxon Valdez event) vs. intervals 
of deregulation and a more permissive government stance.12 
Although the MMS had regulatory responsibility for offshore oil drilling 
activities on the U.S. continental shelf at the time of the disaster, subsequent 
reviewers have noted that there was no “comprehensive set of regulations 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
specifically addressing deep water technology, drilling, or well design” at the 
time of the Macando blow out.13 Perhaps for this reason, the MMS notably did 
not detect the problems at the Macando well-site through ordinary inspection 
processes prior to the event. The post-event investigation nevertheless revealed 
a series of regulatory violations associated with the Deep Water Horizon 
disaster, including failure to perform operations in a safe and workmanlike 
manner, failure to take necessary precautions to keep the well under control at 
all times, and failure to use appropriate pressure integrity tests as specified by 
regulations.14 Although BP was not directly fined by the regulator for these and 
other regulatory violations, the violations themselves arguably set the stage for 
the oil spill and for the $20-billion settlement fund that eventually followed it.
The Deep Water Horizon case illustrates an important dimension of regulatory 
impact on reputation risk and costs from compliance failures. Particularly where 
the focus of a regulator is on safety, security, or product quality issues, then the 
risk associated with violating the rules may have less to do with the threat of 
investigation and prosecution by the regulator than with injury and harm that 
follows from a major industrial accident. In the Deep Water instance, stronger 
regulatory monitoring and enforcement in the lead-up to the crisis plausibly 
might have helped to prevent the calamity (and the associated reputational 
crisis), even though it might also have been perceived by the company as 
burdensome and punitive. 
So what’s the right way to understand the role of the regulator, and of corporate 
reputation, in the Deep Water Horizon case? The regulator set broad safety and 
operating standards that applied to offshore drilling activity. The regulator did 
not discover the violations at the Macando site until after the crisis. Meanwhile, 
the regulatory violations of BP and its affiliates were associated with a 
catastrophic accident and billions of dollars in damages. Ex post investigation 
of the accident spotlighted the regulatory violations and deficiencies. 
Among the negative consequences to BP was a serious blow to its reputation, 
across all of its major reputational stakeholder groups—including, but not 
limited to, the federal regulator. Note that major safety and environmental 
disasters can always be understood as involving reputational crisis for the firms 
involved in them. In this instance, the failure to follow regulatory guidelines 

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
10
(and to institute effective controls and compliance) was arguably a proximate 
cause for an environmental catastrophe, and for the corporate reputational 
hurricane that accompanied it.
Knight Capital Group: “Mulligan” Denied
Knight Capital is a U.S.-based financial services firm that engages in a variety 
of institutional trading and market-making activities. The firm was well known 
and reasonably well regarded until August of 2012, when, as recounted in 
Chapter 7, a glitch in a newly activated automated trading program led to wildly 
erratic and unintended securities trading activities. The firm found itself unable 
to shut down the rogue software quickly, and trading losses of approximately 
$440 million resulted within a matter of minutes. The losses threw the firm into 
turmoil, led to a collapse in the price of its own common stock, and largely 
wiped out the equity position of Knight Capital’s existing shareholders, forcing 
a crisis intervention and recapitalization of the firm by a new group of investors.15 
In the wake of the episode, confidence in the broader stock market (not to speak 
of Knight Capital itself) reportedly deteriorated to its lowest point in several 
years.16
The automated trading disaster at Knight Capital would have caused a 
reputational crisis for the company in any event, but regulatory oversight and 
intervention (or lack thereof) played an important role in both the lead-up to and 
aftermath of, the crisis. 
Only hours following the “frolic and detour” perpetrated by Knight’s rogue 
trading software, the CEO of the company reportedly called Mary Schapiro, 
chairman of the SEC who was vacationing in Maine, to request that the firm be 
allowed to unwind its unintentional acquisition of more than $4 billion of 
securities positions, in a manner analogous to the cancellation of bogus trades 
that was permitted following the “flash crash” of 2010. Knight’s request for a 
professional Mulligan17 was rejected by the SEC, which then forced the 
company to seek rapid intervention from new investors in order to recapitalize. 
The Wall Street Journal reported: “Ms. Schapiro's willingness to stand firm on a 
decision that would imperil a large firm was partly a reflection of the changes in 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
place since the market collapse on May 6, 2010, known as the flash crash. 
Exchanges canceled hundreds of trades afterward, angering market participants 
who said the decision was arbitrary and hurt market integrity. Under SEC 
pressure, exchanges instituted more specific rules governing when trades could 
be canceled. Ms. Schapiro stood by those guidelines, say people briefed on the 
discussion.”18
In a related vein and in the days following the episode, the SEC began to 
investigate whether Knight had violated the SEC’s “Market Access Rule,” 
which promulgated standards to require broker-dealers and market makers to 
install new control systems to prevent automated trades that either violate 
capital and credit thresholds, or else that appear to be erroneous.19 The Market 
Access Rule was itself enacted in the wake of the flash crash of 2010, and was 
specifically intended to prevent episodes like the recent Knight Capital trading 
debacle. 
As of later summer 2012, the SEC investigation of Knight Capital remained 
ongoing—but it once again reflects a situation in which the behavior of a firm 
arguably violated a regulatory standard pressing for more rigorous compliance 
and controls, with disastrous financial and reputational consequences for the 
firm. Further regulatory fallout both for Knight Capital, and for the securities 
markets more broadly, could easily spin out of this episode downstream.
Guidance
The preceding cases illustrate that regulators are sometimes either strongly 
influenced by, or else exert strong influence upon, corporate reputation. The 
cases also show that regulators often set standards that can be associated with 
tremendous reputational risk to firms, and that that risk often goes beyond the 
simple threat of enforcement. 
Notably absent from our list of cases in this chapter are the many episodes in 
which regulatory enforcement and intervention have themselves been directly 
associated with fines and penalties of tens or hundreds of millions of dollars to 
corporations (Siemens, Alcatel-Lucent, Daimler-Chrysler, Eli Lilly, Johnson & 

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
12
Johnson, etc.). Those episodes are surely important too, but they obscure the 
fact that regulation, and the behavior of regulators, can often have a more 
subtle, but equally important, effect on firms. 
Whenever regulatory standards are violated by a corporation and significant 
harm to external stakeholder groups results, then the potential for a reputational 
disaster is close at hand. The regulator often sets the stage for corporate 
reputational risk in these instances, and may shine the investigative spotlight 
after the fact of a crisis episode, even though regulatory enforcement in itself is 
not the precipitating factor of the crisis. A similar reputational pattern can be 
observed in a wide array of regulatory examples and fact patterns, drawing on 
substantive regulators as disparate as the SEC and the Minerals Management 
Service. 
In a somewhat different vein, it’s important to recognize that some key elements 
of regulatory policy are particularly aimed at strengthening the antecedents of 
corporate reputation, and driving companies to pursue stronger reputational 
performance. The FSGO (with respect to Morgan Stanley) and CMS examples 
described in this chapter are both cases in point. 
The FSGO is in one sense a back-handed regulatory document seeking to drive 
a corporate compliance agenda, at the same time that it also serves as a 
blueprint for federal sentencing decisions in corporate criminal cases. The 
FSGO provides a set of detailed instructions to companies for how to mitigate 
an important precursor to reputational risk, while also establishing incentives to 
press companies actually to do so. 
The CMS example, by contrast, spotlights a regulatory effort to drive stronger 
reputational performance for hospitals with another major stakeholder group: 
patients. In this case, the regulator is a direct consumer of reputational 
information about the institutions, and is using that information to incentivize 
new hospital-based quality improvement efforts. Here again, regulators play an 
important role on both sides of the corporate reputational spectrum. Regulators 
set standards that directly influence reputational risk and prophylactic activity 
on the part of firms. But regulators are also consumers of reputational 
information, and can themselves be strongly influenced by it in their 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
enforcement and standard-setting activities. To put it another way, regulators 
and firms are like the partners in an elaborate minuet, constantly moving back 
and forth in intricate patterns, with a choreography that is partly scripted by 
institutional reputations.
Given all of the foregoing, we would be remiss not to remember that there is a 
deep and fundamental relationship between what regulators do and what firms 
do through their compliance programs. In some sense, compliance efforts 
undertaken within companies are a mirror reflection of the standards and 
enforcement undertaken by regulators. Compliance in a vacuum would have 
little meaning or purpose without regulation to give structure and substance to 
related corporate efforts. Again, regulators are one of the basic landscape 
features of the business environment, in helping to determine how commerce 
and industry will be conducted. Many facets of the relationship between 
regulators and the private sector move beyond considerations of corporate 
reputation. Nevertheless, corporate reputation and reputational risk are 
underlying ghosts in the machine, whenever and wherever the government 
becomes involved in the regulation of business enterprise.
What are some practical action items for firms and executives to consider, based 
on all of this? First, know your regulator. A firm needs to understand the 
substantive regulatory standards that apply to it, and the enforcement posture of 
the corresponding regulators, in order to assess and manage its related risks. 
Second, engage your regulator. The fact that regulators are themselves a 
reputational stakeholder group, and a consumer of reputational information 
about business, means that firms have some power to influence them through 
the scope of their own behavior. Formulating a plan for how best to do this is 
partly a compliance activity, but also an activity with deeper strategic and 
cultural significance for firm management. 
Finally, firms should appreciate the Socratic maxim: “The way to gain a good 
reputation is to endeavor to be what you desire to appear.”20 Meeting the 
demands of regulators is only partly about the technical exercise of fulfilling 
outside legal requirements. On a more important level, it is about internalizing 
and embodying a set of substantive standards that define product quality, 
workplace safety, environmental sustainability, good labor practice, and many 

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
14
of the other hallmarks of corporate reputational excellence. To really do this 
well is to maximize corporate reputational assets, while reducing reputational 
risks, and the financial costs arising, to a minimum (Table 10-2). And that is the 
fundamental challenge for corporations in seeking to deal most effectively with 
their regulators.
Consider This

Regulators are both influenced by reputation in the decisions that they 
make and are also influencers of reputation through their own 
enforcement activities.

Some elements of regulatory policy are particularly aimed at 
strengthening the antecedents of corporate reputation and at driving 
companies to pursue stronger reputational performance.

Some of the most catastrophic corporate reputational crises were 
precipitated by corporate failures to comply with substantive regulatory 
requirements, or to engage effectively with regulators.
By the Numbers
Prosecution with imprisonment, fines, and penalties are among the punishments 
regulators use to foster conformance with business practices that are acceptable 
under the law. Conformance as evidenced by intent—an authentic 
reputation—even in the setting of a process failure can mitigate punishment and 
avoid costs.
Table 10-2. Exemplary Benefits and Costs of Regulatory Compliance or Failure
P&L Impact
Regulator
Action
Example
Value
Cost avoided
Department of 
Justice
Criminal 
prosecution 
Morgan Stanley
$69.4 million 
(est.)

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
averted
Cost avoided
CMS
Penalties averted
Meeting 
Medicare quality 
standard for 
hospital 
readmission
$300 million 
(aggregate 
anticipated 
hospital penalties 
for 2013)
Cost incurred
Multiple
Fines and 
penalties
BP
$20 billion
Cost incurred
SEC
Relief denied
Knight Capital
$440 million
1 Michael Greenberg is a Senior Behavioral Scientist with the RAND Corporation and Director of 
the RAND Center for Corporate Ethics and Governance. He is a lawyer and a psychologist by 
training. He received his PhD in clinical psychology from Duke University and his law degree 
from Harvard, and spent several years in corporate law practice at Ropes & Gray in Boston prior 
to joining RAND.
2 Representative Barney Frank (D-Mass.) speaking on Bloomberg TV, 2 August 2012. Available 
at: http://hereisthecity.com/2012/08/03/rep-barney-frank-congress-cant-write-laws-to-stop-errors-
like-kn/. Accessed 12 August 2012.
3 It is not a coincidence that these examples of regulatory focus correspond directly to several of 
the basic pillars of business reputation that we outlined in Chapter 1. 
4 See discussion in Department of Justice press release dated April 25, 2012, Former Morgan 
Stanley managing director pleads guilty for role in evading internal controls Required by FCPA.” 
Available at: http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2012/April/12-crm-534.html.  Accessed 2 September 
2012.
5 Ibid.
6 See Department of Justice, Appendix B – Chart 5, Sanctions imposed upon legal persons for 
FCPA violations since 1998. Available at: 
http://www.justice.gov/criminal/fraud/fcpa/docs/response3-appx-b.pdf. Accessed 2 September 
2012.
7 Olster S. One nation, ruled by money. Fortune. 20 April 2012. Available at: 
http://features.blogs.fortune.cnn.com/tag/ethics/. Accessed 3 September 2012.
8 Tsukerman Y. He was getting close to my price. Available at: 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 10 | 
Regulators
16
http://ytspar.tumblr.com/post/458327591/he-was-getting-too-close-to-my-price. Accessed 3 July 
2012.
9 See 76 Federal Register 26490 (May 6, 2011). CMS, hospital inpatient value-based purchasing 
program: final rule.
10 See generally Fiegl C. AMEDNEWS.com, August 27, 2012. 2,200 Hospitals face Medicare pay 
penalty for readmissions. Available at: http://www.ama-
assn.org/amednews/2012/08/27/gvsb0827.htm; and Rao J. NPR blog, August 13, 2012, 
Thousands of Hospitals face penalties for high readmission rates. Available at: 
http://www.npr.org/blogs/health/2012/08/13/158711121/thousands-of-hospitals-face-penalties-
for-high-readmission-rates?sc=ipad&f=1001. Accessed 2 September 2012. 
11 Subsequent reorganization within the Department of Interior has replaced the old MMS with 
two new administrative entities, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and the Bureau of 
Safety and Environmental Enforcement. See discussion at http://www.boemre.gov/. Accessed 2 
September 2012.
12 See discussion in King & Johnson. An oil thirsty America divided into ‘dead sea.’ The Wall 
Street Journal. 8 October 2010.
13 See Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. Report regarding the 
causes of the April 20, 2010 Macando well blowout, 14 September 2011, at 172.
14 Ibid.
15 See Wall Street to bail out Jersey City's Knight Capital with $400 million package. Bloomberg 
News. August 6, 2012. Available at: 
http://www.nj.com/business/index.ssf/2012/08/wall_street_to_bail_out_jersey.html. Accessed 2 
September 2012. 
16 See Cheng J. The Wall Street Journal. 21 August 2012 Knight Capital’s woes chip away at 
Wall Street confidence. Available at: http://blogs.wsj.com/marketbeat/2012/08/21/knight-capitals-
woes-chip-away-at-wall-street-confidence/. Accessed 2 September 2012. 
17 Milligan. Wikipedia. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mulligan_%28games%29. 
Accessed 3 September 2012.
18 Patterson S, Strasburg J, Bunge J. SEC nixed Knight's plea for a do-over. Wall Street Journal. 6 
August 2012. Available at: 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10000872396390444246904577571113923528168.html. 
Accessed 3 September 2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
19 Rule 15c3-5 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, enacted November 15, 2010 (see 
Exchange Act Release No. 63241, Nov. 3, 2010, 75 FR 69792). See also discussion in Lynch SN. 
Reuters. August 3, 2012, U.S. SEC examining risk controls at Knight Capital. Available at: 
http://news.yahoo.com/u-sec-examining-risk-controls-knight-capital-213115172--sector.html. 
Accessed 2 September 2012.
20 Socrates (470 BC–399 BC) quotes. ThinkExist.com. Available at: 
http://thinkexist.com/quotations/reputation/2.html. Accessed 2 September 2012.

C H A P T E R
11
Cultural Context
By Robert C. Brandegee1
The ability of a company to execute its strategy and bring new products and 
services to market, are directly linked to a company’s understanding of the 
social and environmental context in which this happens.
—Aron Cramer2 
We have shown how reputation is a consequence of corporate behavior that 
motivates stakeholders to behave in ways that either reward or punish the 
corporation. We’ve argued that reputation crises—instances in which markets 
punish companies—are often consequences of operational failures in one or 
more of the six business processes that are the pillars of reputation (Table 1-1). 
The factor precipitating market punishment is the magnitude of the market’s 
disappointment when expectations are not met. 
While the behaviors of companies help set those expectations, cultural 
norms—local expectations of citizenship behavior—also play a role.3 To 
appreciate the complex interplay among cultural norms, corporate values, and 
stakeholder expectations, it is helpful to look at cases in which reputational 
crises have arisen in the absence of any overt business process failure. 

Chapter 11 | Cultural Context
2
This chapter presents only a superficial mention of controversies over some of 
the most passionate modern-day social struggles. It is enough for our purpose of 
illustrating the cultural context, but it makes no judgment about the issues these 
companies encountered in these cases. Although the cases may touch on 
readers’ personal sensitivities, as Chapter 1 indicated, this book observes and 
explains in the spirit of American pragmatism and avoids moralizing.
Society, Expectations, and Reputation 
Corporate behaviors are shaped by a company’s values and reflect its culture. 
This is especially the case in companies still led by their founders or closely 
held by related family members.
At the time companies are formed, their cultures reflect the values of the time as 
well as the strategic and operating processes for meeting market needs. These 
are the foundation of corporate cultures. For every company, corporate boards 
are stewards of those cultures. As society’s expectations evolve, the standards 
by which corporate behaviors are judged by a company’s stakeholders also 
evolve. Corporate cultures, however, are usually slower to evolve, and therein 
lies a significant endemic reputational risk: Corporate culture, company values, 
and company operations can lose touch with the evolving expectations of both 
stakeholders and society at large. 
Four cases—News Corp, Chick-fil-A, Susan G. Komen, and Target—illustrate 
the diversity of perspectives in society that can transform operational decisions 
into reputational crises. Individually, they demonstrate pitfalls to steer clear of 
in operating a business so as to minimize market friction. Collectively, they 
underscore the many ways that daily debate centers on the question: What 
should society expect from businesses that are formed and operate under its 
laws?
News Corp: The Great Debate
Elisabeth Murdoch, daughter of News Corp Chief Executive Rupert Murdoch 
and chairman of News Corp's U.K. television production firm Shine, declared 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
on 23 August 2012 that “profit without purpose is a recipe for disaster.”4 
Delivering the annual James MacTaggart Memorial Lecture (the keynote 
address at the MediaGuardian Edinburgh International Television Festival), 
which both her father and brother had delivered in prior years, Elisabeth said, 
“It is increasingly apparent that the absence of purpose—or of a moral 
language—within government, media, or business could become one of the 
most dangerous ‘own goals’ for capitalism and for freedom.” 
Three years and a $4.4-billion reputational crisis earlier (see Chapter 4), 
Elisabeth’s brother James—then heir presumptive to their father Rupert’s 
Global News Corporation empire—expressed a decidedly different view: “The 
right path is all about trusting and empowering consumers. It is about 
embracing private enterprise and profit as a driver of investment, innovation, 
and independence. And the dramatic reduction of the activities of the state in 
our sector… The only reliable, durable, and perpetual guarantor of 
independence is profit.”5 
James was certainly right about the importance of profit. Without it, a company 
cannot survive, no matter how worthy its purpose. Yet that pursuit ended in 
precipitous fall. So Elisabeth was right too. Businesses whose aims extend no 
further than making a profit can end up destroying themselves.6 Yet, were it not 
for its profits then, as well as now, News Corp would not have survived the fall, 
and Elisabeth would not have been invited to deliver the keynote.
The debate between the Murdoch siblings is one regal contest in the great 
debate on the role of business in society waged by armies of adversaries on 
countless fields and issues. It is a debate on which companies speak daily 
through their actions as much as their words, as they struggle to address 
profitably the common expectations of their markets without antagonizing any 
of the various sets of adversaries who compose those markets.
Chick-fil-A: Unnecessary Controversy
In the early 1960s, Truett Cathy founded Chick-fil-A, now the second largest 
quick-service chicken restaurant chain in the United States. With more than 

Chapter 11 | Cultural Context
4
1,615 locations in 39 states and Washington, DC, sales topped $4.1 billion in 
2011. Large as it is, it remains a family business. Truett is the chairman and 
CEO, his son Dan is president and COO, and his son Don (Bubba) is senior vice 
president.
Family businesses are built around family values, and nonagenarian Truett 
Cathy, author of five motivational books, is a devout Southern Baptist with 
strong religion-focused family values. Since 1946, all of his restaurants have 
been closed on Sunday.7 One of the missions of the WinShape Foundation, a 
charity 
funded 
by 
the 
family, 
is 
supporting 
marriage 
enrichment 
retreats—between a man and a woman. A Foundation spokesperson stated, “We 
do not accept homosexual couples because of the statement in our contract.”8
Marriage, gay rights, and religion are flashpoint issues on which different 
groups with strong social convictions passionately disagree. In a June 2012 
radio interview, President Dan Cathy elaborated on his company’s values and 
its “support of the traditional family” and declared that “legalizing same-sex 
marriage would invite God’s judgment on our nation.” 9,10 In an election year 
already seething with politically stoked culture wars, a media firestorm erupted. 
US News and World Report described the reactions of several unlikely 
stakeholders11:
First the Jim Henson Co., which provided Muppets toys for Chick-fil-A kids 
meals, pulled its toys and its partnership with the restaurant. Then the 
(Democratic) mayors of Boston and Chicago expressed opposition to new 
Chick-fil-A outlets opening in their cities…On the other side, Republican 
politicians such as presidential candidate Rick Santorum and former 
Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee defended the restaurant chain and its 
policies....
Same-sex marriage activists called a boycott and Governor Huckabee countered 
by calling a national Chick-fil-A Appreciation Day that increased the chain’s 
business that day by 30%—countered in turn 2 days later by a nationwide Same 
Sex Kiss Day at the restaurants.12
Truett Cathy is proud of his inherently uncontroversial chicken sandwich, a 
food product that his market—customers, employees, suppliers, and 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
creditors—understands. It is not clear how Dan Cathy’s radio pronouncements 
improved that product’s reputation beyond a limited portion of these 
stakeholders. The son’s ill-considered remarks ignited a potentially damaging 
controversy that had nothing to do with the core business his father had built.13 
Susan G. Komen: Lurking Controversy 
Chick-fil-A was not the only battle in the culture wars of 2012. In January, the 
Susan G. Komen for the Cure Foundation announced the elimination of its 
funding of breast cancer education and screening by Planned Parenthood 
pursuant to a new internal rule that organizations under Congressional 
investigation, as Planned Parenthood was at the time, were ineligible for Komen 
funding. This decision outraged women’s health advocacy groups and triggered 
an immediate surge in donations and grants to Planned Parenthood. Three days 
later, Komen restored the funding and the senior anti-abortion Komen 
executives behind the decision to defund Planned Parenthood resigned, but the 
damage had been done. Attendance and revenues at Komen events across the 
nation fell by a third. In August, Komen founder Nancy G. Brinker, having 
presided over an organization that had raised more than $740 million for breast 
cancer research since 1982, stepped down as CEO in the hope that it would 
“help Komen get past the bad publicity.”14,15
Women’s health is not uncontroversial.16 Few will find fault with improving the 
health of women in general, and curing breast cancer is a noble cause. But the 
potentially explosive issue of abortion has always lurked beneath the surface.17 
It is to Nancy Brinker’s credit that for three decades she succeeded in sidelining 
the abortion issue from the benefits of the foundation to women’s health.18 
Through a few decisions, a handful of Komen executives unleashed a latent 
debate that grew in intensity and severely damaged the foundation’s core 
business.19

Chapter 11 | Cultural Context
6
Target Corp: Stumbling into Controversy
In 2010, Target Corp. angered gay-marriage supporters with a $150,000 
political donation that benefited a gay-marriage opponent running for 
Minnesota governor, setting off protests and calls for a boycott from a 
constituency that had previously seen Target as an ally. Two years later, the 
retailer drew the ire of opponents of same-sex marriage by supporting a 
promotion organized by a group of gay Target employees.20 
In the spring of 2012, Target introduced several “Pride”-themed shirts, with 
proceeds to benefit the Family Equality Council, a group fighting a proposed 
amendment to the Minnesota constitution to ban gay marriage.21 In response, 
the American Family Association mobilized its supporters to urge Target to pull 
the shirts. Andy Parrish of Minnesota for Marriage, a pro-family group leading 
the fight for traditional marriage in Minnesota, said, “Target has alienated the 
strong majority of Minnesotans who support traditional marriage. They also risk 
alienating the overwhelming majority of their customers in the 32 states in this 
country that have voted to support traditional marriage.”22 
As a retailer of general merchandise, Target sells products and services that are 
hardly controversial. For fifty years, social justice and community service have 
been planks of its business platform.23 The company’s consistent “socially 
responsible” behavior created market expectations for which it has been widely 
acknowledged. It is a company Elisabeth Murdoch could appreciate. In 2010, 
the business side—thinking like James Murdoch—supported a candidate who 
called for lower business taxes, but who also had strong social views 
inconsistent with the expectations of Target’s market. Through one ill-
considered decision, the company stumbled into a social controversy that could 
leave observers with the impression that its 48-year track record of social 
responsibility never existed.
Guidance
The Chick-fil-A, Komen, and Target social controversies illustrate how 
contending social-issue groups and individuals express their values and direct 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
their capital—whether by purchase decisions, by direct donation to social-issue 
advocacy groups, or by investment decisions in the equity markets. The lesson 
in these three cases is that no corporate action goes unobserved, and that it is 
foolish to neglect society’s expectations. The lesson in the News Corp. case of 
the debate between siblings underscores the diversity of emotional issues 
related to these expectations.
“Doing the right thing is the right thing to do,” advises Paul Liebman, formerly 
Chief Compliance Counsel for Dell, Inc.24 Knowing there is a diversity of 
opinions as to what constitutes the right thing is the first step toward 
understanding the social context for business operations. Finding the least 
controversial path through a shifting minefield of socially volatile issues is the 
second. Making a misstep along that path is an operational failure that does not 
necessarily have to mature into a reputational crisis if the market accepts the 
company’s authenticity. Building the business case for doing that, with a few 
how-tos, is what the first 10 chapters of this book are all about. 
Consider This

The culture of the times and the company’s founders shape 
its initial culture. The steward of corporate culture, the 
board, tends to want to protect and preserve that culture—a 
posture that can actually prevent it from evolving to 
respond to changes in society’s expectations.

Many social value perspectives expressed by key corporate 
figures may cut two ways, strengthening positive reputation 
among those stakeholders who agree, and vice versa.

Making key business decisions that are mindful of society’s 
expectations can reduce the likelihood of inadvertently 
triggering a reputational crisis.
1 Robert C. Brandegee is a management consultant, retired, with Brandegee Incorporated.

Chapter 11 | Cultural Context
8
2 Aron Cramer President and CEO, BSR (a CSR consultancy)_as quoted in Klein P. Can say on 
pay increase social responsibility? Forbes. 3 July 2012. 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/csr/2012/07/03/can-say-on-pay-increase-social-
responsibility/?goback=.gde_2955795_member_130388605 Accessed 11 August 2012.
3 Gardberg NA, Fombrun CJ. Corporate citizenship: creating intangible assets across institutional 
environments. Academy of Management Review. 2006; 31:329–346.
4 Jannarone J. Elisabeth Murdoch slams ‘profit without purpose.’ The Wall Street Journal. 23 
August 2012. Available at: 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10000872396390444812704577607642320827980.html. 
Accessed 31 August 2012.
5 Murdoch J. 2009 Edinburgh International Television Festival MacTaggart Lecture. 28 August 
2009. 
6 Skapinker M. Murdochs’ schism has lessons for companies. Financial Times. 29 August 2012. 
Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/be886812-ee2b-11e1-b0e4-
00144feab49a.html#axzz259xfuRiL. Accessed 31 August 2012.
7 Chick-fil-A. Why we’re closed on Sunday. Available at: http://www.chick-fil-
a.com/Company/Highlights-Sunday. Accessed 9 August 2012.
8 Yes, Chick-fil-A says, we Explicitly do not like same-sex couples. Available at: Change.org, 26 
January 2011. Jones M. http://news.change.org/stories/yes-chick-fil-a-says-we-explicitly-do-not-
like-same-sex-couples. Accessed 9 August 2012.
9 Dan Cathy, Chick-Fil-A president, on anti-gay stance: ‘guilty as charged.’ Huffington Post. 17 
July 2012. 
10 Zimmerman N. Ed Helms takes high-profile stand against Chick-fil-A for anti-same-sex-
marriage stance [UPDATE: Chick-fil-A Relents?]. Gawker. 19 July 2012. Available at: 
http://gawker.com/5927438/ed-helms-takes-high+profile-stand-against-chick+fil+a-for-
anti+same+sex+marriage-stance. Accessed 9 October 2012.
11 Cline S. Chick-fil-A's controversial gay marriage beef. US News and World Report. 27 July 
2012. Available at: http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2012/07/27/chick-fil-as-controversial-
gay-marriage-beef. Accessed 9 August 2012.
12 Gay rights activists hold ‘kiss day’ at Chick-fil-A restaurants. CNN. 4 August 2012. Available 
at: http://www.cnn.com/2012/08/03/us/chick-fil-a-kiss-day/index.html. Accessed 10 October 
2012.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
13 White MC. Chick-fil-A waffles on gay marriage rights, fries brand image. NBC News,. 21 
September 2012. Available at: http://bottomline.nbcnews.com/_news/2012/09/21/14009108-
chick-fil-a-waffles-on-gay-marriage-rights-fries-brand-image?lite. Accessed 10 October 2012.
14 Schwirtz M. Breast cancer group changes leaders. The New York Times. 8 August 2012. 
Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/09/us/susan-g-komen-for-the-cure-changes-
leadership.html. Accessed 9 August 2012.
15 Will Nancy Brinker’s resignation help Komen Race for the Cure? Palm Beach Post. 10 August 
2012. Available at: http://blogs.palmbeachpost.com/opinionzone/2012/08/10/will-nancy-
brinker%E2%80%99s-resignation-help-komen-race-for-the-cure/. Accessed 1 September 2012.
16 Papuga C. Why have women's health issues become a leading issue in this election? Huffington 
Post. 11 September 2012. Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/casey-papuga/womens-
health-leading-issue_b_1875463.html?utm_hp_ref=elections-2012. Accessed 10 October 2012.
17 Melnick M. Why a Christian group pulled pink bibles for breast cancer awareness. Time. 16 
December 2011. Available at: http://healthland.time.com/2011/12/16/why-a-christian-group-
pulled-pink-bibles-for-breast-cancer-awareness/. Accessed 10 October 2012.
18 Moyers R. Komen needs a strong board that can Stand up to its founder. Philanthropy. 11 
September 2012. Available at: http://philanthropy.com/blogs/against-the-grain/komen-needs-a-
strong-board-that-can-stand-up-to-its-founder/28254. Accessed 10 October 2012.
19 Feder JL. Can Susan G. Komen recover from Planned Parenthood funding fiasco? Politico. 3 
February 2012. Available at: http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0212/72435.html. Accessed 
10 October 2012.
20 Corporate decision renews Target gay rights controversy. Fox8 News. 15 June 2012. Available 
at: http://www.fox8live.com/story/18680499/target. Accessed 1 September 2012.
21 Waldron M. Target’s '’Pride’ T-shirts stir controversy. KTNV Action News. 1 June 2012. 
Available at: http://www.ktnv.com/news/national/156531285.html. Accessed 1 September 2012.
22 Bohon D. Target Corp. announces t-shirt campaign for homosexual marriage. The New 
American. 28 May 2012. Available at: http://thenewamerican.com/culture/family/item/11525-
target-corp-announces-t-shirt-campaign-for-homosexual-marriage. Accessed 1 September 2012.
23 Target Corporation. Culture. Available at: http://corporate.target.com/careers/culture. Accessed 
10 October 2012.
24 Liebman P. Is ethics a valuable intangible asset? Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 9 April 
2010. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 

Chapter 11 | Cultural Context
10
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 8 October 2012. 

C H A P T E R
12
Metrics
There are two possible outcomes: If the result confirms the hypothesis, then 
you’ve made a measurement. If the result is contrary to the hypothesis, then 
you’ve made a discovery.
—Enrico Fermi1
If your stock price is sensitive to your company’s reputation, then managing the 
business processes that are the pillars of reputation is a managerial imperative 
and board oversight duty. Reputation scores and reputational value metrics can 
help. Clearly, senior management needs more detailed measurements than the 
board does. But, as Chapter 8 shows, there are three board-level duties—CEO 
compensation, asset protection, and business strategy—whose fulfillment could 
be enhanced with measures of reputation. 
Reputation scores and reputational value metrics are covered in Chapter 9 at a 
level of granularity interesting to quantitatively inclined readers, and this 
chapter begins where Chapter 9 ended. A qualitative discussion frames the 
picture for all readers and proceeds to a quantitative presentation via charts and 
graphs.

Chapter 12 | Metrics
2
Metrics: Qualitative Edition
There are two kinds of measures of reputation, and they differ from one another 
in the same way that a company’s book value differs from its market 
capitalization. The first is based on surveys and resembles a company’s book 
value as determined by a standard transparent accounting procedure. Surveys 
have been done for decades, reflect the marketing mindset from which they 
arose, and provide a measurement of reputation at the time the survey is 
conducted. They are historic snapshots of mindshare and appear to be good 
predictors of brand awareness and related consumer behaviors. This book cites 
reputation scores from four different surveys. The World’s Most Admired 
Companies (WMAC) survey from Fortune magazine and World’s Most 
Respected Large Companies (MRC) from Barron’s magazine capture the 
mindshare of a business-oriented survey population. The Reputation Quotient 
(RQ) survey from Harris Interactive and the RepTrak survey from the 
Reputation Institute capture the mindshare of a broader general population.
The second kind of measure, resembling market values, involves dynamic 
processes algorithmically driven by measurements of business performance. 
Algorithmic processes have been developed over the past decade, reflect the 
analyst mindset from which they arose, and provide a near real-time 
measurement of reputation. They are current calculations of expected business 
performance, harness the “wisdom of crowds,” and can be good predictors of 
stock price behavior. Hence, these can be useful as early warning signals that 
might guide managers in responding to problems and opportunities.
This book introduces measures from two algorithmic sources. Relative Business 
Performance probability scores from Transparent Value capture the 
probabilities that companies will achieve the business performance expected by 
investors as implied by current stock price. Reputational Value Metrics from 
Steel City Re (the author’s employer) capture reflect the expected economically 
relevant behavior of the diverse stakeholders who have been covered in the 
earlier chapters of this book.
The distinction boils down to this: 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
Survey-based reputation scores quantify what a company has done to create stakeholder 
opinions; algorithmic-based reputational value metrics quantify what the aggregate of 
company stakeholders can be expected to do.
Survey-based reputation scores, not unlike book value, benefit from transparent 
methodologies. Based on relatively large samples, they draw statistically valid 
inferences from questions as simple as, “Rank your respect for this company on 
a scale of 1–5.” They may also delve deeper into psychological aspects of 
reputation to elicit opinions on matters such as vision and leadership, social 
responsibility, financial performance, emotional appeal, products and services, 
and workplace environment. The survey-based measures are disadvantaged, like 
book values, by their lack of timeliness, inherent backwards view, and inability 
to capture the economic value of the opinions. Empirically, they have not 
correlated well with going-forward equity performance.
Algorithmic-based reputational value metrics benefit from high-frequency 
volumes of timely data that enable the measures to report both spot and 
dynamic time-series data on reputational value ranking, volatility (risk), and 
projected rate and direction of change. They capture forward-looking 
expectations related to economic value that are useful measures for financial 
instruments. Today, Transparent Value’s metrics appear publicly only in 
investable mutual funds such as the two described in Chapter 9 (tickers: 
TVIMX, TVVIX). Insurers and hedge funds use Steel City Re’s reputational 
value metrics to underwrite reputation risk and to direct reputation-focused 
investment strategies. Reputational Value Insurance, underwritten by syndicates 
at Lloyd’s and various insurance companies led by Kiln Group, and the 
RepuStars Variety composite equity index calculated by S&P/Dow Jones 
indices (ticker: REPUVAR), are examples. Because of their use in financial 
instruments, the algorithmic-based metrics—not unlike market values—are 
disadvantaged by their lack of transparent methodology.
Algorithmic data avoid potential systematic biases in survey data that can 
unduly shape the reputation scores.2 Whereas the data underpinning the 
algorithmic measures of reputation are captured passively, survey data are 

Chapter 12 | Metrics
4
captured from volunteers who are aware of their contributions. These biases can 
exacerbate biases already evident in the different populations being surveyed 
and help explain why the reputation metrics do not necessarily correlate well 
between and among the different instruments.
Following nearly identical methodologies, the two general public-oriented 
surveys, RQ and RepTrak, showed a 94% correlation among the 48 companies 
that were ranked by both reputation scoring systems. But, whereas the 
correlation between the general public and business-focused survey populations 
in the 128 companies common to both the RepTrak and WMAC measurement 
systems was a meager 21%, the correlation between the algorithmic measures 
and the business-focused survey populations in the 126 companies common to 
both the Steel City Re and the WMAC measurements was 58% (Table 12-1).
Table 12-1. Stepwise Paired Correlations among Five Reputation Measures
WMAC 
(118)
100%
68%
36%
21%
58%
MRC (100)
68%
100%
72%
67%
65%
RQ (60)
36%
72%
100%
94%
46%
RepTrak 
(150)
21%
67%
94%
100%
32%
Ranking 
(142)
58%
65%
46%
32%
100%
WMAC
MRC
RQ
RepTrak
Ranking
Fortune 
Magazi
ne
Barron’
s 
Magazi
ne
Harris 
Interacti
ve
Reputation 
Institute
Steel City 
Re
These different properties suggest that the algorithmic measures of reputational 
value may be more useful for day-to-day managerial and oversight functions, 
while the survey-based reputation scores may be more useful for reviews of 
historical performance and the types of managerial reviews for which historical 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
financials are most useful. Whichever objective is to be served, for executives 
who must manage reputation, measurement is a must.
Case discussions of Steel City Re’s algorithmic measures of reputation covering nearly four 
years of observations can be found on the blog of the Intangible Asset Finance Society, 
Mission: Intangible, at http://www.iafinance.org/BlogRetrieve.aspx?BlogID=419.
Survey-based reputation scores from all four of the aforementioned providers 
and algorithmic reputational value metrics from Steel City Re are available 
publicly and are compared and contrasted in the text that follows. Some of the 
graphics draw upon actuarially and mathematically advanced techniques and 
may require significant time for inspection and dissection. Such attention will 
ensure a level of comfort for operational and oversight decision-making. 
However, if you’re already saturated or prefer to look at case studies published 
in color online,3 this would be a good time to jump to the “Consider This” 
section at the end of this chapter.
Metrics: Quantitative Edition
Of the approximately 35 public companies discussed in this volume, there are 7 
for which there exist 2012 public reputation scores from all 4 providers of 
survey-based measures and Steel City Re’s algorithmic reputational value 
metrics. Transparent Value’s metrics today are shown publicly only through the 
mutual funds they drive. 
Each of the measurement systems uses a different scale. To simplify the 
comparison of values, the measurements from all five systems were converted 
to rank-order percentile values whose denominator is reported in the row 
labeled “Percentile rank denominator.” Although they are refreshed weekly, 
Steel City Re’s algorithmic reputational value metrics for the one date of 5 
January 2012 are presented to enable tabular comparison with the survey groups 
(Table 12-2).
d

Chapter 12 | Metrics
6
Table 12-2. Reputation Scores for Seven Companies Converted to Rank-Order Percentile Values 
and Ordered by Their WMAC Ranking
Source
Fortune 
Magazin
e
Barron’s 
Magazin
e
Harris 
Interacti
ve
Reputati
on 
Institute
Steel 
City Re
Name
TCK
R
World’s 
Most 
Admired 
Compani
es
Most 
Respect
ed 
Compan
y
Reputati
on 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputati
on 
Ranking
5 
January 
12
Percentile 
rank 
denominator
118
100
60
150
142
American 
International 
Group
AIG
6%
4%
0%
4%
18%
Johnson & 
Johnson
JNJ
40%
68%
89%
98%
90%
The Coca- 
Cola 
Company
KO
65%
92%
96%
95%
96%
PepsiCo
PEP
71%
69%
72%
94%
92%
JP Morgan 
Chase
JPM
81%
51%
6%
10%
19%
The Walt 
Disney 
Company
DIS
98%
89%
91%
89%
59%
Apple Inc.
AAP
L
100%
100%
100%
95%
98%
While current reputation rankings are familiar concepts, the Steel City Re 
reputational value metrics introduce additional measures that are explained here 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
and illustrated in the labeled schematic, which, like a map, will help navigation 
through the detailed charts that follow (Figure 12-1). First, labeled A–E, is a 
five-bar chart called “Vital Signs” comprising the reputational metrics for a 
company as benchmarked against peers in the same standard industry group. 
The chart provides a snapshot of the company relative to its peers. Historic 
Volatility, A, reports on the 1-year average standard deviation of the 
reputational value metric. The Current Volatility, B, reports the exponentially 
weighted average of the same parameter over only the trailing 12 weeks. It is 
meaningful when the Current Volatility is significantly different than the 
Historic Volatility. Current Ranking and return on equity (ROE), C and D, 
report in the charts below the Reputation Ranking as of 23 August 2012 (the 
tabular values are from 5 January 2012 corresponding to the date of the survey 
measures) and the trailing 12-month return on equity as of that same date. Last, 
the Forecast Stability, E, reports on the volatility trend. Higher values suggest 
less change going forward.
Figure 12-1. Guide to the understanding of representative algorithmically derived reputational 
value metrics from Steel City Re and are provided here for educational purposes only. TTM = 
trailing twelve months.

Chapter 12 | Metrics
8
The Time Series chart, H, also reports benchmarked data. It gives the 
company’s reputational value ranking over time relative to peers. The terminal 
value corresponds to the value shown in Vital Signs–C. Also shown on the time 
series graph are the ROE of the company, the median of its peer group, and the 
S&P 500 Composite Index serving as a proxy for the broad market. The 
terminal value for ROE corresponds to the value shown in Vital Signs–D.
The four additional bar charts, F–J, report the same values shown in the vital 
signs, but with greater detail. Also, rather than benchmarking to peers, the 
percentile values reflect the company’s standing relative to approximately 7,300 
companies in the Steel City Re database. The values for the peer group quartiles 
are also reported. The metrics include Current Reputation Ranking, F; Trailing 
Twelve Month (Historic) Reputation Volatility, G; Current Reputation 
Volatility, J; and an indicator of reputational stability, the Ranking Vector, I. 
Last, a flag chart, K, displays the indication of reputational ranking stability and 
the expected direction of change.
Flag graphs L and M are two of four graphs introduced in the Guidance section 
of this chapter. They illustrate how rapid changes in reputational value standing 
and value can be discovered, and potentially spur management to take action.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
American International Group (AIG)
World’s Most 
Admired 
Companies
Most 
Respected 
Company
Reputation 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputation 
Ranking
5 January 
2012
6%
4%
0%
4%
18%
Parameter
Metric
Description
Sector & Count
1312
Finance
Industry & Count
    43
Multi-Line Insurance
SubIndustry & Count
  179
Insurance Companies

Chapter 12 | Metrics
10

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11

Chapter 12 | Metrics
12
Johnson & Johnson (JNJ)
World’s Most 
Admired 
Companies
Most 
Respected 
Company
Reputation 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputation 
Ranking
5 January 
2012
40%
68%
89%
98%
90%
Parameter
Metric
Description
Sector & Count
557
Health Technology
Industry & Count
  32
Pharmaceuticals: Major
SubIndustry & Count
  33
Diversified Health Care

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13

Chapter 12 | Metrics
14

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
The Coca-Cola Company (KO)
World’s Most 
Admired 
Companies
Most 
Respected 
Company
Reputation 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputation 
Ranking
5 January 
2012
65%
92%
96%
95%
96%
Parameter
Metric
Description
Sector & Count
345
Consumer Non-Durables
Industry & Count
  20
Beverages: Non-Alcoholic
SubIndustry & Count
  20
Soft Drink Producers & Bottlers

Chapter 12 | Metrics
16

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17

Chapter 12 | Metrics
18
PepsiCo (PEP)
World’s Most 
Admired 
Companies
Most 
Respected 
Company
Reputation 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputation 
Ranking
5 January 
2012
71%
69%
72%
94%
92%
Parameter
Metric
Description
Sector & Count
345
Consumer Non-Durables
Industry & Count
  20
Beverages: Non-Alcoholic
SubIndustry & Count
  20
Soft Drink Producers & Bottlers
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
19

Chapter 12 | Metrics
20

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
21
JP Morgan Chase (JPM)
World’s Most 
Admired 
Companies
Most 
Respected 
Company
Reputation 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputation 
Ranking
5 January 
2012
81%
51%
6%
10%
19%
Parameter
Metric
Description
Sector & Count
1307
Finance
Industry & Count
50
Financial Conglomerates
SubIndustry & Count
249
Commercial Banks /-Bank Hldg Co's

Chapter 12 | Metrics
22

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
23

Chapter 12 | Metrics
24
The Walt Disney Company (DIS)
World’s Most 
Admired 
Companies
Most 
Respected 
Company
Reputation 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputation 
Ranking
5 January 
2012
98%
89%
91%
89%
59%
Parameter
Metric
Description
Sector & Count
420
Consumer Services
Industry & Count
  11
Media Conglomerates
SubIndustry & Count
  64
Miscellaneous Recreation

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
25

Chapter 12 | Metrics
26

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
27
Apple Inc. (AAPL)
World’s Most 
Admired 
Companies
Most 
Respected 
Company
Reputation 
Quotient
RepTrak
Reputation 
Ranking
5 January 
2012
100%
100%
100%
95%
98%
Parameter
Metri
Description
Sector & Count
623
Electronic Technology
Industry & Count
  25
Computer Processing Hardware
SubIndustry & 
Count
  47
Electronic Data Processing Equipment

Chapter 12 | Metrics
28
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
29

Chapter 12 | Metrics
30
Guidance
One of the other benefits of the data frequency and density of the algorithmic 
metrics from Steel City Re is the ability to analyze reputational value trends and 
identify deviations that may be the harbingers of a looming crisis. 
Figure 12-2. Flag graphs of reputational value spot data for both Pepsi and Coca-Cola dated 30 
August 2012 shows a sudden spike in Coca-Cola’s reputational ranking volatility and a negative 
change of rank associated with a stock split and a surprised market. Concurrently, Pepsi’s trailing 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
31
12-month return on equity, if only briefly edged past Coke. In short order, the fundamental 
differences discussed in Chapter 5 returned Coke to its usual dominance.
For example, the metrics for Pepsi and Coke, both members of the 20-member 
Non-Alcoholic Beverages sector, show that as of 23 August 2012 the 
reputational value volatility for Coke increased significantly among the entire 
peer group and began to trend negative (Figure 12-2). These data suggest a 
recent major operational change reduced Coke’s reputation among a significant 
fraction of its stakeholders, and is a signal to management that something 
recently destabilized the situation. Further examples of alerts evidenced by 
changes in the Steel City Re reputational metrics can be found on the Mission: 
Intangible blog of the Intangible Asset Finance Society.
Another benefit of the data frequency and density of the algorithmic metrics 
from Steel City Re is the ability to characterize the severity of a reputational 
crisis in real time. In early May 2012, JP Morgan Chase reported a $2 billion 
loss from a failed hedging strategy. The media declared it a reputational crisis. 
“The dollar loss, though, could be less significant than the hit to Dimon and the 
bank’s reputation,” reported Reuters.4 The insight provided by the Steel City Re 
Reputational Metrics and reported 19 May in the Mission: Intangible blog 
contradicted the pronouncements of the media: “On the basis of JP Morgan 
Chase’s historical reputational value metrics, and in the context of the three-
year long view, this current event could be viewed as just one more bump in a 
long and volatile history of bumps.”5
Four months later, the expectations reported by the reputational metrics were 
realized. By mid-September 2012, the market capitalization decline had been 
erased and the reputational measures had almost all returned to prior values. 
“The events made for great media fodder, but it never really was a reputational 
crisis, as the metrics showed then, and affirm now. And notwithstanding the 
personal abuse of…[Congressional]…hearings, etc., by mid September CEO 
Jamie Dimon had reaped a 22.6% gain from his $17.1 million bet on JP Morgan 
Chase’s reputational resilience for a cool $3.86 million in less than two 
months.”6

Chapter 12 | Metrics
32
Consider This

Because managing and overseeing reputation is a 
managerial activity, reputation metrics can be helpful.

High-frequency algorithmically produced reputational 
value metrics provide insights more useful for day-to-day 
administration, risk management, and crisis management 
while annually generated survey-based scores may be more 
useful for historical reviews assessing past performance.

Colorful charts, graphs. and reputation case studies of 
companies recently in the news can be found on the 
Mission: Intangible blog of the Intangible Asset Finance 
Society: 
http://www.iafinance.org/BlogRetrieve.aspx?BlogID=419.
By the Numbers
The top reasons for measurement are improving business performance and 
enhancing communications. Whether you are an operating executive, 
communications executive or market analyst, reputation scores and reputational 
value metrics have been, are, or soon will be part of your daily fare. The table 
below displays a sample of the cross-correlations of data in this chapter.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
33
Table 12-3. Representative Pairwise Correlations between Various Measures of Reputation
Metric 1
Source
Metric 2
Source 
Number 
of 
Common 
Compani
es
Correlation 
(%)
RepTrak
General 
survey
RQ
General 
Survey
  48
94
MRC
Investor 
survey
SCRE 
Ranking
Algorithmic
  42
65
WMAC
Business 
survey
SCRE 
Ranking
Algorithmic
126
58
RepTrak
General 
survey
SCRE 
Ranking
Algorithmic
136
32
WMAC
Business 
survey
RepTrak
General 
survey
128
21
1 Fermi E. (Nobel laureate in physics, 1938)  Available at: 
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/keywords/measurement.html#dGcXkLYDr7wmheGD.99. 
Accessed 12 August 2012.
2 Wright KB. Researching Internet-based populations: Advantages and disadvantages of online 
survey research, online questionnaire authoring software packages, and web survey services. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 2005;10(3): article 11. Available at: 
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol10/issue3/wright.html. Accessed 7 October 2012.
3 Visit the Mission:Intangible blog of the Intangible Asset Finance Society at http://iafinance.org/.
4 Henry D, Rothacker R. JPMorgan has $2 billion trading loss, reputation hit. Reuters, 10 May 
2012. http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/05/10/us-jpmorgan-trading-
idUSBRE8491H020120510. Accessed 18 September 2012.
5 JP Morgan Chase: Is there a metric in the house? Mission: Intangible. 19 May 2012. Available 
at:  
http://www.iafinance.org/_blog/MISSION_INTANGIBLE/post/JP_Morgan_Chase_Is_there_a_m
etric_in_the_house/. Accessed 18 September 2012.

Chapter 12 | Metrics
34
6 JP Morgan Chase: Got better. Mission: Intangible. 18 September 2012. Available at: 
http://www.iafinance.org/_blog/MISSION_INTANGIBLE/post/JP_Morgan_Chase_%5BI%5D_g
ot_better/. Accessed 18 September 2012.

C H A P T E R
13
Consider These
A business can simultaneously enhance its reputation and demonstrate its 
responsibility by meeting stakeholder expectations.
—Carola Hillebrand and Kevin Money1
An uninitiated came before Hillel, the famed Judean sage and scholar who lived 
more than 2,000 years ago, and said to him, “Make me wise in your ways, on 
the condition that you teach me the whole Torah while I stand on one foot.” 
Hillel answered him: “What is hateful to you, do not to your neighbor. That is 
the whole Torah; the rest is the commentary thereof; now go and learn it.”2
Watch What They Do
Corporate reputation is a multi-stakeholder concept that is reflected in the 
perceptions that stakeholders have of an organization based on what they 
experience personally or discover from all other sources.3 These interactions 
trigger economic behaviors that impact the profit and loss (P&L) statement in 
many ways and ultimately affect enterprise value. There are effects too on 
governance, regulators, and analysts.

Chapter 13 | Consider These
2
Much evidence in the literature and reaffirmed here shows that reputations with 
different stakeholder groups create complex reciprocal behaviors in other 
groups that are then again reflected in reputation. In particular, reputation with 
employees is seen to have an impact on reputation with customers and 
communities.4 
This complexity of interplay suggests, further to the words of Hillel, that the 
prudent way to manage stakeholder interactions is to foster ethical 
conformance, ensure quality, drive innovation, promote sustainability, and 
optimize both safety and security—the six drivers of reputation. Authentic 
behaviors will be observed by all, and reputation will follow. 
We have shown that corporate culture enables board-level decisions and 
operating-level actions that help create value through these six drivers, and that 
the standards by which stakeholders measure success are sensitive to societal 
norms. These norms are dynamic, and a culture appropriate for certain times 
may not remain so, even if the corporate culture is strong and 
unchanging—indeed sometimes because it is strong and unchanging. 
Stakeholders are always watching; the tint of their glasses, however, may shift 
without advance notice. Because of the complex perceptual interplay, 
organizations managing their corporate reputation should take into account not 
only their direct interactions and relationships with stakeholders, but also the 
influences stakeholders have on each other.5
In short, do the right thing for your stakeholders and meet their expectations. 
The rest is commentary thereof; now go and learn it.
Final Guidance
This book is organized to present the origins of reputation, a dynamic 
consequence of a complex web of reciprocal relationships among many 
different stakeholders (Figure 13-1). But rather than risk irrelevance as an 
academic discourse, this book offers readers a financial journey of actions they 
may emulate. The key is to couple corporate behavior to its reputation, 
appreciate that stakeholder behavior translates to measurable reputational value, 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
3
and recognize that the diverse effects of market behaviors yield profit and loss, 
which then links to a company’s stock price. 
This book doesn’t grant reputation the status of an “air ball” by leaving it 
without an owner. It purposefully shifts responsibility for the management of 
reputational value from risk and PR managers to the board of directors, COO, 
and CFO by providing frameworks for governance, measurement, and financial 
risk transfer. 
Last, this book takes pains to clarify what is not reputational value. It 
distinguishes between reputation and measurable reputational value; between 
brand (a promise), and reputation (an expectation of behavior) and between 
generalized market cap loss on one hand and granular details of gains or losses 
in revenue and expenses on the other.
Briefly, Parts 1 and 2 are organized to help the reader appreciate how various 
business processes shape a company’s reputation and trigger behaviors in 
stakeholders that impact specific line items on the P&L statement. The most 
important of these processes are the six drivers of reputational value.
Part 3 shows how the business environment for those business processes is 
influenced by corporate culture, judged by equity investors, governed by the 
company’s directors, observed by analysts, and overseen by regulators. A case 
is made for supporting the board’s oversight duties with reputational metrics 
and signaling value to stakeholders through insurances. 
The first two chapters of Part 4 show how appreciation of corporate actions with 
respect to the six drivers of reputational value is sensitive to evolving societal 
expectations in a qualitative sense, and how the market can observe, interpret, 
and value those behaviors through quantitative measures of reputation and 
reputational value. 
This concluding chapter returns the financial journey to the executive suite and 
boardroom. It is here that reputational value figures in three distinct 
conversations on business strategies: increasing, protecting, and restoring 
reputational value. Here we conclude the journey as we began—with metrics 

Chapter 13 | Consider These
4
and cases, to reinforce the principle that we manage best that which we 
measure.
Figure 13-1. Complex multi-stakeholder interactions, observable actions, and expectations 
collectively establish corporate reputation value and stock price.
Increasing Reputational Value
The average company has an average reputation. “[To increase its reputational 
value,] start with what seems to be almost intuitive,” suggests Paul Liebman, 
formerly Chief Compliance Counsel for Dell Inc., an electronic technology 
company. “Doing the right thing is the right thing to do.”6 Then communicate 
what you are doing in a way that stakeholders can recognize, appreciate, and 
value. The company that successfully transforms itself from an average 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
5
company to one with a superior reputation can expect to realize on average an 
additional 6.5% in market capitalization, all other things being equal. 
The “right thing” is for management to put in place systems that advance the 
performance of the six business drivers of reputation enumerated in detail in 
Table 1-1 and listed again in the preceding section. Systems include policies, 
conformance monitoring solutions, and enforcement mechanisms. “I learned a 
long time ago,” shares Robert Rittereiser, formerly CFO of Merrill Lynch and 
CEO of EF Hutton, both financial service companies, “whatever policies you 
have, ultimately, you must have in place processes that enforce those policies.” 
Having been tasked by the courts to unwind complex failed structures from 
financiers ranging from Michael Milken to Bernie Madoff, Rittereiser adds, “If 
you have a policy you can't enforce, you really don't have a policy.”7
The key success metric for these performance systems is that they provide 
management with an integrated, holistic view of corporate operations. The 
measure of value is the degree with which the transparency created through 
these systems can be appreciated and valued by the market.
George Long, Chief Governance Counsel and Corporate Secretary for PNC, 
speaking on an unofficial basis, whimsically referred to the gathering of 
enterprise-wide data as “sideloading.”8 With Dr. Urmi Ashar (formerly 
president of the Three Rivers Chapter of the National Association of Corporate 
Directors), he describes “sideloading” as a system for building dynamic 
networks both intra - and extra-organizationally to share information and 
developing efficient, knowledge-based processes that can transcend the 
capabilities of an individual. “For those out there who enjoy both anagrams and 
business jargon,” Long quips, “I'll say that sideload also has a nice feature—it 
turns into ‘silo dead.’" More seriously, he adds, “Silos of information [are] a 
bad thing in general because [they] keep information hermetically sealed from 
other parts of the organization that may need it.”
Just as executives protect potentially value-creating information in silos, the C-
suite sequesters potentially value-creating information from the market to 
everyone’s loss. “It’s really to a company’s advantage to explain its 
behavior—to explain why it’s doing things—because in the void…analysts are 

Chapter 13 | Consider These
6
going to make their own decisions and come to their own conclusions,” 
observes Jonathan Low, a founder and partner of Predictiv, LLC, a management 
consultancy.9 Transparency can be a source of value. “Our belief has always 
been that the returns to transparency exceed the returns to secrecy,” says Low. 
“The social graph requires that companies communicate frequently, openly, 
honestly,” affirms Linda Locke, founder and principal with Reputare 
Consulting, a corporate reputation consulting firm.10
Changes begin at the top and involve building a corporate culture that 
acknowledges the expectations of all stakeholders, including society at large. A 
culture that incorporates reputation into its governance increases the likelihood 
that the operational benefits can be realized. “I think you have to get to the 
conversation early enough at the board level,” says Herbert Winokur, Jr., CEO 
of Capricorn Holdings Inc., a private equity group.11 This way the board can 
“make sure that management is thinking about the reputation—the most 
valuable asset of almost every company—when they make decisions,” adds 
Winokur, who’s more-than-300 board meetings included time with financial 
service, energy, and nonprofit groups such as the Harvard Corporation.
Executive compensation today is a variable in reputation and one of the 
processes that boards of directors can change in many companies to increase 
reputational value. Linking reputation and compensation at the highest levels of 
corporation reflects best practices for driving a reputation-focused risk culture 
throughout the organization. Linking compensation and clawbacks to a 
company’s reputation is made easier by systems that quantitatively monitor, 
measure, and report reputation to the board’s compensation committee.
Systems to help management gain transparency in a company whose board is 
setting a reputation-centered tone at the top are tools. The goal, Locke offers, is 
to create reputational value by pleasantly surprising the market “Reputation is 
built on meeting and exceeding stakeholder expectations.”10
Employees are among the many key stakeholders whose improved alignment 
can help create reputational value. They chart their course in an institution and 
adjust their ethical standards on the basis of an institution’s culture and how that 
culture evolves in the course of their employment.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
7
While it may be intuitive that an average company can exceed stakeholder 
expectations, it appears that even a company at or near the top can do so as 
well. Apple Inc. is an exemplary firm with a reputation that has so far proven 
resilient beyond the mortality of its founder, Steve Jobs. 
In transitioning leadership successfully from Steve Jobs to Tim Cook, Apple 
communicated to stakeholders that its processes for innovation and operational 
excellence were institutional and not located solely in one individual. To do so 
was critical and explains how Apple was able to create unexpected reputational 
value. When the market’s expectations are exceeded, reputational value 
increases. The operational benefits associated with Apple’s multi-stakeholder 
focus have helped even this extremely valuable and successful company further 
exceed investor’s expectations.
By the numbers, in 2012 Apple Inc. ranked no. 1 in three of four reputation 
surveys and one algorithmic reputation metric described in Chapter 9. Although 
in 2011 it also ranked no. 1 among the World’s Most Admired Companies, 
Most Respected Companies, and Corporate Reputation Rankings, it ranked no, 
8 in the Reputation Quotient (RQ) rankings and no. 48 in the RepTrak 
rankings—suggesting that, at least among members of the general public, there 
was room for increasing reputation value. Its Steel City Re reputation metrics 
are presented in Chapter 12.
For the trailing 12 months from 23 August 2012, Apple Inc. outperformed the 
average of the top 10% of its 25-member industry computer processing 
hardware peer group12 (excluding Apple) by 8.3%. The only peer company to 
outperform $621 billion Apple’s 75% return on equity was $0.48 billion Cray 
Inc. On 30 August 2012, Cray’s P/E ratio was 15.61.
Protecting Reputational Value
A reputation whose value is worth protecting must be authentic and not 
conflated with a brand. To underscore a key concept in this book, brand promise 
and reputation expectation are not the same. Brand is an emotional construct. 

Chapter 13 | Consider These
8
Reputation is a cognitive expectation of behavior held by stakeholders. 
Investing in the former at the expense of the latter, as shown in the case studies 
throughout this book, will not create long-term value and can degrade 
reputational value. It risks an inauthentic reputation among customers, which 
can lead to great disappointment.
Authentic means understanding what the key drivers of reputational value are, 
above and beyond ethics. For example, in the technology sector case study in 
Chapter 4, innovation was the dominant reputation pillar. In the aircraft power 
plant business case study in Chapter 3, safety was the critical reputation asset. 
In the jewelry case study in Chapter 3, a reputation for quality meant a 
consistent customer experience with a trustworthy salesperson.
Protecting an authentic reputation means having systems to align the global 
workforce with the best interests of the company, provide operational 
transparency, and provide visibility. It also means having media-monitoring 
systems that can provide indications of pending reputational crises. It is 
important to remember that operational failures will invariably happen. With 
proper preparation and quick action, reputational crises do not necessarily have 
to follow them.
In a globally integrated manufacturing operation, a reputation is the product of 
superior engineering design and risk management, which includes top notch 
supply chain oversight and operational control—systems comprising policies, 
conformance-monitoring solutions, and enforcement mechanisms. In a global 
service operation, a reputation similarly rests on supplier engagement and 
earning the designation of a “preferred customer.” Disney explicitly believes 
that its supply chain is a source of reputational value. The company has an 
ongoing initiative to “operationalize a holistic strategy on the supply-chain 
resilience side that we believe is [already] helping to protect our reputation,” 
says Scott Childers, Director, Integrated Trade Management at The Walt Disney 
Company.13 Total global operational visibility, the next frontier in risk 
management, will help the company build on processes that Disney has had in 
place for many years and further “increase the value of that risk mitigation and 
[help] communicate the value upwards and outwards related to Disney’s value 
overall,” adds Childers. “The resilient organization manages its entire supply 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
9
chain from the perspective of its customers,” explains Locke, “because a failure 
at any point is blamed on the company.”10
One strong motivation for developing systems that capture information from all 
supply chain partners is that the volume of information is beyond the 
management capacity of humans. Long notes that McKinsey, the consulting 
firm, “estimates that enterprises stored more than 7 exabytes of new data in 
2010.” One exabyte is equal to 4,000 times the information in the U.S. Library 
of Congress. “You need to identify where all the points of information come 
in,” adds Long.8
When a reputation is compromised, the value proposition for a stakeholder may 
vanish. When multiple stakeholders perceive failure, a firm’s once stellar 
reputation may be permanently damaged, with diminished enterprise value—if 
not overall company viability.
Organizational culture, the driver of reputation, is a force that can reduce the 
variances of otherwise unconstrained behaviors—but only to the extent that 
management and the board take the care (technically, a duty of loyalty) to both 
oversee and enforce it. Ignorance, under U.S. Delaware corporate law, is 
tantamount to culpability. A strong culture that establishes organizational 
norms, and a board of directors that will support management even in the face 
of placing revenue at risk, are essential for driving consistently ethical behavior 
and mitigating the risk from “rogues.” 
Nevertheless, operational failures will occur. They are not crises, according to 
Winokur, who served for 15 years on the board of Enron, the failed energy 
services company. “Crises arrive, by definition, when you’re not expecting 
them. They are something outside the status quo.”11 Knowing when an 
operational failure is becoming a reputational crisis is a key reputational value 
protection strategy. 
“There are several signs of a pending reputational crisis,” says Richard S. 
Levick, president and CEO of Levick Strategic Communications:14 

Search engine results on terms specific to a company’s business, 
products, or people, and linked to websites belonging to the plaintiff’s 

Chapter 13 | Consider These
10
bar, regulators, and activist nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) 
appear at higher levels of relevance.

High-impact bloggers use terms specific to a company’s business, 
products, or people in an adverse context.

Terms specific to a company’s business, products, or people appear 
with Twitter hashmarks.

Reputational value metrics that sense the economic consequences of 
media effects on stakeholders show increased volatility. (item added by 
author). 
These cardinal signs tell “you that things are starting to heat up.” It’s pack 
journalism just like Timothy Crouse described in The Boys on the Bus.14 
Christopher Teas, managing director of Southport Lane, a private equity firm, 
explains it this way. “As the vast volume of information from the Internet 
overwhelms people’s ability to process, they end up parroting the views of those 
they trust.”15
Monitoring the evolution of an operational crisis and being ready to address the 
fallout are managerial imperatives. “Having a rapid cross-functional response 
team … is crucial,” noted Long.8 Levick agreed that a key success factor is 
preparing well in advance of a crisis.14 The mantle of leadership in a crisis, 
however, needs to shift to the board, says Winokur. “When something unusual 
happens, the executive floor becomes essentially a third- or fourth- grade soccer 
team where everybody goes for the ball.” Boards need to take early ownership 
of the crisis response so that management can continue running the company.11
The board’s assumption of crisis management is essential when the reputation 
of the C-suite is at risk. In many cases, the CEO is held to a higher standard 
than other employees, notes William Hernandez, a director of Kodak, Black 
Box, and several other firms.16 It may be “unfair,” but as Low declares, 
“Personal behavior of every kind is increasingly a public matter. Get used to it.”17
The Walt Disney Company has had its surprises from the supply chain, and its 
CEO has been the object of scorn from Institutional Shareholder Services. The 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
11
company has successfully protected its reputation, as shown by the numbers. 
Disney, an $88-billion media and entertainment conglomerate, ranks highly 
among the various reputation surveys and algorithmic measures. In 2012, it 
ranked 13th among the World’s Most Admired, 11th among the World’s Most 
Respected, in the 97.7th percentile in the Corporate Reputation Rankings, 6th in 
the RQ rankings, and 17th on the RepTrak rankings. 
According to the Steel City Re reputational value metrics reported in Chapter 
12, Disney raised its Reputation Value measure over the trailing 12 months by 
0.17 Gerken Units (GU), an increase of 25%. Its reputational value volatility of 
1.5% was at the median of its 11-member media conglomerate peer group,12 and 
its return on equity of 42.4% was at the 88th percentile and 18.4% greater than 
the median return of its peer group. On 30 August 2012, its P/E ratio was 16.34.
Restoring Reputational Value
Because a reputational crisis will shave an average 7% from a company’s 
market capitalization, reputational value restoration can yield a net additional 
average of 13.5% in market capitalization. The incentives are transparent; the 
pathway is formulaic—provided that its execution is authentic by the following 
measures.

Identify the root cause of the process failure that 
precipitated the adverse media events that are central to 
reputational damage.

Chapter 13 | Consider These
12

Identify key stakeholders and assure them that, having 
identified the root cause, the company is taking immediate 
action to rectify the problem while mitigating risks to all 
stakeholders. Implementing authentic operational controls 
linked to reputation risk and value is an exemplary 
demonstration of ongoing restoration of reputation. Davia 
Temin, president and CEO of Temin and Company 
Incorporated, a communications consultancy, says “Any 
time you have a reputational crisis of any kind the best 
companies, the best organizations, and the best industries 
take that seriously and start putting in fixes themselves.”18

Develop, implement, and promote industry-wide adoption 
of process controls that can ensure that neither your firm, 
nor others in the industry, will have to suffer the 
consequences of a similar failure in the future.
As with all reputation-related activities, they must be authentic and they must be 
executed so as to be recognized and valued by stakeholders. The challenge with 
financial service firms after the 2008 crisis, adds Temin, is that the industry 
waited “to have the government put in the ‘fixings’ for them and vilify them 
some more.”
When trust is violated, as it was with the financial industry, authenticity may 
require a third party’s validation. Properly designed reputational insurances can 
help signal authenticity to stakeholders.
By the numbers, AIG, a $58 billion insurance company, ranks poorly in 
reputational surveys. In 2012, it ranked only in the 6th percentile among 138 of 
the World’s Most Admired, 60th—a “critically poor” ranking—in the RQ 
rankings and 144th on the RepTrak rankings. 
On the other hand, it ranked in the 78th percentile of the Steel City Re 
Corporate Reputation Rankings and appears by those algorithmic metrics to be 
on track to restoring its reputation. Similarly to Disney, it raised its Reputation 
Value measure over the trailing 12 months by 0.10 GU or 23%. Its reputational 

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
13
value volatility of 7.4% was at the 92nd percentile of its 43-member multi-line 
insurance company peer group. Its reputational value velocity was a strong 
20.6%, and its return on equity of 24% was at the 88.5th percentile and 24.7% 
greater than the median return of its peer group. Additional reputational metrics 
indicating reputation restoration are reported in Chapter 12.
The reputation metrics suggested that AIG was making changes. With its P/E 
ratio of 2.99 in mid-August 2012, there was ample reward available if that 
multiple were to be raised through the full spectrum of reputational value 
restoration efforts.
By the Numbers—Highlights
Mindful of Bernstein’s maxim—“the plural of ‘anecdote’ is not ‘data’”—this 
book provides quantitative data evidencing the reputational value to be gained, 
placed at risk, or lost, in the context of a diversity of stakeholder behaviors.19 
Table 13-1 highlights some of these data.
Table 13-1. Selected Measures Discussed in Prior Chapters
Chapt
e
r
Source
Descriptio
n
Measure
2
BP’s 2010 crisis 
Regulatory 
burden
50 hearings; 80 bills; and $15–$25 billion in fines 
and penalties
2
BP’s 2010 crisis 
Creditor 
response
Liquidity crisis; net cost of credit 16% increase 
over 2009; credit default swap spreads August 
2012 about 35 basis points higher (70% higher) 
than March 2010
2
BP’s 2010 crisis 
Investor 
response
Two board members not reelected; three 
derivative lawsuits; and friction over future CEO 
compensation; net $54 billion in lost market 

Chapter 13 | Consider These
14
capitalization
Stock price effect—Interval Gains (Losses)
Rolls-
Royce
S&P500
01-Nov-
10
0
0
01-Nov-10
3
Rolls-Royce 
reputational 
value dividend
Sustained 
sales volume 
and pricing 
power
15-Nov-
10
(–8.7%
)
1.1%
15-Nov-10
4
Apple Inc. 
reputational 
value dividend
Employee 
productivity 
and costs
Store sales are 280% more efficient than the 
average of a reference group.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses 
(SG&A) costs are 65% lower than at Microsoft
4
Goldman Sachs 
reputational 
value dividend
Employee 
productivity 
and costs
Average deal size 15% larger than the average of 
its peers; total deal value 42% greater than the 
average of its peers. 
Operating costs per $/revenue no less than 4% 
lower than average of rivals
5
Supply chain 
reputational 
value dividend
Customer of 
choice status
2%–4% lower cost of goods sold
5
Toyota Motors 
crisis
P&L effects
Credit default swap prices up 0.6%–0.7%
16% fall in monthly sales
14% fall in annual market share
3% fall in secondary market pricing power 
(inventory value)
Total P&L impact $2 billion
6
Creditor 
reputational 
value dividend
Credit costs
All other things being equal:
Credit spreads for the largest companies 
with the best reputations (Fortune) are 
~0.75% lower than the prices for those with 
the worst reputations.
CDS prices for the largest companies with the 
best reputations (Barron’s) are ~0.60% lower 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
15
than the prices for those with the worst 
reputations.
7
Equity investor 
reputational 
value dividend
Market cap 
effects of an 
unexpected 
boost in 
reputation
Average annual market cap boost of 6.5% over 
10-year study period
7
Equity investor 
reputational 
value dividend
Effects on 
CEO pay
Correlation of investor respect metric with CEO 
salary: $800,000 per full notch up.
8
Board-level 
reputation risk 
awareness
Most recent 
annual rate of 
disclosure of 
corporate 
reputational 
risk
50% per year increase
71% of the S&P 500 as of June 2012
8
Compensation 
committee 
adoption of 
reputation-
linked 
incentives
Fraction of 
CEO bonus at 
UBS linked 
to measures 
of reputation
11%
9
Survey-based 
reputation 
rankings
Correlation 
of rankings 
from the 
general 
public with 
rankings 
from the 
professional 
business 
community
21%
10
Regulatory costs
Estimated 
average fine 
for Foreign 
Corrupt 
Practices Act 
violations
$69.4 million
12
Metrics
Correlation 
among a 
21%–94%

Chapter 13 | Consider These
16
diversity of 
reputation 
ranking and 
reputational 
value metrics
1 Hillenbrand C, Money K. Corporate responsibility and corporate reputation: two separate 
concepts or two sides of the same coin? Corporate Reputation Review. 2007; 10:261–277.
2 Modern lessons from Hillel. NPR. 7 September 2010. 
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=129706379. Accessed 29 August 2012.
3 Smidts A, Pruyn TH, Van Riel CBM. The impact of employee communication and perceived 
external prestige on organizational identification, Academy of Management Journal. 2001; 
44(5):1051–1062.
4 Carmeli A. Perceived external prestige, affective commitment, and citizenship behaviors. 
Organization Studies.2005; 26(3):443–464.
5 Dutton JE, Dukerich JM, Harquail CV. Organizational images and member identification. 
Administrative Science Quarterly. 1994; 39:239–263.
6 Liebman P. Is ethics a valuable intangible asset? Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 9 April 
2010. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012. 
7 Rittereiser RP. Process-driven reputation risk in supply chains. Mission Intangible Monthly 
Briefing. 7 May 2010. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 18 October 2012.
8 Long G. Who knows what institutional memory and the role of the sideload. Mission Intangible 
Monthly Briefing. 4 November 2011. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset 
Finance Society: http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
9 Low J. Is ethics a valuable intangible asset? Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 9 April 2010. 
Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
10 Locke L. Creating reputation value. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 2 March 2012. Audio 
recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: http://iafinance.org/monthly-
briefings. Accessed 8 October 2012.

Reputation, Stock Price, and You
17
11 Winokur HS. Protecting reputation value. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 13 April 2012. 
Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
12 Industry standard groupings provided by FACTSET.
13 Childers S. Process-driven reputation risk in supply chains. Mission Intangible Monthly 
Briefing. 7 May 2010. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
14 Levick RS. Protecting reputation value. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 13 April 2012. 
Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 10 October 2012.
15 Teas C. Wall Street, volatility, and reputation. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 4 May 
2012. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
16 Hernandez W. Sex and the CEO. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 8 June 2012. Audio 
recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: http://iafinance.org/monthly-
briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
17 Low J. Sex and the CEO. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 8 June 2012. Audio recordings 
available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. 
Accessed 5 October 2012.
18 Temin D. Wall Street, volatility, and reputation. Mission Intangible Monthly Briefing. 4 May 
2012. Audio recordings available from the Intangible Asset Finance Society: 
http://iafinance.org/monthly-briefings. Accessed 5 October 2012.
19 Bernstein IS. Metaphor, cognitive belief, and science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 
1988;11:247–248.

