Higher Education in Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance
Jisun Jung
Hugo Horta
Akiyoshi Yonezawa Editors
Researching
Higher Education
in Asia
History, Development and Future

Higher Education in Asia: Quality, Excellence 
and Governance
Series editors
Angela Yung Chi Hou, Taipei, Taiwan
Akiyoshi Yonezawa, Sendai, Japan
Sheng-Ju Chan, Chiayi, Taiwan
Ka Ho Mok, Hong Kong, China

Aims and Scopes
This book series presents the most important quality issues and the current develop­
ments of higher education in Asian nations from multi-perspectives—academics, 
university managers, QA bodies, governments and students. It makes comparisons 
on these matters among Asian higher education systems, institutions, and QA agen­
cies, drawing on available data-sets with special emphasis on Quality, Excellence 
and Governance.
The series attempts to incorporate the most important quality issues and the  
current developments in Asian nations from multi-perspectives—academics, 
university managers, QA bodies, governments and students into three major 
dimensions—quality, excellence and governance. The scope of Asian region 
includes four areas: East Asia, South Asia, Middle East Asia and the island Pacific 
nations.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/11872

Jisun Jung  •  Hugo Horta  •  Akiyoshi Yonezawa
Editors
Researching Higher 
Education in Asia
History, Development and Future

ISSN 2365-6352	
        ISSN 2365-6360  (electronic)
Higher Education in Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance
ISBN 978-981-10-4988-0        ISBN 978-981-10-4989-7  (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017949361
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of 
the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the 
editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors 
or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims 
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, 
Singapore
Editors
Jisun Jung
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
Akiyoshi Yonezawa
Tohoku University
Sendai, Japan
Hugo Horta
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China

v
Foreword: The Centrality of Research on 
Higher Education
Postsecondary education, in the era of massification, has become big business in 
every sense of that term. Universities and other postsecondary institutions serve 
ever-expanding segments of the population. In Asia, enrolment rates in South Korea 
and Japan are among the highest in the world—at more than 80 percent of the age 
group. Asia’s emerging economies, including China and India, are rapidly expand-
ing—and indeed those two countries will account for more than half of global enrol-
ment growth in the coming several decades. Further, postsecondary education has 
become central to most societies—providing the skills needed in the global knowl-
edge economy and offering social and economic mobility to segments of the popu-
lation which had never had access before.
Public, state-supported postsecondary education is a significant part of the bud-
gets of most countries. The private higher education sector, now the fastest-growing 
part of postsecondary education worldwide, is particularly strong in Asia, where it 
has traditionally educated the large majority of students in Japan, South Korea, 
Taiwan, and the Philippines and is expanding rapidly in Indonesia and elsewhere.
It is surprising that there is only limited knowledge about postsecondary educa-
tion in Asia—and for that matter in much of the world. There are thousands of busi-
ness schools that educate managers and entrepreneurs and conduct research on 
commercial enterprises of all kinds. There are schools for civil servants sponsored 
by governments. Universities do research on most aspects of society. But there is 
very little research or training focusing on postsecondary education. Researching 
Higher Education in Asia is the first effort to assess the state of research on higher 
education in the region, and for the most part, this volume presents a story of igno-
rance of a key social institution. Few if any Asian countries have a robust research 
infrastructure on higher education. There is limited training available for postsec-
ondary leaders—presidents, vice chancellors, rectors, and other key administrative 
officers necessary for any university. There are few journals published. While higher 
education is a matter of considerable public interest and is reported in newspapers 
and the mass media, there are few professionals able to interpret key developments. 
In many countries, statistics are poor or entirely missing.

vi
Researching Higher Education in Asia not only points out the problems but 
makes a strong case for the importance of understanding postsecondary education 
in Asia. Understanding and analysis require good data—statistics, research studies, 
and commentary. If postsecondary education is to be successful and serve the needs 
of ever-increasing numbers as well as the requirement for scientific research that 
contributes to the global knowledge society, a higher education research infrastruc-
ture is needed throughout Asia.
A few countries such as Japan and China have both good statistical information 
about postsecondary education and some research capacity. Other Asian countries 
need to develop research institutes, academic specialists, training programs, and the 
other requirements for understanding postsecondary education.
	
	
Philip G. Altbach
Foreword: The Centrality of Research on Higher Education

vii
Contents
	1	
Introduction: Higher Education Research  
as a Field of Study in Asia.......................................................................	
1
Jisun Jung, Hugo Horta, and Akiyoshi Yonezawa
Part I  Conceptualization and Understandings  
of Higher Education Research in Asia
	2	
Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks  
of Insufficient Contribution to International  
Higher-Education Research....................................................................	
15
Hugo Horta
	3	
Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives for Observing  
East Asian Higher Education..................................................................	
37
Rui Yang
	4	
Higher Education Knowledge Production  
in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia...............................................................	
51
Jae Park
	5	
Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education,  
and Higher Education Research: Mapping the Development 
in Regionalization of Higher Education Research................................	
73
Roger Y. Chao Jr.
Part II  East Asia
	6	
Higher Education Research in Japan:  
Seeking a Connection with the International  
Academic Community.............................................................................	 113
Akiyoshi Yonezawa

viii
	7	
Higher Education Research in China: An Independent  
Academic Field Under the State.............................................................	 131
Lifang Hu and Shuangye Chen
	8	
Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context,  
Trends, and Vision...................................................................................	 145
William Yat Wai Lo and Felix Sai Kit Ng
	9	
Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research  
Themes and Methodologies in National Journals.................................	 163
Jisun Jung
	10	 What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: A Status  
Report on Higher Education in Macau and Its Research....................	 181
Zhidong Hao
	11	 The Development and Progress of Higher Education  
Research in Taiwan: Massification Matters..........................................	 195
Sheng-Ju Chan and Ting-May Huang
	12	 Higher Education Research in Mongolia During  
the Transition Period of Development....................................................	 213
Nyamjav Sumberzul and Shagdarsuren Oyunbileg
Part III  Southeast Asia
	13	 Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global  
Education Hub”: Major Themes in Singapore.....................................	 225
Michael H. Lee
	14	 Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia:  
Towards an Epistemic Community of Practice.....................................	 245
Norzaini Azman and Morshidi Sirat
	15	 Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current  
Trends and Development.........................................................................	 265
Nopraenue Sajjarax Dhirathiti
	16	 Higher Education Research in the Philippines: Policies  
and Prospects............................................................................................	 287
Christian Bryan S. Bustamante
Part IV  South/West Asia
	17	 Education Research and Emergence of Higher  
Education as a Field of Study in India...................................................	 299
N.V. Varghese
Contents

ix
	18	 Higher Education Research in Iran: Quantitative  
Development and Qualitative Challenges..............................................	 315
Abbas Madandar Arani, Lida Kakia, and Mohammad Jafari Malek
	19	 The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education  
Research in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia............................................	 327
Abdulrahman M. Abouammoh
Part V  Conclusion
	20	 Higher Education Research in Asia: History,  
Development and Challenges..................................................................	 355
Jisun Jung, Hugo Horta, and Akiyoshi Yonezawa
Contents

1
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_1
Chapter 1
Introduction: Higher Education Research 
as a Field of Study in Asia
Jisun Jung, Hugo Horta, and Akiyoshi Yonezawa
Abstract  Higher education research in Asia is undergoing significant changes, but 
limited yet in terms of research community, active researchers, research themes and 
methodologies. This chapter introduces the book Researching Higher Education in 
Asia: History, Development and Future, which aims to explore the evolution of 
higher education research as a field of study in Asia using a historical, theoretical 
and empirical approach. It further aims to extend the research scope beyond the 
more studied East Asian countries to incorporate Southeast Asian, South Asian and 
Central Asian countries. An overarching framework that relates to main issues under 
discussion in the region in terms of higher education research is presented in the 
introduction, followed by 14 country cases from different Asia regions describing 
the dynamics of higher education research in each individual country.
Introduction
Higher education research has been expanding worldwide over the past few decades 
(Sadlak and Altbach 1997; Teichler 1996; Tight 2004). This is reflected in the increas-
ing number of academic degree programmes (Blackwell and Blackmore 2003; 
Altbach et al. 2006) and publications specialising in higher education (Volkwein 
et  al. 1988; Altbach and Engberg 2001; Hutchinson and Lovell 2004). As Tight 
(2004) has noted, higher education research has become a more respectable and 
attractive field. There are several reasons for the wide increase in higher education 
research. Above all, massification has caused increasing attention regarding higher 
education among supranational institutions, governments, institutional policymakers 
and other stakeholders (Brennan and Shah 2000). This change has in turn led to fund-
ing support for evaluative research projects to better understand the ongoing changes 
J. Jung (*) • H. Horta 
Division of Policy, Administration and Social Sciences Education, Faculty of Education,  
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SCR, China
e-mail: jisun@hku.hk; horta@hku.hk 
A. Yonezawa 
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
e-mail: akiyoshi.yonezawa.a4@tohoku.ac.jp

2
in higher education systems and their impact on social and economic development 
(Tight 2004). There has also been an increased demand for expertise and data on 
higher education to provide a more sophisticated understanding of the nature of 
higher education characteristics and systems (Altbach et al. 2006). Recent emphasis 
on university competitiveness, such as notions of world-­class universities, league 
tables and internationalisation, has also brought about new research interests within 
higher education (e.g. Seeber et al. 2016). These changes have highlighted a number 
of related issues, both theoretical and practical, at the national, regional and interna-
tional level.
However, the maturity of higher education research differs between regions and 
countries. While some countries have only a few basic statistics and overview 
reports to guide their own knowledge and policy initiatives, many of which are 
unsound, others have solid institutions and agencies gathering systematic informa-
tion through ongoing research on higher education (Schwarz and Teichler 2000). 
The study of higher education is closely related to the size, scale and growth of the 
higher education system in each region (Clark 1996; Tight 2007). It is not surprising 
that higher education as a significant field of academic study initially developed in 
North America, which now has the largest and oldest body of relevant research 
compared to other countries (Tight 2007). Altbach et al. (2006) have shown that the 
United States of America has the largest research enterprise in the field of higher 
education, with a well-developed training programme for researchers. Moreover, 
studies on higher education have focused mainly on the Anglo-Saxon academic 
traditions, such as those found in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada and 
Australia. Beyond this realm, Tight’s (2004) analysis of the main higher education 
journals from outside North America has identified a diverse array of research inter-
ests and methods among European academics. More recently, mass higher educa-
tion systems have also developed in other countries, including countries in Western 
and Eastern Europe, Oceania and parts of Asia-Pacific, with a concomitant increase 
in higher education research. Higher education studies as a course have been added 
to many curricula, and research institutes focused on higher education have been 
established in several countries (Teichler and Sadlak 2000; Altbach et al. 2006).
This book concentrates on higher education research in Asia, a region of the 
world that has experienced a fast growth in participation in higher education, par-
ticularly in the first decades of the twenty-first century, but that it is evolving at an 
accelerated pace in terms of contributions to new knowledge in all fields of science 
(including the humanities). Japan and South Korea have reached the universal 
access stage in terms of gross enrolment in higher education (World Bank 2000), 
and numerous indicators point to a rapid growth in recent research productivity 
among Asian academics (Postiglione and Jung 2012). The average annual growth in 
research output in China and South Korea in 2011 was 16.8% and 10.1%, respec-
tively. China, as the world’s second largest national producer of science and tech-
nology research papers, accounted for 9% of the world total in 2009. Rapid annual 
growth rates of over 10% were also experienced by Iran, Thailand, Malaysia and 
Pakistan between 1999 and 2009 (National Science Foundation 2012).
J. Jung et al.

3
Yet, despite the rapid growth and concomitant challenges of higher education in 
Asia, related research in this field in Asia has a relatively short history, and the par-
ticipation of its higher education community, especially in the international research 
arena, is limited (Jung and Horta 2013). Knowledge about the evolution of higher 
education research in Asia is scarce, and its current status remains to a very large 
extent unknown. Many questions remain unanswered: who is doing such research, 
what topics are being researched, and how do researchers collaborate with one 
another? Is higher education research being undertaken by higher education 
researchers or by researchers in related fields, do they have a stable and sustainable 
national academic community for their research, and do they collaborate with col-
leagues in other countries? If these communities exist at national and international 
level, what is it that characterises and defines them the best, and what are the future 
plans for development?
Higher Education as a Field of Study
When one describes higher education research, one frequently encounters the ques-
tion of whether higher education is a mature and independent academic discipline. 
The answer is often ‘no’ or ‘not really’, as there is insufficient evidence to define 
higher education research as a ‘discipline’, which generally addresses a highly 
abstract phenomenon and remains exclusive to a large a number of people with 
interest in the subject (Piierce 1991). May (1997) has described higher education 
research as enjoying only ‘part-time involvement’ from scholars who hold and 
apply theoretical perspectives from other disciplines. Instead of using the word ‘dis-
cipline’, scholars often describe higher education as a ‘field’. For example, Tight 
(2004) stated that the work of higher education departments or centres might be 
called a ‘field of study’ or ‘practice’ rather than a discipline, while Altbach et al. 
(2006) described higher education research as an emerging ‘field’. The term ‘field’ 
is a geographical metaphor used to describe, categorise and classify knowledge and 
skills (Burke 2000). Fields are constructed over time with ‘accumulated knowledge, 
paradigms and academic capitals, recognised by academics or other social groups’ 
(Chen and Hu 2012, p. 656). As a field of study, higher education research is repre-
sented by academic degree programmes at the postgraduate level, and there are 
higher education institutes and centres, and specialized journals (Altbach et  al. 
2006). Nonetheless, the term ‘academic field’ is still used ‘loosely’ and ‘customar-
ily’ (Chen and Hu 2012).
In reality, the boundaries of this field are recognised by ‘a group of people oper-
ating as a community who identify with it and work within it’ (Chen and Hu 2012, 
p. 664). Tight (2012, p. 209) described communities of practice in higher education 
as ‘groups or networks which help guide, regulate and make meaning of our lives, 
both in work and outside’. The importance of academic departments in creating and 
maintaining disciplinary communities makes them the building blocks from which 
a discipline is created (Pierce 1991). Tight (2004) applied Wenger’s (2000) ­definition 
1  Introduction: Higher Education Research as a Field of Study in Asia

4
of ‘community’ – the ‘basic building blocks of a social learning system’ (p. 229) – 
to the higher education community. Members should have sense of a joint enter-
prise, relationships of mutuality and a shared repertoire. Tight (2004) concluded 
that ‘higher education research is not a single community of practice but, rather, a 
series of, somewhat overlapping, communities of practice’ (p. 409).
In this context, there have been discussions to identify the nature and features of 
higher education research. For instance, higher education is an object-focused area 
based on multi-disciplinarity, as researchers in other subspecialities often deal with 
topics related to the enterprise of higher education (Altbach et al. 2006; Teichler 
1996, 2005). Teichler (1996) described the features of higher education research as 
characterised by a blurred distinction between practitioners and researchers in the 
midst of the principal tension between scientific reasoning and professional prob-
lem solving. Tight (2004) further explained that most higher education researchers 
do not need to make their theoretical perspectives explicit or become involved in 
broader aspects of the theoretical debate. How, then, has such a group built an aca-
demic community in higher education? They have established degree programmes, 
research centres and associations; they have held annual conferences and published 
research results in specialised journals to share their ideas. The evolution of higher 
education research in terms of research centres, academic programmes and publica-
tions across the region has been well listed in the Rumbley et al. (2014) Higher 
Education: A Worldwide Inventory of Research Centers, Academic Programs, and 
Journals and Publications. There are also several bibliographical sources in higher 
education, including journal articles, books, encyclopaedias and handbooks, gov-
ernment documents, dissertations and theses, legal material, newspapers, confer-
ence proceedings, letters and, in particular, a number of research journals focused 
on higher education. The latter group has expanded over the past few decades, with 
many now in international circulation (Budd 1990; Altbach et al. 2006). For exam-
ple, a few special issues were published in recent years to explore the legitimacy of 
higher education research as a field of study in terms of diverse research themes and 
methodologies in different contexts. They are The development of higher education 
research as a field (Published in Higher Education Research and Development, 
2012), Alternative methodologies in higher education (Published in Higher 
Education Research and Development, 2013), and Researchers and policy makers: 
A strategic Alliance (published in Studies in Higher Education, 2014).
Professional journals in most disciplines serve the important function of provid-
ing a mechanism for professional communication. They encourage the communica-
tion of ideas, stimulate discussion – including on controversial topics – and allow 
scholars to share their findings (Hutchinson and Lovell 2004). With the influence of 
journal articles, there have been attempts to analyse higher education research pat-
terns from a sociometric perspective. This method provides an unobtrusive, non-­
reactive measure of formal communication practices within a scholarly discipline 
(Smith 1981). An examination of what is used during the process of communication 
in higher education allows readers to discern the current position of higher educa-
tion research. Who, then, studies higher education? Who is predominantly engaged 
J. Jung et al.

5
in higher education research? Which country, institution or discipline are they from? 
Teichler (1996) categorised higher education researchers by their backgrounds, 
dividing them into five categories: (1) department-based occasional researchers, (2) 
continuous discipline-based scholars, (3) scholars based in higher education 
research institutes, (4) applied higher education researchers and research units and 
(5) occasional research practitioners. Furthermore, Teichler (1996) described the 
changing trends in higher education research. While past research on higher educa-
tion tended to focus on individual countries, there is now increased interest in com-
parative perspectives, including research from supranational organisations 
(UNESCO, OECD and World Bank, among others).
Higher Education Research in Asia
To describe the growth of higher education in the Asian region, Marginson (2011) 
quoted Times Higher Education (2010) as stating that ‘higher education systems in 
North America and Western Europe are watching the emerging Asian systems with 
a mix of excitement and apprehension’. The Asia-Pacific region has the fastest 
growing higher education market internationally, based on rapid economic growth 
(Shin and Harman 2009). According to UNESCO’s annual statistics, enrolment in 
tertiary education in East Asia and the Pacific was approximately 47 million in 
2007, over three times that of 1991 at 14 million. The growth rate in South and West 
Asia is also surprising, with 20 million students currently enrolled. Higher educa-
tion in Asia has undergone enormous change and development in the past few 
decades. In particular, massification is not a simple issue of enhanced access; this 
change in scale is of great importance because it has transformed the entire land-
scape of higher education, affecting governance, financing, quality, curricula, facul-
ties and student demographics (Shin and Harman 2009). In defining the major 
challenges of higher education in Asia-Pacific for the twenty-first century, Shin and 
Harman (2009) list massification, privatisation, accountability and governance, 
internationalisation and the global ranking of universities. Postiglione (2011), in 
pointing to the effects of the global recession on higher education in East and 
Southeast Asia, noted that during this period it is particularly important for the 
region to continue to reform governance and administration, access and equity, 
internal and external efficiency and regional collaboration.
The development of higher education itself has been accompanied by an increase 
in academic interest within the community, stimulating the creation of a common 
identity (Teichler 1996). In particular, we must recognise the importance of not only 
the national but also the international academic community. Arimoto (2000) pro-
posed that it is time for domestic networks to reach out to the worldwide network of 
research on higher education. In this light, what is in store for higher education 
research in Asia? Despite these emerging issues, one cannot help but ask how many 
academics are involved in this research field and how active its research community 
currently is. Asia has a number of research institutes specialised in higher education, 
1  Introduction: Higher Education Research as a Field of Study in Asia

6
some of which are internationally recognised, such as the Research Institute for 
Higher Education at Hiroshima University in Japan (established in 1970) and the 
Research Center of Higher Education Development at Xiamen University in China 
(established in 1978). Additionally, supranational organisations such as the OECD, 
UNESCO and the World Bank have continuously contributed to higher education 
research. Such international organisations in Asia have also contributed by collect-
ing data broadly and conducting a large proportion of the major higher education 
research. For instance, the Asian Development Bank has published a series of higher 
education research reports and releases annual statistics on the higher education sec-
tor with a focus on Asia. However, Arimoto (2000) described the institutionalisation 
of higher education research in this region as still ‘underdeveloped’.
Some studies have investigated the evolution of higher education research in this 
region. For instance, Chen and Hu (2012) outlined the history of higher education 
research by the academic community in China and described its stages of progres-
sion as pre-discipline, discipline establishment, expansion and consolidation. They 
offered a perspective on the unique Chinese context, noting that the field could not 
have established itself as a proper and recognised field without the blessing of the 
state. They further indicated that higher education research in China has been open 
to international academic communities since the 1980s and has sought an outward-­
looking perspective through international referencing. Further inquiry into higher 
education research in Asia is still needed. Guided by Schwarz and Teichler’s (2000) 
analysis of higher education research in the European context, we can pose the same 
question and consider its implications: ‘How can research on higher education 
cover more successfully the broad thematic range and bring together the various 
areas of expertise?’ (p. 2).
About This Book
Asian countries have similar backgrounds in the evolution of higher education 
research. Their higher education systems face challenges that require active engage-
ment from researchers to permit policymakers and managers to take informed deci-
sions. Yet the higher education research community in Asia appears fragmented and 
dispersed, with an inconsistent focus on research themes (Jung and Horta 2013) and 
a heavy dependence on just a few dedicated scholars. Institutional support also varies 
substantially across countries. In some, higher education research associations are 
pivotal in developing the higher education community, while in others they are either 
developing too slowly or mired in internal issues, in which case education adminis-
trative associations or government agencies often take the role of fostering higher 
education research at the national level. In addition, the higher education community 
in each country appears to be strongly affected by funding opportunities and the dis-
ciplinary background of its researchers. For an interdisciplinary field such as higher 
education research, the disciplinary organisation of Asian universities – echoing simi-
lar challenges elsewhere (see Ribeiro 2014) – appears to obstruct its development.
J. Jung et al.

7
In a globalised scientific community, national and local dynamics still matter. 
The study of higher education communities at the national level is warranted to 
understand how domestic higher education communities with shorter or longer his-
tories, associated organisations and related specialist publications contribute to the 
challenges of national higher education and dialogue with the international higher 
education community. This dialogue between the national and international higher 
education communities is particularly relevant, as topics such as faculty and staff 
development, institutional research and quality assurance, for example, can some-
times strengthen local higher education research, as these practices are highly 
embedded in their local contexts. This book aims for a broad discussion on the 
subject of higher education research as a field of study in Asia. It strives to share 
ideas about the evolving higher education research communities in Asia, identify 
common and dissimilar challenges, improve regional articulation of these national 
communities, and ultimately contribute to the international higher education 
research community. This is particularly important as several higher education 
authors have argued for an Asian view that goes beyond the simple adoption of 
Western models that may not be the most appropriate for analysing the Asian con-
text. In light of this gap in current knowledge, each chapter in this book focuses on 
a set of questions that the editors of this book deem critical to better understand the 
higher education community in Asia.
•	 Who is undertaking higher education research in Asia?
•	 Where are the key regions of higher education research in Asia, and how have 
they been evolving?
•	 To what extent does higher education research in Asia involve international, 
regional, national and institutional collaboration?
•	 Is higher education an independent academic field at the national level across 
Asia?
•	 Does Asia have research institutes, academic degree programmes and nationally 
based academic journals specialising in higher education?
•	 What kinds of topics are being researched, and what methodologies are being 
applied?
•	 What is the relationship between government policy and higher education 
research?
The country cases apply robust analytical thinking and in-depth analysis based 
on a solid theoretical and methodological framework to highlight key events and 
issues critical to the past, current and future development of each country’s national 
community. This includes the effects of agents in higher education research devel-
opment, the role of funding sources, the resulting influence (or not) of this research 
on policymaking, the relative influence of national versus international higher edu-
cation research communities and the links between higher education, teaching and 
practice. In each case, the authors briefly present the historical background of their 
own higher education research community and focus on specific issues regarding 
the current landscape of higher education research in their own context. In terms of 
methodology, these studies use various methods including both quantitative and 
1  Introduction: Higher Education Research as a Field of Study in Asia

8
qualitative approaches. Based on accumulated expertise and a strong scholarly net-
work, this book aims to explore the evolution of higher education research as a field 
of study in Asia using a historical, theoretical and empirical approach. It further 
aims to extend the research scope beyond the East Asian countries to incorporate 
Southeast Asian, South Asian and Central Asian countries. An overarching frame-
work is presented in the introduction, followed by 14 country cases from different 
Asian regions describing the dynamics of higher education research in each indi-
vidual country. It is noteworthy that some of the countries have little to almost no 
history concerning research done in higher education, since its national higher edu-
cation research communities were never truly developed or are only now starting to 
develop. In many country cases, the focus on higher education research rests on one, 
a few or a group of researchers that take interest in issues related to higher educa-
tion, in other cases remits to a newly formed research centre and attempts to create 
national communities and national language journals. In most of these cases, the 
authors opted to explain the evolution of their higher education system, bringing in 
topics of current interest, and mix it with the little there is to say about a research 
field that is only now starting to evolve from an embryonic phase.
The book consists of four sections. Part I opens with a general overview of higher 
education research in Asia, including how this academic community has developed, 
its level of activity and its values and methods from an Asian point of view. In Chap. 
2, Hugo Horta presents a comparative analysis of international publication data 
across the various Asian countries, using historical quantitative analysis from a 
descriptive perspective, to provide a macro view of higher education research in 
Asia, covering the contribution of higher education researchers to the global pool of 
knowledge in higher education research and assessing the patterns of collaboration 
at regional and global levels. Rui Yang, in Chap. 3, criticises the almost total current 
reliance on Western theoretical constructs in the conceptualisation of higher educa-
tion development in East Asia and argues for perspectives that emphasise the influ-
ence of traditional East Asian cultural thinking on contemporary development. In 
the following chapter, Jae Hyung Park examines the Confucian heritage and its 
methodological issues in knowledge production, followed by ‘Asia’ as a higher edu-
cation research methodology. Roger Jr. Chao, then, explores the regionalisation of 
higher education research in Asia and its relationship to the broader literature on 
Asian regionalism, to facilitate a better understanding of its evolution and future 
direction.
Part II presents higher education research in East Asia – including Japan, China, 
Hong Kong, Macau, South Korea, Taiwan and Mongolia – which currently leads the 
higher education research community in Asia in most cases. Akiyoshi Yonezawa 
describes how higher education research in Japan was shaped historically and dis-
cusses its current and future challenges in the global context. Li-Fang Hu and 
Shuang-Ye Chen outline the development of higher education research in China 
into a well-recognised independent academic field with an organised academic 
community in its unique national and historical context. Using empirical publica-
tion data, Yat Wai Lo and Felix Sai Kit Ng focus on higher education research in 
Hong Kong, both at the national and international level. Zhidong Hao examines the 
key issues in higher education in Macau and its national and global challenges. The 
J. Jung et al.

9
case of South Korea is explored by Jisun Jung, which describes the development of 
its higher education research and the key topics and methodologies applied. 
Sheng-Ju Chan and Ying Chan focus on Taiwan and its rapid development in higher 
education research despite the lack of a solid academic programme and other con-
straints. Nyamjav Sumberzul and Shagdarsuren Oyunbileg consider higher educa-
tion research in Mongolia, where it is still in the initial stages of development.
Part III examines the especially rapid development of higher education research 
in Southeast Asia, including Singapore, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. 
Michael Lee probes the major characteristics, trends and issues in higher education 
development in Singapore, under such themes as ‘centralised decentralisation’, 
entrepreneurialisation, globalisation, internationalisation, marketisation and massi-
fication. Norzaini Azman and Morshidi Sirat introduce the salient features of the 
evolution and current state of higher education research in Malaysia. Nopraenue 
Dhirathiti focuses on Thailand through the lens of teaching courses and programmes, 
national educational policy and current research and publication in higher education 
research. Christian Bryan Bustamante provides an overview of the status and chal-
lenges of higher education research in the Philippines, based mainly on the policies 
of the Philippines’ Commission on Higher Education (CHED).
Part IV focuses on South and Central Asia, including India, Iran and Saudi 
Arabia. N. V. Varghese describes the historical and current higher education research 
in India and highlights the major challenges to its future development. Abbas Arani, 
Lida Kakia and Mohammad Jafari Malek provide an overview of the development 
of higher education research in Iran and its key contemporary challenges, while the 
chapter by Abdulrahman Abouammoh analyses the case of Saudi Arabia, where this 
field of research is currently undergoing regeneration.
The concluding chapter of the book provides a summary of findings, the evolu-
tion of national higher education research communities and the challenges – com-
mon and not so common – that are still to be tackled in the region, and based on 
these, a set of suggestions for the future development of the field of higher educa-
tion research in Asia is forwarded.
References
Altbach, P., & Engberg, D. (2001). Higher education: A worldwide inventory of centers and pro-
grams. Phoenix: Oryx Press.
Altbach, P. G., Bozeman, L. A., Janashia, N., & Rumbely, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Higher education a 
worldwide inventory of centers and programs. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Arimoto, A. (2000). Recent developments of higher education research and higher education 
policy in Japan. In S. Schwarz & U. Teichler (Eds.), The institutional basis of higher edu-
cation research: Experiences and perspectives (pp. 93–106). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Blackwell, R., & Blackmore, P. (Eds.). (2003). Towards strategic staff development in higher edu-
cation. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Brennan, J., & Shah, T. (2000). Quality assessment and institutional change: Experiences from 14 
countries. Higher Education, 40(3), 331–349.
1  Introduction: Higher Education Research as a Field of Study in Asia

10
Budd, J. M. (1990). Higher education literature: Characteristics of citation patterns. Journal of 
Higher Education, 61(1), 84–97.
Burke, P. (2000). A social history of knowledge: From Gutenberg to Diderot. Cambridge: Polity.
Chen, S., & Hu, L. (2012). Higher education research as a field in China: Its formation and current 
landscape. Higher Education Research & Development, 31(5), 655–666.
Clark, B. (1996). Substantive growth and innovative organization: New categories for higher edu-
cation research. Higher Education, 32(4), 417–430.
Hutchinson, S. R., & Lovell, C. D. (2004). A review of methodological characteristics of research 
published in key journals in higher education: Implications for graduate research training. 
Research in Higher Education, 45(4), 383–403.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Marginson, S. (2011). Higher education in East Asia and Singapore: Rise of the Confucian model. 
Higher Education, 61(5), 587–611.
May, T. (1997). Social research: Issues, methods and process (2nd ed.). Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
National Science Foundation. (2012). Science and engineering indicators 2012: Academic 
research and development. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind12/c5/c5h.htm
Pierce, S. J. (1991). Subject areas, disciplines and the concept of authority. Library and Information 
Science Research, 13(1), 21–35.
Postiglione, G. (2011). Global recession and higher education in Eastern Asia: China, Mongolia 
and Vietnam. 62(6), 789–814.
Postiglione, G., & Jung, J. (2012). Frameworks for creating world-class universities: The Hong 
Kong case. In J. C. Shin & B. Kehm (Eds.), Institutionalization of a world-class university in 
global competition. Dordrecht: Springer.
Ribeiro, F.M. (2014). Interdisciplinarity in ferment: The role of knowledge networks and depart-
mental affiliation. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, online first. doi:10.1016/j.
techfore.2015.07.021.
Rumbley, L. E., Altbach, P. G., Stanfield, D. A., Shimmi, Y., Gayardon, A., & Chan, R. Y. (2014). 
Higher education: A worldwide inventory of research centers, academic programs, and jour-
nals and publications. Boston: Center for International Higher Education, Boston College.
Sadlak, J., & Altbach, P. G. (Eds.). (1997). Higher education research at the turn of the new cen-
tury. Paris/New York/London: UNESCO/Garland.
Schwarz, S., & Teichler, U. (2000). Introduction: Comparing the institutional basis of higher edu-
cation research. In S. Schwarz & U. Teichler (Eds.), The institutional basis of higher education 
research: Experiences and perspectives (pp. 1–9). Dordrecht: KluwerAcademic Publishers.
Seeber, M., Cattaneo, M., Huisman, J., & Paleari, S. (2016). Why do higher education institu-
tions internationalize? An investigation of the multilevel determinants of internationalization. 
Higher Education, online first. doi:10.1007/s10734-015-9971-x.
Shin, J. C., & Harman, G. (2009). New challenges for higher education: Global and Asia-Pacific 
perspectives. Asia Pacific Higher Education Review, 10(1), 1–13.
Smith, L. C. (1981). Citation analysis. Library Trends, 30, 83–106.
Teichler, U. (1996). Comparative higher education: Potentials and limits. Higher Education, 32(4), 
431–465.
Teichler, U., & Sadlak, J. (Eds.). (2000). Higher education research: Its relationship to policy and 
practice. Oxford/Pergamon: IAU Press
Teichler, U. (2005). Research in higher education in Europe. European Journal of Education, 
40(4), 447–469.
Tight, M. (2004). Research into higher education: An a-theoretical community of practice. Higher 
Education Research and Development, 23(4), 395–411.
Tight, M. (2007). Bridging the divide: A comparative analysis of articles in higher education jour-
nals published inside and outside North America. Higher Education, 53(2), 235–253.
J. Jung et al.

11
Tight, M. (2012). Research in higher education. Berkshire: Open University Press.
Times Higher Education, THE. (2010). Tigers burning bright. Cover, 17(June), 32–33.
Volkwein, J. F., Carbone, D. A., & Volkwein, E. A. (1988). Research in higher education: Fifteen 
years of scholarship. Research in Higher Education, 28(3), 271–280.
Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice and social learning systems. Organization, 7(2), 
225–246.
World Bank. (2000). Higher education in developing countries: Peril and promise (The task force 
on higher education and society). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Jisun Jung  is an Assistant Professor in the Faculty of Education at the University of Hong 
Kong since September, 2015. She received a Ph.D. from Seoul National University, Korea, in 
2011, and she was a postdoctoral fellow and lecturer at the University of Hong Kong. She has been 
involved in the international comparative project ‘The Changing Academic Profession’ since 2009. 
Her current research focuses on academic profession, doctoral education, employment and post-
graduate studies and higher education research in Asia. She is the co-editor of two special issues, 
‘Higher Education Research in East Asia: Regional and National Evolution and Path-Dependencies’ 
in Higher Education Policy and ‘Graduate Employment and Higher Education in East Asia’ in 
International Journal of Chinese Education, and also a co-editor of the book ‘The Changing 
Academic Profession in Hong Kong’ published by Springer in 2017. She has many publications 
in internationally refereed journals such as Higher Education, Studies in Higher Education, 
Minerva, Tertiary Education and Management and Higher Education Quarterly and several 
book chapters in Springer books. She is currently the principal investigator of the project, 
‘Students’ Motivation and Expectation for Career Advancement in Self-financed Master’s 
Program: Hong Kong Case’.
Hugo Horta  is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Education of the University of Hong Kong 
since September 2014. After completing his Ph.D. at the Technical University of Lisbon, in 2007 
(part of it performed in the Netherlands and in the United States), and a postdoctoral spell in 
Tohoku University, Japan, he worked as Advisor to the Portuguese Secretary of State of the 
Ministry of Science, Technology and Higher Education, from 2010 to 2011. He also served as the 
Portuguese National delegate to the ERA Steering Committee on Human Resources and Mobility 
from 2010 to 2014. Throughout this period, he published articles focused on various topics in 
international peer-reviewed journals in the field of Higher Education and Science and Technology 
Studies. He is currently Coordinating Editor at Higher Education and sits in the advisory editorial 
boards of Higher Education Policy, Asian Pacific Education Review, Journal of Higher Education 
and Science and the International Journal of Institutional Research and Management (IJIRM). He 
recently co-edited a book on Trends and Challenges in Science and Higher Education: Building 
Capacity in Latin America with Manuel Heitor and Jamil Salmi.
Akiyoshi Yonezawa  is Professor and Director of the Office of Institutional Research, Tohoku 
University. He also serves as a Special Advisor to the President for Institutional Research and 
Effectiveness. He received Ph.D. in Education from Tohoku University. With a background in 
sociology, he mainly conducts research on comparative higher education policy – especially focus-
ing on world-class universities, internationalisation of higher education and public-private rela-
tionships in higher education. He established his expertise in higher education policy and 
management though working experience at universities and public organisations: Nagoya 
University, National Institution for Academic Degrees and University Evaluation, Hiroshima 
University, OECD and the University of Tokyo. He is currently serving as a board member at Japan 
Society of Educational Sociology and at Japan Association for Higher Education Research. He is 
a co-editor of book series Higher Education in Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance series 
(Springer Book Series).
1  Introduction: Higher Education Research as a Field of Study in Asia

Part I
Conceptualization and Understandings 
of Higher Education Research in Asia

15
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_2
Chapter 2
Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: 
The Risks of Insufficient Contribution 
to International Higher-Education Research
Hugo Horta
Abstract  The aim of this study is to explore questions associated with the engage-
ment of Asia-affiliated researchers in higher-education research published interna-
tionally. The contribution of Asia-affiliated researchers to the international 
higher-education research community is measured by analysing articles published 
in Scopus-indexed journals between 1980 and 2015. The results show that despite 
the somewhat accelerated growth since the 2000s in the number of articles pub-
lished internationally by higher-education researchers affiliated with Asian coun-
tries, this community is still relatively small and poorly regionally connected, relies 
extensively on collaboration with researchers from native English-speaking coun-
tries and predominantly comprises researchers who began publishing international 
higher-education research in the last 15 years. Currently, Asian-based researchers 
contribute less to the global pool of higher-education research than their counter-
parts in most other regions of the world. These findings lead to the argument that 
efforts must be made to increase the participation of Asian-based researchers in 
international higher-education research in the short term. The failure to do so, in a 
globalised world in which English is the lingua franca of research, will significantly 
limit the world’s understanding of the characteristics and development of higher 
education in Asia. In the absence of native Asian accounts and analyses, non-Asian-­
based researchers may be solely responsible for contributing insights into Asian 
education to the international higher-education literature. The key and somewhat 
provocative question asked here of higher-education researchers based in Asia is as 
follows: are you going to allow others to research and share to the world their under-
standings of what is happening in higher education in Asia – with all the conse-
quences associated to it  – or are you going to take the initiative and do it 
yourselves?
H. Horta (*) 
Division of Policy, Administration and Social Sciences Education, Faculty of Education,  
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China
e-mail: horta@hku.hk

16
Introduction
The volume of both national and international higher-education research published 
in international journals is increasing (Tight 2004). The growing interest in higher 
education as a subject of enquiry has arisen from the central role played by higher 
education in knowledge, social, economic and cultural systems in today’s knowl-
edge society (David 2011; Shin and Harman 2009). Higher-education researchers 
have sought answers to a plethora of questions related to higher education that many 
governments, families and other stakeholders around the world are interested in 
tackling (Altbach et al. 2006). In so doing, higher-education researchers are required 
to deal with increasingly diverse and complex issues arising from the development 
of higher-education systems in the twenty-first century. As a result, a great range of 
research themes and topics has been addressed, although a strong emphasis remains 
on policy issues, theory and practice and pedagogy (David 2011; Tight 2004). 
Concurrently, higher-education research worldwide has been augmented by the 
views and expertise of researchers from various backgrounds, such as scientists, 
educators and administrators (Ashwin et al. 2015).
Nevertheless, higher-education research remains under-researched (Tight 2004). 
Dennison (1992) pointed out with some irony that although higher education has 
become a major area of government expenditure and public interest, higher-­
education research has received relatively little investment from public sources (i.e. 
the government). The development of higher-education research has progressed at 
different speeds in different regions of the world, but this variation has also received 
limited attention from researchers, international organisations and other stakehold-
ers (Jones 2012). Higher-education research communities tend to emerge and 
develop when higher-education systems are expanded. In North American and 
Western European countries, relatively recognised, competent and engaged higher-­
education research communities have been established following the early develop-
ment of higher-education systems. However, in Asia and other regions, researchers 
are less engaged with higher education from an international standpoint (Jung and 
Horta 2013), in part due to the later development of most higher-education systems 
in these regions (Jung and Horta 2015; Chen and Hu 2012).
It is important to assess the development of higher-education research in Asia 
for several reasons, of which two are acknowledged to be the most relevant. (1) 
Most higher-education systems in Asia are undergoing accelerated massification, 
with a speed, breadth and scope never previously attained in any other part of the 
world (Shin et al. 2015). This process carries with it many of the usual challenges 
facing the development of higher-education systems, but also brings to the fore 
new challenges created by uncertain, complex and multifaceted trends of globalisa-
tion. (2) In the years to come, higher-education systems in Asia are expected to 
account for the largest share of students worldwide. However, Asian governments 
are also investing substantially in activities at the top of the higher-education 
knowledge pyramid, in Heitor and Horta’s (2016) words, that is, the academic-
research component of higher-education systems. To increase their countries’ vis-
H. Horta

17
ibility in the ­international scientific community, governments across Asia are 
making consistent efforts to promote institutions with a greater or lesser degree of 
resemblance to the American model of the research university (Yang 2015; 
UNESCO 2014). In addition, they are replacing manufacturing processes that add 
little value (such as the mere assemblage of products designed elsewhere; Locke 
and Wellhausen 2014) to transform their economies into innovative, knowledge-
driven systems. Higher-­education researchers based in these countries have a key 
role to play in explicating and contributing to this development, although national 
higher-education research communities in Asia have not always prospered, due to 
various factors related to resources, traditions, mentalities, rewards and institu-
tional environments (e.g. Chen 2015; Chan and Chan 2015).
Although national higher-education communities play a key role in making poli-
cies and elucidating the development of national higher-education systems, the fail-
ure of these national communities to contribute to the international scientific 
community is an increasingly urgent problem (Yonezawa 2015; Jung 2015). In a 
globalised world in which geopolitical and scientific communities influence each 
other and are increasingly connected, policymakers look for benchmarks to com-
pare performance (Voegtle et al. 2011). In addition, the media today share news 
from all over the world, and curiosity about the dynamics of higher-education devel-
opment in Asia is mounting (e.g. Marginson 2011). Audiences across the world, not 
just higher-education researchers and policy makers, are interested in learning about 
key developments in Asia’s higher-education systems. For example, it remains 
unclear how Asian governments are reorganising their countries’ education systems 
and institutions; what strategies are being adopted in Asia to internationalise educa-
tion, to establish knowledge hubs, to build research capacity, networking and col-
laboration, to use and expand resources and to increase access; and which learning 
styles are being fostered to improve students’ learning experiences and graduates’ 
employability (e.g. Mok 2016; Postiglione 2014). The global research community 
has shown clear interest in these questions, as demonstrated by the following two 
examples. An article about East Asia, Singapore and the rise of the Confucian edu-
cation model by Simon Marginson, an Australian researcher currently based in the 
United Kingdom, received 76 citations between its publication date in 2011 and 
October 2016. A 2009 article on the challenges facing higher education in Asia and 
the Pacific region by Jung Cheol Shin, a South Korean researcher, and Grant 
Harman, an Australian researcher, has garnered 61 citations since its publication in 
2009. This rapid accumulation of citations reflects the speed with which articles on 
Asian higher-education systems have drawn attention and interest worldwide.
At this juncture, two key questions are as follows. Who is publishing internation-
ally on higher education in Asia? Who is letting the world know what is happening 
in Asian higher education, how it is happening and why? Answers to these questions 
are suggested by a very simple scientometric analysis. A search of international 
higher-education journals indexed in the Scopus database for articles with the key-
word ‘Asia’ in their titles, abstracts or keywords reveals that the researchers who 
write the most about higher education in Asia are affiliated with institutions in 
Australia and the United States. That two of the most frequently cited articles on the 
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

18
current state of and future directions for higher education in Asia were authored by 
Australian researchers is indicative of the global prevalence of non-Asian research-
ers in the field of Asian higher education.1 This raises concerns that Asia-based 
researchers are under-represented in the higher-education literature; according to 
some authors, this may be due to editorial bias (e.g. Atkinson 2013). Meanwhile, the 
‘Westernisation’ of theories and methods and their consequent inapplicability to 
Asian contexts creates tension and discomfort among Asia-based researchers (Lo 
2016a, b), while they continue to struggle to define Asia-appropriate models, theo-
ries and methods that are visible to both national and international actors and repre-
sent best practice in analysing ongoing developments in Asian higher-education 
systems (Yang 2015; Postiglione 2014).
Against this backdrop, the current chapter builds on and extends the work of 
Jung and Horta (2015) on the contribution of Asian countries to internationally pub-
lished higher-education research. Its aim is to better understand how this contribu-
tion has evolved and to what extent researchers in the Asian region are capable of 
contributing more than they have done so far. To achieve this aim, descriptive statis-
tics drawn from a dataset of indexed international journals are analysed using a 
quantitative historical method (e.g. White and McCain 1998) to (1) assess the evolu-
tion of publications in Asia and elsewhere in the world, (2) analyse co-authorship 
collaboration at country level and (3) identify and better understand generational 
changes in composition of Asia-based higher-education researchers with the great-
est volume of international publications.
This chapter is organised as follows. In the next section, the data used and the 
chosen methodological approach are described. Subsequently, the results are dis-
cussed in relation to previous literature on higher-education research and the trans-
formation of higher-education systems in Asia. The final section concludes the 
study: the findings are discussed with reference to the current engagement in inter-
national publication of Asia-based higher-education researchers, and some conse-
quences of the failure to encourage higher-education researchers to publish in 
international higher-education journals are suggested.
Methods
Database and Analysis
This study is based on the Scopus database, a large abstract and citation database of 
peer-reviewed research literature, which is particularly suited to the analysis of pub-
lications produced in international peer-reviewed higher-education journals due to 
1 The most frequently cited article with the keyword ‘Asia’ in the international higher education 
literature (cited 118 times) was published in 2008 in Higher Education Policy and co-authored by 
two English researchers and one Asia-based researcher (Deem et al. 2008). The second most fre-
quently cited article with this keyword was authored by Simon Marginson, as noted in the text.
H. Horta

19
its extensive coverage of journals in the social sciences (Norris and Oppenheim 
2007). The data collection was conducted in March 2016 and covered articles with 
a focus on higher-education research published by Asia-affiliated authors between 
1980 and 2015. The content of the specialised higher-education literature (journals 
only) was based on the recommendations by Hutchinson and Lovell (2004) and 
Tight (2004), who identified and listed core higher-education journals. A few 
recently indexed higher-education journals were added to this list to cover a field 
with expanding publication venues (Brennan and Teichler 2008). The latter journals 
were identified by considering only journals with the words ‘higher education’ and 
‘tertiary education’ in their titles (as in similar research; see Horta and Jung 2014). 
The final list of journals is similar to that used in recent research on higher education 
in Asia (see Jung and Horta 2015). Analysing specialised higher-education litera-
ture is meaningful because these journals offer forums for the presentation of new 
knowledge and professional communication and debate (Tight 2008).
Using the criteria explained above, the search yielded 19,305 articles on higher 
education published between 1980 and 2015. However, 3323 articles were removed 
from the analysis due to insufficient information on the country or institution of 
affiliation, as author affiliation provides a critical measure of the development of 
knowledge in the field by region and country. More than 50% of the articles with 
undefined affiliations were published by the Chronicle of Higher Education. 
Although this publication is indexed in the higher-education journal database, it has 
a multitude of functions (such as advertising academic jobs and hosting blogs); it 
predominantly concerns issues in the higher-education system of the United States; 
and its articles are generally only one or two pages long, in which higher-education 
researchers identify and debate topics of immediate interest to stakeholders (Meyer 
2010). In a sense, the Chronicle of Higher Education is a publishing venue that 
communicates the approaches and findings of higher-education research to both the 
general public and the higher-education community (Wilson 2011); therefore, the 
comparability of its aims and purposes with those of other well-established special-
ised higher-education journals is questionable.
The remaining 15,982 articles – constituting the final database – were catego-
rised by country and region according to author affiliation to gain insights into the 
nature and evolution of higher-education knowledge production in each world 
region and country. As the focus of analysis was knowledge production in interna-
tional higher education in Asia, the United Nations’ classification2 of countries was 
generally followed to identify those countries considered to be part of Asia. Only 
two countries in this classification, Turkey and Israel, were not considered part of 
Asia. As associated member states to the European Union, these countries have long 
benefited from European research funding, positioning them between the European 
Research Area and the Asian research community. Therefore, their situation differs 
considerably from that of other Asian countries (Svarc et al. 2013; Zimmerman 
et al. 2009). The publication-counting method used in the study was whole ­counting, 
2 The United Nations’ list of countries classified by region can be found at http://unstats.un.org/
unsd/methods/m49/m49regin.htm [last accessed 26 September 2016].
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

20
a common scientometric counting method whereby articles with multiple authors 
are counted by author affiliation (Gauffriau et al. 2008). For example, an article with 
two authors affiliated with different countries was counted as two articles. The main 
focus of the analysis was articles authored or co-authored by researchers based in 
Asia. These data were analysed by quinquennia to assess the evolution of produc-
tion in the field of higher education at the country level. Author analysis was also 
pursued to identify the researchers in the region who have produced the greatest 
volume of international publications on higher education.
Results
Evolution of Higher-Education Research Worldwide and in Asia
The number of articles published in higher-education journals worldwide is increas-
ing. As Fig. 2.1 shows, the number of articles published between 1980–1984 and 
2011–2015 increased by 4.4 times, from 1301 to 5738, respectively. This growth 
reflects the increasing contribution of national higher-education research communi-
ties to the international knowledge pool – even from communities with a long his-
tory of participation in global science research (Lo and Ng 2015). Some of these 
international publications were also comparative studies, which have maintained a 
steady state throughout the last decades as identified by Kosmutzky and Krucken 
(2014). However, the rise in the number of articles is also due to the emergence of 
new journals in higher education and the increase in annual volumes and issues of 
existing higher-education journals to accommodate the increasing participation and 
contribution of researchers from outside the United States (Tight 2012).
This growth was not linear, but followed a polynomial trend line with two main 
periods. First, from 1980 to the mid-2000s, article number remained fairly steady, 
fluctuating only within a narrow range (from 1211 publications in each of two peri-
ods, 1983–1977 and 1985–1989, to 1486 in 2001–2005). Between 2001 and 2005, 
only 9% more articles were published than between 1980 and 1984. In the second 
main period, from the mid-2000s to the present day, the increase in the number of 
publications accelerated, accounting for most of the spectacular growth recently 
observed in publications on higher education. This period of growth coincided with 
the transformation of the higher-education systems of upper middle income coun-
tries from elite to mass systems (Marginson 2016) and with increasing national and 
institutional policy pressure on researchers from all disciplines to publish more fre-
quently in international indexed journals, especially high-impact journals (Dobele 
and Rundle-Theile 2015; West and Rich 2012). This pressure was due in part to the 
craze for world university rankings and institutional positioning and legitimisation 
activities in global higher-education systems, and in part to the rise of an evaluative 
culture and accompanying assessment systems in higher education, associated with 
managerial practices that have influenced academia (Leisyte and Wilkesmann 2016; 
Cattaneo et al. 2016). As interest in higher education mounts, and its challenges – old 
H. Horta

21
and emergent – draw the attention of mature higher-education researchers and others 
that contribute to the pool of knowledge on higher education (Kehm 2015), it will be 
interesting to see whether the increase in publications on higher education will con-
tinue or stabilise in the near future. Interest in higher-education issues, coupled with 
the ‘publish or perish’ imperative and other collaborative-competitive trends associ-
ated with pressurised audit cultures, evaluation systems and prestige rankings, sug-
gests that the second key trend depicted in Fig. 2.1 will last for several more years.
Researchers from different regions make different contributions to the field of 
higher education (Fig. 2.2). There are two main reasons for this inequality. First, 
almost all of the specialised higher-education literature is published in English, 
favouring researchers in native English-speaking countries and countries in which 
resources are available to allow authors to commission their articles to be proofread 
by native English speakers (Min 2014). Second, compared with those in Asia, 
higher-education systems developed earlier in North America, followed by Europe, 
in which the international collaboration of national communities was internation-
ally supported by the European Framework programmes (Hoekman et al. 2013). 
This created demand for a higher-education research community that would support 
policymakers, the academic community and other stakeholders by gaining insights 
into the emerging and sometimes unexpected challenges facing higher-education 
massification (Kuzhabekova et al. 2015).
Therefore, it is not surprising to observe in Fig. 2.2 that researchers affiliated 
with North and Central America3 contributed the most to the higher-education field 
3 A large percentage of the articles published in the North and Central America regions were 
authored or co-authored by US and Canada-affiliated researchers.
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
Fig. 2.1  Number of publications in specialised higher-education literature worldwide, 
1980–2015
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

22
during the first period identified in Fig. 2.1 (from 1980 to the mid-2000s), followed 
by Europe. On average, researchers in North and Central America published 608 
articles per quinquennium, and European researchers published 486. Researchers 
from Oceania published a third to a half of the output of researchers in North and 
Central America and Europe (169 articles per quinquennium), followed by their 
counterparts in Asia, Africa and South America (49, 25 and 8 articles per quinquen-
nium, respectively). This trend had a similar regional composition in the second 
period, from 1980 to 2015, but researchers in North and Central American and 
Europe produced roughly the same number of publications, with both areas show-
ing rapid growth. Oceania-based researchers also produced substantially more pub-
lications than in the first period (exhibiting the greatest increase between the two 
periods). The average number of articles published per quinquennium from 2002 to 
2006 by researchers in North and Central America was 1329, while European 
researchers published an average of 1271 articles and Oceania-based researchers 
604. The Asia-based authors also increased their contribution to the international 
field, with their average number of publications per quinquennium in this period 
reaching 248. Between the first period and the second period, the average number of 
articles published by Asian-based researchers per quinquennium grew by more than 
five times.
The number of articles by African authors also increased (with more than 100 
articles published in a quinquennium for the first time in 2007 and 2011, respec-
tively). During the second period, African researchers published an average of 101 
articles per quinquennium. The South American contribution to the field also 
increased substantially, but South American researchers were still far from publish-
ing 100 articles in a single quinquennium; and in the second period, 2011–2015, 
they published only a third of the number of articles produced by African authors. 
On average, South American researchers published 26 articles per quinquennium in 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Africa
Asia
Europe
North/central America
Oceania
South America
Fig. 2.2  Publications in the specialised higher-education literature by region, 1980–2015
H. Horta

23
the second period. There are several possible reasons for the limited contribution of 
South American higher-education researchers; most importantly, they tend to dis-
seminate their findings predominantly in Spanish and Portuguese language journals 
that are not indexed by an English language-dominated international community 
and thus lack widespread visibility (see Vasconcelos et al. 2009).
Figure 2.3 shows that the worldwide share of international higher-education 
articles produced by Asia-affiliated researchers increased from 2% to 4% in the 
1980s and 1990s, respectively, from 5% to 6% in the first decade of the 2000s and 
to 8% after 2010. Although this is a positive trend, it also indicates that Asian-based 
researchers have the potential to make a greater contribution to the field of higher-­
education research and that knowledge production in this field is currently occur-
ring at a very low rate. This is confirmed by the following two observations. Between 
1981 and 1985, Asian researchers in the field of higher education published 0.002 
articles per million people in Asia. This figure increased to 0.003 between 1991 and 
1995, 0.005 between 2001 and 2005 and 0.023 between 2011 and 2015, but remains 
far from the world average, which serves as a reference point for world production 
relative to the global population. Between 1981 and 1985, 0.055 articles per million 
people worldwide were published in the field of higher education. This figure 
remained roughly stable in 1991–1995 (0.053), decreased in 2001–2005 to 0.047 
(partly due to the rapid increase in the world population during this period) and has 
recently reached 0.160. This trend indicates that the contribution of new knowledge 
to the international higher-education literature by Asian researchers relative to the 
population of Asia is significantly smaller than the equivalent contribution of 
researchers elsewhere in the world. Similar findings are obtained from the analysis 
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
7.000
World
Asia as a percent of the world
Fig. 2.3  Publications in the specialised higher-education literature worldwide and share of Asia-­
affiliated publications, 1980–2015
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

24
of the number of students of both sexes enrolled on all programmes in tertiary edu-
cation. Between 2000 and 2004, Asian-based researchers published 0.36 articles in 
the field of higher education per 1 million students enrolled in tertiary education in 
Asia; during the same period, the world average was 2.45 articles per 1 million stu-
dents enrolled in tertiary education. Between 2010 and 2014, 0.79 articles were 
published by Asian researchers per 1 million students enrolled in tertiary education 
in Asia, while 5.52 were produced worldwide per 1 million tertiary students. Similar 
to the results for population, the findings for tertiary enrolment indicate that the 
production of new knowledge produced by Asia-affiliated researchers in the field of 
higher education relative to the total number of students enrolled in tertiary educa-
tion in Asia is much lower than the equivalent contributions in other regions.4
The contribution of researchers across Asia to higher-education research is also 
unequal, with some countries accounting for a greater share of the overall number 
of publications in the region (Jung and Horta 2015). Analysis of the relative contri-
bution of researchers affiliated with different Asian countries to knowledge 
­production in higher education reveals dynamics of both change and stability. 
Figure 2.4 shows the relative contribution of countries in Asia to the field of higher 
education. The 10 countries responsible for the greatest share of knowledge produc-
tion are shown individually in the figure, while the remaining countries are aggre-
gated into a category named ‘others’. In terms of stability, analysis reveals that a 
4 Population figures based on World Bank data (http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.
aspx?source=education-statistics-~-all-indicators#) and United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organisation data (http://data.uis.unesco.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=EDULIT_
DS#) [both accessed 27 September 2016].
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Hong Kong
China
Japan
Malaysia
Taiwan
Singapore
South Korea
India
Iran
United Arab Emirates
Others
Fig. 2.4  Production of higher-education research by Asian country, 1980–2015
H. Horta

25
considerable proportion of the articles published in the field of higher education in 
Asia originate in Hong Kong, consistent with the findings of previous literature 
(Kim et al. 2017; Jung and Horta 2013). Another stable publication trend is the pre-
dominance of East Asian countries in the international publication of higher-educa-
tion research. The higher-education systems in these countries were established 
earlier than those in West, South, Southeast and Central Asia (Jung and Horta 2013).
In terms of change, several countries were responsible for the production of 
higher-education knowledge during the 1980s, and those in the ‘others’ category 
were the highest producers during this period. Promisingly, after several years of 
fairly low but steady production, these countries have collectively begun to contrib-
ute more to the international pool of knowledge in higher education since the early 
2000s. However, these countries have the potential to contribute even more, as their 
aggregate production from 2011 to 2015 was exceeded only by Hong Kong and 
China. If this trend persists, the contribution of researchers across Asia to interna-
tional higher-education research is likely to become more balanced in the near 
future. Hong Kong researchers continue to contribute most to higher-education 
research in Asia, because Hong Kong’s higher-education system is an educational 
hub boasting some key Asian flagship universities and a highly internationalised 
and well connected academic community, within which English is (not unproblem-
atically) the main language used in publications (Lo 2016a, b; Lo and Ng 2015; 
Choi 2010). However, Hong Kong should be understood as something of an outlier 
in the region due to these educational features and its status as a multicultural hub; 
it is sometimes regarded as a foreign territory within Asia (even by mainland 
Chinese students studying in Hong Kong; see Yu and Zhang 2016).
The rapid growth in China’s contribution to higher-education research began in 
the early 2000s, partly as a result of national policies designed to increase the 
research capacity, internationalisation and visibility of the Chinese academic com-
munity. The number of Chinese-authored publications in all disciplines has increased 
substantially (Breznitz and Murphree, 2011). The growing contribution of Chinese 
researchers to internationally published higher-education research is also related to 
the accelerated development of China’s higher-education system. In addition, knowl-
edge production in China is becoming increasingly outward looking, as intended by 
the Chinese government (Chen and Hu 2012). However, these incentives to publish 
are balanced by problems with research quality (Feng et al. 2012) and research integ-
rity (Yang 2015; Zeng and Resnik 2010). The increase in higher-­education publica-
tions in Taiwan, Malaysia, South Korea and Singapore since the early 2000s, despite 
their specific characteristics and thematic concentrations (see Kim et al. 2017), fol-
lowed national efforts to promote these countries’ research and development systems 
as global knowledge hubs by increasing not only their ­knowledge production and 
visibility but university prestige, networking and innovation (Lee 2015).
In the 1980s, researchers based in India also made a key contribution to the 
higher-education research produced in Asia; however, following a decline and sub-
sequent growth in the 1990s, their production has substantially decreased, reaching 
a low but steady publication rate during the early and late 2000s. It would be useful 
to understand why the Indian contribution to the international higher-education 
community has reached a plateau. Meanwhile, Japan-based researchers made a 
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

26
steady and relevant contribution to the development of and knowledge production in 
higher-education research from the early 1990s; however, production reached a 
peak in 2006–2010, and Japan’s contribution to the field has since been decreasing. 
This trend may be linked with national or institutional incentives in the form of 
research funding and career progression to focus knowledge production on national 
journals to guarantee a more straightforward knowledge exchange within Japanese 
society. However, the trend may also be associated with limitations on research 
approaches and resources (such as the time required to publish in both national and 
international journals) and unsolved language barriers that may eventually be tack-
led by a younger generation of higher-education researchers (Yonezawa 2015; 
Futao 2014).
It is important to rejuvenate the body of researchers in the higher-education field. 
New generations of researchers keep the field alive, as they combine knowledge 
accumulated by past generations of researchers with new knowledge of their own 
obtained through their particular abilities and approaches, and respond to novel 
challenges facing researchers in the field. Table 2.1 shows the researchers who pro-
duced the greatest volume of higher-education literature in Asia in two periods 
(1980–2015 and 2000–2015). In both periods, Hong Kong-based researchers were 
overwhelmingly prominent. Throughout the whole period under analysis (1980–
2015) and the most recent period (2000–2015), seven of the ten most productive 
researchers were based in Hong Kong, and all of the ten most productive researchers 
were based in East Asia, reflecting the leading role of East Asian researchers in 
producing and internationally disseminating new knowledge on higher education. 
Even more importantly, the most productive researchers basically represent a new 
generation of researchers. Only David Kember and Ka-Ho Mok published articles 
before 2000; the remaining researchers have published research only in the last 
15 years. This suggests that the field of higher education in Asia is being advanced 
by young scholars and scholars with strong publication records in recent years 
(which may indicate that researchers are adapting to the need to be more outward 
looking by publishing in international peer-reviewed journals).
Table 2.1  Most productive researchers in Asian region in two periods
Author (1980–2015)
No. of 
articles
Author (2000–2015)
No. of articles
Kember, D. (Hong Kong)
35
Kember, D. (Hong Kong)
22
Shin, J. C (South Korea)
13
Shin, J. C. (South Korea)
13
Tsai, C. C. (Taiwan)
12
Tsai, C. C. (Taiwan)
12
Watkins, D. (Hong Kong)
12
Mok, K. H. (Hong Kong)
  9
Mok, K. H. (Hong Kong)
10
Jung, J. (Hong Kong)
  9
Jung, J. (Hong Kong)
  9
Macfarlane, B. (Hong Kong)
  9
Macfarlane, B. (Hong Kong)
  9
Huang, F. (Japan)
  8
Huang, F. (Japan)
  8
Leung, D. Y. P. (Hong Kong)
  8
Leung, D. Y. P. (Hong Kong)
  8
Horta, H. (Hong Kong)
  7
Horta, H. (Hong Kong)
  7
Carless, D. (Hong Kong)
  6
H. Horta

27
Analysis of the Asia-based authors who published at least three articles between 
1980 and 2015 reveals that the trend observed among the highest-producing research-
ers in Table 2.1 can be generalised to most authors in the field. Of the researchers 
with at least three publications in the whole period, 81% published only between 
2000 and 2015, 7% published between 1980–1999 and 2000–2015 and 12% pub-
lished only between 1980 and 1999, indicating that they have since retired or are 
otherwise no longer engaged in producing higher-education research. This suggests 
that a new generation of higher-education researchers has emerged and is responsible 
for knowledge production and development in the field, in line with the developing 
character of higher-education research as a field of knowledge in Asia (Jung and 
Horta 2013). The emergent nature of Asian higher-education research is also evident 
from Asian researchers’ tendency to collaborate with native English-­speaking 
researchers on publications in international higher-education journals. In the period 
under study, 25% of all of the articles published by Asia-affiliated authors were pro-
duced in collaboration with researchers based in the United States, 16% with 
researchers based in the United Kingdom and 15% with researchers based in 
Australia. Within Asia, collaboration most frequently occurs with researchers in 
Hong Kong (6%), followed by China (5%, the same percentage as Canada) and 
Singapore (4%). Unsurprisingly, countries developing their research capacity rely on 
countries with leading scientific communities for collaboration (indeed, this phenom-
enon is prevalent in most disciplines; see Yonezawa et al. 2016; Mosbah-­Natanson 
and Gingras 2014). However, the extent of this collaboration is surprising. For exam-
ple, the proportion of internationally published higher-education research on which 
Asian-affiliated researchers have collaborated with US researchers is exactly the 
same as the proportion produced collaboratively by all Asian countries (25%).
Although collaboration between researchers in the scientific community is wel-
come in a globalising world facing increasingly complex challenges, excessive reli-
ance on partners outside Asia to the detriment of regional collaboration may 
adversely affect the identity, development and theoretical and methodological cre-
ativity of Asia-based higher-education researchers (Yang 2014). This tension is par-
ticularly evident in post-colonial countries and territories and has led to an emphasis 
on searching for and conceptualising appropriate models of higher-education sys-
tems and institutions in Asia (Li 2012). The increase in ‘soft’ and economic power 
of Asian countries operating within global research and higher-education systems 
has only made this tension more apparent and more pressing (Zha and Hayhoe 
2014; Postiglione 2014).
Conclusion
The contribution of higher-education researchers affiliated with Asia-based institu-
tions to international knowledge production in the field of higher education is grow-
ing. However, this growth began only recently, in the early 2000s, and Asia-based 
researchers are currently underperforming relative to researchers in other parts of 
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

28
the world in their contribution to the global pool of knowledge in the field of higher 
education. This underperformance is evident from analysis of the volume of publi-
cations contributed by Asian researchers to the international higher-education litera-
ture relative to population size and number of students in Asia and from comparison 
of this indicator with the world average number of publications in higher education 
relative to global population and total number of students worldwide. The analysis 
reported in this book chapter also reveals that the Asian higher-education research 
community is becoming more and more internationally oriented and relies increas-
ingly on a new generation of researchers. However, this positive trend has several 
limitations. The first is the tremendous reliance of Asian-affiliated researchers on 
scholars from countries such as the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia 
to collaboratively produce contributions to the field. This collaboration should by no 
means be devalued or obstructed; in modern globalised research systems, collabora-
tion has become the praxis of research activities in most fields and is crucial to 
attempts to solve the increasingly complex and uncertain challenges facing human 
societies all over the globe (Ebadi and Schiffauerova 2015). But it is important to 
increase collaboration between higher-education researchers in the Asian region, 
which continues to be scarce, revealing a somewhat disconnected and unarticulated 
community of researchers that contributes little to the international higher-­education 
community (this besides the limited collaboration between those higher-education 
researchers involved in teaching and learning and those working on the policy 
dimensions of higher-education research; see Kim et al. 2017; Horta and Jung 2014).
In recent years, there have been attempts to tackle the problem of limited col-
laboration between Asia-affiliated researchers in the field of higher education. The 
creation of the Higher Education Research Association (HERA) (whose name 
excludes geographical particularity and thus reflects an internationalist stance simi-
lar to that of Europe’s Consortium of Higher Education Researchers, CHER) and its 
ongoing conferences indicate a growing willingness to bring together higher-­
education researchers from Asia, starting with researchers based in East Asia.5 The 
HERA conferences occur annually and move from country to country, probably in 
emulation of the CHER model. This is promising, because the attempt made by 
CHER’s instigators to promote a linked, relatively coherent and thriving higher-­
education research community with an international outlook in Europe has largely 
been successful (Teichler 2013). Routine events such as annual conferences help to 
consolidate higher-education research communities and furnish them with common 
identities, enabling them to make a unified contribution to the field (Francis 2014; 
Kehm 2013). Other national conferences are taking place in Asia to promote a more 
international perspective and underline the need to contribute to international 
knowledge in the field, providing a forum for debate on national and institutional 
experiences, challenges and initiatives from which others can learn. For example, 
during the 2016 annual meeting of the Japan Association for Higher Education 
Research, a session in English with non-Japanese guests was held for the very first 
5 The fourth and most recent HERA conference took place in Hong Kong in May 2016: https://
www.ln.edu.hk/dgs/events/HERA-conference-programme.pdf [accessed 29 September 2016].
H. Horta

29
time to discuss ways of encouraging higher-education researchers in Japan to pub-
lish internationally. The audience comprised mainly young researchers and some of 
the most internationally engaged Japanese researchers, and at the end its members 
expressed a willingness to continue holding such sessions in English and open them 
further to international scholars from Asia and beyond.
The development of Asian higher-education research, like any other such devel-
opment, faces ‘growing pains’ and requires difficult decisions. Scholars based in 
Asia (with the exception of Hong Kong-based researchers, who also make the most 
prolific contribution to global knowledge of higher education) often find it difficult 
to write in English (Min 2014). However, language-editing services are increasingly 
available in many countries, allowing authors to ensure that their manuscripts are in 
accurate English prior to submission (Lane and Tang 2016). As a coordinating edi-
tor for one of the most international and visible journals in the field of higher educa-
tion (Higher Education), I can say with certainty that in the vast majority of cases, 
submitted manuscripts are not turned down based on language issues if the research 
is up to standard and has the potential to concretely advance the field. In addition, 
some journals in the field of education offer programmes to help non-English native 
speakers to publish internationally, minimising language barriers (Lillis et al. 2010). 
As a result, language is still a barrier to higher-education researchers in Asia seeking 
to publish internationally, but one that can be to some extent overcome.
Other challenges are much more concerning, such as the inadequate training and 
preparation of researchers in tightly focused – and sometimes insular – national 
higher-education research communities that accept and even promote research prac-
tices and writing styles that do not meet the requirements for publication in interna-
tional journals (e.g. Jung 2015; Yang 2015). The younger generation of researchers 
must be exposed from a very early stage in their training – i.e. at Master’s level or 
doctoral level – to the theories, methods and writing and presentation practices and 
requirements adopted by the global higher-education community. To this end, 
researchers-in-training should be given opportunities to engage intensively in 
research activities and projects, to participate in and present research at interna-
tional conferences and to collaborate in various ways with researchers from differ-
ent countries (Sala-Bubaré and Castelló 2016; Laudel and Glaser 2008). This 
process of socialisation is critical to ensure that the new generation of higher-­
education researchers is adequately prepared to contribute effectively to the interna-
tional higher-education research literature.
Other concerns relate to career-promotion incentives, research identity and the 
various obligations, duties and benefits that arise from engagement with ­international 
and national communities. In many cases, such engagement creates tension due to 
discrepancies between national, local and/or international practices (Kwiek 2015). 
Examples include the priorities for research set by research-funding agencies and 
the increasing constraints placed on time, a key academic resource (Ylijoki 2013). 
The increasing pressure to publish internationally is accompanied by pressure to 
publish in the national higher-education literature (Vessuri et al. 2014). It is impor-
tant to balance the contribution made by researchers to these two sectors of the lit-
erature, which have different audiences and belong to different research communities, 
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

30
and to position and allocate resources accordingly (e.g. Boyd and Smith 2016; 
Smith et al. 2014). It is not always easy to find such a balance. Research-­funding 
agencies play a key role in the relative production of nationally and internationally 
oriented research (Drivas et al. 2015), but the limited number of international pub-
lications by researchers in many countries in Asia suggests an orientation towards 
national publications to the detriment of publishing in international journals (as in 
South Korea; see Jung 2015).
However, if few or no locally based researchers write about higher education in 
their own countries and publish these case studies in the English language interna-
tional literature, higher education in Asia will ultimately be addressed only by 
researchers based elsewhere and written based on their own culturally informed 
perspectives. Crucially, English is the lingua franca of research today; articles not 
published in English are unlikely to be read widely. Publications in Japanese, 
Chinese and other languages used in the Asian region are generally read only by 
those who know these languages. The problem is a lack of global visibility, which 
is of major importance, because any story told on a global scale – by non-nationally 
based or nationally based researchers – will resonate and remain in the minds of 
audiences worldwide, thereby becoming the ‘truth’. Some scholars raise concerns 
about intellectual imperialism when researchers based elsewhere tell the stories of 
other countries in ways subsequently criticised (often legitimately; see Alatas 2000) 
for bias. However, the appropriation of these stories by researchers based elsewhere 
may also be due to a lack of local narratives in the international literature and thus a 
gap in global understanding of the issues addressed.
However, the point here is not whether research written by researchers based 
elsewhere is biased (and there are many cases of such researchers with tremendous 
in-depth knowledge of other countries; e.g. Hayhoe 2015).6 The key problem is that 
research produced by researchers based elsewhere may receive global acceptance if 
locally based researchers do not publish their own accounts of events in their respec-
tive countries in the international literature. It is natural to assume that the only 
available information on a topic – even if limited to a few articles or affected by 
bias – is a valid account of that topic. Note that culturally or socially biased articles 
written about a higher-education system by non-Asian affiliated researchers have a 
fair chance of being accepted by international journals if the panel reviewers are 
researchers who know little about the country’s higher-education system or society. 
The application of theories and methods with which reviewers are familiar, rather 
than the content of the articles, will be the decisive factor in their assessment of 
research quality. The key question I am asking is as follows: are researchers based 
in Asia content to allow only other researchers to report on and discuss the progress 
of higher education in their own region and countries? If not, higher-education 
6 Note that terms used throughout the text are “Asia-based researchers” or “Asia-affiliated research-
ers” which focus on affiliation and not on nationality. By this, I underline that nationality is not 
necessarily a precondition to better understand a country. There may be foreign researchers living 
in a country that may understand some phenomena in that country better than most nationals from 
that country.
H. Horta

31
researchers in these countries need to be more proactive in sharing their views of 
recent developments, analysing case studies using up-to-date research practices and 
publishing their findings in English in international journals in the field.
Higher-education researchers in Asia need to be aware of the consequences of 
the failure to engage with the international higher-education community. Several 
scholars in Asia have already addressed this issue by identifying post-colonial 
trends and asserting the place of Asian indigenous research in national and global 
research communities (Xie and Yang 2015; Yang 2013). However, it is important to 
be wary of movements that may become too radical and contradict the universal and 
global characteristics of science (see Park 2016 for a critique of Chen 2010), as such 
movements are likely to be detrimental rather than constructive. A lack of contribu-
tion to the international literature may also limit the visibility and influence of 
important findings, which may then be misattributed to later scholars who obtain 
similar results. The origin of such a misattribution would not lie in post-colonialism, 
plagiarism or any other ideological or political practice, but simply in the failure to 
make findings visible through publication in English and in the international litera-
ture. Research on science and technology policy provides a key example. The triple-­
helix model conceptualised by Henry Etzkowitz and Loet Leidesdorff in the late 
1990s (Leidesdorff and Etzkowitz 1996) is now familiar to everyone in the science 
and technology policy community; it has been widely used and has received hun-
dreds if not thousands of citations in the literature. Etzkowitz and Leidesdorff have 
naturally been celebrated for developing the concept. However, in the early 1970s, 
an Argentinian researcher named Jorge Sabato proposed a model known as the tri-
angle of Sabato, which is remarkably similar to the triple-helix model (Sabato 
1975); the main difference is that the latter was conceptualised 20 years earlier. Why 
has the triple-helix model received recognition worldwide, while hardly anyone 
outside Latin America knows about the triangle of Sabato? The answer is simple: 
Sabato wrote his findings in Spanish and contributed only to the Latin American 
science and technology policy community, whereas Etzkowitz and Leidesdorff pub-
lished their findings in English and contributed to the global science and technology 
policy community.
This example underlines the main objective of this chapter: to call on researchers 
based in Asia to publish more research on their national higher-education systems 
in the international literature. If these researchers continue to underperform in the 
global arena while interest in higher education in Asia continues to grow, an increas-
ing number of researchers will come to Asia to research Asian higher-education 
systems using their own social and cultural perspectives. Some of these analyses are 
likely to yield biased findings, due to cultural and social differences between Asian 
and other higher-education contexts that are not easily grasped, researchers’ limited 
access to information or the use of pre-existing ‘Western’ theoretical frameworks 
(usually derived from a global scientific hegemony established in the United States; 
see Marginson 2008) to explain the phenomena under analysis.
I am not convinced that these researchers analysing Asian higher education should 
be solely blamed for their potentially biased findings if they do not have Asian col-
leagues with whom to collaborate or lack access to previous findings published inter-
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

32
nationally by Asian-affiliated higher-education researchers. To prevent bias, it is 
necessary for higher-education researchers in Asia to write their own accounts of the 
development of regional higher-education systems and to publish these accounts in 
the international higher-education literature. They must continue to collaborate with 
colleagues from other parts of the world when writing about Asia, but also to increase 
their collaboration with other Asian researchers to gain insights into the different 
dynamics of development of higher education across Asia. Initiatives fostering com-
munication and networking have already been established to form a coherent and 
participatory higher-education research community in Asia, which will play a crucial 
role in achieving an in-depth and nuanced understanding of the region and in making 
knowledge of Asian higher education available to the world.
References
Alatas, S. H. (2000). Intellectual imperialism: Definition, traits, and problems. Southeast Asian 
Journal of Social Science, 28(1), 23–45.
Altbach, P. G., Bozeman, L. A., Janashia, N., & Rumbley, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Higher education: 
A worldwide inventory of centers and programs. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Ashwin, P., Deem, R., & McAlpine, L. (2015). Newer researchers in higher education: Policy 
actors or policy subjects. Studies in Higher Education. doi:10.1080/03075079.2015.1029902.
Atkinson, R. (2013). Journals with borders, journals without borders: Underrepresentation of Asian 
countries in educational research journals. Higher Education Research and Development, 
32(3), 507–510.
Boyd, P., & Smith, C. (2016). The contemporary academic: Orientation towards research work and 
researcher identity of higher education lecturers in the health professions. Studies in Higher 
Education, 41(4), 678–695.
Brennan, J., & Teichler, U. (2008). The future of higher education and of higher education research. 
Higher Education, 56(3), 259–264.
Breznitz, D., & Murphree, M. (2011). Run of the Red Queen: Government, innovation, globaliza-
tion, and economic growth in China. New Haven/London: Yale University Press.
Cattaneo, M., Meoli, M., & Signori, A. (2016). Performance-based funding and university research 
productivity: The moderating effect of university legitimacy. Journal of Technology Transfer, 
41(1), 85–104.
Chan, S.-J., & Chan, Y. (2015). Higher education research community in Taiwan: An emerging 
field. Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 459–475.
Chen, K.-H. (2010). Asia as a method: Towards deimperialization. Durham: Duke University 
Press.
Chen, S. (2015). Boundary objects and boundary brokering to make the research-policy-practice 
nexus possible: The case of the Chinese higher education field. Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 
441–457.
Chen, S.-Y., & Hu, L. F. (2012). Higher education research as a field in China: Its formation and 
current landscape. Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 655–666.
Choi, P. K. (2010). ‘weep for Chinese university’: A case study of English hegemony and academic 
capitalism in higher education in Hong Kong. Journal of Education Policy, 25, 233–252.
David, M. E. (2011). Overview of researching global higher education: Challenge, change or cri-
sis? Contemporary Social Science, 6(2), 147–165.
H. Horta

33
Deem, R., Mok, K. H., & Lucas, L. (2008). Transforming higher education in whose image? 
Exploring the concept of ‘world-class’ university in Europe and Asia. Higher Education Policy, 
21(1), 83–97.
Dennison, J. D. (1992). Higher education as a field of study in Canada. In A. D. Gregor, & G. Jasmin 
(Eds.), Higher education in Canada (pp. 83–91). Ottawa: Supply and Services Canada.
Dobele, A. R., & Rundle-Theile, S. (2015). Progression through academic ranks: A longitudinal 
examination of internal promotion drivers. Higher Education Quarterly, 69(4), 410–429.
Drivas, K., Balafoutis, A.  T., & Rozakis, S. (2015). Research funding and academic output: 
Evidence from the Agricultural University of Athens. Prometheus (United Kingdom), 33(3), 
235–256.
Ebadi, A., & Schiffauerova, A. (2015). On the relation between the small world structure and scien-
tific activities. PLos One, 10, 3, article number e0121129, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0121129.
Feng, L., Yong, Y., Xiaolong, G., & Wei, Q. (2012). Performance evaluation of research univer-
sities in mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan: Based on a two dimensional approach. 
Scientometrics, 90(2), 531–542.
Francis, D. E. (2014). Lean and the learning organization in higher education. Canadian Journal 
of Educational Administration and Policy, 157, 1–23.
Futao, H. (2014) Challenges for higher education and research: A perspective from Japan. Studies 
in Higher Education, 39(8), 1428–1438.
Gauffriau, M., Larsen, P. O., Maye, I., Roulin-Perriard, A., & Von Ins, M. (2008). Comparisons of 
results of publication counting using different methods. Scientometrics, 77(1), 147–176.
Hayhoe, R. (2015). China through the lens of comparative education: The selected writings of 
Ruth Hayhoe. London: Routledge.
Heitor, M. V., & Horta, H. (2016). Introduction: democratizing higher education and science in 
Latin America. In H. Horta, M. V. Heitor, & J. Salmi (Eds.), Trends and challenges in science 
and higher education: Building capacity in Latin America (pp. 1–26). Dordrecht: Springer.
Hoekman, J., Scherngell, T., Frenken, K., & Tijssen, R. (2013). Acquisition of European research 
funds and its effect on international scientific collaboration. Journal of Economic Geography, 
13(1), 23–52.
Horta, H., & Jung, J. (2014). Higher education research in Asia: An archipelago, two continents or 
merely atomization? Higher Education, 68(1), 117–134.
Hutchinson, S. R., & Lovell, C. D. (2004) A review of methodological characteristics of research 
published in key journals in higher education: Implications for graduate research training. 
Research in Higher Education, 45(4), 383–403.
Jones, G. A. (2012). Reflections on the evolution of higher education as a field of study in Canada. 
Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 711–722.
Jung, J. (2015). Higher education research as a field of study in South Korea: Inward but starting 
to look outward. Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 495–515.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2015). The contribution of East Asian countries to internationally published 
Asian higher education research: The role of system development and internationalization. 
Higher Education Policy, 28, 419–439.
Kehm, B. M. (2013). CHER annual conferences and changing topics. In C. Musselin, & B. M. 
Kehm (Eds.), The development of higher education research in Europe: 25 years of CHER 
(pp. 35–42). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Kehm, B.  M. (2015). Higher education as a field of study and research in Europe. European 
Journal of Education, 50(1), 60–74.
Kim, Y., Horta, H., & Jung, J. (2017) Higher Education research in Hong Kong, Japan, China and 
Malaysia: Exploring research community cohesion and the integration of thematic approaches. 
Studies in Higher Education, 42(1), 149–168.
Kosmutzky, A., & Krucken, G. (2014). Growth or steady state? A bibliometric focus on interna-
tional comparative higher education research. Higher Education, 67(4), 457–472.
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

34
Kuzhabekova, A., Hendel, D. D., & Chapman, D. W. (2015). Mapping global research on interna-
tional higher education. Research in Higher Education, 56(8), 861–882.
Kwiek, M. (2015). The internationalization of research in Europe: A quantitative study of 11 
national systems from a micro-level perspective. Journal of Studies in International Education, 
19(4), 341–359.
Lane, T., & Tang, J. (2016). Publishing challenges faced by authors with English as a second lan-
guage. European Science Editing, 42(2), 36–38.
Laudel, G., & Glaser, J. (2008). From apprentice to colleague: The metamorphosis of early career 
researchers. Higher Education, 55(3), 387–406.
Lee, J.  T. (2015). Soft power and cultural diplomacy: Emerging education hubs in Asia. 
Comparative Education, 51(3), 353–374.
Leidesdorff, L., & Etzkowitz, H. (1996). Emergence of a triple helix of university-industry-­
government relations. Science and Public Policy, 23(5), 279–286.
Leisyte, L., & Wilkesmann, U. (Eds.). (2016). Organizing academic work in higher education: 
Teaching, leaning and identities. London/New York: Routledge.
Li, J. (2012). World-class higher education and the emerging Chinese model of the university. 
Prospects, 42(3), 319–339.
Lillis, T., Magyar, A., & Robinson-Pant, A. (2010). An international journal’s attempts to address 
inequalities in academic publishing: Developing a writing for publication programme. 
Compare, 40(6), 781–800.
Lo, W. Y. W. (2016a). The concept of greater China in higher education: Adoptions, dynamics and 
implications. Comparative Education, 52(1), 26–43.
Lo, W. Y. W. (2016b). The recalibration of neoliberalisation: Repoliticising higher education pol-
icy in Hong Kong. Higher Education. doi:10.1007/s10734-016-9989-8.
Lo, W. Y. W., & Ng, F. S. K. (2015). Trends and developments of higher education research in 
Hong Kong: In pursuit of a cosmopolitan vision. Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 517–534.
Locke, R. M., & Wellhausen, R. L. (2014). Production in the innovation economy. Cambridge: 
MIT Press.
Marginson, S. (2008). Global university hegemony [vers une hégémonie de l’université globale]. 
Critique Internationale, 39(2), 87–107.
Marginson, S. (2011). Higher education in East Asia and Singapore: Rise of the Confucian model. 
Higher Education, 61(5), 587–611.
Marginson, S. (2016). The worldwide trend to high participation higher education: Dynamics of 
social stratification in inclusive systems. Higher Education, 72(4), 413–434.
Meyer, K. A. (2010). A study of online discourse at the Chronicle of higher education. Innovative 
Higher Education, 35(3), 143–160.
Min, H.-T. (2014). Participating in international academic publishing: A Taiwan perspective. 
TESOL Quarterly, 48(1), 188–200.
Mok, K. H. (2016). Massification of higher education, graduate employment and social mobility in 
the Great China region. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 37(1), 51–71.
Mosbah-Natanson, S., & Gingras, Y. (2014). The globalization of social sciences? Evidence from 
a quantitative analysis of 30 years of production, collaboration and citations in the social sci-
ences (1980–2009). Current Sociology, 62(5), 626–646.
Norris, M., & Oppenheim, C. (2007). Comparing alternatives to the Web of Science for coverage 
of the social sciences’ literature. Journal of Informetrics, 1(2), 161–169.
Park, J. (2016). Asian education and Asia as a method. In C.-M. Lam & J. Park (Eds.), Sociological 
and philosophical perspectives in the Asia-Pacific Region. Dordrecht: Springer.
Postiglione, G. A. (2014). Research universities for national rejuvenation and global influence: 
China’s search for a balanced model. Higher Education, 70(2), 235–250.
Sabato, J.  A. (1975). El pensamiento latinoamericano en la problemática ciencia-tecnologia-­
desarrollo-dependencia. Buenos Aires: Paidós.
Sala-Bubaré, A., & Castelló, M. (2016). Exploring the relationship between doctoral students’ 
experiences and research community positioning. Studies in Continuing Education. doi:10.10
80/0158037X.2016.1216832.
H. Horta

35
Shin, J. C., & Harman, G. (2009). New challenges for higher education: Global and Asia-Pacific 
perspective. Asia Pacific Higher Education Review, 10(1), 1–13.
Shin, J. C., Postiglione, G., & Huang, F. (Eds.). (2015). Mass higher education development in 
East Asia: Strategy, quality, and challenges. Dordrecht: Springer.
Smith, K. M., Else, F., & Crookes, P. A. (2014). Engagement and academic promotion: A review of 
the literature. Higher Education Research and Development, 33(4), 836–847.
Svarc, J., Laznjak, J., & Perkovic, J. (2013). Integration of the Western Balkan countries and 
Turkey in the framework Programmes: Some empirical evidence. Journal of European 
Integration, 35(1), 53–72.
Teichler, U. (2013) The initial objectives of CHER to form a professional organization of higher 
education researchers. In C. Musselin, & B. M. Kehm (Eds.), The development of higher edu-
cation research in Europe: 25 years of CHER (pp. 7–24). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Tight, M. (2004). Research into higher education: An a-theoretical community of practice. Higher 
Education Research and Development, 23(4), 395–411.
Tight, M. (2008). Higher education research as tribe, territory and/or community: A co-citation 
analysis. Higher Education, 55(5), 593–605.
Tight, M. (2012). Higher education research 2000-2010: Changing journal publication patterns. 
Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 723–740.
UNESCO. (2014). Higher education in Asia: Expanding out, expanding up – The rise of graduate 
education and university research. Montreal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
Vasconcelos, S., Sorenson, M., Batista, P., Sant’Ana, M., & Leta, J. (2009). The effect of the lin-
guistic landscape of today’s science on the performance indicators of researchers from a Latin 
American country: A trend for the regions? 12th International Conference on Scientometrics 
and Informetrics, ISSI 2009, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 14 July to 17 July, pp. 330–337.
Vessuri, H., Guédon, J.-C., & Cetto, A. M. (2014). Excellence or quality? Impact of the current 
competition regime on science and scientific publishing in Latin America and its implications 
for development. Current Sociology, 62(5), 647–665.
Voegtle, E. M., Knill, C., & Dobbins, M. (2011). To what extent does transnational communica-
tion drive-cross-national policy convergence? The impact of the Bologna process on domestic 
higher education policies. Higher Education, 61(1), 77–94.
West, R. E., & Rich, P. J. (2012). Rigor, impact and prestige: A proposed framework for evaluating 
scholarly publications. Innovative Higher Education, 37(5), 359–371.
White, H. D., & McCain, K. W. (1998). Visualizing a discipline: An author co-citation analysis 
of information science, 1972–1995. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 
49, 327–355.
Wilson, J. L. (2011). Blogging about diversity: The academy sounds off in the Chronicle of Higher 
Education. Multicultural Education and Technology Journal, 5(2), 106–115.
Xie, M., & Yang, R. (2015). Leaning towards the centers: International networking at China’s five 
C9 league universities. Frontiers of Education in China, 10(1), 66–90.
Yang, R. (2013). Indigenizing the Western concept of the university: Chinese experience. Asia 
Pacific Education Review, 14(1), 85–92.
Yang, R. (2014). Going global: Contemporary international networking in Chinese mainland uni-
versities. Chinese Education and Society, 47(1), 27–43.
Yang, R. (2015). Reassessing China’s higher education development: A focus on academic culture. 
Asia Pacific Education Review, 16(4), 527–535.
Ylijoki, O.-H. (2013). Boundary-work between work and life in the high-speed university. Studies 
in Higher Education, 38(2), 242–255.
Yonezawa, A. (2015). Connecting higher education research in Japan with the international aca-
demic community. Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 477–493.
Yonezawa, A., Horta, H., & Osawa, A. (2016). Mobility, formation and development of the aca-
demic profession in science, technology, engineering and mathematics in East and South East 
Asia. Comparative Education, 52(1), 44–61.
Yu, B., & Zhang, K. (2016). ‘It’s more foreign than a foreign country’: Adaptation and experience 
of mainland Chinese students in Hong Kong. Tertiary Education and Management. doi:10.10
80/13583883.2016.1226944.
2  Higher-Education Researchers in Asia: The Risks of Insufficient Contribution…

36
Zeng, W., & Resnik, D. (2010). Research integrity in China: Problems and prospects. Developing 
World Bioethics, 10, 164–171.
Zha, Q., & Hayhoe, R. (2014). The ‘Beijing consensus’ and the Chinese model of university auton-
omy. Frontiers of Education in China, 9(1), 42–62.
Zimmerman, E., Glanzel, W., & Bar-Ilan, J. (2009). Scholarly collaboration between Europe and 
Israel: A scientometrics examination of a changing landscape. Scientometrics, 78(3), 427–446.
Hugo Horta  is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Education of the University of Hong Kong 
since September 2014. After completing his Ph.D at the Technical University of Lisbon, in 2007 
(part of it performed in the Netherlands and in the US), and a postdoctoral spell in Tohoku 
University, Japan, he worked as Advisor to the Portuguese Secretary of State of the Ministry of 
Science, Technology and Higher Education, from 2010 to 2011. He also served as the Portuguese 
National delegate to the ERA Steering Committee on Human Resources and Mobility from 2010 
to 2014. Throughout this period, he published articles focused on various topics in international 
peer-reviewed journals in the field of higher education studies and science and technology studies. 
He is currently Coordinating-editor at Higher Education, and sits in the advisory editorial boards 
of Higher Education Policy, Asian Pacific Education Review, Journal of Higher Education and 
Science and the International Journal of Institutional Research and Management (IJIRM).  He 
recently co-edited a book on Trends and Challenges in Science and Higher Education: Building 
Capacity in Latin America with Manuel Heitor and Jamil Salmi.
H. Horta

37
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_3
Chapter 3
Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives 
for Observing East Asian Higher Education
Rui Yang
Abstract  After absorbing Western knowledge for at least one and a half centuries, 
East Asian higher education has made some remarkable achievements in recent 
decades. Throughout the region, a Western-styled higher education system has been 
well established. The region has become the world’s third great zone of higher edu-
cation, science, and innovation, alongside North America and Western Europe/UK, 
with research powerhouses, and the fastest growth in scientific output. While East 
Asia’s achievement has been widely acknowledged, assessment of its future devel-
opment is not. The strikingly contrastive assessments among scholars are often due 
to their perspectives employed consciously and unconsciously in their research. 
This chapter attempts to delve deeply into the theorization of perspectives for 
observing higher education development in East Asia. After some methodological 
inquiries into research perspective and frames of reference, it critiques the current 
English literature and calls for multiple perspectives for studying East Asian higher 
education. It concludes that current conceptualization of East Asian higher educa-
tion development relies almost entirely on Western theoretical constructions and 
argues that the perspectives that give weight to the impact of traditional East Asian 
ways of cultural thinking on contemporary development are badly needed.
Introduction
Let me begin with some personal reflections. As a researcher watching and writing 
about higher education in East Asia, I have been an active contributor to the litera-
ture. My academic career spans nearly three decades with roughly one decade each 
in the Chinese mainland, Australia, and Hong Kong. I published mainly in the 
Chinese language in the 1990s and shifted to the English language since the 2000s. 
I have found it highly relevant to reflect on some of my own trajectories and experi-
ences before I critique the work by my fellow researchers in the area of higher 
education in East Asia:
R. Yang (*) 
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
e-mail: yangrui@hku.hk

38
First, regarding perspective and frame of reference:
•	 I commenced my doctoral studies at the University of Hong Kong in June 1996. 
When I was still new in Hong Kong, one day my Head of Department sent me to 
the airport to meet a British visitor, an eminent scholar in education and the then 
Dean of the Graduate School at the Institute of Education of the University of 
London. As a young man who had just been out of the mainland, I was struck by 
the huge differences in my eye between Hong Kong and the Chinese mainland at 
the time. On the way from the airport to the Robert Black College where the 
British professor stayed, I asked her if she thought Hong Kong was a Chinese 
society. Understandably, her answer was positive and immediate.
•	 In 2002, I was in Hong Kong again after 5 years of study and work in Australia. 
I was invited to deliver a seminar at the City University of Hong Kong where I 
told the audience that Hong Kong in my view was indeed a Chinese society.
Second, as for knowledges, their sociocultural contexts and politics:
•	 In the early 1980s when China’s university enrolment rate was well below 3%, I 
was a junior student then. One day one of my classmates was preparing for the 
semester exam. He tried to recite Lenin’s definition of matter.1 We then had some 
discussions at the dormitory about how to understand the definition. When I 
pointed to a chair in the room as an example of matter, I was laughed by my 
roommates.
•	 In 1993, I visited a primary school at a well-developed coastal city in Guangdong, 
China. A class of grade one were having a quiz. One question was how the sky 
looked like with four choices: dark, gray, blue, and bright. Some pupils looked 
out of the window at the sky and ticked gray as the answer. Their answer was 
graded wrong because the standard answer was blue, even if the sky in China’s 
coastal areas had already been much polluted by then and indeed looked gray.
•	 In 2014, I visited Guangxi Normal University at the picturesque Guilin city in 
China. The Faculty of Education organized a special discussion session between 
their professors and myself. The Associate Dean (research) remarked that in their 
everyday teaching and research, Chinese educational history could hardly come 
in, while Western history of education could fairly easily.
•	 In 2004, I was sent to Singapore to teach a Master of Education course of the 
international programs offered by the Faculty of Education at Monash University. 
I encouraged the students to cite published works by local authors in both English 
and Chinese when they prepared for their essays. One student formally com-
plained to my Dean that the suggestion was “ridiculous.” Fortunately, I had an 
open-minded Dean and she simply laughed off the complaint.
1 Today, Chinese students continue to recite the definition: “Matter is a philosophical category 
denoting the objective reality which is given to man by his sensations, and which is copied, photo-
graphed and reflected by our sensations, while existing independently of them” (Lenin 1962, 
p.130).
R. Yang

39
Although the above is only in a montage-like manner, they were my actual experi-
ence and played a role in shaping how I view real-world educational issues and how I 
assess other people’s work in the field of higher education research. The first two 
scenarios show how a person’s perspective and frame of reference influence the pic-
ture a researcher has. The third montage indeed left its long-lasting mark on me. Many 
years later I still try to reflect on that. Together with the fourth and the fifth, they show 
how deeply Chinese contemporary education has been separated from even irrelevant 
to societal needs and how little attention the education pays to the real world. Similar 
stories can be easily found throughout China at all levels of education.
The above montages also show collectively knowledge politics in Chinese contem-
porary education, similar to the situations in most non-Western societies where formal 
education is foreign (usually Western) in nature without much linkage to their actuali-
ties. While Dewy (1938) insisted that the educator’s role was in creating an educative 
experience, the experience in Chinese schooling is often based on Western experi-
ence. As the last montage shows in particular, Western education is perceived as pres-
tigious in non-Western societies. Western knowledge is the one that counts as the real 
knowledge by both the educator and the general public. The student who complained 
about my suggestion was indeed paying a dear price to buy a Western degree.
Understanding is hermeneutically always conditioned by one’s own horizon and 
perspective. Our horizon and perspectives are shaped by a variety of factors. 
Furthermore, they are multifaceted and are always in a change state. What should be 
the appropriate perspective for observing East Asian higher education? How should 
we interpret what we have observed? All of the above reflections have significant 
implications for how we should conduct our research and how we assess the exist-
ing literature on East Asian higher education.
Perspective, Frame of Reference, and Comparative Historical 
Analysis
In 1804, Shu Shi (1037–1101), one of China’s greatest poets in history, wrote a poem 
on Mount Lu. The poem has since been well known for articulating philosophical 
insights into the interaction between recognition and perspective. It is often under-
stood as a reflection on the limitation and blindness of an insider’s point of view or 
the difficulty of knowing something up close. It describes Mount Lu in four lines2:
Viewed horizontally a range; a cliff from the side;
It differs as we move high or low, or far or nearby.
We do not know the true face of Mount Lu,
Because we are all ourselves inside.
2 The Chinese original is 苏轼,《题西林壁》:横看成岭侧成峰, 远近高低各不同。不识庐山真
面目,只缘身在此山中。
3  Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives for Observing East Asian Higher…

40
The poem vividly illustrates the critical significance of perspective for observa-
tion. According to the poet, the very interiority of the location makes it impossible 
for us to know the “true face of Mount Lu.” We do not know the “true face of Mount 
Lu” because what we see constantly changes as we move high or low, far off, or up 
close. Such a circularity or subjectivity of our understanding urges us to become 
conscious of the challenge. It demonstrates how perspectives influence how we see 
and interpret the world. It also implies how difficult to overcome the limitation of 
our own perspectives. A perspective is usually defined as an ingrained way of per-
ceiving the world. Simply put, it is the way that one looks at something. Its closely 
related term frame of reference refers to a complex set of assumptions and attitudes 
which we use to filter perceptions to create meaning. The frame can include beliefs, 
schemas, preferences, values, culture, and other ways in which we bias our under-
standing and judgment. It is a set of ideas, as of philosophical or religious doctrine, 
in terms of which other ideas are interpreted or assigned meaning.
Some people, such as Friedrich Nietzsche and Edmund Husserl, use the term 
horizon, which was further developed by Hans-Georg Gadamer (1975) into a cru-
cial term for understanding the very nature of understanding: “The horizon is the 
range of vision that includes everything that can be seen from a particular vantage 
point” (p.302). Since and to some extent because of them, the term has been used 
more to characterize the way in which thought is tied to its finite determinacy and 
the way one’s range of vision is gradually expanded. Every (social) researcher has 
her/his particular horizon or vantage point from which she/he sees and understands 
things, and what she/he sees must be within the range of her/his vision, tied to her/
his finite determinacy. Thus horizon constitutes the precondition of understanding 
or what Heidegger (1962) called the fore-structure of understanding. Before people 
understand anything, they already have some idea about that which they are about 
to understand, that is, their anticipations or prejudgments, and the process of under-
standing appears to move in a hermeneutic circle. For instance, when observing 
East Asian higher education, a Western scholar would understand it from the hori-
zon and perspective of a Westerner.
The hermeneutic circle does not legitimize the subjectivity of one’s own hori-
zon. As Gadamer (1975) points out, all correct interpretation must be on guard 
against arbitrary fancies and the limitations imposed by imperceptible habits of 
thought, with one’s gaze always directed on the things themselves (p.267). What it 
does is to remind us of the significance of perspective and frame of reference in the 
social sciences. Issues of perspective are particularly relevant in comparative his-
torical analysis which has a long and distinguished history in social research. Major 
figures in the formation of modern social science, including Adam Smith, Alexis de 
Tocqueville, Karl Marx, and Max Weber, all pursued comparative historical analy-
sis as a central mode of investigation. Offering historically grounded explanations, 
this research method appeals most to sociologists, political scientists, historians, 
and anthropologists interested in tracing the development of social forms and insti-
tutions and comparing these processes across cultures. The scholarly tradition has 
dominated social thought for centuries, with a dramatic reemergence over recent 
decades. Thus, comparative historical inquiry is increasingly visible in the 
R. Yang

41
­institutions and organizations of the social science disciplines such as sociology, 
history, and political science (Mahoney and Rueschemeyer 2003).
However, comparative historical analysis has been challenged for privileging 
Western perspective over others in the studies of other/non-Western societies epito-
mized often by Western bias and lack of intimate knowledge of and respect for those 
societies. Calls for insider perspectives are heard increasingly. Indeed, social 
researchers have engaged in an extensive debate about the merits of researchers 
being “outsiders” or “insiders” to the community they study. Insider-outsider per-
spectives have been theorized across various academic disciplines. The main dis-
juncture between the insider and outsider perspectives is simply a conflict in what 
Merton (1972) calls the “public interpretation of reality” (p.19): The outsider per-
spective primarily draws on the classical philosophical arguments that warn against 
“the corrupting influence of group loyalties upon the human understanding” (p.19). 
It assumes that objective knowledge relies on the degree to which researchers can 
detach themselves from the prejudices of the social groups they study (Agar 1980; 
Boon 1983). The insider perspective, however, essentially questions the ability of 
outsider scholars to competently understand the experiences of other groups because 
they are not initiated in the cultural values of the people they study.
The insider/outsider distinction lacks acknowledgment that insiders and outsid-
ers, like all social roles and statuses, are frequently situational, depending on the 
prevailing social, political, and cultural values of a given social context (Merton 
1972). Recent research has attempted to move beyond a strict outsider/insider 
dichotomy to emphasize the relative nature of researchers’ identities depending on 
the specific research context. The central question should not be whether or not one 
group or the other has privileged access to social reality but a consideration of their 
distinctive and interactive roles in the process of truth seeking. With the politics 
between knowledges in the social sciences, it is much more important for research-
ers to reflect upon the identities and Merton’s (1972) “status sets” that they bring to 
a research project, the way in which those identities may affect the development of 
partnerships with community members, and how they may affect the research pro-
cess and its outcomes (Mercer 2007). What is urgently needed for contemporary 
social research is a multiplicity of perspectives and pluralistic epistemologies 
(Polkinghorne 1983).
In a context of Western dominance in contemporary social inquiry in East Asia, 
it is highly likely that a locally based researcher adopts a Western lens to observe 
her/his own society. With an increasing number of researchers from East Asia, 
including those within the region and those studying and working overseas, con-
ducting research on higher education in East Asia, the politics of representation and 
authenticity are placed at the core. In the comparative studies of higher education, 
researchers are required to be not only aware of the perspectives adopted by other 
researchers but also constantly reflexive upon their own. Calling for the plurality of 
system models to render transparent the possible analytical schemas and analyze 
each system from more than one vantage point, Marginson (2014) argues that 
­phenomena significant from several different vantage points take an added impor-
tance and facilitate generic global analysis. He writes:
3  Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives for Observing East Asian Higher…

42
Comparative education walks a path between homogenization and ultra-relativism. Over its 
history the field has tended to err on the side of homogenization. Most analytical work in 
comparative education, particularly in the USA and the leading European powers, imposes 
a single norm of system design as the template against which all systems are evaluated. 
Typically the norm is undeclared and based on the scholar’s own higher education system. 
The approach is comparative but nation-bound: liable to underplay elements from other 
nations that fall outside the template, and global relations across national borders. Often the 
effect is also neo-imperial, as national systems are positioned as inferior copies of the mas-
ter system. (pp. 28–29)
Normative frameworks tend to shape knowledge in social science. They are not the only 
factor in play. Observation and evidence are central. Observed data have materiality. 
However, the normative template used in comparison determines which data are visible and 
which questions can be asked. If the template being used is the US system it is clear Chinese 
universities have insufficient autonomy to make strategic decisions. If the template used is 
a Post-Confucian one it is clear American families are not sufficiently committed to learn-
ing and the state has only a weak commitment to system improvement. Questions signifi-
cant in one framework become less significant in the other. (p.29)
Knowledge Politics and the Searching for an East Asian 
Scholarly Identity
Social theories are, by nature, the result of specific times and spaces. However, 
although non-Western philosophers, such as Confucius, had long analyzed society 
and culture, the contemporary social sciences have their origins in European think-
ers especially in the nineteenth century (Rosenberg 2008). Their diffusion to nearly 
all non-Western societies from their European heartland was under the condition of 
imperialism and colonialism. They are now institutionalized all over the world. 
Contemporary international academic discourses are highly dominated by Western 
scholarship. This is particularly evident in the social sciences. Major social theories 
are almost exclusively based on Western experience. Names mentioned in textbooks 
are overwhelmingly of Western origin. Non-Western names such as Confucius are 
rarely seen. As the result of the specific time and space, once either time or space 
changes, such social theories become much less relevant in interpreting social phe-
nomena, let alone guiding social practice. Against a backdrop of increasingly inten-
sified globalization, these theories are often applied in a context in which both time 
and space have changed.
East Asian societies have long been struggling with their long-desired integration 
between their traditional and Western cultural traditions. Ever since their early 
encounters with the West, their strikingly different cultural heritages have led to 
continuous conflicts with Western values. They are confronted with a difficult 
choice: the dominant Western knowledge on one hand, their strong indigenous tra-
ditions on the other, and the constant tensions between the two. The two value sets 
have never been on equal footing: the West came to Asia with immense prestige 
especially since the nineteenth century, with a pronounced effect of Asia’s tendency 
R. Yang

43
to imitate the West. Fundamental assumptions of Asian indigenous knowledges 
have rarely been presented as established sets of beliefs and as processes or coher-
ent methods of learning and teaching. Even with recent developments, Western 
knowledge remains the one that counts throughout the region. For East Asian societ-
ies, the coexistence of the two value systems proves extremely challenging. After 
absorbing Western system for one and a half centuries, East Asia has been institu-
tionally westernized. The implementation of Western system has resulted in “aca-
demic colonization” in social inquiry in East Asia. Most social science researches 
have designated to accumulate empirical data under the guidance of Western theo-
retical models (Hwang 2016).
Lu Jie, an eminent education researcher based at Nanjing Normal University on 
the Chinese mainland, points out the previous that the previous experiences of west-
ernization and sovietization had left little space for an appreciation and understand-
ing of China’s indigenous pedagogy or its possibilities for supporting modern 
educational development. Using Chinese pedagogy as an example, she remarks:
There still exists in Chinese academic circles a strong Westernization thrust, which tends to 
incorporate into Chinese pedagogy a somewhat simplistic transplant of pedagogical trends 
and theories based on Western scientific knowledge. (Lu 2001, p.249)
Citing Yang Kuo-shu,3 she notes that although China and Chinese people are the 
objects of study, the theories and concepts used are Western or reflect Western 
orientation:
While in daily life we are Chinese, in our studies we are Westerners, accepting and adopting 
Western concepts, theories and approaches. Under such circumstances we are only able to 
ape Westerners at every step. In both the quantity and quality of our studies we cannot 
compare with Westerners. As a result, up to now we have failed to establish a position of 
importance in the field of social and behavioral sciences. This historical lesson serves to 
remind us that consistency with our origins is the only way for Chinese pedagogy to prog-
ress toward world status. (Lu 2001, pp.251–252)
However, the authenticity of Western science and its methodology as the arbiters of 
“truth” have been increasingly questioned in Asia. Calls for alternative discourses in 
the social sciences have long lingered in Asia, such as China, the Philippines, Japan, 
Korea, and India, dating back to the early part of the twentieth century. The search for 
more relevant social science has recently picked up intensity and sincerity in East Asia 
(Lee 2000). The quest for an East Asian scholarly identity has been placed high on the 
agendas of social science research throughout the region. East Asian societies need to 
figure out how to wed their traditional values with the dominant Western ones. To do 
so, they need to understand the irrelevance/relevance of Western knowledge in East 
Asian context. In fact, East Asian scholars have never stopped questioning the rele-
vance of the social sciences for non-Western societies. Their questioning of the valid-
ity of Western social sciences in explaining East Asian realities dates back to many 
decades ago (Alatas 1972; Alatas 1993, 1998). In China, for example, Fei Xiaotong 
3 Yang Kuo-shu is a professor of psychology at the National Taiwan University. He received his 
PhD from the University of Illinois and has since published on psychology and behaviors of 
Chinese people, personality psychology, and social psychology.
3  Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives for Observing East Asian Higher…

44
(Fei Hsiao-t’ung) (1979), writing in the 1940s, described sociological debates in 
Chinese universities as being “between pedants showing off their knowledge” and 
noted that they were based on “facts and theories derived from Western society” (p.25).
Two scenarios coexist ironically in East Asia. On one hand, East Asia’s indige-
nous knowledge has been seldom presented as established and coherent sets of beliefs 
and has been largely devalued and/or ignored as processes or coherent methods of 
learning and teaching. Those who are using local materials and Western theoretical 
frameworks cannot successfully incorporate their indigenous traditions. On the other 
hand, East Asian societies are well positioned to develop their own social theories by 
their wealth of unique cultural heritages and their huge demographic and geographi-
cal size with sufficient center of gravity to operate with relative autonomy. The region 
is known for its rich intellectual traditions particularly in human and social sciences. 
On the basis of its abundance of social knowledge and a long tradition of social 
respect for scholarship, such a possibility is much facilitated by the region’s remark-
able development over the past decades which provide rich food for thought and 
ideas. Our contemporary turbulent and unpredictable world and times are also ideal 
for East Asian struggles to create new forms of knowledge and power (Yang 2005).
A successfully built East Asian social science identity would not only contribute 
significantly to the social and intellectual development of East Asian societies but also 
lift international social research to a substantially higher level. Some Western thinkers 
have expressed the need for non-Western social science development and have called 
for reassessing Western social theories. For example, Brenkman (1987) appeals to 
“relativize and reinterpret the Western tradition, which has taken its claim to univer-
sality” (p.230). Huntington (1996) has emphatically pointed out that modernization 
thesis is “misguided, arrogant, false, and dangerous,” projecting “the image of an 
emerging homogenous, universally Western world” (p.28). He reiterates that Western 
civilization is precious not because it is universal but because it is unique (p.35) and 
that “culture follows power” and “Imperialism is the necessary, logical consequence 
of universalism” (p.41). Placing higher expectations on China, Perry (1999) hopes 
that the study of China can mature from a “consumer field” (dependent for its analyti-
cal insights upon imports from the study of other countries) to a “producer field” 
(capable of generating original analyses of interest to comparativists in general).
Some individual scholars have achieved highly in this aspect. Gregory Chow 
(1997), a Chinese American economist base at Princeton University, has challenged 
some mainstream beliefs by studying China’s practices. He finds that the successful 
experience of the township and village enterprises in China is sufficient to challenge 
the dogma that only private enterprise in a capitalist economy can be efficient 
(p.321). China’s current legal system, which is seen as poorly developed in Western 
perceptions, has been working well for China’s internal economic development, and 
less than strict enforcement of a law can sometimes be beneficial (p.323). It is said 
that China is ruled by people and not by law. This statement does not necessarily 
imply that the Chinese system is bad (p.324). In fact, he argues, in a society empha-
sizing the collective good, government leadership is stronger, and its effects require 
more careful study. Democracy in the sense of a government of the people, for the 
people, and by the people can be practiced under a one-party rule (p.325).
R. Yang

45
Examples from the Literature on East Asian Higher 
Education
The names mentioned above are usually outside education: John Brenkman in 
American literature, Samuel Huntington in political sciences, Elizabeth Perry in 
Asian studies, and Gregory Chow in economics. What then about education and 
especially the study of higher education in East Asia? To answer this question, I 
searched for the literature using Ingenta Connect via the electronic library at the 
University of Hong Kong on October 29 in 2015. It needs to note that this survey 
has its clear limitations. Its aim is not to provide a comprehensive survey of the 
existing English literature on East Asian higher education. Rather, it attempts to 
offer an example of some current literature to illustrate who are observing East 
Asian higher education development and form what angle. The keywords used for 
searching the literature were East Asia and higher education. There was no time 
limit set for the search.
Altogether 55 items popped up on my computer screen, with the earliest pub-
lished in 1995 and the latest in 2015. They have covered a wide range of topics, and 
those on education are at various levels of schooling. Each was checked carefully. 
Three of them were not available at the time. Seventeen items excluded because of 
their irrelevance were respectively on foreign-trained dentists in the United States, 
socioeconomic variation in tobacco consumption, progress of the doctoral students 
from the Middle East, the impact and treatment of allergic rhinitis in the Middle 
East, European convergence in dental education, structural change and wage 
inequalities in the manufacturing sector, post-Communist youth in Central Asia, 
skilled migration from India, Africa’s economic growth, Pakistan’s electronic 
access, physical activity in early pregnancy, smoking in migrants in New South 
Wales, socioeconomic disparities in low birth weight outcomes in Quebec, OECD’s 
economic outlook, benefits of growth for Indonesian workers, East Asian child-­
rearing attitudes, and human rights in EU-China relations.
While there are so many irrelevant items included in the above list, some works 
that fall squarely into the field of East Asian higher education to my knowledge have 
been excluded, such as Howe (2009). This might be due to the coverage of the 
searching engine and/or the indexing situations of different academic journals. 
There were four book reviews that cannot be regarded as research work. Thirty-one 
publications were finally included in the following analysis. They were published in 
1995 (1), 1998 (1), 2001 (1), 2002 (1), 2003 (1), 2005 (2), 2006 (1), 2007 (6), 2008 
(1), 2009 (1), 2011 (4), 2012 (1), 2013 (4), 2014 (4), and 2015 (2). Among them, 
some work are only remotely related to East Asia such as three World Bank Working 
Papers, respectively, on economic analysis of World Bank education projects (2001), 
education and earnings in Vietnam (1998), and promoting growth in Sri Lanka 
(1995). A number of works claim research on East Asia yet indeed only look at one 
society such as Hong Kong, Thailand, and Japan. Altogether 14 were considered 
directly on East Asia.
3  Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives for Observing East Asian Higher…

46
Authors Writing About East Asian Higher Education
The 31 items were written by 46 authors: among them, most (20) were Westerners 
based in the West, followed by East Asians working within their own region (13). 
There were five authors who are originally from East Asia and now based in the West, 
and four Western authors now based at East Asia. Two authors who are neither from 
the West nor from East Asia originally worked at East Asia when the publications 
were produced. In contrast, another two authors who are neither from the West nor 
from East Asia originally were then based outside East Asia, but had written on East 
Asia. They were consultants employed by the World Bank. While it is not a surprise 
that most authors who publish in English are from the West, it deserves our attention 
that more and more East Asian scholars are publishing in international English jour-
nals. It is also interesting to see more Westerners are watching East Asia from within 
East Asia. As Asia’s rise continues, such trends are expected to continue.
Areas of East Asia Higher Education Researched
The 31 publications covered a wide range of themes, including internationalization 
and regionalization of higher education in East Asia, higher education markets, 
(higher) education governance, economic analysis of education projects (of the 
World Bank), education and earnings, impact of family background on schooling, 
educational software for training, digital access in an era of globalization, higher 
education hubs, authorship and plagiarism, world-class universities, higher educa-
tion reform policies, university rankings, female academics, transnational higher 
education, problem-based learning, private higher education, education in promoting 
economic growth, innovation support systems, student and teacher experience, and 
policy-borrowing in higher education. Based on such diversified research themes, it 
is difficult to point out the most evident research focuses in the coming years.
References Cited
The 31 publications cited a total of 1270 references. Among them, 1159 (91.26%) 
were in English, while 10 (0.78%) in German. Ninety-four (7.46%) government 
documents were cited, of which 77 were from East Asia and 17 the West. Seven 
local references were cited, among them, four were published in Sri Lanka and two 
were in Chinese. The Chinese ones were indeed the same work cited twice by the 
same author in two different publications. The imbalance between Western (espe-
cially English) literature and local scholarship cannot be more evident. This contrast 
explains how researchers lack a local perspective. Such a gap often leads to divides 
among local scholars between those publishing in English and those mainly writing 
R. Yang

47
in  local languages. Major East Asian societies including the Chinese mainland, 
Japan, Korean and Taiwan have all developed a solid research system operating 
in local languages. For both international and local researchers, it is no longer fea-
sible to continue to ignore the increasingly large bodies of literature the system 
produce. Indeed, the width and depth of such locally produced literature are often of 
high quality. Anyone who aims to truly understand East Asia needs to pay serious 
attention to it.
The fact that local literature, especially those on local history and culture in 
native languages, has been incorporated so little is indeed a serious issue for research 
on East Asian higher education. Higher education is deeply rooted in culture, and 
universities are after all cultural institutions. They are most profoundly influenced 
by the cultural conditions of their societies locally, regionally, and globally. East 
Asian high education development is fundamentally about the relations between 
Western and East Asian cultural values. Whether or not East Asian societies can 
fulfill their long-desired integration between the two knowledge systems is the true 
meaning of and biggest challenge for East Asian high education development. 
Within such a cultural context, researchers have to understand their own cultures 
and societies well. Yet, understanding their own cultures and histories has been a 
mission impossible for the generations born after the mid-twentieth century due to 
the dramatic historical changes in these societies. Without understanding their own 
histories, cultures, and societies, it is just not possible for them to build a truly 
locally based perspective. It would also be beyond their capacity to challenge the 
often inappropriate Western perspective in observing East Asian societies.
Theoretical Framework Employed
The theoretical frameworks employed by the 31 publications can be categorized 
into 4: pure description of East Asian practices (2), using foreign (Western) theories 
to analyze East Asia (15), using East Asian examples to confirm foreign (Western) 
theories (13), and trying to challenge foreign (Western) theories (1). This scenario 
echoes the findings from a similar survey of literature a few years ago which used 
Hong Kong and education policy as keywords (Yang 2013). In the survey, only one 
piece of work among 73 publications was trying to challenge the existing Western 
theory. Interestingly, the author of the work was from Australia originally with 
decades of academic working experience in Hong Kong. In the current survey, the 
author is from Germany working at a Japanese university. The fact that they are both 
Western working in East Asia is not purely accidental. While most Western scholars 
observing from the West tend to be Euro-centered, East Asian local researchers have 
had a strong colonial mindset. The mindset is most evident in former colonized 
societies such as Hong Kong and Taiwan. It is also strong among the societies such 
as China and Japan where although there was no political colonization, there has 
been colonization of their mind. A typical research work produced by East Asian 
3  Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives for Observing East Asian Higher…

48
researchers is constituted of Western theories with local examples. The “academic 
colonization” defined by Hwang (2016) remains prevalent throughout East Asia.4
End Remarks
East Asian societies have recently made remarkable some progresses in higher edu-
cation. While the achievement has been widely acknowledged, assessment of their 
future development is not. The developments and the highly differing assessments 
of such developments raise questions of profound significance not only about how 
researchers of higher education have conceptualized East Asian higher education 
development but also about how the scholarly communities that produce such 
knowledge function. Both those studying East Asia from outside and the East Asians 
themselves have often been bogged down into a quagmire of a tradition-modernity 
contrast in their interpretation of what’s happening in East Asian higher education. 
Regarding contemporary East Asian development as a modernization process, they 
have equated modern with Western and Western with advanced. As a result, the 
West and Western practices become the standard to assess East Asia, whereas any-
thing unfound in Western practices have been considered as insignificant or do not 
get considered at all. Their assessments arouse uneasiness, not necessarily because 
the interpretations are incorrect, but because they are consistent with a mindset 
based on Western primacy, despite strong assault on such hold since the 1950s.
Ever since their early encounters with the West, East Asian societies have been 
struggling with the relations between the two strikingly different yet mutually intol-
erant cultures. While East Asian states have been keen to embrace Western civiliza-
tion, East Asian people are not willing to give up their traditions. For East Asians, 
the past one and a half centuries are thus culturally soul-stirring. Such an experience 
adds importance to a cultural and historical perspective on one hand and increases 
the difficulty for East Asian thinkers not to be affected by their strong emotions in 
their scholarly work on the other. East Asian higher education development is fun-
damentally about the relations between Western and their indigenous higher educa-
tion traditions. The greatest challenge for East Asia is that their universities have not 
yet figured out how to marry the “standard norms” of Western higher education to 
their traditional values. After delving into the theorization of perspective and hori-
zon in social research and citing some recent English literature as an example, this 
chapter argues for a multiplicity of research perspectives, especially for a cultural 
and historical perspective that gives weight to the impact of traditional ways of cul-
tural thinking on contemporary development of East Asian higher education.
4 It is important to point out that with recent remarkable social development in major East Asian 
societies, a small number of (usually the best) local researchers have started to become more con-
fident. At the same time, and quite unfortunately, there have been some signs of dangerous aca-
demic nationalism.
R. Yang

49
References
Agar, M. (1980). The professional stranger. New York: Academic.
Alatas, S.  H. (1972). The captive mind in development studies. International Social Science 
Journal, 34, 9–25.
Alatas, S. F. (1993). On the indigenization of academic discourse. Alternatives, 18, 307–338.
Alatas, S. F. (1998) Western theory, East Asian realities and the social. In S. H. Lee (Ed) Sociology 
in East Asia and its struggle for creativity (pp. 73–82). Montreal: International Sociological 
Association.
Boon, J. (1983). Other tribes, other scribes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brenkman, J. (1987). Culture and domination. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Chow, G. C. (1997). Challenges of China’s economic system for economic theory. The American 
Economic Review, 87, 321–327.
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience & education. New York: Kappa Delta Pi.
Fei, H. T. (1979). The dilemma of a Chinese intellectual. New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Gadamer, HG (1975) Truth and method, 2nd rev. ed. (Translation and revised by J. Weinsheimer 
and D. G. Marshall). New York: Crossroad.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. New York: Harper and Row.
Howe, E. R. (2009). The internationalization of higher education in East Asia: A comparative 
ethnographic narrative of Japanese universities. Research in Comparative and International 
Education, 4, 384–392.
Huntington, S. P. (1996). The West: Unique, not universal. Foreign Affairs, 75, 28–46.
Hwang, KK (2016) From cultural rehabilitation to cultural renaissance. In Chou CP and J Spangler 
(Eds) Chinese education models in a global age. Springer, Singapore. (in Press).
Lee, S. H. (2000). The rise of East Asia and East Asian social science’s quest for self-identity. 
Journal of World-System Research, VI, 768–783.
Lenin, VI. (1962). Materialism and empirio-criticism. In: Vol. 14 of V. I. Lenin: collected works. 
Progress Publishers, Moscow.
Lu, J. (2001) On the indigenousness of Chinese pedagogy. In R. Hayhoe & J. Pan (Eds.), Knowledge 
across cultures: A contribution to dialogue among civilizations (pp. 249–253). Hong Kong: 
Comparative Education Research Center, University of Hong Kong.
Mahoney, J.  & Rueschemeyer, D. (2003). Comparative historical analysis: Achievements and 
agendas. In J. Mahoney & D. Rueschemeyer (Eds.), Comparative historical analysis in the 
social sciences (pp. 3–38). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marginson, S. (2014). Academic freedom: A global comparative approach. Frontiers of Education 
in China, 9, 24–41.
Mercer, J.  (2007). The challenges of insider research in educational institutions: Wielding a 
double-­edged sword and resolving delicate dilemmas. Oxford Review of Education, 33, 1–17.
Merton, R. (1972). Insiders and outsiders: A chapter in the sociology of knowledge. American 
Journal of Sociology, 78, 9–47.
Perry, E. J. (1999, October 8–9). Partners at fifty: American China studies and the PRC. Paper 
presented at the conference Trends in China Watching: Observing the PRC at 50, Sigur Center 
for Asian Studies, Elliott School of International affairs, George Washington University.
Polkinghorne, D. E. (1983). Methodology for the human sciences: Systems of inquiry. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Rosenberg, A. (2008). Philosophy of social science. Boulder: Westview Press.
Yang, R. (2005). Internationalization, indigenization and educational research in China. Australian 
Journal of Education, 49, 66–88.
Yang, R. (2013, June 25). Doing comparative education research in Chinese societies: Personal 
reflections. Paper presented at XVI World Council of Comparative Education Societies World 
Congress 2013, Buenos Aires.
3  Foil to the West? Interrogating Perspectives for Observing East Asian Higher…

50
Rui Yang  is Professor and Associate Dean (cross-border and/or international engagement) in the 
Faculty of Education at the University of Hong Kong. With over two and a half decades of aca-
demic career in China, Australia, and Hong Kong, he has gained extensive experiences and con-
tributed to leadership, with an impressive track record on research at the interface of Chinese and 
Western traditions in education. He has established his reputation among scholars in English and 
Chinese languages in the fields of comparative and international education and Chinese higher 
education. Frequently called on to deploy his cross-cultural knowledge and expertise globally, his 
international reputation is evidenced by his extensive list of publications, research projects, invited 
keynote lectures in international and regional conferences, leadership in professional associations, 
and membership in editorial boards of scholarly journals. Bridging the theoretical thrust of com-
parative education and the applied nature of international education, his research interests include 
education policy sociology, comparative and cross-cultural studies in education, international 
higher education, educational development in Chinese societies, and international politics in edu-
cational research.
R. Yang

51
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_4
Chapter 4
Higher Education Knowledge Production 
in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia
Jae Park
Abstract  Against a descriptive analysis or even eulogies on the neoliberal impact 
on Asian higher education such as “brain gain/drain,” managerialism, marketiza-
tion, and globalization, this theoretical chapter takes a rather critical position regard-
ing the ongoing neoliberalization of higher education as a field of study in Asia. It 
examines the discourse of Confucian heritage culture and its methodological issues 
in knowledge production, followed by some recent counterarguments against the 
universalism of research methodology by exploring the possibility of Asia as a 
higher education research methodology.
Introduction
In a century that is called after her, Asia is yet to come to terms with her past under 
colonialism and Cold-War “peripheriality” amid fresh nationalistic struggles and 
territorial/maritime disputes from within. Knowledge production was at the core of 
such an “imposed peripheriality,” and it still remains the most looked up and debated 
upon among the commonly recognized threefold mission of higher education (HE), 
namely, instruction, research, and social projection.
This chapter suggests an alternative theoretical imagination on contemporary 
Asian HE and its knowledge production in social sciences and humanities in the 
context of her unfinished modernity, from a colonial past to an inextricably neoliberal 
J. Park (*) 
The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
e-mail: jpark.hku@gmail.com
Universities…are dominated and influenced by the need for the 
kind of education that produces a system of special 
examinations and the trained expertness that is increasingly 
indispensable for modern bureaucracy 
– Max Weber

52
present. Indeed, under the self-imposed hastiness of belated modernity, Asia 
swiftly embraced what Max Weber keenly perceived and wrote in 1946 as a transi-
tion from generalist education to expert education in order to sustain modern 
bureaucracy (Weber 2011 [1946]). These “imported” instrumentalist principles of 
higher education had a great impact on the nature and mission of Asian universities 
which, in turn, led to a widespread reformation and creation of numerous new 
higher education institutions across Asia (Zhou and Park 2015). The general spirit 
behind the early twentieth-century HE reformation was far from being entirely dis-
couraging and politicized in order to attain industrial modernization; there was also 
a genuine enlightenment among intellectuals. Bertrand Russell described thus his 
encounter with Chinese HE students during his one-year sojourn in the Republic of 
China in 1920:
They wish their country to acquire what is best in the modern world… As the first step to 
this end, they do all they can to promote higher education, and to increase the number of 
Chinese who can use and appreciate Western knowledge without being the slaves of 
Western follies. (1993[1922], p. 214)
His was a Western1 view of China but not as generalizable across Asia. Korean HE 
was, for example, suffering under the geopolitics among the surrounding empires 
(Schmid 2002), and it had a significant role in the anti-colonial movement (Atkins 
2010). Japanese HE, on the other side of the Asian colonization process, took an 
important role in Meiji and post-Meiji Japanese modernization. Meiji Ishin generated 
a unique HE and schoolmen:
The man regarded as Japan’s first professional academic anthropologist, Tokyo Imperial 
University’s Tsuboi Shogoro (1863–1913), was a physical anthropologist rather than an 
ethnographer. It was left to his student Torii Ryuzo (1870–1953) to inaugurate ‘scientific’ 
ethnographic fieldwork in the recently acquired colony of Taiwan, studying the island’s 
aboriginal peoples (whom he called ‘untamed barbarians’) on four trips between 1896 and 
1900. (Atkins 2010, p. 62)
This biography reflects the general spirit of university under Meiji restoration, 
closely linked to hegemonic ambitions in the Asian geopolitical setup, which were 
reified with the victory over Russia in 1904–1905 and dismantled with the defeat in 
the Second World War. Noted Japanese scholar Takeuchi Yoshimi cites John 
Dewey’s visit to Japan and China and elaborated the following on the modernization 
in both nations (Takeuchi 2005 [1961], p. 154): “While Japan appeared on the sur-
face to be quite modernized, the roots of this modernization were in fact shallow. If 
this were not corrected, he warned, Japan would almost certainly come to ruin.” 
Takeuchi used Dewey as a mouthpiece to point out an idea that was politically sensi-
tive for him: Japanese modernization was a soft copy and block import of Western 
modernization of the imperial/colonial kind, whereas the university student-led 
May Fourth Movement was a genuinely local Chinese initiative.
1 Throughout this chapter, the terms “West” and “Western” are used in their broader sense, as in the 
“West and the rest” by Stuart Hall (1992).
J. Park

53
For a critical analysis of such a fascinating panorama, this chapter takes the bull 
by the horns to break down the present book’s theme (Higher Education Research 
as a Field of Study in Asia) into the following sub-themes in a question format:
–– Is higher education research a champ à la Bourdieu?
–– Could there be a research methodology that is authentically Asian?
–– Should the main concern of Asian knowledge production be a neoliberal hege-
mony in the region?
–– Does Asian knowledge production address the equally Asian needs and 
problems?
–– What is the fate of knowledge already produced and what does it bring home?
Perhaps a disclaimer here would be helpful. Asian academics today live in a sea of 
bureaucratized and bureaucratizing HE institutions as diagnosed by Weber. Since 
the fish is the last to see the water, most of us Asian academics seldom counterpoise 
Asia as a critical outlook in order to examine HE as a Western social institution. It is 
the Asian HE knowledge production I am up to problematize in this chapter by 
looking at its positioning as a field, method, and goals. A second disclaimer is more 
obvious: I cannot even remotely represent the entire Asian HE research community. 
Hence, I do not pretend to offer here a World Bank kind of report. All that is argued 
hereafter is based on my personal exposure to Asian higher education as well as 
other education systems I have been fortunate to experience.
Knowledge Production as a Field in Asia
The main question related to HE-based research addressed in this section is whether 
an “Asian higher education research” is a field of study, that is, an academic disci-
pline of its own standing. By required characteristics, a field should possess a three-
fold principle of (1) an inner coherence of the substantive subject matter with 
identifiable boundaries; (2) Bourdieu’s principle of champ, namely, the interplay of 
structures and human agency; and (3) members’ subject-specific utterances or dis-
course (Ref. Manzon 2011).2 Although readers might find the suggestion rather 
mechanistic and essentialist, it is of great value if we are to understand the core of 
the matter without illusory attempts of accommodating all the nuances of a field.
The validity of the threefold justification of what constitutes a field could be 
better understood with a thought experiment. Suppose that there is an area of research 
A with reasonably distinct boundaries, a substantive body of content and logical 
2 For this threefold principle, I have profited from Maria Manzon’s theorization and apology of 
comparative education as a field (2011) albeit our few disagreements. For example, for the term 
discourse, instead of power relation-based one suggested by Foucault, I take a more positive 
stance: “ways of combining and integrating language, actions, interactions, ways of thinking, 
believing, valuing, and using various symbols, tools, and objects to enact a particular sort of 
socially recognizable identity”(Gee 2011, p. 29).
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

54
coherence. Suppose also that there is a growing number of academics attracted to A 
and they now devote to it a great deal of time; they debate with agreements and 
disagreements; they ripple out on and related to A to the wider community, which 
perhaps unwittingly make them known as “people doing research on A” by scien-
tists in different disciplines and departments; members themselves believe they 
have a group identity (that of doing A) and that they have something to say about A, 
hence contributing to society.
If A, as above-described, could be recognized as a field, there is no reason why to 
deny it to both “higher education” and “Asian higher education research.” Of course, 
the issue is open to refutations, but, anyway, this is precisely how science makes 
advances as suggested by Karl Popper (1963). I shall elaborate a few possible 
refutations.
Ambiguity argument is commonly used by skeptics in philosophy, and it is a com-
mon refutation. Can the size of a community of experts determine a field? Suppose 
that the total number of “people doing research on A” equals five in the whole world. 
If so, is A a field? How about if the total number of experts is 50 or 500?
Consider a second refutation. Bourdieu’s concept of field is a social space where 
the interplay between structure and agency takes place over the pursuit of desirable 
resources (1969). This could, sometimes, not be applicable to A or other comparable 
research areas. For example, suppose that A is the Scarlet Letter “A” for adultery 
and A is merely a handful of experts in this novel by Hawthorne. There is no resource 
whatsoever for these bohemian scholars to compete for neither state nor institu-
tional funding. This is not that far-fetched; in fact, most university-based research in 
humanities and the arts are conducted by helping themselves. In this case, there is 
no field at all in Bourdieu’s sense of an arena, where people compete for resources, 
power, and ideology as Daniel Katz observed (1965).
A final refutation is a fundamental goal of science called reduction or inter-­
theoretic reduction by which experts merge disciplines and fields with the principle 
of Ockham’s razor. Thus, chemistry may eventually be absorbed by physics (parti-
cle physics to be precise), and, closer to our field, the psychology of education is a 
potential candidate to be incorporated into neuroscience (see the elimination of 
classic psychology suggested by Churchland 1981). From medicine to law, there is 
a scarcity of holistic synthesis, while an exorbitant amount of specialisms tends to 
further fragment into sub-specialisms. So, wouldn’t it be salutary that both “higher 
education” and “Asian higher education research” are merged into, say, education 
studies or sociology? A relatively recent response of higher education institutions to 
this problem, but rarely successful, is the advocacy and rise of interdisciplinary and 
multidisciplinary divisions, departments, and research centers.
From the “threefold principle” mentioned earlier, “higher education” and, in a 
lesser degree, “Asian higher education research” clearly have a structure/agency and 
discourse. “Higher education” has an international network of societies devoted to 
it and a sizable number of scholars who consider themselves doing “higher educa-
tion.” Furthermore, it has a score of highly reputed academic journals almost at the 
same level of curriculum studies. An indicator of the rise of higher education as a 
sizable field of study is the international journal rankings. Higher education journals 
J. Park

55
are prominent with another two rising stars in the category of education studies, 
namely, educational technology and environmental-ecological studies (2011–2013 
data).3 Higher education-related academic journals have not only attained high 
ranks and impact factors but are also significantly more represented in the field of 
education than traditional areas such as curriculum studies and language instruc-
tion. In the same ranking, no Asian educational journal has reached the top quartile, 
and a journal of Asian HE is yet to be listed, which can suggest that Asian higher 
education as a field of study will continue to have a sizable presence within the 
international higher education field until it is able to substantiate its independence 
as a field of study with significant growth in the coming years doing justice to grow-
ing numbers as well as invested efforts and resources of HE in Asia (UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics 2013).
The biggest challenge to be a field is the first principle: “an inner coherence of 
the substantive subject matter with identifiable boundaries.” We all know that 
“higher education” and “Asian higher education research” would sit more comfort-
ably within the field of education as a subfield or area of enquiry, for example, 
education studies and Asian studies, or perhaps as a subfield of higher education, 
although it is, in turn, under education studies. The boundaries of its subject matter 
are rather weak. When the demarcations are weak, smaller subjects tend to merge 
with other subjects in order to gain in weight or perish.
Yet, why not? If a community of scholars such as A happily organize themselves 
and they are free to utter what they deem important to the world, what could prevent 
them to do so? Polanyi argued: “To accept the pursuit of science as a reasonable and 
successful enterprise is to share the kind of commitments on which scientists enter 
by undertaking this enterprise” (1983, p. 25). This brings us back to the point of 
departure. Perhaps, instead of an almost Renascence argument of “to be or not to 
be,” what is more interesting and fruitful is to examine the sort of issues and prob-
lems mankind faces and figure out what could possibly be solved or alleviated by 
Asian higher education research. I think, this is the only plausible justification to 
regard HE as a (sub)field of study.
Ad Hoc Methodology for Higher Education?
Perhaps the most critical of the threefold characteristic of a field discussed in the 
previous section is discourse. It denotes claims and research findings of a field worth 
being disseminated in benefit of the society, which denotes the identity of a 
3 Thomson Reuters’ JCR ranking is highly selective if not elitist. Its category “education and edu-
cational research” lists only about 200 compared to more than 1000 listed by the “education” cat-
egory of the SCImago Journal Rank-Scopus (2011–2013 data). The latter, despite its larger 
database, only lists a dozen journals on Asian issues. In November 2014, the Times Higher 
Education (THE) split from Thomson Reuters’ JCR ranking (Jobbins 2014). In my view, this was 
due to the smaller database of Thomson Reuters, which cannot serve an increasingly globalized 
academic institutions and their broader range of perspectives and interests.
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

56
community of enquiry beyond the thresholds of historical interplay of self-preserv-
ing power within a structure as Foucault would deconstruct (Foucault 1972). 
Knowledge production is, thus, not a selfish and ostracizing exercise; it tends to 
communicate, spread out, outreach, and become a shared oral and written tradition 
of a civilization and époque, hence discourse.
A discourse, then, implies a process of production and dissemination of knowl-
edge. This section critiques a few idiosyncrasies of Asian education research in 
general, which also affects higher education research. First, I conjecture what could 
possibly be an “Asian methodology,” whether Asian education research could or 
should have a distinct method. Second, I will examine the problem of “subjection 
and submission” in the power relations (Foucault 1983) of Asian HE researchers 
and research participants. It is based on my own experience in the field of humani-
ties and social sciences with no pretense to generalize and extrapolate to methodol-
ogy in natural sciences, which would usually follow some hypothetico-deductive 
methods of the West.
Possibility of an Asian Methodology
A field with substantive corpus of subject matter and plausibly clear boundaries (the 
first characteristic of our threefold principle of a field) can generate not only fresh 
insights but also unique perspectives, frameworks, and perhaps research methods. 
Could or should Asian higher education research have a distinctive methodology 
called Asian methodology?
To my knowledge, there are two such major proposals in Asia. The first one is 
“Asia as method,” that is, Asia as the paradigm for knowledge production suggested 
by some Asian intellectuals in critical (cultural) studies and, second, a nuanced 
empirical social science and education research methodology suggested by expo-
nents of Confucian heritage culture scholarship.
The former will be detailed throughout the rest of this chapter, but, in short, it is 
a critical proposal to transform both knowledge structure and production with the 
idea of Asia as an “imaginary anchoring point” that makes possible societies in Asia 
become each other’s points of reference (Chen 2010). The latter, Confucian Heritage 
Culture (CHC), has been described by the educational research community as a 
group of Asian nation-states with their motherland and overseas population who 
share Confucian values, which consistently reflect in their behavior and social prac-
tices, including learning styles and academic outcomes (Park 2011). This circle’s 
Asian education research methodology calls for critical reflections on the kinds of 
conditions that such a methodology should meet if it were to produce plausible and 
fruitful researches and that are not misinterpretation-prone, methodologically trou-
bling, or of dubious validity.
A sine qua non condition for viability (survival of the fittest argument in global 
academic arena) is a “compliance” issue with the conventional Western research 
dynamics and philosophy of science. “Research dynamics” comprises the research 
J. Park

57
rationale and ensuing actions, namely, free and rational choice of a unit of inquiry 
and framework, fieldwork (or equivalent), and analysis. A framework comprises a 
conceptual component and a perspective, a plausible version of preexisting theory 
or “paradigm,” which equips the researcher with an epistemic/logical coherence 
throughout all the stages of an inquiry. In my view, this and comparable Western 
research dynamics and their basic rationale are required conditions to which any 
possible Asian HE research should pledge and that Asian HE researchers have no 
other option but to comply with any of the time-honored “Western methodologies” 
if they want to be recognized in and outside Asia.
The most sui generis problems for an Asian methodology are in the sphere of 
moral philosophy and actions. Consider the act of choosing a theoretical framework 
by researcher X. There are a set of tentative theories available to X. The predica-
ment here is that all theories known to X are, obviously, yet to be tested, hence, 
nothing can assure X of their adequacy. We will see that an interesting paradox 
occurs here. X now has to make a choice. Is X free to choose any ad random? 
Probably not! If X is honest, X has to take an informed and rational decision to 
choose the best theory or the fittest theory (Popper 1959). The issue here is that not 
everybody will do what X does and this is ethically troubling. For example, consider 
the case of researcher Y who just attained a government research fund to start a 
research project in the coming academic year. It surely has obtained an ethical com-
mittee’s clearance. Yet, the moral problem is that almost the same research has 
already been conducted and completed by Y’s senior colleague in the same research 
center with a different funding source. What Y did is to replicate the extant plan with 
minor changes for the proposal. The topic and framework are almost identical to the 
completed one. Y is aware that the prior research resulted with minimal to moderate 
relevance and impact. Clearly, Y did not choose the fittest theory; in fact, Y’s only 
goal appears to be that of getting a competitive grant for prestige and promotion.
Consider a second case of imaginary researcher Z. Professor Z has been in the 
same experimental research topic for more than 25 years that most people and col-
leagues regard as a very successful academic career. In his tenure, more than 100 
papers have been published and more than a dozen reputed research grants obtained 
from competitive sources. Z has been using one research model adapted from a 
single theory. The effect size d has consistently been low. The ethical problem that 
Z faces is that of dragging on a model that is known to Z himself, already, as inef-
fective. Karl Popper (1959) explained his Falsification theory by saying that scien-
tific knowledge advances by error elimination, the act of discarding wrong/weak 
hypotheses or false theories that failed to solve the research problem. In my opinion, 
Z’s case is not that uncommon in social sciences and humanities; theories that failed 
to advance understanding or have lost descriptive power are repeatedly used by the 
same researcher and same research center. Needless to say, any attempt to forcibly 
reconcile the research dataset with a failed or weak hypothesis and framework goes 
against academic integrity. I will later illustrate the foregoing claims with some real 
cases in Asian higher education.
I argued elsewhere that an Asian research methodology would be impossible 
were it to attempt bypassing Western research rigor, yet Asian methodology in and 
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

58
about CHC could be recognized as a particularly nuanced methodology subject to 
certain conditionals (Park 2011). One of such conditionals is that a culturally sensi-
tive Asian research methodology ought to take into account variation in experience 
to overcome the tension between emic and etic dimensions of research. The referred 
variation is the distance between the experience of the actor and the experience cum 
articulation of it by researchers. The following section will deal with problem.
Researchers and Research Subjects in “HE Field”
However plausible it may be, the abovementioned account of “compliance issue” 
with the Western methodology, numerous Asian HE researchers think that escaping 
the rigor of Western research methodologies is possible. After reviewing more than 
200 works by scholars in and outside Asia, I recently published the salient argu-
ments from such a position (Park 2016). I do not think that they constitute an aca-
demic community with an esprit de corps or a field, but I am quite certain that they 
share a common concern: Asia’s modernity, colonization, and the Cold War pro-
foundly damaged the interplay of structures and subjectivity of Asia, which, in order 
to heal, necessitates a local reference point, knowledge structure, and production so 
that “self may be transformed, and subjectivity rebuilt” (Chen 2010, p. 212).
Outside the circle, however, the position differs among scholars. For example, 
Asian higher education expert William Lo (2011) identifies two main perspectives 
in understanding the hegemonic struggle in Asian HE knowledge production. From 
an anti-colonial perspective, he says, such hegemony of knowledge production 
would be an oppression, whereas, from a soft-power perspective, an attraction. My 
opinion is that either way applies to how Asia looks at herself. Whether it is a charm 
offensive, animosity, or both does not matter. What really does is that, without strug-
gle against the privileges of knowledge (knowledge, competence, and qualifica-
tion), Asia would never get rid of the scar of subjection and submission. (For what 
privilege of knowledge entails, see Foucault 1983, p. 212.)
The preceding analysis is important if we are to understand researchers and 
research subjects in Asian HE knowledge production. A powerful and incisive 
observation can open our discussion, and it is from noted Taiwanese intellectual 
Kuan-Hsing Chen (2003, p. 878):
The ‘west’ is equipped with universalist ‘theory’ and the rest of us have ‘particularist’ empir-
ical data, and eventually in writing, ‘we’ become a footnote to either validate or invalidate 
theoretical propositions. Hence, theoretically minded researcher vs. native informant.
This accusation rings an alarm bell of how ethical issues and methodological issues 
overlap in research. The overlap occurs at the very start of a knowledge production 
process. The act of singling out a research problem from hundreds that come to the 
attention of a researcher depends on the exercise of the researcher’s freedom and 
choice; hence, it is a moral act in a Kantian sense. Bewilderment or sense of wonder 
makes researchers choose a research problem while dismissing all others, while not 
J. Park

59
changing a research problem lightly implies a no less free and rational moral act. 
Ethical-methodological overlap is already apparent when turning research partici-
pants into a case or a research problem by “pathologizing” and problematizing them 
(Nind et al. 2004).
In a broad sense, an “Asian HE research field” is a discursive space where an 
interplay of structure and agency occurs by problematizing Asian HE academics, 
students, and other research participants by tagging and classifying them (e.g., brain 
gain and drain) with overt cultural invasion and disruption. The very concept of 
“research field” denotes an economy of power relations (Foucault 1983) in Asia. 
Under an imposed colonial and Cold-War peripheriality, the “West and the rest,” the 
Asian HE embraced alien ideals of HE that gave priority to their pragmatic goals 
and analytical-positivistic methodologies at the expense of humanities as well as 
social studies. Across Asia, HE knowledge production became the crucible where 
researchers and research participants, now colonial subjects, unwittingly lost their 
subjectivity with generally weak “forms of resistance against different forms of 
power” (Foucault 1983, p. 211).
Higher Education and Asian Problems
The problem of subjection and submission in knowledge production indicates self-­
imposed limitations in agency that are deeply rooted in the xin (心 mind-heart) of 
Asian researchers. Naoki Sakai (2010, p. 448) tries to explain, for example, why 
Asians have difficulties with theorizing in humanities and how theoretical elabora-
tions came to be understood as the exclusive possession of the West. He argues that 
the Western conception of West is not geographical but a distinction in knowledge 
production in humanities. He elucidates it with the terms humanitas (Latin) and 
anthropos (Greek) (2010, p. 455):
Humanitas has signified those people who could engage in knowledge production in both 
the first and the second relationships—namely, in the empirical as well as transcendental 
relationships, hence, empirico-trancendental doublet—while anthropos has gradually been 
reserved for people who participate in knowledge-production only in the first. Thus, human-
ity in the sense of humanitas has come to designate Western or European humanity, to be 
distinguished from the rest of humanity—so long as we trust in and insist upon the putative 
unity of the West.
This point contrasts with Stuart Hall’s (1992) that the concept of the East emerged 
when the West formulated a “West and the rest.” In Sakai’s argument, the East-West 
distinction is a distinction in knowledge production in humanities and understating 
of social realities, namely, social sciences. Sakai also implies that global knowledge 
production rides on the conceptual binary of West and non-West. Sakai takes it as 
almost innate that Asians have been relegated to the intellectual periphery, namely, 
Anthropos; hence, Asia might produce knowledge but it is incapable of strong theo-
ries as it lacks a logical-metaphysical tradition, which relegates Asia to the produc-
tion of positivistic and pragmatic knowledge. Sakai’s view of the global knowledge 
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

60
production is polarized and anti-naturalistic, that is, there is no continuum between 
the empirical world and the world of humanities. His view of Asian (or perhaps 
limited to Japanese) knowledge production is different with what Bertrand Russell 
observed in the early Chinese modernization:
Chinese schools and universities…are not hotbeds of rabid nationalism as they would be in 
any other country, but institutions where the student is taught to think freely, and his 
thoughts are judged by their intelligence, not by their utility to exploiters. The outcome, 
among the best young men, is a really beautiful intellectual disinterestedness. (Russell 
1993[1922], p. 222)
Russell also perceived a genuine interest for humanities and social sciences. He 
witnessed a Chinese youth full of eagerness to become modern yet with “a pro-
foundly humanistic attitude to life” (Russell 1993[1922], p. 223), that is, socially 
oriented humanities aimed at solving urgent problems of China and Asia (e.g., post 
Versailles treatise annexation of Shandong by Japan).
Among the young, a passionate desire to acquire Western knowledge, together with a vivid 
realization of Western vices. They wish to be scientific but not mechanical, industrial but 
not capitalistic. To a man they are Socialists, as are most of the best among their Chinese 
teachers. They respect the knowledge of Europeans, but quietly put aside their arrogance. 
(Russell 1993[1922], p. 222)
In contrast, Sakai seems to suggest an internalized handicap of many Asian HE 
researchers. We could also extrapolate, however, that it is not that HE researchers 
cannot do humanistic research but they could rather be reluctant to look at their own 
problems while looking up to the West.
If we are to compare scholarship on Asian HE with the West, we will find that 
Western scholarship on HE is quantum ahead. It is sizable and some of them 
regarded as classics (Barnett 1990; Jaspers 1960; Newman 1999 [1907]; Ortega y 
Gasset 1999; Pelikan and Newman 1992). Even early history and critical arguments 
about Asian HE have been written mostly by Western scholars, John Dewey on 
student activism during the May Fourth Movement (Takeuchi 2005 [1961]; Wang 
2007), Bertrand Russell on the Chinese universities’ intellectual capacity at the turn 
of the twentieth century (Russell 1993[1922]), and the more recent neoliberal 
hermeneutics by Philip G. Altbach (1989, 2004; Altbach and Salmi2011).
Where is Asian meta-discourse on Asian HE? Why are the neoliberal arguments 
so prevalent in Asian HE scholarship? Why is Asian subjectivity silenced by default 
in Asian HE knowledge production? These are rather naively provocative questions 
but useful to address upfront the leitmotif of this book “Higher education research 
as a field of study in Asia” (this was also the initial/tentative title of the book)  and 
find some answers.
Asian scholars have long been preoccupied with a never-ending and complex 
mindset of “catching up with the West” and standardized preference for analysis 
over synthesis, empirical-positivistic induction over other methods, and ambition 
for generalizability and “total” frameworks. Administratively, Asian HE has been 
emulating the dominant Western model for HE management, which is an arena of 
realpolitik at the expense of academic freedom with a direct impact on knowledge 
production (Ginsberg 2011).
J. Park

61
It is not far-fetched to argue that all three key missions of HE in Asia have 
become dependent on or caught by a neoliberal outlook, materialism, “bad” prag-
matism and utilitarian, neo-Kantian normative discourses, market-oriented manage-
rialism, and internationalization and the “glory” of global rankings as a goal. 
Consider the following special initiatives for selected “elite” universities:
–– China’s 211 and 985 projects
–– Japan’s Global 30 program
–– South Korea’s Brain Korea 21 Program
–– Taiwan’s Program for Aiming for Top University (Five Year-Fifty Billion 
Program)
–– Hong Kong’s Areas of Excellence Scheme
They aim to improve the research capacity of selected institutions or research units, 
thereby facilitating them to achieve world-class status. Should the future of Asian 
knowledge production be developed with neoliberal gimmicks? Jamil Salmi 
appraises that there is a crisis and the problems also faced by Asian HE; they are 
clearly not sustainable (2014):
–– Raising unreasonable expectations of a rapid rise in the rankings.
–– Creating dangerous distortions in resource allocation in favor of a few flagship 
institutions to the detriment of the overall tertiary education system when addi-
tional resources are not available.
–– Undue priority to research and publications in prestigious journals, often at the 
expense of excellence and relevance in teaching and learning.
–– World-class systems are made equivalent to those that can boast the largest num-
ber of highly ranked universities.
A problematization of Asian HE knowledge production is complex and multifac-
eted. They are both structural and agential. Among the structural problems, to men-
tion just a few, we have the so-called all-administrative universities (Ginsberg 2011) 
in Asia, state-sponsored “internalization-aimed” HE programs, institution and state-­
initiated elbowing for a higher position in the global rankings, hegemony of 
Anglophone academic journals, massive manipulation of peer-reviewing process to 
get published in top-ranked journals, and cash incentives for high rank publications 
that are becoming a norm across Asian universities.
Problems of agency are not less acute. When Asian universities recruit foreign 
students, they are getting global talents; when American universities do so, they do 
a favor to the international cause of democracy and development. Agential problems 
of Asian HE might be more deeply ingrained in the mind and soul of researchers 
and students, hence harder to tackle. Across Asia, academics have a general aver-
sion to teaching, and most of us are after the glory of a successful research fund 
hunting. A case in point is Hong Kong. Even those universities with the founding 
spirit of assisting secondary education graduates who went to industries’ full-time 
jobs for diverse socioeconomic reasons with evening lectures are now fully 
embarked in what is a must—a government-funded research university, a true 
betrayal in a city that has a pathologically low rate of access to HE and ridiculously 
small number of HE institutions.
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

62
The super-emphasis on HE knowledge production is a dated problem in the 
West. John Henry Cardinal Newman argued that research is neither the main nor the 
maiden mission of a university, and it should rather be done outside the campus 
(Barnett 1990). Earlier across Europe, the Humboldtian idea of a university argued 
for a balance between teaching and research (Anderson 2010). I agree with Robert 
Anderson that the proportion of research and teaching, even social projection, 
should not have a fixed proportion but a flexible and adaptable model. When we turn 
our eyes to the Asian context, what we see is a huge continent that houses the richest 
and poorest nations on earth in a frantic neoliberal race. In this regard, I find Simon 
Marginson’s pragmatic analysis of HE in East Asia and Singapore (2011) bundling 
them together as a phenomenon linked to Confucius or Confucianism. Marginson 
looks at numerical facts such as state investment on research; thus, Asian universi-
ties are divided into research universities and the rest. Marginson’s thin version of 
Confucian culture only renders an oversimplified and generalized neoliberal 
argument.
My opinion is that, on the one hand, East Asian nations have both thin and thick 
value systems coexisting side by side and, on the other hand, that many HE statisti-
cal figures and policies are the results of structural and agential problems Asian HE 
inherited from her colonial past and that are still embedded in the mind-heart of HE 
stakeholders. Do Asian universities buy an archaic British ideal of a university in 
Henry Newman’s fashion and should hence, perhaps, strongly orient toward human-
istic discoveries? Not at all! Asian HE is, in a way, more neoliberal than the conser-
vative half of the United States.
To sum up the section, all the problems in Asian HE knowledge production call 
for a keen ability to look inwardly, examining the Asian knowledge production with 
an Asian, humanistic, historical, and, if possible, philosophical perspective.
Knowledge Mobility in Asia
So far, this chapter has mostly looked into the problems inherent to the first two 
missions of HE—research and teaching—in a multifarious context of Asian moder-
nity. In this final section, I address the convoluted problem of knowledge mobility 
in Asia, that is: What is knowledge produced by HE for and where does it go?
We mentioned that, by nature, knowledge production is not an egocentric or 
hermitic endeavor; it tends to be disseminated and communicated to become a 
shared oral and written wisdom tradition of a society while shaping its history. 
Knowledge mobility studies the process of produced knowledge to different clusters 
of the society (Fenwick and Farrell 2012). It is not only about the transfer and use 
of research but also its discourse, politics, and ethical dimensions. I organize the 
discussion by two usual destinations of produced knowledge: scholarly publications 
and the larger community. We will see that Asian HE has significant predicaments 
in either of them.
J. Park

63
Scholarly Publications
My colleague and friend Rui Yang says, “Scholarly publication is a significant instance 
of the way in which academic knowledge is ‘mobilized’ in the global network” (Yang 
2011, p. 185). I think this is plausible but an incomplete picture. “Mobility” is a heav-
ily politicized and sociologically loaded term. It often categorizes a person or groups 
on Marxian assumptions of promotion or demotion from a social class. Of late, a 
technology-mediated social network and its horizontal mobility have been discussed. 
Any versions of mobility imply that somebody or something bridges a gap between a 
local and distant place and the power to act—agency. An agent is capable of either 
agere, Latin for “to do mentally,” which differs from facere, Latin for “to do physi-
cally.” I have never accepted this Medieval Aristotelian-­Thomistic distinction because, 
in my view, human facere cannot be performed without the corresponding nous and 
agere. Anyhow, academic scholars are heirs of schoolmen, and they are agents of 
knowledge production. But scholars do not only produce knowledge, but they also 
deliver and communicate knowledge to other agents. These recipients are both imme-
diate and distant peers, who play an important role in the advancement of science, 
namely, Polanyi’s principle of mutual control, a “simple fact that scientists keep watch 
over each other. Each scientist is both subject to criticism by all others and encouraged 
by their appreciation of him” (Polanyi 1983, p. 72).
Within academic circles, Asian HE knowledge production faces another critical 
problem—academic corruption. Research is inextricably a moral act insofar as free 
actors are involved in it (Park 2011). Therefore, it is little surprising that knowledge 
production is the kernel of academic corruption in Asia (Macfarlane et al. 2012; Ren 
2012; Yang 2005). Ethical issues affect scholarly publications (Yang 2011), public 
feeling and public understanding (Kim 2009), politicization of higher education 
(Yang 2010), and higher education’s “research muscle,” public instruction, and 
social projection that can turn HE institutions into ideological state apparatuses 
(Althusser 2006), for example, the case of Chinese Confucius Institutes (Park 2013). 
Asian academic corruption often occur in the interplay between HE structure and 
agents of HE research under imported Western audit cultures and the pressures on 
performativity in educational research (Somekh and Schwandt 2007) (also see the 
Asian methodology section).
Community-Bound Knowledge Transfer
From the two usual destinations of produced knowledge, I now refer to the com-
munity at large. I examine the distance and linkage between the two key missions of 
HE, namely, research and community projection, also known as “knowledge trans-
fer” (KT) or “knowledge exchange” in various HE institutions.
Apart from teaching and research, KT is usually regarded as the third mission of 
HE (Lockett et al. 2008) (Nelles and Vorley 2010). It emerged in the 1990s Europe 
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

64
as an academic discourse—from ivory tower to praxis—and a social responsibility 
discourse (Serrano-Velarde and Krücken 2012). My claim here is that there is a 
significant gap between Asian conception of KT and its actual practice.
In what is the most prototypical understanding of it, an Asian state university 
funding agency define KT as:
The systems and processes by which knowledge, including technology, know-how, exper-
tise and skills are transferred between higher education institutions and society, leading to 
innovative, profitable or economic or social improvements. (UGC 2015, my emphasis)
It adds that it should be a two-way process, because “not only would the community 
enjoy realizable benefit from the knowledge transferred from institutions, but aca-
demics and researchers would also be enriched by having closer ties with the larger 
community” (UGC 2015).
The usefulness-oriented KT can be problematized (Strathern 2007) because of 
its social self-imagery of situating itself into global market and knowledge econ-
omy, globalization. But for the postcolonial Asia, the very globalization itself is 
problematic:
[Globalization is] capital-driven forces which seek to penetrate and colonize all spaces on 
the earth with unchecked freedom, and that in so doing have eroded national frontiers and 
integrated previously unconnected zones. In this ongoing process of globalization, unequal 
power relations become intensified, and imperialism expresses itself in a new form. (Chen 
2010, p. 4)
In this view, the “third mission” is essentialized as one more socioeconomic engage-
ment, capacity building for university-industry linkages (Schiller and Brimble 
2009), or an entrepreneurial turn toward being bundled together with other core 
missions—teaching and research (Nelles and Vorley 2010).
Not only is KT a discourse mounted on a Western view of globalization that 
evokes a “G-series” World Summit cocktail party, but it also turns Asian knowledge 
production into a subservient of the West-led globalization cum neo-imperialism. 
These have become the neoliberal bases on which the so-called KT strategies are 
formulated and adopted by Asian HE, albeit notable discrepancies among countries 
and systems in planning, implementation, and governmental HE funding.
My critique is not at KT itself but this naïve idea that any KT, regardless of its 
local contexts, should be instrumental to reify the universal dream of a ‘globalized 
world’.
From West to Asia, Then Back to the Ideal of University
The core of the matter is as follows: What is the contribution of Asian universities 
to human condition in the immediacy? Are Asian HE institutions contributing to the 
solution of the regional problems? Should the main concern of Asian HE the highest 
position in global rankings by promoting flagship “boutique universities”?
J. Park

65
The neoliberal management and administration of Asian HE as knowledge pro-
duction machinery comes at a high price. The first victim is academic and intellec-
tual freedom and the loss of subjectivity. Then, even the social projection of 
knowledge or KT in Asia has become a lip service. As Kuan-Hsing Chen argued, 
there is a need to formulate a critical proposition to transform the existing knowl-
edge structure and, at the same time, transform ourselves, so that Asian societies can 
become each other’s points of reference to “develop a more adequate understanding 
of contemporary cultural forms, practices, and institutions in the formerly colonized 
world”(Chen 2010, p. 1).
I think this is possible and should be done although fewer, critical discourses on 
HE do exit in the West. In what constitutes an alarm bell for academics and intel-
lectuals, Henry Giroux critiques the relative silence of the Western (American in 
particular) university intellectuals on the 70th anniversary of the Hiroshima atomic 
bombing (Giroux 2015). He says that, overwhelmed by decades of public education 
in a culture of violence and warring, treating the socially marginalized as “dispos-
able people” and abandoned dead bodies, the US HE intellectuals are in a state of 
moral coma in respect to the country’s darker and unexamined past. The cause, he 
argues, is the rampant neoliberalism that transformed an entire civilization with loss 
of intellectual capability to put itself under the skin of others. The consequence is an 
“esthetics of catastrophe” that exults the violence and glorifies cruelty, in which 
social imagery is hijacked by a mental state of numbness dictated by a “neoliberal 
disimagination machine.” Giroux has faithfully reflected on what is going on in the 
university campuses:
The lesson to be drawn here, however tentative, is that under the reign of neoliberalism the 
roles and responsibilities of the intellectual are being devalued, reduced to a stance marked 
by a flight from moral and political responsibility, infused by an indifference to the unpleas-
ant necessities of mass violence, and safely tamed within public spheres such as higher 
education that have given themselves over to a crude instrumental rationality and endorse-
ment of market-based values, practices, and policies. (Giroux 2015, pp.  108, my 
emphasis)
This caution is not only for the West. I believe it is the kind of structure and agency 
that Asian HE knowledge production should never buy wholesale and that Asian HE 
has an imperative homework of healing the wounds of colonization and the Cold 
War; the damage inflicted by a borrowed neoliberal outlook and all-administrative 
HE should be criticized and, if possible, halted.
Brace, the Worst May Be Ahead
This section attempts to outline some desirable or promising directions for Asian 
HE. The section showcases a recent Japanese education policy to underscore that 
the issues previously raised in the chapter are pressingly current.
Japan’s Ministry of Education was founded as an independent department of the 
Meiji government. Its early education policies were aligned with an imperialistic 
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

66
ideal of regional political hegemony and pursue of a Western model of moderniza-
tion (Takeuchi 2005 [1961]). Breaking a centennial tradition, it was merged with the 
former Science and Technology Agency to become the “Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology” (MEXT) in 2001. This amalgamation 
was rather fateful for education, in my view. Education that had always been seen as 
a field in the domain of social sciences and humanities was now placed next to 
national science and technology, which are, in turn, regarded as champions and 
catalyzers of the ongoing globalization buzz.
The fast decline of Japanese HE humanities and social sciences was all a matter 
of time. No sooner had the merge occurred than a new social and political paradigm 
was imposed to Japanese HE. Now, it has to respond to market pressures by intro-
ducing the idea of rank-tabled excellence, competition (both sane and insane), 
higher managerial autonomy, reduced costs, and, in short, organizational reform as 
“agencification” (Yamamoto 2004). The move also includes reifying a financial 
management focus of both publicly and privately funded Japanese HE with a profit-­
oriented business model (Parker 2012).
In 2015, Takamitsu Sawa, the president of Shiga University, expressed concern 
over the MEXT’s ad hoc policy on humanities and social sciences in HE (Sawa 
2015):
On June 8, all presidents of national universities received a notice from the education min-
ister telling them to either abolish their undergraduate departments and graduate schools 
devoted to the humanities and social sciences or shift their curricula to fields with greater 
utilitarian values.
Sawa had previously alerted the Japanese public that Japan’s national universities 
are being “forced” to implement unprecedented reforms following a business model 
(Sawa 2014). His stress call a year later was followed by media responses (Grove 
2015; Nakata Steffensen 2015).
MEXT is unflinching in its power deployment as it justifies its hard hand on 
Japanese education/normal universities and programs. In the majestic plural “We,” 
MEXT underlines:
At teacher training universities and faculties, we are meanwhile working to raise teacher 
quality while reducing student quotas, based on factors such as expected demographic 
dynamics and teacher demand. To that end, we already have a policy to “abolish” courses 
in the teacher training universities and faculties which do not focus on acquisition of a 
teacher certificate. From now on emphasis will be placed on teacher training courses and 
the issue is to raise teacher quality. (2015, p. 3)
Japan is not the only country where social sciences and humanities in HE continue 
languishing. It is, indeed, a global phenomenon (Eagleton 2015). Humanities and 
social sciences faculties are not shut down upfront, but their courses and programs 
are eaten away from within like apple worms. When the actual closing down occurs, 
the public will hardly notice it or have no interest in humanity to voice any concern. 
Unlike many global cases of “all-administrative universities” (Ginsberg 2011) 
where social sciences and humanities have been subtly and gradually chocked over 
the years, the Japanese case gets a distinction for its frontal attack à la swordsman.
J. Park

67
In the outset of this section, I promised an outline of some promising directions 
to save Asian HE humanities and social sciences. I do not pretend to offer a panacea 
policy formula because the Asian HE landscape is rather heterogeneous, albeit their 
common features such as their colonial past, strong eagerness for development, and 
rapturous celebration of globalization.
It could be argued that whatever may be the Asian nation-states’ vision and mis-
sion, the ongoing demolition of HE humanities and social sciences may backfire on 
us, Asia, making us once more embrace a worldview and social programs that are 
not authentically ours while fueling up rampant nationalism and dangerous geopo-
litical disputes within our continental boundaries. If social sciences and humanities 
are intellectual instruments for self and a mutual understanding in and among our 
societies, ours seems to be a time when we need social sciences and humanities the 
most. Hence, it is only foolish that we now take action to destroy such intellectual 
tools right at the root of knowledge structure and production—Asian higher 
education.
What I have offered here is a call for an immediate/deep examination and reflec-
tion on the current state of affairs so that, in so doing, we Asians may authentically 
determine, neither imposed nor conditioned, the future directions for the Asian HE 
humanities and social sciences.
Conclusion: Toward a “Fourth Mission” of Asian Higher 
Education
I am not a purist, and I do not believe that human endeavors including the time-­
honored social intuitions such as universities are to be read in black and white. 
However, there is not even a remotest doubt that Asian HE institutions are in the 
pains of delivering a knowledge production machinery, “research mill,” at the ser-
vice of the state, or state apparatuses (Althusser 1971) with borrowed neoliberal 
principles and practices.
In a century called after her, Asia is still preoccupied with putting herself on the 
Western topography. I do believe that Asian universities will keep contributing to 
the global goal (not ragged globalization) of universitas, that is, universal access to 
knowledge with authentic and sustainable growth, which may lead to a real and 
“sincere” service to the society with qualitative improvement of human condition.
This service in Asia should set some priorities, for example, knowledge pro-
duced in Asia should contribute to easing war grudges and territorial-maritime dis-
putes with fresh nationalistic politics that threaten the peace. Perhaps it should be a 
“Fourth Mission of HE,” a mission of sanitation and reconciliation from within, 
with a wide range of Asian perspectives in humanity and social sciences research to 
overcome the many inherent and dated regional problems in true spirit of science, 
which “derives its capacity for self-renewal from its belief in the presence of a hid-
den reality, of which current science is one aspect, while other aspects of it are to be 
revealed by future discoveries” (Polanyi 1983, p. 82).
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

68
The unfinished modernization of the Asian continent and its many internal 
conflicts should be a primary focus and aim of Asian HE knowledge production. 
They should be able to portrait, explain, and ease the numerous and manifold Asian 
problems. If HE research were to be taken as an independent field of study in Asia, 
there is a need to look at it from a historical and philosophical standpoint in order to 
connect dated and outstanding problems in Asia with local-regionally produced 
knowledge. To do so, it has to reflectively reexamine its own subjectivity and to 
get out of an intellectual and emotional chasm for an uncritically embracing 
borrowed model of HE.
Asian HE knowledge production has faced colossal challenges in every stage of 
its process, from subjectivity to methodology through knowledge transfer. Asia was 
the reference point for the self-imagery of the West, that is, the West became West 
by looking at itself in the mirror of the East (Hall 1992). What is suggested here is 
different: Asia will better understand what she is with Asia as a reference point of 
herself, and never in the usual paradigm of the West and the rest.
References
Altbach, P. G. (1989). Student political activism : An international reference handbook. New York: 
Greenwood Press.
Altbach, P. G. (2004). Globalisation and the university: Myths and realities in an unequal world. 
Tertiary Education & Management, 10(1), 3–25.
Altbach, P. G., & Salmi, J. (2011). The road to academic excellence : The making of world-class 
research universities. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Althusser, L. (1971). Lenin and philosophy, and other essays. London: New Left Books.
Althusser, L. (2006). Ideology and ideological state apparatuses (Notes towards an Investigation). 
In A.  Sharma, & A.  Gupta (Eds.), The anthropology of the state: A reader (pp.  86–111). 
Malden/Oxford: Blackwell Pub.
Anderson, R. (2010). The ‘Idea of a University’ today. History and Politics. Retrieved from http://
www.historyandpolicy.org/policy-papers/papers/the-idea-of-a-university-today
Atkins, E.  T. (2010). Primitive selves: Koreana in the Japanese colonial gaze, 1910–1945. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Barnett, R. (1990). The idea of higher education. Milton Keynes: Society for Research into Higher 
Education: Open University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1969). Intellectual field and creative project. Social Science Information, 8(2), 
89–119. doi:10.1177/053901846900800205.
Chen, K.-H. (2003). Civil society and Min-Jian: On political society and popular democracy. 
Cultural Studies, 17(6), 877–896.
Chen, K.-H. (2010). Asia as method : Toward deimperialization. Durham: Duke University Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1981). Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes. The Journal 
of Philosophy, 78(2), 67–90. Retrieved from file:///C:/Documents%20and%20Settings/
HKU%20Student/My%20Documents/Edu-arbol/ebooks/Churchland%20Paul%201981%20
Eliminative%20Materialism.pdf
Eagleton, T. (2015, April 6). The slow death of the University. The Chronicle Review.. Retrieved 
from http://chronicle.com/article/The-Slow-Death-of-the/228991/
Fenwick, T. J., & Farrell, L. (Eds.). (2012). Knowledge mobilization and educational research : 
Politics, languages and responsibilities. New York: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge. London: Tavistock Publications.
J. Park

69
Foucault, M. (1983). The subject and power. In H. Dreyfus & P. Rabinow (Eds.), Michel Foucault: 
Beyond structuralism and hermeneutics (2nd ed., pp.  208–226). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Gee, J. P. (2011). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method (3rd ed.). New York: 
Routledge.
Ginsberg, B. (2011). The fall of the faculty: The rise of the all-administrative university and why it 
matters. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giroux, H.  A. (2015). Hiroshima and the responsibility of intellectuals: Crisis, catas-
trophe, and the neoliberal disimagination machine. Thesis Eleven, 129(1), 103–118. 
doi:10.1177/0725513615592985.
Grove, J. (2015, September 14). Social sciences and humanities faculties ‘to close’ in Japan after 
ministerial intervention: Universities to scale back liberal arts and social science courses. 
Times Higher Education. Retrieved from https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/
social-sciences-and-humanities-faculties-close-japan-after-ministerial-intervention
Hall, S. (1992). The West and the rest: Discourse and power. In S. Hall & B. Gieben (Eds.), 
Formations of modernity (pp. 275–332). Cambridge: Polity Press in association with the Open 
University.
Jaspers, K. (1960). The idea of the university. London: Peter Owen.
Jobbins, D. (2014November 20). New THE split throws rankings world into turmoil. University 
World News, Issue No: 344. Retrieved from http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php
?story=20141120074833487
Katz, D. (1965). Nationalism and strategies of international conflict resolution. In H. C. Kelman & 
Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues (Eds.), International behavior: A social-­
psychological analysis (pp. 356–390). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Kim, J.  (2009). Public feeling for science: The Hwang affair and Hwang supporters. Public 
Understanding of Science, 18(6), 670–686. Retrieved from http://pus.sagepub.com/content/ear
ly/2009/02/16/0963662508096778.abstract.
Lo, W. Y. W. (2011). Soft power, university rankings and knowledge production: Distinctions between 
hegemony and self-determination in higher education. Comparative Education, 47(2), 209–222.
Lockett, N., Kerr, R., & Robinson, S. (2008). Multiple perspectives on the challenges for knowl-
edge transfer between higher education institutions and industry. International Small Business 
Journal, 26(6), 661–681. doi:10.1177/0266242608096088.
Macfarlane, B., Zhang, J., & Pun, A. (2012). Academic integrity: A review of the literature. Studies 
in Higher Education, 39(2), 339–358. doi:10.1080/03075079.2012.709495.
Manzon, M. (2011). Comparative education: The construction of a field. Hong Kong/Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Marginson, S. (2011). Higher education in East Asia and Singapore: Rise of the Confucian model. 
Higher Education, 61(5), 587–611. doi:10.1007/s10734-010-9384-9.
MEXT. (2015). National University Reform for the Coming Era. (1362381_1_1). Tokyo: Higher 
Education Bureau, Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology-Japan 
Retrieved from www.mext.go.jp/english/highered/__icsFiles/.../10/.../1362381_1_1.pdf
Nakata Steffensen, K. (2015, September 30). Japan and the social sciences: Behind the headlines: 
Kenn Nakata Steffensen takes an in-depth look at the challenges facing Japan’s public univer-
sities. Times Higher Education. Retrieved from https://www.timeshighereducation.com/blog/
japan-and-social-sciences-behind-headlines
Nelles, J., & Vorley, T. (2010). From policy to practice: Engaging and embedding the third mission 
in contemporary universities. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 30(7/8), 
341–353.
Newman, J. H. (1999 [1907]). The idea of a university, defined and illustrated: I. In nine discourses 
delivered to the Catholics of Dublin. II. In occasional lectures and essays addressed to the 
members of the Catholic University (New ed.). Washington, DC: Regnery Gateway.
Nind, M., Benjamin, S., Sheehy, K., Collins, J., & Hall, K. (2004). Methodological challenges in 
researching inclusive school cultures. Educational Review, 56(3), 259–270.
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

70
Ortega y Gasset, J. (1999). Mission of the university. London: Routledgel.
Park, J. (2011). Metamorphosis of Confucian heritage culture and the possibility of an Asian edu-
cation research methodology. Comparative Education, 47(3), 381–393. doi:10.1080/0305006
8.2011.586769.
Park, J.  (2013). Cultural artifact, ideology export or soft power? Confucius Institute in Peru. 
International Studies in Sociology of Education, 23(1), 1–16. doi:10.1080/09620214.2013.7
70205.
Park, J. (2016). Asian education and Asia as method. In C. M. Lam & J. Park (Eds.), Sociological 
and philosophical perspectives on education in the Asia-Pacific region (pp.  205–225). 
New York/London: Springer.
Parker, L. D. (2012). From privatised to hybrid corporatised higher education: A global finan-
cial management discourse. Financial Accountability & Management, 28(3), 247–268. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0408.2012.00544.x.
Pelikan, J. J., & Newman, J. H. (1992). The idea of the university : A reexamination. New Haven: 
Yale University Press.
Polanyi, M. (1983). The tacit dimension. Gloucester: Peter Smith.
Popper, K. R. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery. London: Hutchinson.
Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Ren, K. (2012). Fighting against academic corruption: A critique of recent policy developments in 
China. High Educ Policy, 25(1), 19–38. doi:10.1057/hep.2011.20.
Russell, B. (1993[1922]). The problem of China. Nottingham: Spokesman.
Sakai, N. (2010). Theory and Asian humanity: On the question of humanitas and anthropos. 
Postcolonial Studies, 13(4), 441–464.
Salmi, J.  (2014). Global view on tertiary education. Retrieved from http://tertiaryeducation.
org/2014/07/world-class-universities-or-systems/
Sawa, T. (2014, June 22). University is not a business. The Japan Times. Retrieved from http://
www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2014/06/22/commentary/japan-commentary/university-­
business/#.VrW6Tk-BpdA
Sawa, T. (2015, August 23). Humanities under attack. The Japan Times. Retrieved from http://
www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2015/08/23/commentary/japan-commentary/humanities-­
attack/#.VihJ9W5N_AH
Schiller, D., & Brimble, P. (2009). Capacity building for university–industry linkages in develop-
ing countries: The case of the Thai higher education development project. Science Technology 
& Society, 14(1), 59–92. doi:10.1177/097172180801400103.
Schmid, A. (2002). Korea between empires, 1895–1919. New York: Columbia University Press.
Serrano-Velarde, K., & Krücken, G. (2012). Private sector consultants and public universities: 
The challenges of cross-sectoral knowledge transfers. European Journal of Education, 47(2), 
277–289. doi:10.1111/j.1465-3435.2012.01523.x.
Somekh, B., & Schwandt, T. A. (Eds.). (2007). Knowledge production: Research work in interest-
ing times. Oxford: Routledge.
Strathern, M. (2007). Measures of usefulness: A diatribe. In B. Somekh & T. A. Schwandt (Eds.), 
Knowledge production: Research work in interesting times (pp. ix, 214 p). Oxford: Routledge.
Takeuchi, Y. (2005 [1961]). Asia as method [Hoho to shite no Ajia]. In R. F. Calichman (Ed.), What 
is modernity? Writings of Takeuchi Yoshimi (pp. 149–165). New York: Columbia University 
Press.
UGC. (2015). Knowledge transfer. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: University Grants 
Committee. Retrieved from http://www.ugc.edu.hk/eng/ugc/activity/kt/kt.htm
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. (2013). Higher education in Asia expanding out, expanding 
up: The rise of graduate education and university research. Montreal: UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics.
Wang, J. (2007). John Dewey in China. Albany: SUNY Press.
J. Park

71
Weber, M. (2011 [1946]). The ‘Rationalization’ of education and training. In R.  Arum, I.  R. 
Beattie, & K. Ford (Eds.), The structure of schooling: Readings in the sociology of education 
(pp. 4–6). Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press, SAGE Publications.
Yamamoto, K. (2004). Corporatization of national universities in Japan: Revolution for gover-
nance or rhetoric for downsizing? Financial Accountability & Management, 20(2), 153–181. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0408.2004.00191.x.
Yang, R. (2005). Corruption in China’s higher education system: A malignant tumour. International 
Higher Education 39: 18–20. International Higher Education, 39(1), 18–20.
Yang, R. (2010). Soft power and higher education: An examination of China’s Confucius Institutes. 
Globalisation, Societies and Education, 8(2), 235–245.
Yang, R. (2011). Scholarly publishing, knowledge mobility and internationalisation of Chinese 
universities. In T.  Fenwick & L.  Farrell (Eds.), Knowledge mobilization and educational 
research: Politics, languages and responsibilities (pp. 185–197). London: Routledge.
Zhou, D., & Park, J. (2015). China’s third attempt of education reform with a global outlook. 
International Journal of Comparative Education and Development (form Comparative 
Education Bulletin, ISSN1992-4283), 17(2), 54–67.
Jae Park  is an assistant professor and head of the International Education Research Unit in the 
Centre for Lifelong Learning Research and Development of the Education University of Hong 
Kong. He has published articles in Educational Philosophy and Theory,  Comparative 
Education, International Studies in Sociology of Education, and Ethics & Behavior. He serves as 
the past president of the Comparative Education Society of Hong Kong and as the editor-in-chief 
of the International Journal of Comparative Education and Development.
4  Higher Education Knowledge Production in Postcolonial-Neoliberal Asia

73
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_5
Chapter 5 
Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher 
Education, and Higher Education Research: 
Mapping the Development in Regionalization 
of Higher Education Research   
Roger Y. Chao Jr.
Abstract  This chapter is an exploratory study to fill in the knowledge gap related 
to regionalization of higher education research in Asia and its relationship with the 
broader Asian regionalism literature and facilitate a better understanding of its evo-
lution and future direction. Key concepts related to regionalization of higher educa-
tion, the development of Asian regionalization, and regionalization of higher 
education research in Asia are presented and followed by the discussion and conclu-
sion sections of this chapter.
Introduction
With the increased focus on regionalism across disciplines since the 1990s, Asia has 
seen a significant literature on political, economic, and security regionalisms. 
Increased interdependency within Asia facilitated by neoliberal globalization, the 
establishment of the East Asian production network, various bi-/tri- and multilateral 
trade agreements, and the changing security environment brought about by the end 
of the cold war era facilitated Asian regionalisms and a growth in Asian regionalism 
literature. Furthermore, the challenges brought about by the 1997/1998 Asian finan-
cial crisis not only increased the focus on Asian regionalism research but also served 
as a catalyst for increased East Asian economic, financial, and political regionaliza-
tion. In spite of conflicting visions of Asian regionalization and the legitimacy-­
capacity issue in Asian regionalism (Acharya 2014a, b), developments in East Asian 
regionalism resulted in the establishment of the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN) centered ASEAN Plus Three (APT) and East Asian Summit 
(EAS) frameworks in 1997 and 2005, respectively. These frameworks significantly 
expanded the ASEAN regionalization project to initially include China, Japan, and 
R.Y. Chao Jr. (*) 
UNESCO International Centre for Higher Education Innovation, Shenzhen, China
e-mail: rylimchao@yahoo.com

74
South Korea and later Australia, India, and New Zealand into an East Asian region-
alization project. East Asian regionalism, however, has been seen to be lopsided with 
a strong focus on economic regionalism along with the development of regional 
governance mechanisms (Jayasuriya 2004a, b; Chao 2013).
Regionalization of higher education in Asia was influenced by European higher 
education developments with the Bologna Process and the establishment of the 
European Higher Education Area in 1999 and 2010, respectively. Although it started 
as European projects, the establishment of regions and the regionalization of higher 
education expanded from its European origin and influenced regionalisms and 
regionalization of higher education worldwide. In fact, Chao (2011) has stated that 
the “Bolognazation of Global Higher Education1 can be seen as Europe’s initiative 
to remain competitive and emerge as the leader in the higher education space.” The 
influence of the Bologna Process and the developments of the European higher 
education regionalization project have influenced the East Asian and the Asia Pacific 
regions (Chao 2011, 2014a, b). East Asian regionalization of higher education, how-
ever, is a complex project given its multiple stakeholders, frameworks, power asym-
metries within the region and its regional organizations and frameworks, and the 
ASEAN way of consultation and consensus building.
Aside from the influence of Asian regional organizations (e.g., ASEAN, Southeast 
Asian Ministers of Education Organization-Regional Centre for Higher Education 
and Development (SEAMEO-RIHED)) and its member nation states, various exter-
nal institutions such as the European Union; Asia-Europe Meeting; United Nations 
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); and the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) significantly influence policy transfer through a number 
of mechanisms including technical assistance, study visits, project funding, and 
publications (Dale and Robertson 2012; Dang 2013; Chao 2014a, b). As such aside 
from the political, organizational, and functional approaches to regionalization of 
higher education (Knight 2013), path dependency, power asymmetries, and the 
maturity of a region’s regionalization project need to be considered (Chao 2014a).
Given the importance of higher education within the global knowledge-based 
economy discourse, understanding the extent of knowledge production, who are the 
knowledge producers, and the evolution and direction of higher education research is 
increasingly becoming a necessity. In spite of Asia’s accelerated expansion of higher 
education in the past two decades, it has been noted that little attention has been 
given to the evolution of higher education research in Asia (Jung and Horta 2013). 
Similarly in spite of the increased focus on the regionalization of higher education 
in research and policy circles since the early 2000s, little attention has been placed 
on higher education research evolution in Asia.
This chapter is an exploratory study to fill in the knowledge gap related to region-
alization of higher education research in Asia and its relationship with the broader 
Asian regionalism literature and facilitate a better understanding of its evolution and 
future direction. Key concepts related to regionalization of higher education, the 
1 Defined as “the process by which the Bologna Process is creating harmony (not standardization) 
and convergence in higher education systems across the world” (Chao 2011)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

75
development of Asian regionalization, and regionalization of higher education 
research in Asia are presented and followed by the discussion and conclusion sec-
tions of this chapter.
Regionalism and Asian Regionalism Research
Given that this chapter is focused on regionalization of higher education in Asia and the 
developments of its research, it is necessary to address the basic understanding of 
regionalism, its related concepts and issues. Furthermore, there remains the need to 
incorporate the power dimension and dynamics to understand the evolution of region-
alism studies and subsequently the regionalization of higher education research in 
Asia.
The distinction between regionalism, regionalization, regional integration, and 
regions falls in their being an ideology, a process, a condition, and a result of the 
regionalization process, respectively. Regional integration is the condition that the 
regionalization process aims to achieve to establish a real region, which is mini-
mally defined as “a limited number of states linked together by geographic relation-
ship and by a degree of mutual interdependence.” Regions are actually social 
constructs constructed by its actors’ interests and their subjective understandings 
and form part of the international system and are usually constructed by intergov-
ernmental collaborations between two or more states and differentiated in terms of 
social, economic, political, and organizational cohesiveness2 (Ravenhill 2001, 2010; 
Hettne and Soderbaum 2000; Hettne 2005; Chao 2014b). Regionalism has been 
recently defined as “an outcome of the integration processes usually involving the 
coalition of social forces: markets, private trade investment flows, policies and deci-
sions of organizations and state led initiatives” (Robertson 2008) expanding its 
original focus on government initiatives to include other social actors.
In fact, Lombaerde and Soderbaum (2013) four-volume edited publication on 
regionalism broke down regionalism’s development into classical regional integra-
tion (1945–1970), revisions of classical regional integration (1970–1990), new 
regionalism (1990–2000), and comparative regionalism (2000–2010). Shifting from 
their initial focus on economic and security regionalisms, Asian regionalism 
research has increasingly focused on political regionalism which includes a focus 
on regional community building and regional governance as shown in the list of 
selected publications and edited volumes presented in Appendices 1 and 2, respec-
tively. Even though its focus has changed from time to time, regionalism has actu-
ally evolved from classical (old) regionalism to new regionalism and subsequently 
increased its focus on comparing regions and regional integration developments. 
Contemporary developments, such as the economic and security developments and 
the increased momentum on Asian integration and community building in the early 
2 This definition is based on supranational regions which are different from subnational regions.
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

76
1990s and 2000s, respectively, have also influenced Asian regionalism research as 
shown in the list of edited volumes presented in Appendix 2.
As power asymmetries and dynamics are also predominant in regionalism, these 
are represented in regionalism research. These include the leadership question in 
Asian regionalism (Frankel and Kahler 1993; Acharya 2008, 2009, 2014b; Kavalski 
2009), interregional competition (Capie 1994; Higgots and Stubbs 1995; Dent 
1998; Robertson 2008; Acharya and Buzan 2010), Asian regional governance 
(Jayasuriya 2001, 2004a, b), and the role and influence of regional and international 
organizations (Acharya and Johnston 2007; Foot 2011; Watson 2014). The latter 
can also be seen in Appendix 3, a subset of the list of selected Asian regionalism 
research presented in Appendix 1, which shows research published by regional 
organizations and think tanks, and those affiliated with international organizations 
studying regionalism such as the United Nations University Institute – Comparative 
Regional Integration Studies. These institutions not only contribute to the knowl-
edge base and contemporary policy discourses but also render support to key stake-
holders and regional (and other regions) actors within Asian regionalism.
As this chapter is not about Asian regionalism, the above observations should be 
sufficient to highlight some trends in Asian regionalism research. These observed 
trends include: the evolving characteristic, definitions, and actors in regionalism 
(and by extension Asian regionalism); an initial focus on economic regionalism 
(particularly during the period 1990–2001) which then shifted its focus on political 
regionalism especially since 2000; Asian regionalism research published in edited 
volumes that tend to be focused on contemporary issues; and the power asymmetry 
and dynamic dimension in Asian regionalism research that are seen in terms of 
inter- and intra-regional contexts and the influence of regional organizations and 
think tanks. These observed trends need to be confirmed with a larger study of 
regionalism research not limited to Asia. Given the scope of this chapter, however, 
the above observed trends should suffice in the task of mapping the regionalization 
of higher education research in Asia.
Asian Regionalization of Higher Education: A Conceptual 
Framework
Although Asian regionalism development is lagging behind European regional 
developments, their approach to regionalism actually follows different models, 
namely, networked and institutional regionalism. According to Yeo (2010), Europe’s 
institutional regionalism “achieves integration through endowing specific institu-
tions with far-reaching decision-making powers to shape the behavior of the mem-
ber states,” which is contrasted by East Asia’s open-ended networked regionalism. 
Similarly, and in spite of Europe’s pioneering status and influence in the regional-
ization of higher education, the regionalization of higher education in Asia has 
taken a different path. Chao (2014a) presents the difference in European and East 
Asian regionalization processes and the regionalization of their respective higher 
R.Y. Chao Jr.

77
education systems, which tend to support Yeo’s institutional and networked region-
alism argument.
As presented in Fig. 5.1, UNESCO’s 1983 Asia-Pacific Regional Convention on 
the Recognition of Qualification in Higher Education together with ASEAN, which 
established the ASEAN University Network (AUN) and the AUN-quality assurance 
network (AUN-QA) in 1995 and 2000, respectively, and SEAMEO, particularly 
through SEAMEO-RIHED, is the core of East Asian regionalization of higher edu-
cation. Although guided in part by European higher education developments, the 
abovementioned institutions and their higher education initiatives have advanced 
contemporary East Asian regionalization of higher education. Along with other 
institutions, such as the Asia Pacific Quality Assurance Network (APQN) and the 
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), networks (e.g., University Mobility 
for the Asia Pacific (UMAP)), and the Australian-led Brisbane Communiqué, East 
Asian regionalization of higher education initiatives has focused on student mobil-
ity, quality assurance, mutual recognition, and harmonizing academic systems 
toward establishing a regional higher education area. The scope and boundaries of 
this regional higher education area, however, remain vague to date with its evolution 
being shaped by extra-regional forces. These extra-regional forces include the 
European Union, which launched and supported the 9.6 million Euro project “the 
European Union Support to Higher Education in ASEAN Region (EU SHARE)” for 
the period 2015–2018, and the Asia-Europe Meeting education dialogues. In spite 
of this brief overview of East Asian regionalization of higher education, Fig. 5.1 and 
Table 5.1 should be able to give a bird’s eye view of the process and the various 
related initiatives being undertaken.
With the abovementioned contextual differences between European and East 
Asian regionalism established, it is appropriate to dwell into the definition of region-
alization of higher education and the conceptual frameworks that will inform our task 
in mapping the development of regionalization of higher education research in Asia.
Stressing that regionalization is an intentional ongoing and evolutionary process 
built on existing and new relationships and activities by diverse actors, Knight 
Fig. 5.1  East Asian regionalization of higher education (Source: Chao 2014a)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

78
(2012) defined regionalization of higher education as the “process of facilitating 
closer collaboration and alignment among higher education actors within a desig-
nated area or framework called a region.” Along with the above definition, Knight 
(2012, 2013) also advanced a conceptual model for the regionalization of higher 
education based on three different but complementary approaches, namely, functional, 
organizational, and political approaches (FOPA).
The functional approach focuses on practical activities like the alignment of sys-
tems and policies and collaborative programs. On the other hand, the organizational 
Table 5.1  Regionalization of higher education in Asia (FOPA)
1980
1990
2000
2010
Organizational
Administrative
SEAMO 
RIHED 
(1993*); 
AUN (1995); 
AUN-QA 
(1998)
AQAN (2008)
Functional
Mobility85
UMAP 
(1993)
AIMS (2009)
AUN Student Mobility 
initiative (2010); 
CAMPUS Asia (2012)
Credit transfer
AUN-ACTS (2010); 
Harmonizing CTS in 
GMS and beyond (2012)
Quality assurance
AUN-QA guidelines 
(2004); AUN-QA 
Manual (2006); Chiba 
Principles for QA in HE 
in the Asia Pacific 
(2008)
Guide to AUN-QA 
Assessment at Program 
level (2011)
Mutual recognition 
revised UNESCO 
recognition convention 
for the Asia and Pacific 
(1983)
Revised UNESCO 
recognition convention 
for the Asia and Pacific 
(2011)
Political
Regional integration
AFTA 
(1992); AFAS 
(1995); 
ASEAN 
Vision 2020 
(1997)
East Asian Vision Group 
(2001); East Asian 
Study Group (2002)
East Asian Vision Group 
II (2012)
HE regional integration
Brisbane Communiqué 
(2006); SEAMEO-­
RIHED harmonization 
of higher education 
(2008 and 2009)
APT Plan of Action on 
Education 2010–2017 
(unimplemented to date)
Source: Chao (2014b)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

79
approach refers to the development of organizational architecture including develop-
ing organizations and networks that guides regionalization initiatives, and lastly, the 
political approach involves the political will and strategies that place regionalization 
initiatives on the agenda of decision-making bodies which are usually embodied in 
terms of declarations, conventions, agreements, treaties, and summits.
It should be noted that Asian regionalization of higher education is focused on 
East Asian regionalism and its higher education initiatives. As such, and at least to 
date, East Asian regionalization is representative of Asian regionalization of higher 
education. Chao (2014b) mapping of key East Asian higher education regionaliza-
tion (and related) initiatives from the 1980s to the early 2010s into Knight’s func-
tional, organizational, and political approaches, as presented in Table 5.1, provides 
a longitudinal overview of Asian higher education regionalization. Together with 
the evolution of Asian regionalism research, the power dimension discussed in the 
next paragraph provides a basis to map and analyze regionalization of higher educa-
tion research in Asia.
Furthermore, given that education policies including that for regionalization of 
higher education travel between nations and/or between regions, its acceptance, 
adaption, location, and transformation into a hybrid policy that fits the local or 
regional contexts are usually negotiated by nation states through bilateral and mul-
tilateral levels especially using regional and interregional frameworks, networks, 
and organizations (Chao 2011, 2014a; Dale and Robertson 2012; Dang 2015). This 
actually falls in line with DiMaggio and Powell’s (1983) concept of institutional 
isomorphism and collective rationality where regions, and their respective member 
nation states and other actors, reshape their respective (regional and national) higher 
education systems through coercive isomorphism, mimetic processes, and norma-
tive pressures.
In fact, international organizations along with key East Asian regional organiza-
tions (e.g., ASEAN, SEAMEO-RIHED, and ASEAN University Network) direct 
and negotiate higher education discourses and shape the characteristics and evolu-
tion of Asian regionalization of higher education (Chao 2014b; Moutsios 2009, 
2010). The influence of UNESCO Asia and Pacific Regional Bureau of Education, 
and to a lesser extent the Asian Development Bank and the Asia Pacific Economic 
Cooperation, has also contributed to Asia’s regionalization of higher education 
which necessitates inquiry into their contribution to regionalization of higher educa-
tion research in Asia. Lastly, the establishment of the Asia Pacific Quality Assurance 
Network (APQN) in 2003, which aims to serve the needs of quality assurance agen-
cies in Asia Pacific higher education, should also be considered in the analysis.
Regionalization of Higher Education Research in Asia
Although a recent study by Jung and Horta (2013) shows that higher education 
research publications in Asia have been increasing, the study also noticed that its 
proportion in relation to total world publications in higher education research 
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

80
remains stationary. In fact, the same study highlighted that “the higher education 
research community in Asia is heavily concentrated in a few countries and universi-
ties, resting on a relatively small number of core scholars who published research in 
the international specialized higher education journals” (Jung and Horta 2013). 
Furthermore, a tendency toward thematic specializations has also been seen among 
higher education researchers in Hong Kong, China, Japan, and Malaysia (Kim et al. 
2015).
Along with the growing interest and higher education regionalization initiatives 
in Asia, a similar growth in regionalization of higher education research in Asia can 
be seen. The signs of the development of a specialized community focused on 
regionalization of higher education research, however, remain inexistent or minimal 
at best. This section presents various regionalizations of higher education research 
in Asia, including academic publications, project reports, and regional organiza-
tions’ relevant documents which form part of the region’s regionalization process.
Based on the selected publications presented in Appendix 4, regionalization of 
higher education research in Asia started roughly in the early 2000s with its focal 
topics evolving from simple to more complex and interdisciplinary topics. Research 
during the period 2003–2009 tend to focus on higher education (restructuring, 
privatization, quality and equity issues, massification, governance, rankings, and 
world-class universities) with East Asia, Asia, or the Asia Pacific region taken as a 
geographic boundary, context, and/or a point of comparison. Among the publica-
tions in that period, three publications did focus on regionalisms and how interna-
tional and regional organizations should and/or are approaching East Asian higher 
education (Yepes 2006; Robertson 2008) and the development of transnational edu-
cation in East Asia (Huang 2007).
In contrast, post-2010 publications have significantly refocused their topics on 
various issues and challenges to East Asian regionalism. In fact, an increased focus 
on higher education regional cooperation, internationalization (including regional 
higher education hubs and student mobility trends), regional quality assurance, and 
the establishment of regional organizations and networks related to higher educa-
tion is gaining ground in regionalization of higher education research in Asia. 
Furthermore, similar to regionalization research presented in the earlier sections, 
research in education policy transfer and its power dynamics has also been gaining 
ground especially in relation to Europe, the Bologna Process, the European Higher 
Education Area, and their impact and influence in the Asia/Asia Pacific region’s 
regionalization of higher education processes.
The evolution of focal topics in regionalization of higher education research in 
Asian is also reinforced even in subcategories of research including edited volumes 
(Appendix 5), journal articles (Appendix 6), and even selected chapters of a recently 
published book (published 2015) on the European Higher Education Area (Appendix 
7). Edited volumes and journal articles related to regionalization of higher educa-
tion research evolved from using East Asia/Asia/Asia Pacific as a context, to the 
challenges in regionalization of higher education in Asia, and eventually to the pro-
cess, power asymmetries, and policy borrowing, transfer, and mobility within 
regionalization of higher education in the region. Furthermore, the editors (or at 
R.Y. Chao Jr.

81
least of the editors) come from Asia, work in Asia, or are connected/affiliated with 
an institution that studies Asia, including higher education. Although this observa-
tion seems to hold true for journal articles on regionalization of higher education 
research in Asia, there is a need to conduct a broader and systemic study to increase 
its reliability.
In relation to power asymmetries and influence in Asia, a brief observation on inter-
national and regional organizations’ related publications (Appendix 8) shows that the 
East West Center, Asian Development Bank, SEAMEO-RIHED, UNESCO Asia and 
Pacific Regional Bureau for Education, APEC, and very recently even the Institute of 
International Education have been engaged in the regionalization of higher education 
research in Asia. A deeper look at the nature of these publications, however, shows that 
APEC and SEAMEO-RIHED took the lead in regionalization of higher education 
research in Asia. This can be seen in terms of the Australian-led Brisbane Communiqué 
and the latter’s mission to increased collaboration (and eventually harmonization) of 
Southeast Asian (which was later expanded to East Asian) higher education.
The Asian Development Bank and East West Center’s geographical focus (on 
Asia and the Asia Pacific, respectively), UNESCO’s interest on mutual recognition 
of higher education qualifications, and the Institute of International Education’s 
interest in understanding international education in relation to US international edu-
cation competitiveness in part explain their entry and contribution to regionalization 
of higher education research in Asia. The Asia Pacific Quality Assurance Network, 
whose mission statement is “to enhance the quality of higher education in Asia and 
the Pacific region through strengthening the work of quality assurance agencies and 
extending the cooperation between them,”3 also contributes to research focused on 
harmonizing quality assurance in the region which is a functional part of regional-
ization of higher education in Asia.4
The increased focus on higher education in global and regional policy platforms, 
the development of Asian regionalism, and regionalization of higher education 
explains not only the growth of higher education research in Asia but also that for 
regionalization of higher education research in the region. Most (if not all) of the 
selected East West Center publications included in the selected literature in Appendix 
1 were based on international education-related events hosted in Asia in collabora-
tion with Asian universities and researchers. Furthermore, APQN’s work and their 
contributing authors/scholars established a small community centered on APQN’s 
central theme of quality assurance in Asia and the Pacific region. The existence of a 
higher education research community in Asia is no longer the question, but rather is 
there a subcommunity within the higher education research community focused on 
regionalization of higher education in Asia.
Looking at Appendix 9, which maps the selected literature into Knight’s func-
tional, organizational, and political approaches (FOPA) to regionalization of higher 
education, the minimal research contribution to the organizational approach is the 
3 http://www.apqn.org/about/mission/
4 APQN and their affiliates organize conferences and events around harmonizing quality assurance 
in the Asia and the Pacific region.
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

82
most striking observation. In fact, only Tadaki and Tremewan (2013) and 
Ratanawijitrasin (2015) work on advancing the use of international consortia as a 
transformational space, and the challenges of governance in the evolving landscape 
of Southeast Asian higher education, respectively, focused on the organizational 
approach. Although international and regional organizations have contributed to 
research within both functional and political approaches, the ADB, APEC, and 
UNESCO tend to focus on the functional approaches, while the SEAMEO-RIHED 
has placed significant effort to research focused on the political approaches.
Looking at research within the functional approaches, the range of themes 
involved ranges from transnational education and world-class universities to the 
various higher education challenges (access, equity, privatization, quality assur-
ance, and governance), rankings, and higher education research within the Asian 
region. Although not all of these researches are directly relevant to regionalization 
of higher education research, these researches provide the contextual background 
and academic discourse into what does on in the region and indirectly filter into 
regionalization of higher education research. They also bring out the different 
dimensions and challenges within the regionalization of higher education process in 
Asia. Within the political approach, researches range from intra-regional and inter-
regional policy transfer and influence, advocating regionalization of higher educa-
tion in Asia (including Southeast Asia/East Asia/Asia Pacific), and these policies 
influence to member nation states and increasingly an alternative path to regional-
ization and/or an Asian higher education model.
Discussion
Given the development of regionalism, regionalism, and regionalization of higher 
education research in Asia, there is the need to establish certain parameters. Is there 
a higher education research community focused on regionalization of higher educa-
tion research? Which organizations form part of this research community? What 
factors determine the themes of regionalization of higher education research? And 
are there unique features in regionalization of higher education research in terms of 
government policy? This section focuses on discussing the abovementioned ques-
tions in relation to the various data on Asian regionalism and regionalization of 
higher education in Asia presented in the earlier sections.
Regionalization of Higher Education in Asia Research 
Community
Given the regionalization of higher education research (Appendix 4) and related 
research by international/regional organizations and their affiliates (Appendix 8), it 
may be plausible to mention the presence of regionalization of higher education in 
R.Y. Chao Jr.

83
Asia research community. Evolving from a subcommunity within the broader higher 
education research community, its members include Asian studying and working in 
other regions, higher education scholars, and practitioners affiliated with institu-
tions with an interest in higher education in Asia. Most of these scholars/research-
ers, however, are focused on key themes within Knight’s functional, operational, 
and political approaches to regionalization of higher education and are also engaged 
in other higher education-related topics. Furthermore, it was observed that the the-
matic focus of these researchers tends to evolve along with contemporary develop-
ments in Asian regionalism and the ongoing higher education discourse and 
dialogues within the region. As such, it may be more practical to assume a subgenre 
of the higher education research community in Asia that includes research in region-
alization of higher education in Asia.
The members of this regionalization of higher education in Asia research com-
munity are spread out across and even outside the region. Although most are affili-
ated with academic institutions, some researchers working for international and 
regional organizations contribute to regionalization of higher education research as 
part of their institutions’ thematic or geographic focus and constitute part of this 
research community. For example, Hou (2011, 2012; Hou et al. 2015a, b), who is 
currently the vice president of the Asia Pacific Quality Assurance Network, has 
been engaged in quality and quality assurance-related research mostly related to 
Taiwan and the Asia Pacific region. Furthermore, Asian academic institutions have 
jointly hosted a number of East West Center’s higher education events leading to 
edited volumes related to regionalization of higher education in Asia (see Appendix 
8). These two cases illustrate the different methods one contributes to regionaliza-
tion of higher education research in Asia and its community.
As shown in Appendixes 8, the Asian Development Bank, Asia Pacific Economic 
Cooperation, East West Center, SEAMEO-RIHED, and UNESCO form part of the 
regionalization of higher education in Asia research community. To a lesser extent, 
but increasingly over the past years, the ASEAN University Network (AUN) is 
expected to contribute to research and become part of the community. Although 
their initial focus was on subnational higher education cooperation between AUN 
member universities, the past years have seen the organization increasingly focuses 
on regional higher education cooperation at ASEAN and ASEAN plus 3/6 levels. As 
mentioned earlier in this chapter, the 9.6 million Euro European funding project will 
at least ensure that AUN and their related research projects will contribute and focus 
on regionalization of higher education in Asia.
Path Dependency
The themes in regionalization of higher education research in Asia, and possibly 
worldwide, tend to be path dependent based on global and regional economic, secu-
rity, and political developments, the evolution of Asian regionalism, and the actors 
engaged with regionalization of higher education in Asia. Path dependency, 
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

84
however, is not fixed and unidirectional. In fact, negotiations between actors, the 
ongoing evolution of Asian regionalism, and the funding directed to regionalization 
of higher education in Asia may reshape the path, within boundaries, of regionaliza-
tion of higher education in Asia.
To broadly illustrate this path dependency, multilateral and eventually regional 
(and bi/tri-lateral) trade agreements managed to set up global and regional markets 
for goods and services. At the multilateral level, the World Trade Organization’s 
1995 General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (GATT) and General Agreement on 
Trade in Services (GATS) essentially set the pace of economic liberalization at the 
global stage. While the former institutionalized economic globalization and set the 
global rules of trade, the latter reconstituted higher education as a commodity sub-
ject to the rules of trade at the global level. Prior to GATT and GATs, APEC’s estab-
lishment in 1989, with its initial member economies being close US allies in the 
Asia and Pacific region, advocated for open regionalism based on the principles and 
rules of what we now know as GATT and GATS. ASEAN, with all its founding 
member countries being APEC member economies, followed through with its 
ASEAN Free Trade Area and ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services in 1992 
and 1995, respectively. The end of the Cold War in 1991 facilitated APEC and 
ASEAN membership to include former socialist countries in the late 1990s expand-
ing economic regionalism and formed the foundation for regionalization of higher 
education in Asia. Although Asian regionalism and regionalization of higher educa-
tion reinforced global developments, Asia’s historical development (at national and 
regional levels), unique governance structure, diversity, and relevant actors negoti-
ated and facilitated a localized hybrid of economic globalization and regionalization 
of higher education in Asia.
Similarly, Europe’s Bologna Process, which led to the establishment of the 
European Higher Education Area in 2010, serves as a catalyst for regionalization of 
higher education across regions, including Asia, regionalization of higher education 
in Asia is dependent on the maturity and characteristics of Asian regionalism, its 
governance structure (e.g., ASEAN Way), Asian higher education diversity, and the 
region’s key higher education actors including non-Asian actors providing funding, 
technical assistance, and capacity building support to the regionalization of higher 
education project.
This path dependency holds for both Asian regionalism research and regionaliza-
tion of higher education research in Asia. As observed earlier in this chapter, Asian 
regionalism research focused on the evolving characteristic, definitions, and actors 
in Asian regionalism, an initial focus on economic regionalism (1990–2001) which 
eventually shifted to political regionalism especially since the 2000s. Although 
regionalization of higher education research in Asia can be said to have started in 
the early 2000s, its evolution from simple to complex interdisciplinary themes 
clearly mirrors (but at a faster pace) Asian regionalism research developments. It 
has evolved from higher education issues within Asia as a geographic boundary, to 
issues to regionalization of higher education in Asia, and eventually to the pro-
cesses, power asymmetries, and policy borrowing, transfer, and mobility within 
regionalization of higher education in Asia.
R.Y. Chao Jr.

85
Actors and Thematic Selection
As key actors and power asymmetries do play a role in regionalization of higher 
education, they also play a role in regionalization of higher education research. 
Donor countries, regional organizations, interregional forums, and other function-
ally specific organizations contribute to regionalization of higher education research 
to provide evidence-based policy advocacies or directives and interregional policy 
mobility or simply to gain a better understanding of a phenomenon within their 
geographic area of focus.
The Australian-led Brisbane Communiqué and the European Union that sup-
ported regionalization of higher education initiatives in Asia are just examples of 
donor countries’ engagement. Australia, through APEC and the ASEAN-Australia-­
New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (ASEAN-ANZ FTA), has been continuously 
advocating and supporting regionalization of higher education in Asia. In terms of 
regionalization of higher education, SEAMEO-RIHED, and to a lesser extent the 
Asian Development Bank, started strongly advocating for regionalization of higher 
education in Asia and contributing to its research (SEAMEO-RIHED 2008, 2009; 
ADB 2012). On the other hand, AUN and APQN have focused on quality assurance 
issues since the 2000s, while UNESCO has been strongly contributing to mutual 
recognition of higher education qualifications especially in the late 2000s.5 In fact, 
Table 5.1 showed that regionalization of higher education initiatives in Asia and 
regional quality assurance only started in the mid-2000s, while academic/student 
mobility, credit transfer, and mutual recognition (revisited) issues occurred in the 
2010s.
With the developments in regionalization of higher education in Asia, APEC and 
East West Center’s geographic focus on the Asia and Pacific region required them to 
engage and contribute to research. In fact, APEC’s research contributions and 
EWC’s edited volumes only started in the mid- and late 2000s, respectively. 
Contemporary issues, academic discourse, and the development of regionalization 
of higher education in Asia, however, do play a key role in the thematic selection of 
topics especially those published in academic journals.
Research and Government Policies
Given the diverse nature of actors and researchers of regionalization of higher edu-
cation in Asia, is there truly a unique feature in this subfield of higher education 
research? Similar to all higher education research, it is driven by contemporary 
developments in Asian regionalism, global higher education discourses, and chal-
lenges in Asian higher education.
5 UNESCO’s 1983 Mutual Recognition Convention for Higher Education Qualifications was 
revised in Tokyo late 2011.
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

86
A key feature in regionalization of higher education research, however, can be 
seen in its strong comparative nature with the regionalization of European higher 
education. The influence of European higher education developments can be seen in 
Australia’s Brisbane Communiqué and SEAMEO-RIHED’s harmonization of 
Southeast Asian higher education, which actually includes a number of East Asian 
countries. During the period 2015–2018, AUN and its EU SHARE European part-
ners will be significantly contributing to research and evolution of the regionaliza-
tion of higher education in Asia. As such, it has a strong regional comparative nature 
and a strong involvement of regional, interregional, and Asian higher education 
scholars (including those based outside the region), and it supports the need for 
empirical policy-related research required by the key drivers for the regionalization 
of higher education in Asia.
Conclusion
Regionalization of higher education in Asia research is a relatively new research 
area which started in the early to mid-2000s and evolved from simple to complex 
interdisciplinary themes which evolved from higher education issues within Asia as 
a geographic boundary to the process, power asymmetries, and policy borrowing, 
transfer, and mobility within regionalization of higher education in Asia. Although 
the establishment of global markets for goods and services and the commodification 
of higher education formed the foundation, the regionalization of higher education 
in Asia required the maturity of Asian regionalism and was deeply influenced by 
developments in the regionalization of European higher education.
This chapter has presented and analyzed selected literature on Asian regionalism 
and regionalization of higher education in Asia, and mapped the latter into Knight’s 
functional, organizational and political approaches to regionalization of higher edu-
cation. In the process, it has shown and argued that there exists a regionalization of 
higher education in Asia research community, which should be seen as a subgenre 
of the higher education research community in Asia. Members of this community 
include academic researchers/scholars, policy researchers, regional and interre-
gional organizations, and their affiliates located within and outside Asia. In spite of 
its recent existence, the regionalization of higher education in Asia research com-
munity provides significant contribution to empirical research required by policy 
makers and, at times, provides alternatives for Asian hybrid of regionalization of 
higher education based on Asian values, culture, and practices.
A path dependency based on the region’s historical developments, the evolution 
of Asian regionalism, and the negotiations between key actors is apparent in the 
regionalization of higher education in Asia. Starting the mid-2000s, key actors 
including SEAMEO-RIHED and Australia, through APEC, have significantly 
pushed and influenced the regionalization project. In fact, the relevant themes in 
regionalization of higher education in Asia research are influenced by contemporary 
developments in regionalization of higher education in Asia and a number of other 
R.Y. Chao Jr.

87
actors (aside from those mentioned above) whose geographic focus and political 
and economic interest involve the regionalization of higher education in Asia.
Being strongly influenced by European developments, regionalization of higher 
education in Asia research has a strong regional comparative nature with significant 
involvement of regional, interregional, and Asian higher education scholars located 
within or outside the region. It is also significantly influenced by European and 
donor countries’ funding, technical assistance, and capacity building support. 
Lastly, regionalization of higher education in Asia research significantly supports 
the region’s need for empirical policy-related work, influences regional higher edu-
cation policy making, and even managed to provide arguments for an Asian-based 
model for higher education and its regionalization.
Appendixes
Appendix 1: Selected List of Asian Regionalism Research 
and Their Focus
Title
Political
Economics
Security
1968
Nye, JS
International regionalism: 
readings
x
1991
Palmer, ND
The New Regionalism in Asia & 
Pacific
x
1992
Jayasuriya, K
The Dynamics of Economic 
Policy Reform in South-East 
Asia and the South West Pacific
x
1993
Frankel, J & 
Kahler, M
Regionalism & Rivalry: Japan 
& the United States in Pacific 
Asia
x
1994
Garnaut, R & 
Drydale, R
Asia Pacific Regionalism: 
readings in international 
economic relations
x
1994
Acharya, A
An Arms Race in Post-War 
Southeast Asia: prospects for 
control
x
1994
Capie, D
Rival Regions? East Asian 
regionalism and its challenge to 
the Asia-Pacific
x
1995
Higgots, R & 
Stubbs, R
Competing Conceptions of 
Economic Regionalism: APEC 
versus EAEC in the Asia Pacific
x
1995
Acharya, A & 
Stubbs, R
New Challenges for ASEAN: 
emerging policy issues
x
1997
Lake, D & 
Morgan, P
Regional Orders: building 
security in a new world
x
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

88
Title
Political
Economics
Security
1998
Coleman, W & 
Underhill, G
Regionalism & Global 
Economic Integration: Europe, 
Asia & the Americas
x
1998
Dent, C
Regionalism in Southeast Asia: 
Opportunities & threats for the 
European Union (European 
Business Review 98:4, 184-195)
x
1999
Jayasuriya, K 
& Rosser, A
Economic Orthodoxy & the 
East Asian Crisis
x
1999
Barry, D & 
Keith, R
Regionalism, Multilateralism & 
the politics of global trade
x
2000
Acharya, A
The Quest for Identity: 
International relations of 
Southeast Asia
x
2000
Katzenstein, P
Regionalism & Asia
x
x
2000
Stubbs, R & 
Underhill, G
Political Economy & the 
Changing global order
x
x
2001
Jayasuriya, K
South East Asia’s Embedded 
Mercantilism in Crisis: 
International strategies & 
domestic coalitions
x
x
2001
Jayasuriya, K
Governance, Post Washington 
Consensus & the New 
Anti-Politics
x
x
2001
Acharya, A
Constructing a Security 
Community in Southeast Asia: 
ASEAN & the problem of 
regional order
x
2002
Narine, S
Explaining ASEAN: 
Regionalism in Southeast Asia
x
2003
Capie, D & 
Evans, P
The ASEAN Way
x
2003
Acharya, A
Regionalism & Multilateralism: 
Essays on cooperative security 
in the Asia-Pacific
x
2004
Jayasuriya, K
Asian Regional Governance: 
Crisis & change
x
2004
Jayasuriya, K
Governing the Asia Pacific: 
Beyond the ‘new regionalism’
x
2004
Acharya, A & 
To, LL
Asia in the New Milenium: 
APISA first congress 
proceedings
x
2004
Tan, SS & 
Acharya, A
Asia-Pacific Security 
Cooperation: National interests 
& regional order
x
(continued)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

89
Title
Political
Economics
Security
2005
Pempel, TJ
Remapping East Asia: the 
construction of a region
x
2005
Farrell, M, 
Hettne, B & 
Lagenhove, L
Global Politics of Regionalism: 
Theory & practice
x
2007
Acharya, A & 
Johnston, A
Crafting Cooperation: Regional 
international institutions in 
comparative perspective
x
2007
Jones, D & 
Smith, M
Making Process, Not Progress: 
ASEAN & the evolving East 
Asian regional order
x
2008
Acharya, A
Asia Rising: Who is leading?
x
2008
ADB
Emerging Asian Regionalism: A 
partnership for shared prosperity
x
2008
Dent, C
East Asian Regionalism
x
x
2008
Tanaka, H & 
Liff, A
The Strategic Rationale for East 
Asia Community Building
x
2009
Acharya, A
Whose Ideas Matter? Agency & 
power in Asia regionalism
x
2009
Acharya, A
Constructing a Security 
Community in Southeast Asia: 
ASEAN & the problem of 
regional order
x
2009
Kavalski, E
China & the Global Politics of 
Regionalism
x
2009
Hu, R
Building Asia Pacific 
Architecture: the challenge of 
hybrid regionalism
x
2010
Acharya, A & 
Buzan, B
Non-Western International 
Relations Theory: Perspectives 
on & beyond Asia
x
2010
ADB
Institutions for Regional 
Integration: Toward an Asian 
Economic Community
x
2010
Calder, K & 
Ye, M
The Making of Northeast Asia
x
2010
Capie, D
When Does Track Two Matter? 
Structure, agency and Asian 
regionalism
x
2010
Ravenhill, J
Understanding the ‘new East 
Asian Regionalism’ (Review of 
International Political Economy 
17:2, 173-177)
x
x
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

90
Title
Political
Economics
Security
2010
Ravenhill, J
The ‘new East Asian 
regionalism’: A political domino 
effect (Review of International 
Political Economy 1:2, 18-208)
x
x
2011
Foot, R
The Role of East Asian 
Regional Organizations in 
Regional Governance: 
Constraints & contribution
x
2012
Komori, Y
In Search of Regional 
Governance in East Asia: 
Processes & outcomes
x
2012
Capie, D
The Responsibility to Protect 
Norm in Southeast Asia: 
Framing, resistance & the 
localization myth
x
2012
Curley, M & 
Thomas, N
Advancing East Asian 
Regionalism
x
2012
Beeson, M & 
Stubbs, R
Routledge Handbook of Asian 
Regionalism
x
x
x
2013
Lombaerde, P 
& Soderbaum, 
F
Regionalism: Volume 1-4
x
x
x
2014
Watson, L
Foreign Aid & Emerging 
Powers: Asian Perspectives on 
Official Development Assistance
x
2014
Acharya, A
Constructing a Security 
Community in Southeast Asia: 
ASEAN & the problem of 
regional order
x
2014
Acharya, A
Rethinking Power, Institutions 
and Ideas in World Politics: 
Whose IR?
x
x
2014
ADB Institute
ASEAN 2030: Toward a 
borderless economic community
x
2015
Brenan, L & 
Murray, P
Drivers of Integration & 
Regionalism in Europe & Asia: 
Comparative Perspectives
x
R.Y. Chao Jr.

91
Appendix 2: Selected Edited Volumes of Asian Regionalism 
Research
Title
Publisher
Political
Economics
Security
1992
Jayasuriya, K The Dynamics of 
Economic Policy 
Reform in 
South-East Asia 
and the South West 
Pacific
Oxford 
University 
Press
x
1993
Frankel, J & 
Kahler, M
Regionalism & 
Rivalry: Japan & 
the United States in 
Pacific Asia
Univ of 
Chicago Press
x
1995
Acharya, A & 
Stubbs, R
New Challenges for 
ASEAN: emerging 
policy issues
UBC Press
x
1997
Lake, D & 
Morgan, P
Regional Orders: 
building security in 
a new world
Pennsylvannia 
State Univ 
Press
x
1999
Jayasuriya, K 
& Rosser, A
Economic 
Orthodoxy & the 
East Asian Crisis
Murdoch 
University
x
1999
Barry, D & 
Keith, R
Regionalism, 
Multilateralism & 
the politics of 
global trade
UBC Press
x
2000
Stubbs, R & 
Underhill, G
Political Economy 
& the Changing 
global order
Oxford Univ 
Press
x
x
2004
Jayasuriya, K Asian Regional 
Governance: Crisis 
& change
Routledge
x
2004
Jayasuriya, K Governing the Asia 
Pacific: Beyond the 
‘new regionalism’
Palgrave 
Macmillan
x
2004
Acharya, A & 
To, LL
Asia in the New 
Milenium: APISA 
first congress 
proceedings
Marshall 
Cavendish 
Academic
x
2004
Tan, SS & 
Acharya, A
Asia-Pacific 
Security 
Cooperation: 
National interests 
& regional order
M.E. Sharpe
x
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

92
Title
Publisher
Political
Economics
Security
2005
Pempel, TJ
Remapping East 
Asia: the 
construction of a 
region
Cornell Univ 
Press
x
2007
Acharya, A & 
Johnston, A
Crafting 
Cooperation: 
Regional 
international 
institutions in 
comparative 
perspective
Cambridge 
Univ Press
x
2009
Kavalski, E
China & the Glbal 
Politics of 
Regionalism
Ashgate
x
2010
Acharya, A & 
Buzan, B
Non-Western 
International 
Relations Theory: 
Perspectives on & 
beyond Asia
Routledge
x
2013
Lombaede, P 
& Soderbaum, 
F
Regionalism: 
Volume 1-4
x
x
x
2015
Brennan, L & 
Murray, P
Drivers of 
Integration & 
Regionalism in 
Europe & Asia: 
Comparative 
Perspectives
x
R.Y. Chao Jr.

93
Appendix 3: Selected Asian Regionalism Research and Their 
Publishers
1994
Acharya, A
An Arms Race in 
Post-War 
Southeast Asia: 
prospects for 
control
ISEAS
x
2003
Capie, D & 
Evans, P
The ASEAN Way
ISEAS
x
2008
Tanaka, H & 
Liff, A
The Strategic 
Rationale for East 
Asia Community 
Building
Japan Center for 
Intl. Exchange
x
In Wanandi 
& 
Tamamoto
2009
Hu, R
Building Asia 
Pacific 
Architecture: the 
challenge of hybrid 
regionalism
Brookings 
Institution
x
2011
Foot, R
The Role of East 
Asian Regional 
Organizations in 
Regional 
Governance: 
Constraints & 
contribution
Carnegie 
Endowment for 
Peace
x
2013
Lombaerde, P & 
Soderbaum, F
Regionalism: 
Volume 1-4
Sage/UNU-CRIS*
2015
Brennan, L & 
Murray, P
Drivers of 
Integration & 
Regionalism in 
Europe & Asia: 
Comparative 
Perspectives
Routledge/
UNU-CRIS*
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

94
Appendix 4: Selected List of Asian Higher Education 
Regionalism Research
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Title
Journal/
Publisher
2003
Mok, KH & Welch, A
Globalization and educational 
restructuring in the Asia Pacific region
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2006
Keeling, R
The Bologna Process & the Lisbon 
Research Agenda: the European 
Commission’s expanding role in HE 
discourse
European 
Journal of 
Education
2006
Yepes, C D
World Regionalization of Higher 
Education: Policy Proposals for 
International Organizations
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2007
Huang, F
Internationalization of Higher 
Education in the Developing & 
Emerging Countries: a focus on 
transnational higher education in Asia
Journal of 
Studies in 
International 
Educaton
2008
Deem, R; Mok, KH & 
Lucas, L
Transforming Higher Education in 
Whose Image? Exploring the concept 
of the “World Class” University in 
Europe and Asia
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2008
Peng, S & Wang, L-Y
Pursuing Quality and Equity of Higher 
Education: a review of policies and 
practices in East Asia
New Directions 
for Institutional 
Research
2008
Hawkins, J
Higher Education Transformation: 
Some trends in California & Asia
Policy Futures 
in Higher 
Education
2008
Robertson, S
Europe/Asia Regionalism, Higher 
Education and the Production of World 
Order
Policy Futures 
in Higher 
Education
2009
Poole, G & Chen, Y-C
Higher Education in East Asia: 
Neoliberalism & the professoriate
Sense
2009
Shin, JC & Harman, G
New Challenges for Higher Education: 
Global & Asia-Pacific Perspectives
Asia Pacific 
Education 
Review
2009
Tilak, J
Trends in Private Higher Education in 
Asia
Higher 
Education 
Review
2009
Bigalke, T &  
Neubauer, D
Higher Education in Asia Pacific: 
Quality and the Public Good
EWC/Palgrave
2011
Chao, RY
Reflections on the Bologna Process: 
the making of an Asia-Pacfic Higher 
Education Area
European 
Journal of 
Higher 
Education
2011
Marginson, S
Higher Education in East Asia and 
Singapore: Rise of the Confucian 
model
Higher 
Education
(continued)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

95
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Title
Journal/
Publisher
2011
Lo, W
Soft Power, University Rankings and 
Knowledge Production: Distinctions 
between hegemony and self-­
determination in higher education
Comparative 
Education
2011
Neubauer, D & Tanaka, 
Y
Access, Equity & Capacity in Asia 
Pacific Higher Education
EWC/Palgrave
2011
Palmer et al
The Internationalization of East Asian 
Higher Education: Globalization’s 
impact
Palgrave
2011
Welch, A
Higher Education in Southeast Asia: 
Blurring borders, changing balance
Routledge
2012
ADB
Regional Cooperation and Cross-
Border Collaboration in Higher 
Education in Asia: Ensuring that 
everyone wins
ADB
2012
Chao, RY
The Emergence of Regional Quality 
Assurance in South East Asia 
(Understanding the dynamics involved 
in the creation of a regional quality 
assurance system
Scientific 
Bulletin - 
Educational 
Sciences Series
2012
Chen, S-J
Shifting Patterns of Student Mobility 
in Asia
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2012
Kuroda, K & Neubauer, 
D
Migration & Mobility in Asia-Pacific 
Higher Education
EWC/Palgrave
2012
Neubauer, D
Regionalization of Education in Asia: 
Changing patterns, major challenges & 
policy responses
EWC/
HKIED - Asian 
Education & 
Dev. Studies
2012
Hawkins, J; Mok, K H; 
Neubauer, D
Higher Education Regionalization in 
Asia Pacific: Implications for 
governance, citizenship & university 
transformation
EWC/ Palgrave 
Macmillan
2013
Dang, Q
ASEM-the modern silk road: travelling 
ideas for education reforms and 
partnerships between Asia & Europe
Comparative 
Education
2013
Jung, J & Horta, H
Higher Education Research in Asia: a 
publication and co-publication analysis
Higher 
Education 
Quarterly
2013
Jons, H & Hoyler, M
Global geographies of higher 
education: the perspective of world 
university rankings
Geoforum
2013
Mok, KH
The Quest for an Entrepreneurial 
University in East Asia: Impact on 
academic and administrators in higher 
education
Asia Pacific 
Education 
Review
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

96
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Title
Journal/
Publisher
2013
Tadaki, M & Tremewan, 
C
Reimagining Internationalization in 
Higher Education: International 
consortia as a transformative space?
Studies in 
Higher 
Education
2013
Neubauer, D; Shin, JC & 
Hawkins, J
The Dynamics of Higher Education 
Development in East Asia: Asia 
cultural heritage, western dominance, 
economic development & 
globalization
EWC & 
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2014
Jeong, DW; Lee, HJ; 
Lee, SH & Wi, E
Shaping Education Policy Research in 
an Asia-Pacific Context
Asia Pacific 
Education 
Review
2014
Chao, RY
Pathways to an East Asian Higher 
Education Area: a comparative 
analysis of East Asian & European 
regionalization processes
Higher 
Education
2014
Horta, H & Jung, J
Higher Education Research in Asia: an 
archipilago, two continents or merely 
atomization?
Higher 
Education
2014
Yonezawa et al
Emerging International Dimensions in 
East Asian Higher Education
Springer
2015
Mok, KH
Higher Education Transformations for 
Global Competitiveness: Policy 
responses, social consequences, 
impact on academic profession in Asia
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2015
Dang, Q
The Bologna Process Goes East? From 
“Third Countries” to Prioritizing 
Inter-regional Cooperation Between 
the ASEAN and EU
Springer 
(chapter)
2015
Ratanawijitrasin, 
Sauwakon
The Evolving Landscape of South-
East Asian Higher Education and the 
Challenges of Governance
Springer 
(chapter)
Appendix 5: Selected Edited Volumes of Asian Higher 
Education Regionalism Research
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Title
Journal/
Publisher
2003
Mok, KH & Welch, A
Globalization and educatinal restructuring in 
the Asia Pacific region
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2009
Bigalke, T & 
Neubauer, D
Higher Education in Asia Pacific: Quality and 
the Public Good
EWC/
Palgrave
2009
Poole, G & Chen, 
Y-C
Higher Education in East Asia: Neoliberalism 
& the professoriate
Sense
(continued)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

97
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Title
Journal/
Publisher
2011
Neubauer, D & 
Tanaka, Y
Access, Equity & Capacity in Asia Pacific 
Higher Education
EWC/
Palgrave
2011
Palmer et al
The Internationalization of East Asian Higher 
Education: Globalization’s impact
Palgrave
2012
Kuroda, K & 
Neubauer, D
Migration & Mobility in Asia-Pacific Higher 
Education
EWC/
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2012
Neubauer, D
Regionalization of Education in Asia: Changing 
patterns, major challenges & policy responses
EWC/
HKIED - 
Asian 
Education 
& Dev. 
Studies
2012
Hawkins, J; Mok, K 
H; Neubauer, D
Higher Education Regionalization in Asia 
Pacific: Implications for governance, citizenship 
& university transformation
EWC/ 
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2013
Neubauer, D; Shin, 
JC & Hawkins, J
The Dynamics of Higher Education 
Development in East Asia: Asia cultural 
heritage, western dominance, economic 
development & globalization
EWC & 
Palgrave
2014
Yonezawa et al
Emerging International Dimensions in East 
Asian Higher Education
Springer
(continued)
Appendix 6: Selected Journal Articles of Asian Higher 
Education Regionalism Research
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Journal articles
Journals
2006
Keeling, R
The Bologna Process & the Lisbon 
Research Agenda: the European 
Commission’s expanding role in 
HE discourse
European Journal of 
Education
2006
Yepes, C D
World Regionalization of Higher 
Education: Policy Proposals for 
International Organizations
Higher Education 
Policy
2007
Huang, F
Internationalization of Higher 
Education in the Developing & 
Emerging Countries: a focus on 
transnational higher education in 
Asia
Journal of Studies in 
International 
Educaton
2008
Deem, R; Mok, KH & 
Lucas, L
Transforming Higher Education in 
Whose Image? Exploring the 
concept of the “World Class” 
University in Europe and Asia
Higher Education 
Policy
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

98
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Journal articles
Journals
2008
Peng, S & Wang, L-Y
Pursuing Quality and Equity of 
Higher Education: a review of 
policies and practices in East Asia
New Directions for 
Institutional Research
2008
Hawkins, J
Higher Education Transformation: 
Some trends in California & Asia
Policy Futures in 
Higher Education
2008
Robertson, S
Europe/Asia Regionalism, Higher 
Education and the Production of 
World Order
Policy Futures in 
Higher Education
2009
Shin, JC & Harman, G
New Challenges for Higher 
Education: Global & Asia-Pacific 
Perspectives
Asia Pacific 
Education Review
2009
Tilak, J
Trends in Private Higher Education 
in Asia
Higher Education 
Review
2011
Chao, RY
Reflections on the Bologna 
Process: the making of an 
Asia-Pacfic Higher Education Area
European Journal of 
Higher Education
2011
Marginson, S
Higher Education in East Asia and 
Singapore: Rise of the Confucian 
model
Higher Education
2011
Lo, W
Soft Power, University Rankings 
and Knowledge Production: 
Distinctions between hegemony 
and self-determination in higher 
education
Comparative 
Education
2012
Chao, RY
The Emergence of Regional 
Quality Assurance in South East 
Asia (Understanding the dynamics 
involved in the creation of a 
regional quality assurance system
Scientific Bulletin - 
Educational Sciences 
Series
2012
Chen, S-J
Shifting Patterns of Student 
Mobility in Asia
Higher Education 
Policy
2013
Dang, Q
ASEM-the modern silk road: 
travelling ideas for education 
reforms and partnerships between 
Asia & Europe
Comparative 
Education
2013
Jung, J & Horta, H
Higher Education Research in 
Asia: a publication and 
co-publication analysis
Higher Education 
Quarterly
2013
Jons, H & Hoyler, M
Global geographies of higher 
education: the perspective of world 
university rankings
Geoforum
(continued)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

99
Year
Author(s)/Editor(s)
Journal articles
Journals
2013
Mok, KH
The Quest for an Entrepreneurial 
University in East Asia: Impact on 
academic and administrators in 
higher education
Asia Pacific 
Education Review
2013
Tadaki, M & 
Tremewan, C
Reimagining Internationalization 
in Higher Education: International 
consortia as a transformative 
space?
Studies in Higher 
Education
2014
Jeong, DW; Lee, HJ; 
Lee, SH & Wi, E
Shaping Education Policy 
Research in an Asia-Pacific 
Context
Asia Pacific 
Education Review
2014
Chao, RY
Pathways to an East Asian Higher 
Education Area: a comparative 
analysis of East Asian & European 
regionalization processes
Higher Education
2014
Horta, H & Jung, J
Higher Education Research in 
Asia: an archipilago, two 
continents or merely atomization?
Higher Education
2015
Mok, KH
Higher Education Transformations 
for Global Competitiveness: Policy 
responses, social consequences, 
impact on academic profession in 
Asia
Higher Education 
Policy
Appendix 7: Selected Chapters in 2015 Edited Volume 
(European Higher Education Area)
Author
Chapters in (Curaj, Matei, Precopie, Salmi & Scot 
2015) European Higher Education Area: Between 
critical reflections and future policies
2015
Dang, Q
The Bologna Process Goes East? From “Third 
Countries” to Prioritizing Inter-regional 
Cooperation Between the ASEAN and EU
Springer
2015
Ratanawijitrasin, 
Sauwakon
The Evolving Landscape of South-East Asian 
Higher Education and the Challenges of 
Governance
Springer
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

100
Appendix 8: International/Regional Organizations’ Selected 
Publications
Publication title
Publisher
Asian Development Bank
Higher Education in Dynamic Asia: 
Study Reports
2011
ADB
Higher Education Across Asia: An 
overview of issues and strategies
ADB
2012
ADB
Improving Instructional Quality: 
Focus on Faculty Development
ADB
2012
ADB
Counting the Cost: Financing Asian 
higher education for inclusive 
growth
ADB
2012
ADB
Private Higher Education Across 
Asia: Expanding access, searching 
for quality
ADB
2012
ADB
Access without Equity? Finding a 
better balance in higher education in 
Asia
ADB
2012
ADB
Regional Cooperation and Cross-
Border Collaboration in Higher 
Education in Asia: Ensuring that 
everyone wins
ADB
2012
ADB
Administration & Governance of 
Higher Education in Asia: Patterns 
and implications
ADB
2012
ADB
Improving Transitions from School 
to University to Workplace
ADB
2012
Shepherd, B & Pasadilla, G
Services as a New Engine of Growth 
for ASEAN, the Peoples Republic of 
China, and India
ADB Institute
East West Center (EWC)
2009
Bigalke, T & Neubauer, D 
(Eds)
Higher Education in Asia Pacific: 
Quality and the Public Good
EWC/Palgrave
2011
Neubauer, D & Tanaka, Y 
(Eds)
Access, Equity & Capacity in Asia 
Pacific Higher Education
EWC/Palgrave
2012
Kuroda, K & Neubauer, D 
(Eds)
Migration & Mobility in Asia-
Pacific Higher Education
EWC/Palgrave 
Macmillan
2012
Neubauer, D (Ed)
Regionalization of Education in 
Asia: Changing patterns, major 
challenges & policy responses
EWC/
HKIED - 
Asian 
Education & 
Dev. Studies
(continued)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

101
Publication title
Publisher
2012
Hawkins, J; Mok, K H; 
Neubauer, D (Eds)
Higher Education Regionalization in 
Asia Pacific: Implications for 
governance, citizenship & university 
transformation
EWC/ 
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2013
Neubauer, D; Shin, JC & 
Hawkins, J (Eds)
The Dynamics of Higher Education 
Development in East Asia: Asia 
cultural heritage, western 
dominance, economic development 
& globalization
EWC & 
Palgrave
Institue of International 
Education (IIE)
2015
Bhandari, Raika (Ed)
Asia: The Next Higher Education 
Superpower?
IIE
SEAMEO - RIHED
Selected Publications
2005
SEAMEO-RIHED
The Proceedings of Regional 
Seminar on Higher Education in 
Southeast Asia Countries: A current 
update
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2006
SEAMEO-RIHED
Higher Education in South-East Asia
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2008
SEAMEO-RIHED
Harmonization of Higher Education: 
Lessons learned from the Bologna 
Process
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2009
SEAMEO-RIHED
Raising Awareness: Exploring the 
ideas of creating a common space in 
higher education in South-East 
Asian: a conference proceeding
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2010
SEAMEO-RIHED
The Proceedings of Regional 
Seminar on Quality Assurance in 
Higher Education in Southeast Asia 
countries
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2010
Aphijanyatham, Ropharat
East Asian Internationalisation of 
Higher Education: A Key to 
Regional Integration
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2012
SEAMEO-RIHED
A Study of Quality Assurance 
Models in Southeast Asia Countries
SEAMEO-
RIHED
APEC
APEC Human Resources 
Development Working Group 
Publications
1997
APEC
Capacity Building of Human 
Resources Development of Key 
Basic Industries in the Asia-Pacific 
Region
APEC
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

102
Publication title
Publisher
1998
APEC
Global Advantage through People: 
Human Resource Management 
Policies and Practices in 10 APEC 
Economies
APEC
2007
APEC
Enhancement of Quality Assurance 
Systems in Higher Education in 
APEC Member Economies
APEC
2009
APEC
Developing Effective Public-Private 
Partnerships - Report on Human 
Resources Development in the 
APEC Region
APEC
2009
APEC
Mapping Qualifications Frameworks 
across APEC Economies
APEC
2009
APEC
Measures Affecting Cross Border 
Exchange and Investment in Higher 
Education in the APEC Region
APEC
2010
APEC
Higher Education Diploma 
Supplements Among APEC Member 
Economies
APEC
2011
APEC
Quality in Higher Education: 
Identifying, Developing and 
Sustaining Best Practices in the 
APEC Region
APEC
2011
APEC
Strategic Approach to Sustainable 
Capacity Building
APEC
2011
APEC
Capacity building for policies and 
monitoring of cross-border 
education in the APEC region
APEC
2012
APEC
Higher Education Learning Profile 
and Social Development in the 
Asia-Pacific
APEC
2014
APEC
Promoting Regional Education 
Services Integration: APEC 
University Associations Cross-
Border Education Cooperation 
Workshop - Workshop Report
APEC
2013
UNESCO
International Mobility of Students in 
the Asia and Pacific
UNESCO
2014
UNESCO
Higher Education in Asia: 
Expanding Out, Expanding Up: the 
rise of graduate education and 
university research
UNESCO
2015
UNESCO
The Transition from Secondary 
Education to Higher Education: 
Case studies from Asia & the Pacific
UNESCO
R.Y. Chao Jr.

103
Appendix 9: Selected Regionalization of Higher Education 
Research in Asia (FOPA)
Functional
2007
Huang, F
Internationalization of Higher 
Education in the Developing & 
Emerging Countries: a focus on 
transnational higher education in Asia
Journal of 
Studies in 
International 
Educaton
2008
Deem, R; Mok, KH & 
Lucas, L
Transforming Higher Education in 
Whose Image? Exploring the concept of 
the “World Class” University in Europe 
and Asia
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2008
Peng, S & Wang, L-Y
Pursuing Quality and Equity of Higher 
Education: a review of policies and 
practices in East Asia
New 
Directions for 
Institutional 
Research
2008
Hawkins, J
Higher Education Transformation: 
Some trends in California & Asia
Policy Futures 
in Higher 
Education
2009
Poole, G & Chen, Y-C
Higher Education in East Asia: 
Neoliberalism & the professoriate
Sense
2009
Shin, JC & Harman, G
New Challenges for Higher Education: 
Global & Asia-Pacific Perspectives
Asia Pacific 
Education 
Review
2009
Tilak, J
Trends in Private Higher Education in 
Asia
Higher 
Education 
Review
2009
Bigalke, T & Neubauer, D
Higher Education in Asia Pacific: 
Quality and the Public Good
EWC/
Palgrave
2011
Neubauer, D & Tanaka, Y
Access, Equity & Capacity in Asia 
Pacific Higher Education
EWC/
Palgrave
2011
Palmer et al
The Internationalization of East Asian 
Higher Education: Globalization’s 
impact
Palgrave
2012
Chao, RY
The Emergence of Regional Quality 
Assurance in South East Asia 
(Understanding the dynamics involved 
in the creation of a regional quality 
assurance system
Scientific 
Bulletin - 
Educational 
Sciences 
Series
2012
Chen, S-J
Shifting Patterns of Student Mobility in 
Asia
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2012
Kuroda, K & Neubauer, D
Migration & Mobility in Asia-Pacific 
Higher Education
EWC/
Palgrave
2013
Jung, J & Horta, H
Higher Education Research in Asia: a 
publication and co-publication analysis
Higher 
Education 
Quarterly
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

104
Functional
2013
Jons, H & Hoyler, M
Global geographies of higher education: 
the perspective of world university 
rankings
Geoforum
2013
Mok, KH
The Quest for an Entrepreneurial 
University in East Asia: Impact on 
academic and administrators in higher 
education
Asia Pacific 
Education 
Review
2014
Jeong, DW; Lee, HJ; Lee, 
SH & Wi, E
Shaping Education Policy Research in 
an Asia-Pacific Context
Asia Pacific 
Education 
Review
2014
Horta, H & Jung, J
Higher Education Research in Asia: an 
archipilago, two continents or merely 
atomization?
Higher 
Education
2015
Mok, KH
Higher Education Transformations for 
Global Competitiveness: Policy 
responses, social consequences, impact 
on academic profession in Asia
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2011
ADB
Higher Education Across Asia: An 
overview of issues and strategies
ADB
2012
ADB
Improving Instructional Quality: Focus 
on Faculty Development
ADB
2012
ADB
Counting the Cost: Financing Asian 
higher education for inclusive growth
ADB
2012
ADB
Private Higher Education Across Asia: 
Expanding access, searching for quality
ADB
2012
ADB
Access without Equity? Finding a better 
balance in higher education in Asia
ADB
2012
ADB
Administration & Governance of 
Higher Education in Asia: Patterns and 
implications
ADB
2012
ADB
Improving Transitions from School to 
University to Workplace
ADB
2010
SEAMEO-RIHED
The Proceedings of Regional Seminar 
on Quality Assurance in Higher 
Education in Southeast Asia countries
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2012
SEAMEO-RIHED
A Study of Quality Assurance Models 
in Southeast Asia Countries
SEAMEO-
RIHED
1997
APEC
Capacity Building of Human Resources 
Development of Key Basic Industries in 
the Asia-Pacific Region
APEC
1998
APEC
Global Advantage through People: 
Human Resource Management Policies 
and Practices in 10 APEC Economies
APEC
(continued)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

105
Functional
2007
APEC
Enhancement of Quality Assurance 
Systems in Higher Education in APEC 
Member Economies
APEC
2009
APEC
Developing Effective Public-Private 
Partnerships - Report on Human 
Resources Development in the APEC 
Region
APEC
2009
APEC
Mapping Qualifications Frameworks 
across APEC Economies
APEC
2009
APEC
Measures Affecting Cross Border 
Exchange and Investment in Higher 
Education in the APEC Region
APEC
2010
APEC
Higher Education Diploma 
Supplements Among APEC Member 
Economies
APEC
2011
APEC
Quality in Higher Education: 
Identifying, Developing and Sustaining 
Best Practices in the APEC Region
APEC
2011
APEC
Strategic Approach to Sustainable 
Capacity Building
APEC
2011
APEC
Capacity building for policies and 
monitoring of cross-border education in 
the APEC region
APEC
2012
APEC
Higher Education Learning Profile and 
Social Development in the Asia-Pacific
APEC
2013
UNESCO
International Mobility of Students in the 
Asia and Pacific
UNESCO
2014
UNESCO
Higher Education in Asia: Expanding 
Out, Expanding Up: the rise of graduate 
education and university research
UNESCO
2015
UNESCO
The Transition from Secondary 
Education to Higher Education: Case 
studies from Asia & the Pacific
UNESCO
Organizational
2013
Tadaki, M & Tremewan, C
Reimagining Internationalization in 
Higher Education: International 
consortia as a transformative space?
Studies in 
Higher 
Education
2015
Ratanawijitrasin, 
Sauwakon
The Evolving Landscape of South-East 
Asian Higher Education and the 
Challenges of Governance
Springer
Political
2003
Mok, KH & Welch, A
Globalization and educational 
restructuring in the Asia Pacific region
Palgrave 
Macmillan
(continued)
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

106
Functional
2006
Keeling, R
The Bologna Process & the Lisbon 
Research Agenda: the European 
Commission’s expanding role in HE 
discourse
European 
Journal of 
Education
2006
Yepes, C D
World Regionalization of Higher 
Education: Policy Proposals for 
International Organizations
Higher 
Education 
Policy
2008
Robertson, S
Europe/Asia Regionalism, Higher 
Education and the Production of World 
Order
Policy Futures 
in Higher 
Education
2011
Chao, RY
Reflections on the Bologna Process: the 
making of an Asia-Pacfic Higher 
Education Area
European 
Journal of 
Higher 
Education
2011
Marginson, S
Higher Education in East Asia and 
Singapore: Rise of the Confucian model
Higher 
Education
2011
Lo, W
Soft Power, University Rankings and 
Knowledge Production: Distinctions 
between hegemony and self-
determination in higher education
Comparative 
Education
2011
Welch, A
Higher Education in Southeast Asia: 
Blurring borders, changing balance
Routledge
2012
Neubauer, D
Regionalization of Education in Asia: 
Changing patterns, major challenges & 
policy responses
EWC/
HKIED - 
Asian 
Education & 
Dev. Studies
2012
Hawkins, J; Mok, K H; 
Neubauer, D
Higher Education Regionalization in 
Asia Pacific: Implications for 
governance, citizenship & university 
transformation
EWC/ 
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2013
Dang, Q
ASEM-the modern silk road: travelling 
ideas for education reforms and 
partnerships between Asia & Europe
Comparative 
Education
2013
Neubauer, D; Shin, JC & 
Hawkins, J
The Dynamics of Higher Education 
Development in East Asia: Asia cultural 
heritage, western dominance, economic 
development & globalization
EWC & 
Palgrave 
Macmillan
2014
Chao, RY
Pathways to an East Asian Higher 
Education Area: a comparative analysis 
of East Asian & European 
regionalization processes
Higher 
Education
2015
Dang, Q
The Bologna Process Goes East? From 
“Third Countries” to Prioritizing 
Inter-regional Cooperation Between the 
ASEAN and EU
Springer
(continued)
R.Y. Chao Jr.

107
Functional
2012
ADB
Regional Cooperation and Cross-Border 
Collaboration in Higher Education in 
Asia: Ensuring that everyone wins
ADB
2012
Shepherd, B & Pasadilla, 
G
Services as a New Engine of Growth for 
ASEAN, the Peoples Republic of 
China, and India
ADB Institute
2005
SEAMEO-RIHED
The Proceedings of Regional Seminar 
on Higher Education in Southeast Asia 
Countries: A current update
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2006
SEAMEO-RIHED
Higher Education in South-East Asia
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2008
SEAMEO-RIHED
Harmonization of Higher Education: 
Lessons learned from the Bologna 
Process
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2009
SEAMEO-RIHED
Raising Awareness: Exploring the ideas 
of creating a common space in higher 
education in South-East Asian: a 
conference proceeding
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2010
Aphijanyatham, Ropharat
East Asian Internationalisation of 
Higher Education: A Key to Regional 
Integration
SEAMEO-
RIHED
2014
APEC
Promoting Regional Education Services 
Integration: APEC University 
Associations Cross-Border Education 
Cooperation Workshop - Workshop 
Report
APEC
2015
Bhandari, Raika (Ed)
Asia: The Next Higher Education 
Superpower?
IIE
References
Acharya, A. (2008). Asia rising: Who is leading? Singapore: World Scientific.
Acharya, A. (2009). Whose ideas matter? Agency & power in Asia regionalism. Ithaca/London: 
Cornell University Press.
Acharya, A. (2014a). Foundations of collective action in Asia: Theory and practice of regional 
cooperation. In G. Capannelli & M. Kawai (Eds.), The political economy of Asian regionalism: 
Issues & challenges (pp. 19–38). Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute/ Springer.
Acharya, A. (2014b). Rethinking power, institutions and ideas in world Politics: Whose IR? 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Acharya, A., & Buzan, B. (2010). Non-Western international relations theory: Perspectives on & 
beyond Asia (A. Acharya, & B. Buzan, Eds.). London/New York: Routledge.
Acharya, A., & Johnston, A. L. (2007). Crafting cooperation: Regional international institutions 
in comparative perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Asian Development Bank. (2012). Regional cooperation and cross-border collaboration in higher 
education in Asia: Ensuring that everyone wins. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
Capie, D. (1994). Rival regions? East Asian regionalism and its challenge to the Asia-Pacific. 
Asian Security, 37(1).
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

108
Chao, R. J. (2011). Reflections on the Bologna process: The making of an Asia Pacific higher 
education area. European Journal of Higher Education, 1(2–3), 102–118.
Chao, R. J. (2013). East Asian regionalism: Perspectives, realities & the future. In D. Mierzejewski 
(Ed.), Dimensions of development: East Asia in the process of changes (pp. 11–24). Lodz: 
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Lodzkiego.
Chao, R. J. (2014a). Pathways to an East Asian higher education area: A comparative analysis of 
East Asian and European regionalization processes. Higher Education, 68(4), 559–575.
Chao, R. J. (2014b). Regionalization, International Organizations & East Asian Higher Education: 
A comparative analysis of East Asian higher education reforms. Hong Kong: City University 
of Hong Kong.
Dale, R., & Robertson, S. (2012). Towards a critical grammar of education policy movements. In 
G. Steiner-Khamsi & F. Waldow (Eds.), World yearbook of education (pp. 21–40). London/
New York: Routledge.
Dang, Q. A. (2013). ASEM – The modern silk road: Travelling ideas from education reforms and 
partnerships between Asia & Europe. Comparative Education, 49(1), 109–117.
Dang, Q. A. (2015). The Bologna process goes East? From “Third countries” to prioritizing inter-­
regional cooperation between the ASEAN and EU. In A. Curaj, L. Matei, R. Pricopie, J. Salmi, 
& P. Scott (Eds.), The European higher education area: Between critical reflections and future 
policies.. Cham: Springer ( Springer Open).
Dent, C. (1998). Regionalism in Southeast Asia: Opportunities & threats for the European Union. 
European Business Review, 98(4), 184–195.
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and 
collective rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological Review, 48(2), 147–160.
Foot, R. (2011, June). The role of East Asian regional organizations in regional governance: 
Constraints & contribution. Retrieved October 24, 2015, from Carnegie Endowment for 
Peace: 
http://carnegieendowment.org/2011/06/07/role-of-east-asian-regional-organizations-
in-regional-governance-constraints-and-contributions
Frankel, J., & Kahler, M. (1993). Regionalism & rivalry: Japan & the United States in Pacific Asia. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hettne, B. (2005). Beyond the ‘New’ regionalism. New Political Economy, 10(4), 543–571.
Hettne, B., & Söderbaum, F. (2000). Theorizing the rise of Regionness. New Political Economy, 
5(3), 457–473.
Higgots, R., & Stubbs, R. (1995). Competing conceptions of economic regionalism: APEC versus 
EAEC in the Asia Pacific. Review of International Political Economy, 2(3), 516–535.
Hou, Y. C. (2011). Quality assurance at a distance: International accreditation in Taiwan Higher 
Education. Higher Education, 61(2), 179–191.
Hou, Y. C. (2012). Quality in cross-border higher education and challenges for the international-
ization of national quality assurance agencies in the Asia-Pacific region – Taiwan experience. 
Studies in Higher Education, 39(6).
Hou, Y. C., Ince, M., Tsai, S., & Chiang, C. L. (2015a). Quality assurance of quality assurance 
agencies from an Asian perspective: Regulation, autonomy and accountability. Asia Pacific 
Education Review, 16(1), 95–106.
Hou, Y. C., Morse, R., Ince, M., Chen, H. J., Chiang, C. L., & Ying, C. (2015b). Is the Asian quality 
assurance system for higher education going Glonacal?: Assessing the impact of three types of 
program accreditation on Taiwanese universities. Studies in Higher Education, 40(1), 83–105.
Huang, F. (2007). Internationalization of higher education in the developing and emerging coun-
tries: A focus on transnational higher education in Asia. Journal of Studies in International 
Educaton, 11(3–4), 421–432.
Jayasuriya, K. (2001). Governance, Post Washington Consensus & the new anti-politics. Hong 
Kong: SEARC, City University of Hong Kong.
Jayasuriya, K. (Ed.). (2004a). Asian regional governance: Crisis & change. London: Routledge.
Jayasuriya, K. (Ed.). (2004b). Governing the Asia Pacific: Beyond the ‘new regionalism’. 
Hampshire/New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
R.Y. Chao Jr.

109
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Kavalski, E. (2009). China & the global politics of regionalism. Burlington: Ashgate.
Kim, Y.-G., Horta, H., & Jung, J.  (2015). Higher education research in Hong Kong, Japan, 
China, and Malaysia: Exploring research community cohesion and the integration of thematic 
approaches. Studies in Higher Education. doi:10.1080/03075079.2015.1036850.
Knight, J. (2012). A conceptual framework for the regionalization of higher education: Application 
to Asia. In J. Hawkins, K. H. Mok, & D. Neubauer (Eds.), Higher education regionalization in 
Asia Pacific: Implications for governance, citizenship & university transformation (pp. 17–36). 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Knight, J. (2013). A model of regionalization of higher education: The role and contribution of 
tuning. Tuning Journal for Higher Educaton, 1, 105–125.
Lombaerde, P. D., & Söderbaum, F. (Eds.). (2013). Regionalism: Volume 1–4. Thousand Oaks: 
Sage.
Moutsios, S. (2009). International organizations and transnational education policy. Compare, 
39(4), 467–478.
Moutsios, S. (2010). Power, politics and transnational education policy. Globalization, Societies 
and Education, 8(1), 121–141.
Ratanawijitrasin, S. (2015). The evolving landscape of South East Asian higher education and 
the challenges of governance. In A. Curaj, L. Matei, R. Pricopie, J. Salmi, & P. Scott (Eds.), 
The European higher education area: Between critical reflections and future policies. Cham: 
Springer Open.
Ravenhill, J. (2001). APEC and the construction of Pacific rim regionalism. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Ravenhill, J. (2010). The “New East Asian Regionalism”: A “Political Domino” effect? Review of 
International Political Economy, 1(2), 178–208.
Robertson, S. (2008). ‘Europe/Asia’ regionalism, higher education & the production of world 
order. Policy Futures in Educaton, 6(6), 719–729.
SEAMEO-RIHED. (2008). Harmonization of higher education: Lessons learned from the Bologna 
process. Bangkok: SEAMEO-RIHED.
SEAMEO-RIHED. (2009). Raising awareness: Exploring the ideas of creating a common space in 
higher education in South-East Asian: A conference proceeding. Bangkok: SEAMEO-RIHED.
Tadaki, M., & Tremewan, C. (2013). Reimagining Internationalization in Higher Education: 
International consortia as a transformative space? Studies in Higher Education, 38(3), 367–285.
Watson, L. (2014). Foreign aid & emerging powers: Asian perspectives on official development 
assistance. Abingdon: Routledge.
Yeo, L. H. (2010). Institutional regionalism versus networked regionalism: Europe and Asia com-
pared. International Politics, 47(3/4), 324–337.
Yepes, C. D. (2006). World regionalization of higher education: Policy proposals for international 
organizations. Higher Education Policy, 19, 111–128.
Roger Y. Chao Jr.  is currently the senior consultant for UNESCO International Centre for Higher 
Education Innovation. He has a MEd (Mathematics), European MA in Lifelong Learning: Policy 
and Management, and a PhD (Asian and International Studies) from the University of the 
Philippines, Danish School of Education, Aarhus University, and City University of Hong Kong, 
respectively.2
5  Regionalism, Regionalization of Higher Education, and Higher Education Research…

Part II
East Asia

113
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_6
Chapter 6
Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking 
a Connection with the International Academic 
Community
Akiyoshi Yonezawa
Abstract  This study examines the historical, current, and future challenges of 
higher education research in Japan within a global context and discusses future 
perspectives. Japanese higher education research has been strongly influenced by 
the international academic community. At the same time, higher education research-
ers in Japan have participated in international projects, and Japan has served as a 
leader for economic and academic research in East Asia. However, the language 
barrier and the early development of higher education as a clearly identifiable topic 
of research have contributed to Japanese higher education research’s rather unique 
characteristics. Currently, this area of research is undergoing rapid expansion 
through the participation of emerging professionals, such as institutional research-
ers and faculty/staff developers. In addition, the internationalization of the academic 
community is having both a progressive and a retrogressive impact on higher educa-
tion research in Japan.
Introduction
Higher education has been one of the most internationalized areas of research within 
the broader field of social sciences and education. As indicated by Marginson and 
Rhoades (2002), the perspectives of higher education have already exceeded the 
national dimension because of globalization. However, in non-English-speaking 
countries with established academic traditions, the language barrier is still substan-
tially high, particularly in relation to the publication of research. Japan is a good 
Note
This chapter is modified from the article originally published by Yonezawa, A. (2015), Connecting 
Higher Education Research in Japan with the International Academic Community, in Higher 
Education Policy, 28(4), 477–493.
A. Yonezawa (*) 
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
e-mail: akiyoshi.yonezawa.a4@tohoku.ac.jp

114
example of a country where social sciences, including higher education research, 
have been presented primarily in the literature written in the national language 
(Yonezawa 2008). From the earliest stage of the establishment of modern universi-
ties in the latter half of the nineteenth century, the social science fields in Japan have 
utilized the Japanese language as the main medium of instruction and have fostered 
researchers mainly through domestic graduate education based on supervision and 
literature in the national language (Yonezawa 2015).
The international experience of higher education researchers in Japan varies 
(Huang 2015), partly because of diversified academic and professional backgrounds. 
Many of the leading researchers in this field have had study-abroad experiences as 
graduate students or visiting scholars. In addition, it is becoming more common to 
participate in international conferences and projects inside Japan or abroad. However, 
it is fair to argue that the number of higher education researchers who are actively 
engaged in publishing articles in English is very limited, partly because the domestic 
publication market is large enough to establish their academic career inside Japan.
The existence of this language barrier also impacts the landscape of academic 
dialogue. Teichler (1997, 2007), who has developed a close network with higher 
education researchers in Japan, has pointed out that the rich accumulation of litera-
ture and dialogue on higher education research in Japan has historically been invis-
ible to the international academic community. Jung and Horta (2013) have developed 
a map of higher education research in Asia through an analysis of the international 
citation database. In their findings, Japan is one of the largest producers of publica-
tions in this research area, but even in international publications, it is not well con-
nected to the higher education research communities of other countries and 
economies in Asia.
The boundaries of academic dialogue based on language have established a sepa-
rate development of perspectives in the academic literature among different lan-
guage communities. Those who are not familiar with a language that has a weak 
international influence simply cannot access the literature in that language, and they 
do not have a strong enough incentive to acquire the necessary language skills that 
would enable them to access and participate in the ongoing dialogue. Under these 
circumstances, authors writing in their own language do not include international 
readers in their audience, and the academic dialogue therefore tends to be limited to 
the users of their language.
This tendency also has been noted in comparative education research, which is 
international in nature. Yamada (2014b) has described the rather autonomous 
­development of comparative education research in Japan based on an analysis of 
questionnaires completed by members of the Japan Comparative Education Society. 
However, Yamada’s review is rather unique because it has been specifically written 
for the international research community.
Again, in the literature in Japanese, several literature reviews of higher education 
research have been written with the assumption that the readers consist of those 
within the Japanese academic research community (Tsukahara 2009; RIHE 2006, 
2014; JAHER 2007, 2013; Hashimoto and Asonuma 2010–2011). The provision of 
a simple aggregated summary of the enormous amount of literature on higher 
A. Yonezawa

115
­education in Japanese is not necessarily effective because most of the detailed argu-
ments do not directly reflect the interest of international readers. An effective 
approach would be to exhibit the context of higher education in Japan for an inter-
national audience, as Huang (2014) discussed in his work on the challenges of 
Japanese higher education and research of Japan focusing on demographic trends 
and internationalization.
In this article, the author reviews higher education research written by academics 
based in Japan. The author focuses mainly on comparative research studies because 
they have more direct linkages with issues and topics familiar to the international 
audience. In terms of methodology, the author refers to the examinations of repre-
sentative approaches of comparative education research indicated by Bray et al. 
(2014). First, the author examines the development of networks, institutions, and 
journals on higher education research in Japan. Second, the author identifies the 
audience of higher education research in Japan and its demand for higher education 
research. Third, the author examines the international context of higher education 
research in Japan, with a focus on the strong Japanese interest in borrowing ideas 
from developments elsewhere from various models. Finally, the author identifies the 
future challenges of higher education research in Japan, particularly related to its 
link to the international research community.
The Platform of Higher Education Research in Japan
Higher education research in Japan has been developed as a field that is based on the 
dialogues of various stakeholders on multiple platforms, from scholarly oriented 
theorists to the practitioners both in macro and micro scopes (Tsukahara 2009). 
Here, the author identifies the major journals and associations in higher education 
research in Japan, referring to the existing reviews of Japan’s higher education 
research previously mentioned in this article.
The journal on higher education that has the longest history in Japan is IDE: 
Contemporary Higher Education. IDE has been published as a monthly magazine 
by the Institute for the Development of Higher Education since 1957, and it has a 
reputation of presenting the work of a wide variety of authors, including research-
ers, policy makers, and higher education managers. International authors, mainly 
higher education researchers, have also contributed through translated articles that 
are relevant to the audience in Japan.
The Research Institute for Higher Education (RIHE) was established at Hiroshima 
University in 1972. It was the first research institute in Japan to specifically focus on 
higher education research. RIHE participated in various international projects in the 
early stages of its history and has published the journal Daigaku Ronshu (Research 
in Higher Education) since 1972. RIHE has also occasionally published articles and 
reports in the English language, circulated them internationally, and posted them on 
its website. The main focus of the research at RIHE has been on policy studies. 
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

116
However, researchers of history, economics, sociology, and others have also partici-
pated in the research projects and events at RIHE.
Other Japanese universities have also established various types of centers and 
institutes for higher education research. For example, the University of Tsukuba 
established the Research Center for University Studies in 1986, focusing mainly on 
policy studies in universities and science. Centers related to higher education research 
and services were then established at major national universities, such as at Kyoto 
University in 1994, the University of Tokyo in 1996, and Nagoya University in 1998. 
These more recently established centers tend to be focused more on the research and 
service provision for their own universities, such as institutional research to provide 
information to the offices of the presidents, faculty and staff development, or the cur-
riculum management of general education. At the national level, the National 
Institute for Educational Policy Research under the Ministry of Education, Culture, 
Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) established the Department for Higher 
Education Research in 2001, and it has engaged in surveys and comparative studies 
related to the concrete policy demands of the national government, such as the 
assessment of educational outcomes. These institutes have also published institu-
tional bulletins and reports, some of which have been published in English.
In addition, graduate education programs on higher education research are 
offered at Hiroshima University, Nagoya University, J. F. Oberlin University, and 
the University of Tokyo. The research and development divisions of national insti-
tutes that provide public services also employ researchers and experts of higher 
education, and they conduct surveys and research on university finance and man-
agement, quality assurance, entrance examinations, and so on.
Japan also has academic associations related to higher education. The represen-
tative association for policy-oriented research on higher education is the Japanese 
Association for Higher Education Research (JAHER). In addition, the Liberal and 
General Education Society of Japan, the Japan Association of Japanese University 
Administrative Management, and other groups of researchers, professionals, and 
experts have served as platforms for dialogues among higher education researchers, 
policy makers, and practitioners. Adding to the associations and networks of higher 
education research, many higher education researchers also belong to academic 
associations with various disciplines and neighboring fields, such as educational 
research, comparative education, sociology of education, and the public administra-
tion of education. These associations have occasionally invited international 
researchers for key note speeches, presentations, and article contributions and have 
also engaged in academic exchange with international academic associations and 
associations in other countries.
In addition, various types of publications that could be identified as higher edu-
cation research have been published through the academic journals of neighboring 
research fields, such as comparative education, the sociology of education, the pub-
lic administration of education, science policies, and so forth (Kaneko 2010; Amano 
1990a). Japanese researchers have also published their articles and research notes in 
higher education research through the bulletins issued by the schools and depart-
ments to which they belong.
A. Yonezawa

117
The Audience for Higher Education Research in Japan
What does the audience for higher education research in Japan look like? This is a 
question frequently raised in examining the characteristics of an academic field. For 
example, Bray et al. (2014) examined the characteristics of various journals and 
other publications and identified the major actors of comparative studies in educa-
tion as parents, practitioners, policy makers, and international agencies and academ-
ics, all of whom have different purposes. Through the reviews of the articles of 
comparative research in higher education that appeared in the various platforms 
mentioned in the previous section of this study, the author identifies the following 
audience for higher education research in Japan.
The first group of readers in this research field is composed of students and their 
parents. Higher education itself has traditionally been considered a major social 
issue in Japan; for example, the tradition of harsh competition surrounding the 
entrance exams for prestigious universities has been recognized as a serious social 
issue (Dore 1997). At the same time, the deep commitment by parents toward prepa-
ration for the entrance examination and the choice of schools and universities have 
been taken for granted in Japan because parents have substantially supported their 
children’s university studies. The findings of higher education researchers that have 
explained the mechanisms of student admission and life at the universities and that 
have provided alternative approaches based on the case studies of other countries 
have certainly drawn the attention of the general public.
The second group of readers is composed of policy makers seeking information 
on the policies and practices of higher education in other countries so that they can 
compare Japanese higher education to other education systems and so that they can 
adopt effective policies. MEXT has also employed staff members who are experts in 
the education systems of various countries, and these individuals participate in the 
research communities of comparative education, including higher education research.
The third group of readers is represented by the managers and administrators of 
universities and higher education institutions. They read the research and informa-
tion on higher education from the viewpoint of practitioners. Some have long-term 
commitments to higher education research and publish books and articles based on 
their experience, knowledge, and expertise. In addition to access to the literature of 
higher education research in general, these managers and administrators have also 
requested that higher education researchers be involved in the consultancy and 
administrative practices of higher education. Beyond the internal service centers for 
admission, job placement, faculty and staff development, and so on, many universi-
ties have set up offices and divisions of institutional research for supporting the 
strategic decisions of university managers (Kobayashi 2014).
The fourth but most important group of readers consists of the higher education 
researchers themselves. The ultimate focus of these researchers is on the frontiers of 
knowledge and on making theoretical contributions to higher education. Adding to 
the conceptual works by researchers in Japan, many of the works by the leading 
international researchers have been translated into Japanese and shared widely 
among researchers and other audiences in Japan. For instance, the comparative 
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

118
study of higher education systems by Clark (1983) was translated by Arimoto in 
1994 and has had influence among higher education researchers as a classic. 
Hashimoto (2008), who conducted a critical analysis of the policy formation pro-
cess regarding the training of medical doctors throughout Japanese universities, 
presents a representative example in that he developed his original framework partly 
based on Clark’s triangle (academics, the state, and the market) of coordination.
The last yet still important audience is represented by international organizations 
and researchers outside Japan. When they want to conduct a comparative study or 
analyze the Japanese education system, they need information and ideas from 
researchers and experts in the field of higher education (see, e.g., the works of James 
and Benjamin 1988; Pempel 1978; Hazelkorn 2011). On the other hand, in the 
Japanese Journal of Higher Education Research (published by JAHER), research-
ers from other countries contribute articles on international trends in higher educa-
tion research (Birnbaum 1998) and provide external views on higher education 
research in Japan (Teichler 2007). Joint research among researchers inside and out-
side Japan that focuses on higher education reforms in Japan has also been pub-
lished in this journal (Eades et al. 2005; Goodman et al. 2013).
The International Context of Higher Education Research 
in Japan
What is the international context of higher education research in Japan? Again, the 
author approaches this issue based on an examination of literature reviews linked to 
the changing context of society and policies in Japan.
Japan was the first to develop a modern higher education system in East Asia and 
has also been economically influential for a long time. Although information that is 
internationally available has been limited, higher education researchers worldwide 
have paid attention to the trends and research in this country. The interaction between 
researchers inside and outside of Japan, in many cases, has occurred not only through 
publications in English but also through research collaboration, interviews, and dis-
cussions at international conferences. However, in many cases, the provision of 
information on domestic discourse to the international audience has not functioned 
as a direct contribution to global and regional frameworks. The case studies based 
on the information provided by experts in Japan need to be reinterpreted in order for 
international experts to form international frameworks, and very few higher educa-
tion researchers from Japan have accomplished such a substantial leading role so far.
Independence from the International Research Community
The higher education research community in Japan has developed its own perspec-
tive rather independently from the international research community. This is partly 
because the audience and stakeholders of higher education research already exist in 
A. Yonezawa

119
Japan and also because the connection with the international research community of 
higher education has been rather limited.
For example, Japanese experts on the history of higher education have their own 
academic community called the Research Group of University History. Their core 
research topics include the history of universities and higher education both inside 
and outside of Japan. The universities and higher education institutions in Japan 
have primarily been patterned after a Western model that is based partly on the heri-
tage of Eastern intellectual cultures influenced by China and Korea. Therefore, this 
research group has been actively engaged in publishing the histories of higher edu-
cation in Germany (Beppu 1998), the United States (Sakamoto 2002), China 
(Otsuka 1996), France, Italy, and more. Most of the researchers in this group have 
visited and studied in these countries and have interacted with experts and research-
ers there. However, the majority of the articles and books written by the Japanese 
researchers of this group have been published in Japanese, and their targeted audi-
ence has been the Japanese language community.
Borrowing the Models Outside of Japan
Many researchers have tried to engage in higher education research from a com-
parative perspective by reflecting on the actual issues and challenges faced by uni-
versities and higher education in Japan. There has always been a demand for 
adopting policies from other countries, such as those of North America and Europe. 
This research on the higher education systems of foreign countries and the com-
parative research from the Japanese viewpoint have significantly impacted the 
direction of the policies and practices of higher education in Japan.
One example of this is the policy design for the expansion of the higher educa-
tion system in Japan. Japan had realized mass higher education by the beginning of 
the 1970s as an early case in the world. To understand the ongoing transformation 
of the higher education system in Japan, many higher education researchers referred 
to Trow’s model of elite, mass, and universal higher education (Burrage 2010). 
Actually, Trow’s model and his related work have been viewed as the most influen-
tial in Japan research among higher education researchers and policy makers. 
Kitamura and Amano, leading researchers on US and Japanese higher education in 
Japan, edited and translated several articles of Trow’s work (Trow 1976; 2000), and 
these works have been utilized for predicting, analyzing, and reflecting on the 
expansion of Japanese higher education in the latter half of the twentieth century. 
For example, Kaneko (1990) identified the uniqueness of Japanese mass higher edu-
cation, which is led by its large private sector, compared with those of the United 
States and Western Europe, where public higher education institutions absorb the 
absolute majority of students. Researchers on the history of Japanese higher educa-
tion have pointed out that the expansion of Japanese higher education led by the 
private higher education sector had already started before World War II because of 
the government’s reluctance to expand the public higher education sector even 
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

120
though there was a rapid increase in demand due to industrialization (Amano 1986; 
Ito 1999). Referring to these studies, Yonezawa (2013) composed an article in 
English on the development of private higher education, referring to the various 
comparative frameworks in the international literature.
The US and German higher education systems have particularly influenced the 
development of higher education in Japan from the mid-nineteenth century up to the 
present. In addition to mass and universal higher education, various topics high-
lighted in higher education research in the United States have been introduced and 
investigated by researchers in Japan, such as general and liberal arts education, the 
closure of universities and colleges, student consumerism, tuition and fees, finance, 
and organizational governance. These topics are strongly related to the trends of 
“globalization,” “marketization,” and “commercialization” in higher education, 
which have also been observed in Japan.
On the other hand, the approaches to and methods of education and quality assess-
ment have also been focus areas of policy adoption. Some researchers have provided 
comparisons of the US and Japanese higher education systems and proposed reforms 
based on their own experiences, and some have developed comparative frameworks 
from a Japanese viewpoint (see, e.g., Kariya 1992). Others have conducted surveys 
and described the systems and practices of US higher education, such as those related 
to professional schools and student enrollment (Yamada 1998, 2008).
The German higher education system has also been used to explain the origins of 
contemporary issues and the challenges faced by higher education in Japan, such as 
the systems for appointing faculty members and chairs (Ushiogi 1973, 2008). In 
particular, international comparisons of university governance in the United States, 
Germany, and other countries have been published (Takagi 1998; Morozumi 2001; 
Ehara and Sugimoto 2005) before and after the Japanese government made a drastic 
reform of national and local public universities by introducing corporate style man-
agement in 2004. Again, the target audience of these comparative studies was 
Japanese readers. However, some researchers have also been actively involved in 
introducing these reforms and their impact to an international audience (see, e.g., 
Kitagawa and Oba 2010).
Developing Comparative Frameworks from Japan
These comparative research studies have not been limited to mere collections of 
information; some studies have intentionally tried to develop their own comparative 
frameworks. For example, Ushiogi (2004) argued that the research on higher educa-
tion in Japan faced a turning point due to global structural changes in the 1990s. The 
end of the Cold War led to the end of a major ideological conflict in education 
between non-Marxists and pro-Marxists. At the same time, Japanese society had 
become more established and mature in social living after experiencing an unprec-
edented economic boom in the early 1990s. Before this change, the North American 
and European higher education systems had been perceived as the perfect models 
for policy adoption. However, researchers started to realize that they needed to 
A. Yonezawa

121
tackle the challenges in higher education that could no longer be solved through the 
mere borrowing of policies from the “more advanced” Western models.
Nakamura (2007) criticized the tendency of some higher education researchers 
to utilize the term “globalization” as a buzzword. He tried to make a contribution on 
meritocracy by examining the Japanese entrance examination process (Nakamura 
2003). This approach was rather orthodox among Japanese social scientists in 
higher education (see, e.g., Amano 1990b). At the same time, this type of theoretical 
contribution was also being made by comparative education researchers. For exam-
ple, Ogawa (2001) researched the equity of access to higher education and the labor 
market with a focus on ethnic minorities in China.
The US higher education system has certainly played a role in the debate on the 
future direction of Japanese higher education. However, the US higher education 
system is based on a highly decentralized federal system and on a highly developed 
and well-established market in which both education and research activities are 
completely different in nature from those of the Japanese higher education system. 
On the other hand, Europe experienced social and financial difficulties in the 1980s 
and also faced the challenge of reintegration after the collapse of the socialist regime 
in the USSR and Eastern Europe around 1990. At that point, Europe started to form 
a regional higher education arena; this process was accelerated due to the Bologna 
Process beginning in 1999.
This transformation of the European higher education system was monitored, 
surveyed, and analyzed by higher education researchers in Japan, especially in rela-
tion to quality assurance and the internationalization of higher education (see, e.g., 
Yoshikawa 2003; Kido 2012). However, again, the regional and geographic context 
of East Asia is completely different from that of Europe, which had already started 
a systemic regional integration.
Seeking New Models for Japan’s Higher Education
What drew more attention from Japanese policy makers was the rise of new public 
management policies in Europe, particularly in the United Kingdom. Starting in the 
mid-1980s, research on the UK higher education system became popular among the 
experts and policy makers of higher education in Japan. While the UK higher edu-
cation system had been referred to among higher education researchers in Japan 
even before 1980, it was seen as an ideal but not realistic model of elite and free 
higher education. However, after Thatcher’s revolution, the UK higher education 
reform became a model for the introduction of new public management into higher 
education, not only for Japan but also for other, mostly continental European, coun-
tries (Tanaka 2005). The introduction of a contract between the government and 
universities in 1992 in France, as well as other reforms in university evaluation in 
Europe, was also surveyed and analyzed by researchers in Japan, primarily in 
response to requests by policy makers (see, e.g., Oba 2009). The models for policy 
borrowing became further diversified through worldwide structural changes.
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

122
From the end of the twentieth century, the higher education systems in the new 
industrial economy and other emerging countries started to draw the attention of 
higher education researchers and policy makers in Japan as new models from which 
to borrow policy. Up to that point, the research on higher education in these coun-
tries had primarily been curiosity-driven explorations or development studies. For 
example, in addition to the comparative studies of Altbach and various international 
authors (Altbach and Umakoshi 2004), Umakoshi edited a book on higher educa-
tion in the Asia Pacific with researchers in Japan in the Japanese language (Umakoshi 
2004). It covered topics such as world-class university policies, the transformation 
into a universal state of higher education, and the transition from secondary educa-
tion to tertiary education in Asian countries.
At the same time, articles in Japanese written by researchers who had studied as 
international students or postdoctoral fellows in Japan increased rapidly after the 
Japanese government started to increase its acceptance of international students and 
researchers in the mid-1980s. These studies reflected both the interests of the 
research communities in Japan and the social demands of the researchers’ countries 
of origin. The work of these non-Japanese researchers added an international per-
spective to the Japanese higher education research community. When their studies 
were complete, some of them established their careers in Japan as comparative 
higher education researchers, using Japanese, English, and their home languages 
(see, e.g., Huang 2006). Some went back to their own countries but continued to 
contribute to Japanese language publications, as well as to lead the research com-
munity in field research based on the positivism and comparative research in their 
home countries (see, e.g., Bao 2007).
As noted, some works written in English have been translated into Japanese and 
have had a significant influence on the Japanese higher education research commu-
nity. Studies on the Japanese higher education system written in languages other 
than Japanese and English, however, have not been read widely by the researchers 
in the Japanese research community and have therefore had little impact on higher 
education research in Japan. At the same time, a limited amount of literature by 
Japanese researchers has been translated into other languages, for example, Chinese, 
by former students of these Japanese researchers or experts who accessed their 
research through international conference and lectures.
Active Participation to International Projects
Beginning in the 1990s, the higher education research community in Japan grew 
significantly because of the expansion of job opportunities in various professional 
arenas, such as institutional research, faculty development, and finance. Researchers 
started to engage in comparative studies of a variety of topics, such as entrance 
examinations, graduate schools, quality assurance, and university governance. 
Research on responses to the globalization and internationalization of higher educa-
tion became particularly popular in many countries, including Japan. Ebuchi (1997) 
A. Yonezawa

123
participated in the initial international dialogue regarding the conceptualization of 
the internationalization of higher education, and he published his findings in 
Japanese. Japanese researchers also started to publish articles in English on Japanese 
and Asian higher education in collaboration with international researchers (Kaneko 
and Teichler 1997; Altbach and Umakoshi 2004; Altbach and Ogawa 2002; 
Ninomiya et al. 2009). Because the Japanese economy had established its leading 
status by the end of the 1980s, some research groups in Japan started to participate 
more actively in international projects. Arimoto and the RIHE, Hiroshima University, 
participated in international surveys on academic professions in 1992 and in 2007 
and also initiated another survey on academic professions in Asia in 2011. Arimoto 
edited a book series based on the Changing Academic Profession (CAP) survey and 
contributed to a comparative framework along with international leaders in this field 
(Teichler et al. 2013; Arimoto et al. 2015). Yoshimoto participated in two interna-
tional surveys of university graduates in collaboration with European research 
groups: Careers after Higher Education: A European Research Study (CHEERS) 
and The Flexible Professional in the Knowledge Society (Reflex) study (Yoshimoto 
2002; Allen et al. 2007). Yamada (2014a, b) implemented large-scale surveys on 
student learning and compared the results to surveys in the United States.
Regarding internationalization of higher education, Japan established a distin-
guished position in Asia as a country receiving a significant number of students—
again, mainly from Asia—by the end of the 1990s. The policies and practices for the 
internationalization of Japanese higher education were introduced to the interna-
tional research community by Umakoshi (1997) and Horie (2002) as trials for the 
internationalization of higher education of a non-Western industrial country. 
However, most of the research and surveys on the internationalization of higher 
education have been published in Japanese—again, mainly for the domestic audi-
ence (see, e.g., Gondo 1992).
Growing Attention to Asian Higher Education
From the mid-2000s, the emergence of international university rankings and an 
improvement in the international reputation of Asian universities changed the direc-
tion of research on the internationalization of higher education. In particular, for 
experts in other countries, Japan appeared to have big challenges regarding interna-
tionalization at home, especially regarding active contributions to the international 
research community in the fields of the humanities and social sciences. Yonezawa 
(2007) described this change as a challenge to establishing world-class universities 
and also hierarchical diversities on the perspectives and practices of international-
ization among different types of universities in Japan. At the same time, Kuroda 
et al. (2014) conducted a survey of the top universities in East and Southeast Asia 
and highlighted the increasing academic and student exchanges within the Asian 
region.
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

124
Moreover, publications on foreign higher education written in Japanese are cur-
rently growing, and the targeted countries and topics of these publications are 
becoming more diversified. In particular, research on Asian higher education has 
significantly increased in quantity and scope. On the other hand, research on some 
geographical regions, such as Africa, is still very limited in the Japanese literature.
These articles in Japanese on Asian higher education are mainly written by Japanese 
researchers and Asian researchers who have had study experiences in Japan. Especially 
in the case of the literature on non-English-speaking countries, research has typically 
been implemented through direct translations between Japanese and the languages 
used in those countries—for example, German, French, Chinese, Korean, Thai, 
Vietnamese, and Indonesian, without relying on English as today’s lingua franca. In 
this process, researchers in Japan tend to focus more on research as area studies (e.g., 
studies of Taiwan’s society and higher education written in Japanese language) and are 
thus less likely to connect their work to global or regional perspectives.
Experts and researchers in educational development have started to implement 
and publish their research within the field of higher education. The researchers of 
development studies have been more involved in the international research com-
munity, but not necessarily within the higher education research community. 
However, these boundaries are now becoming unclear, at least among Japanese and 
East Asian researchers (Yonezawa et al. 2014). Among the researchers in educa-
tional development and also among the researchers who have specific expertise 
interests, such as financial assistance, student exchange, and learning engagement, 
English is more likely to be used as the communication medium. Here, a closer con-
nection to the global and regional perspective is likely to appear even in the litera-
ture in Japanese. For example, Kobayashi (2008) developed a worldwide comparative 
framework on financial assistance policies from the viewpoint of Japanese higher 
education reform.
Future Challenges
As has been described in this article, in Japan, the higher education research com-
munity is rather independent from the international network, even in the field of 
comparative research. It is true that some international actors, such as international 
organizations and researchers, have paid attentions to Japan’s higher education, and 
Japanese researchers and practitioners have sought to borrow models on an interna-
tional basis. Although international perspectives are shared somewhat through 
active efforts to search out and translate the literature on and practices of higher 
education outside Japan, it is clear that Japanese higher education research has his-
torically been invisible to the international research community. Concurrently, the 
rapid growth of science, technology, and highly skilled human resources in neigh-
boring countries in Asia is changing the perspectives toward Japan by an interna-
tional audience from a distinguished case to one of the leading cases in Asia. In 
short, Japan is no longer a key attractive model in Asia for many higher education 
researchers in the world.
A. Yonezawa

125
Japan’s experiences in modern higher education lasting more than 100 years are 
not always shared in a way that conveys its deep knowledge and insight. This may 
be a disadvantage to higher education researchers and stakeholders in other parts of 
the world, particularly for those interested in comparative higher education research. 
At the same time, the researchers and other stakeholders in Japan also face the prob-
lem that their issues are not included enough in international discussions. This is 
simply because Japan’s higher education is internationally invisible and not appeal-
ing as a success model to learn. For example, although the impact of aging on higher 
education without sufficient migration flow has become a common challenge among 
some East Asian higher education systems, the literature based on collaborative 
research between Asian researchers is highly limited (Yonezawa and Kim 2008).
A new approach is needed to strengthen the link between the higher education 
research community in Japan and the international community—and especially the 
regional research community. In particular, increasing competitiveness within edu-
cation and the research capacity of Asian universities are dramatically changing the 
perspectives and knowledge flows in the world of academia. The frameworks of 
higher education research now include the paradigms and concepts of international 
relations, political economics, and cooperation. In these areas, researchers in Japan 
are now actively engaged in research projects within the international research com-
munity, especially in the Asia Pacific region (see, e.g., Hirosato and Kitamura 2009; 
Mok and Yonezawa 2007).
Today, researchers in neighboring fields, such as migration studies (Liu-Farrer 
2011), science and technology policies (Sun and Negishi 2010), and university–
industry links and innovation (Kitagawa and Woolger 2008), also view higher edu-
cation as one of their major fields of study. Their research, however, is not necessarily 
developed on the basis of existing higher education research inside Japan.
It is also clear that many practices in higher education should now be seen in the 
context of internationalization and globalization, while the national context 
­continues to play a critical role. The language used in the majority of the literature 
on higher education in Japan is still Japanese, and this tendency is strengthened by 
the expansion of the higher education research community to include professional 
practitioners. The question of how to construct a productive link between research-
ers in the national research community and those of other countries is still a big 
challenge for the future development of the higher education research communities 
in Japan and possibly in most of the other non-English-speaking Asian countries.
A structural transformation of the job opportunities in relation with higher edu-
cation research in Japan also provides serious challenges in terms of the direction of 
higher education research. Policy- and scholarly oriented studies on higher educa-
tion now face difficulty in terms of how to increase job opportunities in a very 
severe environment for the whole higher education sector in this country. More job 
opportunities have opened for more practical areas, such as faculty/staff develop-
ment, institutional research, and multimedia education. The training necessary for 
these careers as “higher education experts” is not necessarily linked with the above-
mentioned comparative and policy-oriented research in higher education. Moreover, 
increased attention on the viability of Japanese university education in the global-
ized economy has fostered more practically useful research that offers direct prob-
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

126
lem solutions, rather than research reflecting Japanese higher education based on 
international perspectives. In many cases, the higher education researchers that 
were trained through the newly established academic approaches in the last two or 
three decades have faced difficulty in directly applying what they studied to the very 
practical nature of the jobs they have acquired as experts in teaching/learning 
improvement, institutional research, and so forth. In this context, the graduate train-
ing in higher education research itself is now at the crossroads—it is now more 
linked to the practices of higher education in Japan and in the world, but not neces-
sarily engaged in the active development of international research frameworks in a 
traditional domain of higher education research. Actually, some experts, such as 
those involved in faculty development, institutional research, and quality assurance, 
are now starting to actively engage in international expert meetings, while it is too 
early to identify the outcome in terms of quality literature from Japan.
Following are suggestions to improve the regional and global connection.
First, higher education researchers in Japan and Asia should develop their 
regional academic platforms, such as the Higher Education Research Association, 
which just saw its beginning in 2014. Second, the higher education research com-
munity should involve the academics and researchers who are actively engaged in 
the international research community. Considering the interdisciplinary nature of 
this research field, this approach would be more effective. Finally, the systematic 
efforts to provide training and instruction to actively publish in English should be 
strengthened, as seen in some social science fields these days. At this moment, how-
ever, such initiatives are slow and weak. Especially, it is crucial for them to find 
training and job opportunities outside of Japan and to assure a more direct connec-
tion between domestic and international higher education research communities.
References
Allen, J., Inenaga, Y., Velden, R. van der, & Yoshimoto, K. (eds.) (2007). Competencies, higher 
education and career in Japan and the Netherlands. Dordrecht: Springer.
Altbach, P. G., & Ogawa, Y. (Eds.). (2002). Special issue on higher education in Japan. Higher 
Education, 43(1), 1–155.
Altbach, P. G., & Umakoshi, T. (Eds.). (2004). Asian universities: Historical perspectives and 
contemporary challenges. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Amano, I. (1986). Koto Kyoiku no Nihonteki Kozo (Structure of higher education in Japan). Tokyo: 
Tamagawa University Press.
Amano, I. (1990a). Henkyosei to kyokaijinsei (The marginal men in the periphery). Studies of 
Educational Sociology, 47(1), 89–94.
Amano, I. (1990b). Education and examination in modern Japan. Tokyo: University of Tokyo 
Press.
Arimoto, A., Cummings, W. K., Huang, F., & Shin, J. C. (Eds.). (2015). The changing academic 
profession in Japan. Dordrecht: Springer.
Bao, W. (2007). Chugoku no Minei Koto Kyoiku Kikan (Private higher education institutions in 
China). Tokyo: Toshindo.
Beppu, A. (1998). Doitsu ni okeru Daigaku Kyoju no Tanjo (Beginning of the academic profession 
in Germany). Tokyo: Sobunsha.
A. Yonezawa

127
Birnbaum, R. (1998). America ni okeru Koto Kyoiku Kenkyu no Tenkai to Koto Kyoiku heno 
Shisa (Higher education research in Japan and the United Sates). Japanese Journal of Higher 
Education Research, 1(1), 81–97.
Bray, M., Adamson, B., & Mason, M. (Eds.). (2014). Comparative education research: Approaches 
and methods. Dordrecht: Springer.
Burrage, M. (Ed.). (2010). Twentieth-century higher education: Elite to mass to universal/Martin 
Trow. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Clark, B. R. (1983). The higher education system: Academic organisation in cross-national per-
spective. Berkeley: University of California Press. (Translated and published into Japanese by 
Arioto, A. In 1994 as Koto Kyoiku System. Tokyo: Toshindo.)
Dore, R. (1997). The diploma disease: Education, qualification and development (2nd ed.). 
London: Institute of Education, University of London.
Eades, J. S., Goodman, R., & Hada, Y. (Eds.). (2005). The ‘Big Bang’ in Japanese higher educa-
tion: The 2004 reforms and the dynamics of change. Melbourne: Trans Pacific Press.
Ebuchi, K. (1997). Daigaku Kokusaika no Kenkyu (Research on internationalization of universi-
ties). Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
Ehara, T., & Sugimoto, H. (Eds.). (2005). Daigaku no Kanri Unei Kaikaku (Reform of university 
management). Tokyo: Toshindo Press.
Gondo, T. (ed.) (1992). Asia 8 kakoku ni okeru Daigaku Kyoju no Nihon Ryugaku Kan (Perspective 
on studying in Japan among university professors in eight countries in Asia). Higashi-­
Hiroshima: RIHE, Hiroshima University.
Goodman, R., Kariya, T., & Taylor, J. (Eds.). (2013). Higher education and the state: Changing 
relationships in Europe and East Asia. Oxford: Symposium Books.
Hashimoto, K. (2008). Senmonshoku Yosei no Seisaku Katei (Policy process of professional train-
ing). Tokyo: Gakujutu Shuppankai.
Hashimoto, K., & Asonuma, A. (eds.) (2010–2011). Readings Nihon no Koto Kyoiku (Readings: 
Japan’s higher education, book series). Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
Hazelkorn, E. (2011). Rankings and the reshaping of higher education: The battle for world-class 
excellence. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hirosato, Y., & Kitamura, Y. (2009). The political economy of educational reforms and capacity 
development in Southeast Asia. Dordrecht: Springer.
Horie, M. (2002). The internationalization of higher education in Japan in the 1990s: A reconsid-
eration. Higher Education, 43(1), 65–84.
Huang, F. (2006). Internationalization of curricula in higher education institutions in comparative 
perspectives: Case studies of China, Japan and The Netherlands. Higher Education, 51(4), 
521–539.
Huang, F. (2014). Challenges for higher education and research: A perspective from Japan. Studies 
in Higher Education, 39(8), 1428–1438.
Huang, F. (2015). Internationalization. In A. Arimoto, W. K. Cummings, F. Huang, & J. C. Shin 
(Eds.), The changing academic profession in Japan (pp. 197–211). Dordrecht: Springer.
Ito, A. (1999). Senkanki Nihon no Koto Kyoiku (Japanese higher education between world wars). 
Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
JAHER. (2007). A decade of higher education research [Special issue]. Japanese Journal of 
Higher Education Research, 10(1), 7–163.
JAHER. (2013). Higher education research: Institutionalization and its challenges [Special issue]. 
Japanese Journal of Higher Education Research, 16, 7–218.
James, E., & Benjamin, G. (1988). Public policy and private education in Japan. Basingstoke: 
Macmillan.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Kaneko, M. (1990). Kyoiku ni okeru Seifu no Yakuwari to Kyoiku Keikaku (The role of govern-
ment in education and education planning). In M. Yano, & K. Arai (Eds.), Shogai Gakushu 
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

128
Jidai no Kyoiku Keikaku (Education planning in the age of lifelong learning) (pp.  3–24). 
Tokyo: Kyoiku Kaihatsu Kenkyusho,.
Kaneko, M. (2010). Higher education studies in Japan. Educational Studies in Japan: International 
Yearbook, 5(1), 11–20.
Kaneko, M., & Teichler, U. (Eds.). (1997). Special issue on higher education in Japan. Higher 
Education, 34(2), 123–292.
Kariya, T. (1992). America no Daigaku Nippon no Daigaku (American universities and Japanese 
universities). Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
Kido, Y. (2012). Doitsu Toitsu EU Togo to Globalism (Integration of Germany, EU and Globalism). 
Tokyo: Toshindo.
Kitagawa, F., & Oba, J. (2010). Managing differentiation of higher education system in Japan: 
Connecting excellence and diversity. Higher Education, 59(4), 507–524.
Kitagawa, F., & Woolgar, L. (2008). Regionalisation of innovation policies and new university—
Industry links in Japan: Policy review and new trends. Prometheus, 26(1), 55–67.
Kobayashi, M. (Ed.). (2008). Worldwide perspectives of financial assistance policies: Searching 
relevance to future policy reforms for Japanese higher education. Tokyo: Center for Research 
and Development for Higher Education, University of Tokyo.
Kobayashi, M. (2014). Daigaku ni okeru Institutional Research no Genjo to Arikata ni kansuru 
Chosa Kenkyu Hokoku (Survey report on current trends and future of institutional research at 
universities in Japan). Tokyo: University of Tokyo.
Kuroda, K., Yuki, T., & Kang, K. (2014). The institutional prospects of cross-border higher educa-
tion for East Asian regional integration: An analysis of the JICA survey of leading universi-
ties in East Asia. In A. Yonezawa, Y. Kitamura, A. Meerman, & K. Kuroda (Eds.), Emerging 
international dimensions in East Asian Higher Education (pp. 55–79). Dordrecht: Springer,
Liu-Farrer, G. (2011). Labour migration from China to Japan: International students, transna-
tional migrants. Abingdon: Routledge.
Marginson, S., & Rhoades, G. (2002). Beyond national states, markets, and systems of higher 
education: A glonacal agency heuristic. Higher Education, 43(3), 281–309.
Mok, K., & Yonezawa, A. (Eds.). (2007). Globalisation, changing nature of the state and gover-
nance [Special issue]. Education, Globalisation, Societies and Education, 5(1), 1–136.
Morozumi, A. (2001). Daigaku no Soshiki Keiei: America ni okeru Kenkyu Doko (University orga-
nization, governance and management: A review of research in the United States). Japanese 
Journal of Higher Education Research, 4, 157–176.
Nakamura, T. (2003). Educational aspirations and the warming-up/cooling-down process: A com-
parative study between Japan and South Korea. Social Science Japan Journal, 6(2), 199–220.
Nakamura, T. (2007). Koto Kyoiku Kenkyu to Shakaigakuteki Sozoryoku: Koto Kyoiku 
Shakaigaku Kenkyu ni okeru Riron to Hoho no Konnichiteki Kadai (Higher education research 
and sociological imagination: Theoretical and methodological problems in the sociology of 
higher education today). Japanese Journal of Higher Education Research, 10(1), 97–109.
Ninomiya, A., Knight, J., & Watanabe, A. (Eds.). (2009). Past, present and future of international-
ization in Japan [Special issue]. Journal of Studies in International Education, 13(2), 115–284.
Oba, J.  (ed.) (2009). France no Daigaku Hyoka (University evaluation in France). Higashi-­
Hiroshima: RIHE, Hiroshima University.
Ogawa, Y. (2001). Shakaishugi Chugoku ni okeru Shosu Minzoku Kyoiku (Education for ethnic 
minorities in socialist China). Tokyo: Toshindo.
Otsuka, Y. (1996). Gendai Chugoku Koto Kyoiku no Seiritsu (Establishment of contemporary 
Chinese higher education). Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
Pempel, T.  J. (1978). Patterns of Japanese policymaking: Experiences from higher education. 
Boulder: Westview Press.
RIHE. (2006). Thirty years in higher education research [Special issue]. Daigaku Ronshu (Research 
in Higher Education), 36(1), 1–329.
RIHE. (2014). Forty years in higher education research [Special issue]. Daigaku Ronshu (Research 
in Higher Education), 46(1), 1–329.
A. Yonezawa

129
Sakamoto, T. (2002). America Daigakushi to Gender (History of American universities and gen-
der). Tokyo: Toshindo.
Sun, Y., & Negishi, M. (2010). Measuring the relationships among university, industry and other 
sectors in Japan’s national innovation system: A comparison of new approaches with mutual 
information indicators. Scientometrics, 82(3), 677–685.
Takagi, H. (1998). Daigaku no Hoteki Chii to Jichi Kiko ni kansuru Kenkyu (Research on legal 
status and autonomous organization of universities). Tokyo: Taga Shuppan.
Tanaka, M. (2005). The cross-cultural transfer of educational concepts and practices: A compara-
tive study. Oxford: Symposium.
Teichler, U. (1997). Higher education in Japan: A view from outside. Higher Education, 34(2), 
275–298.
Teichler, U. (2007). Soto kara mita nihon no koto kyoiku kenkyu (Higher education research in 
Japan: A view from outside). Japanese Journal of Higher Education Research, 10, 165–177.
Teichler, U., Arimoto, A., & Cummings, W.  K. (2013). The changing academic profession. 
Dordrecht: Springer.
Trow, M. (1976). Kogakureki Shakai no Daigaku: Elite kara Mass he (Universities in high creden-
tial society: Elite to mass). Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press. [Japanese: Edited and translated 
by Amano, I. & Kitamura, K.]
Trow, M. (2000). Kodo Joho Shakai no Daigaku: Mass kara Universal he (Universities in high 
information society: mass to universal). Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press. [Japanese: Edited 
and translated by Kitamura, K.]
Tsukahara, S. (2009). Koto Kyoiku (Higher education). Tokyo: Nihon Toho Center.
Umakoshi, T. (1997). Internationalization of Japanese higher education in the 1980s and early 
1990s. Higher Education, 34(2), 259–273.
Umakoshi, T. (Ed.). (2004). Asia Oceania no klto kyoiku (Higher education in Asia and Oceania), 
Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
Ushiogi, M. (1973). Kindai Daigaku no Henyo to Keisei (Formation and transformation of modern 
universities). Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Ushiogi, M. (2004). Sekai no Daigaku Kiki (University crisis worldwide). Tokyo: Chuokoron.
Ushiogi, M. (2008). Humboldt Rinen no Shuen? (The end of Humboldtian idea?). Tokyo: Toshindo 
Press.
Yamada, R. (1998). Professional school. Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
Yamada, R. (2008). America Gakusei Kakutoku Senryaku (Strategies for student enrolment in the 
United States). Tokyo: Tamagawa University Press.
Yamada, R. (Ed.). (2014a). Measuring quality of undergraduate education in Japan. Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Yamada, S. (2014b). Constructs of a space of comparative education: Findings from a survey 
of members of Japan Comparative Education Society and their publications. International 
Journal of Comparative Education and Development, 16(1), 31–48.
Yonezawa, A. (2007). Japanese flagship universities at a crossroads. Higher Education, 54(4), 
483–499.
Yonezawa, A. (2008). Quality assessment and assurance in Japanese universities: The plight of the 
social sciences. Social Science Japan Journal, 11(1), 69–82.
Yonezawa, A. (2013). The development of private higher education in Japan since the 1960s: 
A reexamination of a center-periphery paradigm. In A. Maldonado & R. M. Bassett (Eds.), 
The forefront of international higher education: A festschrift in honor of Philip G. Altbach 
(pp. 183–194). Dordrecht: Springer.
Yonezawa, A. (2015). Inbreeding in Japanese higher education: Inching toward openness in a glo-
balized context. In M. Yudkevich, P. G. Altbach, & L. E. Rumbley (Eds.), Academic inbreed-
ing and mobility in higher education: Global perspectives (pp. 99–129). New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
6  Higher Education Research in Japan: Seeking a Connection with the International…

130
Yonezawa, A., & Kim, T. (2008). The future of higher education in the context of a shrinking stu-
dent population: Policy challenges for Japan and Korea. In OECD (Ed.), Higher education to 
2030 (pp. 199–220). Paris: OECD.
Yonezawa, A., Kitamura, Y., Meerman, A., & Kuroda, K. (Eds.). (2014). Emerging international 
dimensions in East Asian higher education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Yoshikawa, Y. (2003). Europe Togo to Koto Kyoiku Seisaku: ERASMUS Program kara Bologna 
Process he (Changes of policy for higher education in the process of European integration: 
From the ERASMUS Program toward Bologna Process). Research in Academic Degrees, 
17(1), 69–90.
Yoshimoto, K. (2002). Higher education and the transition to work in Japan compared with Europe. 
In J. Enders & O. Fulton (Eds.), Higher Education in a globalising world: International trends 
and mutual observations (pp. 221–239). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Akiyoshi Yonezawa  is a Professor and Director at Office of Institutional Research, Tohoku 
University. He also serves as a Special Advisor to the President for Institutional Research and 
Effectiveness. He received Ph.D. in Education from Tohoku University. With a background in 
sociology, he mainly conducts research on comparative higher education policy – especially focus-
ing on world-class universities, internationalization of higher education, and public–private rela-
tionships in higher education. He established his expertise in higher education policy and 
management through working experience at universities and public organizations: Nagoya 
University, National Institution for Academic Degrees and University Evaluation, Hiroshima 
University, OECD, and the University of Tokyo. He is currently serving as a Board Member at 
Japan Society of Educational Sociology and at Japan Association for Higher Education Research. 
He is a coeditor of the book series Higher Education in Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance 
series (Springer Book Series).
A. Yonezawa

131
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_7
Chapter 7   
Higher Education Research in China: 
An Independent Academic Field Under 
the State             
Lifang Hu and Shuangye Chen
Abstract  This chapter outlines higher education research (HER) in China devel-
oped as a well-recognized independent academic field in the unique national and 
historical contexts. The rise and formation of higher education as a research field in 
China have been closely related with the substantive growth of the higher education 
system itself. Higher education research in China is characterized by strong institu-
tional basis, an obvious orientation toward policy and practice at the macro- and 
mesolevels, and support from and legitimacy by a strong state. Knowledge produc-
tion in the field is currently characterized by being increasingly outward looking 
and through support from the state.
Introduction
The development of the study of higher education in one region is closely related to 
the size, scale, and substantive growth of its higher education system (Clark 1996; 
Tight 2007; Pan 1995). Given the size of the population who received and is receiving 
higher education in China, the Chinese higher education system is currently the 
largest in the world. Like its economic development, China’s higher education 
system has expanded rapidly since 1999. In the latest official educational statistics 
released on the website of the Ministry of Education (MOE) in China (n.d.), there 
were 2560 higher education institutions in 2015, accommodating 2,369,326 aca-
demic and administrative staff, 1,911,406 postgraduate students, and 26,252, 968 
This chapter is a modified and updated version mainly based on our journal articles published in 
2012 (Chen and Hu 2012) and partly from Chen (2015).
L. Hu (*) • S. Chen 
School of Education, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 
Institute of Curriculum & Instruction, Faculty of Education, East China Normal University, 
Shanghai, China
e-mail: hulifang@ruc.edu.cn; chen.shuangye@gmail.com

132
undergraduate students. This gigantic system as well as mounting reform efforts has 
created tremendous opportunities for knowledge production in the field.
“Field” is a geographical and spatial metaphor for categorizing and classifying 
knowledge. A research field is a result of accumulated knowledge, academic capi-
tals, and a bounded “tribe” with certain academic identities (Becher and Trowler 
2001). Journals, books, societies, academic programs, departments, and research 
centers are typical representations of an academic field (Altbach and Engberg 2001; 
Goodchild 2011; Teichler 2011).
Higher education in China as a research field has amassed the above general char-
acteristics as in other regions (Yuan 2011). However, the national and historical con-
texts have shaped HER in China as a distinctive academic field and community. A 
very recent study of higher education in Asia (Jung and Horta 2013) found that the 
most productive researchers in Asia do not have their homed academic units special-
ized on higher education research. There is a visible discrepancy between research 
outputs and the substantive organizational bases. The lack of institutional rapport and 
relevant degree programs could cripple the academic communities of higher educa-
tion research (Jung and Horta 2013). On the contrary, the field of higher education 
research in China is clearly filled up with named academic units of higher education 
research, like institutes, centers, departments, and schools (Wang and Liu 2014).
This chapter outlines the formation and features of the research field of higher 
education in China. A critical mass of researchers and practitioners in the institutes 
of higher education have actively shaped and institutionalized HER as an indepen-
dent field as well as an organized community. At the same time, the state plays a 
significant role in legitimizing and supporting the field. In the following sections, we 
would analyze the formation and development of the HER in China historically from 
two aspects of actors and institutions. To put in another word, those people who made 
the field possible as well as the institutionalizing process are the foci of understand-
ing the HER in China. After that, some features of the field will be outlined.
Scholars Making the Field
Any field of knowledge is an arena of knowledge and people producing knowledge. 
Without scholars and researchers who strongly committed to the bounded commu-
nity, a field is not possible only with claimed knowledge. Both founders and a criti-
cal mass of followers have made and sustained the field.
According to J. Li (2005) and Wang (2010), the historical development of the 
HER in China can be periodized as four stages as the pre-discipline time, discipline 
establishment period, scale expansion stage, and consolidation period. Those stages 
have echoed the political and social changes of China as well as significant educa-
tional reforms, e.g., the years of 1977, 1985, 1992, and 1999. Based on a historical 
analysis of researchers and higher education development in China from ­institutional 
documents and relevant references, we found the development of HER as a field as 
L. Hu and S. Chen

133
well as an academic community in China is closely correlated with an emerging 
group of researchers and an expanding higher education system itself.
1970s: The First Generation
In the pre-discipline time, interests in studies of the university and higher education 
were scattered and not organized. It was Professor Pan Maoyuan, a widely recog-
nized founder of higher education studies in China (Hayhoe 2006; Hu 2010), who 
gathered individuals in conferences and other organized activities. This was the 
prototype of higher education research community in China. It was until 1978 that 
he formally established and led the first research center of higher education at 
Xiamen University, the first institutional base for higher education research then.
Out of need of studying higher education issues at Peking University, Professor 
Wang Yongquan in the Northern China founded another spearhead Institute of 
Higher Education Research in 1984 on campus. In the middle part of China, the 
cities of Wuhan and Shanghai, another two higher education institutes were also 
established at the Huazhong University of Science and Technology and East China 
Normal University. These institutes are still the most renowned centers of higher 
education research in China.
1980s–1990s: The Second Generation
The first generation of HE researchers came from various academic backgrounds, 
such as engineering, Chinese literature, English, history, and comparative educa-
tion, as there was no formal program ever named “higher education” in existence in 
China. However, the forerunners sought to train and attract new higher education 
researchers with more specialized knowledge to expand and consolidate the 
disciplinary foundation of the HER. Thus, a stream of the second generation of 
higher education researchers grew up locally holding specialized degree in higher 
education. These researchers began to exert their influences in the 1990s as a 
formally trained academic cadre in the Chinese field of higher education.
Meanwhile, a group of fresh PhD graduates trained overseas returned to China. 
They brought back related disciplinary and methodological knowledge and instilled 
into the rising field of HER. For example, Professor Min Weifang, a trained educa-
tional economist from Stanford University, joined the Institute of Higher Education 
Research at Peking University and led quantitative empirical research in higher educa-
tion planning, education economics, and finance in the1990s. Professor Chen 
Xiangming, a colleague of Professor Min at Peking University, pioneered qualitative 
methods in higher education, education, and social research in China in the late 1990s.
In the 1990s, four institutions were authorized to grant PhD degrees in higher 
education, i.e., Xiamen University (since 1986), Peking University (since 1990), 
7  Higher Education Research in China: An Independent Academic Field Under the State

134
East China Normal University (since 1993), and Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology (since 1996). Those PhD programs in HER produced around 100 
PhD graduates specialized in higher education in the 1990s. With an increasing 
number of scholars working in the field, their personal research trajectories in higher 
education have defined and shaped HER as a clear and well-bounded academic 
field. Around 80 percent of the top 20 cited authors from the 1980s to 2000s were 
from this generation and the first generation of HE researchers (Fan and Gao 2010).
After 1999: The Third Generation
The year of 1999 represented a significant turning point in the history of Chinese 
higher education from an elite system to a mass one. The enrollment rate of higher 
education in 1999 increased by 50% in a single year. Such a policy-led system 
expansion created numerous practical issues and problems, but they in turn acceler-
ated growth of HER in China by providing abundant research topics previously 
unexplored. The vibrant growth of the field has created plentiful research opportuni-
ties as the field consolidates on the basis of soft but applicable knowledge in study-
ing practice (Labaree 1998; Terenzini 1996).
There were 10 PhD and 60 masters of higher education programs validated by 
the state in 2003 (Li 2005: 300). It was until 2009 that a professional degree of 
Doctor of Education (EdD) was established. Such a professional degree symbolized 
further development of the field to differentiate scholarly research and professional 
practice. Professional and practical relevance have been highlighted in such pro-
grams when training university administrators and policy-makers in the field of 
higher education.
Scholarship and the State Institutionalizing the Field
Beyond scholars as actors making and shaping the HER in China, the field has been 
informally and formally institutionalized and legitimized by academic power from 
scholarship and the state. It is far from enough for a group of scholars gathered and 
claimed their academic identity as a scholarly field in China. The state holds the 
substantial and symbolic power to legitimize and recognize the establishment of 
such a field. An academic field stands as field only after being approved and enlisted 
in the national academic catalogue of disciplines. Otherwise academic units could 
not recruit students and issue-recognized diploma.
In the 1980s, accompanied by the recovery and revival of higher education in 
China after the Cultural Revolution, HER was legitimated by the state as a subdis-
cipline under education in 1983. At the same time, forerunners fueled substantive 
academic activities through taught programs, independent research, conferences, 
societies, and liaison between a growing number of institutes of higher education 
L. Hu and S. Chen

135
research. A first national higher education society was established around then by 
Professor Pan.
During 1980s, almost 200 of institutes of higher education research were estab-
lished in Chinese colleges and universities. Rather than defining their own research 
agenda, their main roles were in consulting and supporting local governments and 
university leadership on issues of higher education and institutional development. It 
was not until the first cross-institutional conference of institutes of higher education 
research coordinated by Professor Pan and Professor Wang in October of 1989 that 
an explicitly scholarly agenda to shape higher education as a research field in China 
began to emerge (Pan 1995).
Given the rising number of higher education institutes, not every institute could 
establish programs to enroll students. Higher education research center at Xiamen 
University was authorized to run the first master program specialized in higher edu-
cation in 1984 and then the first doctoral program in 1986. Xiamen University was 
honored as the first national key disciplinary site (xuekedian) in higher education. 
This title not only implied academic and symbolic capitals but also brought in sub-
stantial financial supports from the state through quotas of research students and 
generous research funding. The recognized status and reputation of this research 
center at Xiamen University have, in turn, reinforced the standing of HER in China.
Following their counterpart at Xiamen, the Institute of Higher Education 
Research at Peking University was also approved by the state to recruit master and 
doctoral students, respectively, in 1986 and 1990. Two institutes adopted diverged 
visions of developing the HER either as a unique discipline standing on its own 
theories or as a field of absorbing theories and methods from other major disciplin-
ary fields, such as economics, psychology, and sociology (Chen 2010). Different as 
they have been, the two leading institutes of higher education research in China are 
more like brothers than rivals to enrich the diversity of the HER.
Meanwhile, HER journals were proliferating as tangible means to disseminate 
the outputs of knowledge production in the field. Around 400 such journals existed 
by the end of the 1980s (Li 2005: 202). Journal of Higher Education (gaodeng 
jiaoyu yanjiu), founded in 1980 by Huazhong College of Technology (now 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology), is ranked the second most pres-
tigious educational journal in China today.
In the Chinese context, the state is an essential player in formally institutional-
izing the HER, but the growing scholarship as well as the enlarging academic com-
munity also contributes to the development of the HER along with the substantive 
system changes in the field of higher education.
After 1999, the Chinese higher education system has been enormously expanded. 
During the historical expansion of the system, HER in China has benefited from rich 
resources from the practical field of real problems and the pressing policy needs. 
Researchers are conscious of reviewing the field regularly and making the research 
field more visible than ever before. Any explicit review was rare before the 2000s. 
The first notable attempt to record such information was made in 1999 by Professor 
Chen Xuefei in publishing an edited anthology of selected journal articles on higher 
education between 1949 and 1999. In the 2000s the number of review articles which 
7  Higher Education Research in China: An Independent Academic Field Under the State

136
examined publications in the field increased visibly. Researchers (Bie and Peng 
2008; Ding and Zhou 2009; Fan and Gao 2010; Gong and Ye 2006; Han 2009; Pan 
and Li 2009; Pan and Liu 2006; Tang 2010; Zhang and Sun 2009; Zhong et al. 2009) 
chose themes, methods, researchers, and research institutes as analytical units to 
map out the field of HER in China from the quantitative and qualitative knowledge 
production disseminated through Chinese journals.
Accompanied by the expansion of the field, traditional institutes of higher educa-
tion in the comprehensive universities initiated organizational upgrading from a 
research institute to a school of education during this period. For example, the 
Institute of Higher Education Research at Peking University was upgraded and 
renamed the Graduate School of Education in 2000. The institute in Xiamen 
University was renamed the Institute of Education in 2004. Another flagship com-
prehensive university, Tsinghua University, established their Institute of Education 
in 2009. The phrase “higher education” was deliberately omitted in their new names. 
This signifies their research expertise under the new organization moving beyond 
higher education as a subfield under education. At the same time, the status of a 
school indicates that the field of higher education research within the university is 
symbolically equal to other fields as social sciences, arts, and humanities.
Features of Higher Education Research in China
In the following section, we outline the features of higher education as a research 
field and an academic community in China.
An Independent Academic Field
Unlike in other contexts, higher education research in China is a legitimized inde-
pendent academic field under the general discipline of education. The status of an 
academic field or a discipline in China needs to be approved and conferred by the 
state in accordance with the Catalogue of Academic Degrees Awarding and 
Education (xueke shouyu he rencai peiyang xueke mulu), an authoritative official 
regulation document which was issued and authorized by the Ministry of Education 
and the Academic Degrees Committee of the State Council (ADCSC) in China. 
Universities do not hold the authority to grant their own degrees. It is the state that 
governs and authorizes academic degree conferral to respective institutions.
Recognized as an independent academic field, higher education research has not 
reached a proper disciplinary status as enjoyed by other social science disciplines. 
For example, there has been a classical and lasting academic debate about whether 
higher education is a field or a discipline in China (Hu 2003; Wang 2004; Liu 2011; 
Gong 2011; Yan 2011; Guo 2011; Liu 2011; Yuan 2011; Zhang 2011).
L. Hu and S. Chen

137
An Organized Academic Community
The community of researchers in China includes researchers in HER centers or 
specialized higher education departments based in schools of education and other 
self-identified researchers from universities and think-tanks, such as official research 
institutes (e.g., the National Educational Development and Research Center affili-
ated to the Ministry of Education in China). The China Association of Higher 
Education is the officially endorsed society of higher education researchers in 
China. These organizations and associations have constituted a strong institutional 
basis for higher education research community in China.
By 2001, over 700 HER units existed in Chinese universities and 30 provincial 
HER institutes (Li 2005, 285). Due to university mergers and institutional restruc-
turing, the number of HER institutes dropped to fewer than 400 by 2010 (Wang and 
Liu 2014).
Beyond the higher education researchers in the above units, some policy officials 
and practitioners working in the field of Chinese higher education also contribute to 
higher education research in China. Nongovernmental research organizations exist 
as well, such as the 21st Century Education Research Institute and Mycos Research 
Institute.
Academic Programs  Academic programs are a vital institutional basis to generate 
impacts through people. Academic programs are artifacts as well as social spaces 
and processes to accommodate future members. According to the database on the 
national postgraduate students information website (http://yz.chsi.com.cn), 91 
higher education programs and 96 education economics and management programs, 
which also focus on economic perspectives and administration in higher education, 
currently exist at a masters level. At the doctoral level, 18 institutions are authorized 
to grant PhD degrees in higher education, and 15 EdD programs can confer profes-
sional doctoral degrees. Part-time students with full-time positions at various edu-
cational authorities and universities can regularly meet and interact with researchers 
by socializing with the teachers and future researchers who are their peers in the 
programs. Networking, understanding, and developing friendships through experi-
ences in academic programs facilitate the research-policy-practice nexus in a grad-
ual but deep manner. Although no comprehensive data is available, in the prestigious 
HER centers in China, e.g., Peking University, Xiamen University, and Huazhong 
Science and Technology University, senior policy-makers from the Ministry of 
Education and veteran university administrators did choose those academic pro-
grams, especially the EdD programs.
Key National Journals Specialized on HER  Academic journals represent the orga-
nized institutional efforts to shape the research field by publishing articles, which 
are accounted as the major source of knowledge production constituting the field.
7  Higher Education Research in China: An Independent Academic Field Under the State

138
We counted the number of the selected articles in the database of RHERD1 from 
1999 to 2014 by their source journals. The top ten Chinese journals have a signifi-
cant impact in shaping the field. They are the Journal of Higher Education (gaodeng 
jiaoyu yanjiu), Tsinghua Journal of Education (qinghua daxue jiaoyu yanjiu), 
Education Development Research (jiaoyu fazhan yanjiu), Jiangsu Higher Education 
(jiansu gaojiao), Modern University Education (xiandai daxue jiaoyu), Comparative 
Education Research (bijiao jiaoyu yanjiu), Peking University Education Review 
(beida jiaoyu pinglun), Chinese Higher Education (zhongguo gaodeng jiaoyu), 
Fudan Education Forum (fudan jiaoyu luntan), and Chinese Higher Education 
Research (zhongguo gaojiao yanjiu).
HER Themes and Orientation
Situated in the unprecedented social turbulence after 1989, higher education in 
China underwent an array of reforms and transformations. Substantive reforms of 
recruitment, employment, and tuition fees occurred, and there were remarkable 
institutional mergers in the Chinese higher education system. This made up the 
study of higher education and societal transition timely issues and meant that HER 
in this period was more focused on the practical needs of policy and institutions.
HER in China is oriented by practical issues and policy concerns, while it retains 
a strong tradition of theoretical and disciplinary enquiry (Pan and Chen 2005; Zhong 
et al. 2009; Wang and Liu 2014). Issues on the macro- and mesolevels have been 
emphasized as policy consultation, and institutional needs are the prioritized tasks 
for HER institutions in China (Wang and Liu 2014; Chen 2015).
From articles on higher education in the RHERD database from 1999 to 2009 
classified as theoretical research, practical issue research, historical research, and 
comparative research, we find among 3074 articles that 67 percent focus on practi-
cal issues, 17 percent on theoretical issues, 11 percent on comparative approaches, 
and 4 percent on historical approaches. Among articles published on Chinese Higher 
Education in 2012, around 70% attended to practical issues in higher education by 
our calculation.
Recently, there are also rising research themes on student engagement and fac-
ulty development on the microlevel. But they still cannot outshine the traditional 
themes on the macro- and mesolevels.
1 Renda Higher Education Research Digest (RHERD) (renda fuyin ziliao gaodeng jiaoyu) is anes-
tablished and highly reputable database of quality articles selected by experts invited by the 
Information Center for Social Sciences of Renmin University of China. It can be found from http://
ipub.zlzx.org/
L. Hu and S. Chen

139
The State Support
The state directs and supports the higher education research. In the RHERD data-
base of 1999–2014, the number of published articles indicates that governmental 
projects and funding are increasing, especially since 2006 (Fig. 7.1). In 1999 just 
1.63 percent of the articles in the database indicated funding support (i.e., five arti-
cles). By 2014 the total number of articles indicating funding support rose to 103, 
accounting for almost 58 percent. Since 2011, over half of the published articles in 
the RHERD database claimed the funding support by the state from various research 
funding projects.
Outward-Looking from Referencing
Since its establishment in 1980s, higher education as a research field in China has 
been open to international academic communities via individual networks, foreign 
visitors, translation of classic works, and returning Chinese scholars educated over-
seas. Pan and Chen (2005) called for international academic exchanges to be used 
to create a mutual dialogue between HE researchers in China and internationally 
rather than for such exchanges to be seen as resulting in dependent development. 
About 11 percent of the articles selected in the RHERD from 1999 to 2009 were 
comparative in nature. This is quite different from the inward-looking nature of the 
HER community in North America (Tight 2007). The Chinese community of HER 
tends to be more outward looking.
1.63%
6.17%
5.43%
7.48%
7.29%
9.03%
0.37%
16.48%
23.17%
31.13%
31.19%
47.50%
54.79%
59.41%
61.41%
57.54%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Fig. 7.1  The percentage of the state-funded HER articles in the total published articles per year in 
the RHERD database (1999–2014) (Note: Data in 2005 is missing)
7  Higher Education Research in China: An Independent Academic Field Under the State

140
In the RHERD database from 1999 to 2014, there is a rising trend toward more 
international referencing as indicated in Fig. 7.2. In 1999, there were less than 40% 
articles citing international (mostly English language) references, while in 2014 the 
proportion increased to over 80%. This finding was echoed by another review of the 
international references used by the HE articles in the 2008 database of Chinese 
Social Science Citation Index (CSSCI) (Tang 2010).
Conclusion
Academic field is a term loosely and customarily used to describe a certain body of 
knowledge. Its boundary is recognized by a group of people operating as a com-
munity who identify themselves and work within it. A critical mass of people 
housed by certain organizations in the university, academic societies, journals, and 
programs constitutes the virtual and real landscape of the field of HER in China. 
However, quite different from other systems, the HER field in China has been legiti-
mated and supported by the state and given the symbolic status as a proper special-
ized discipline.
The past 30 years has witnessed the growth of a vibrant academic community 
which has built up and shaped the field of HER in China. Higher education is a soft-­
applied field of academic inquiry consisting of many contributing disciplines. 
Generally the higher education research field in China has addressed practical issues 
and policy needs emerging from the substantive growth of higher education. This 
community is locally rooted but increasingly outward looking.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Proportion of the articles with international references
Proportion of international references
Fig. 7.2  Annual proportion of international references and the articles with international refer-
ences in the RHERD database (1999–2009)
L. Hu and S. Chen

141
References
Altbach, P., & Engberg, D. (2001). Higher education: A worldwide inventory of centers and pro-
grams. Phoenix: Oryx Press.
Becher, T., & Trowler, P. (2001). Academic tribes and territories: Intellectual enquiry and the 
culture of disciplines (2nd ed.). Buckingham: The Society for Research into Higher Education 
& Open University Press.
Bie, D., & Peng, Y. (2008). 近十年我国高等教育研究的现状与未来走向—以《高等教育研
究》刊发论文为样本 [On the development of higher education study in China in recent ten 
years and its future trends: Take the papers published by Journal of Higher Education as sam-
ple]. 高等教育研究 [The Journal of Higher Education], 29(4), 65–72.
Chen, X. (Ed.). (1999). 中国高等教育研究50年(1949–1999)[Higher education research in China 
for 50 years (1949–1999)]. Beijing: Educational Science Press.
Chen, H. (2010). 北大高等教育研究:学科发展与范式变迁 [Higher education research in 
Peking University: Discipline development and paradigm shift]. 北京大学教育评论 [Peking 
University Education Review], 8(4), 2–11.
Chen, S. (2015). Boundary objects and boundary brokering to make the research-policy-­practice 
nexus possible: The case of Chinese higher education field. Higher Education Policy, 28, 
441–457.
Chen, S., & Hu, L. (2012). Higher education research as a field in China: Its formation and current 
landscape. Higher Education Research & Development, 31(5), 655–666.
Clark, B. (1996). Substantive growth and innovative organization: New categories for higher edu-
cation research. Higher Education, 32, 417–430.
Department of Finance of Ministry of Education in China & National Bureau of Statistics of 
China. (n.d.). The Database of China Educational Finance Statistical Yearbook. Retrieved on 
December 12, 2011 from http://data.cnki.net/navi/HomePage.aspx?id=N2010090825&name=
YZZJJ&floor=1
Ding, X. and Zhou, Y. (2009). 高等教育研究方法的演变——基于人大复印资料《高等教育》
(1980—2007)的分析 [The evolution of research methods in higher education: Analysis based 
on Higher Education (1980–2007) of Renmin University in China], 理工高教研究 [Higher 
Education Research in Science and Technology], 28(2),22–27.
Fan, W. and Y.  Gao. (2010). 中国高等教育研究主题:1979–2008 [Higher education research 
themes in China: 1979–2008]. 高等教育研究 [The Journal of Higher Education], 31(2), 
43–52.
Gong, F. (2011). 追问研究本意纾解学科情结[Explore the original purposes of higher educa-
tion research and resolve the complex of discipline]. 北京大学教育评论 [Peking University 
Education Review], 9(4), 41–48.
Gong, F., & Ye, B. (2006). 2000–2004年中国教育研究热点与关键词—基于CSSCI的统计分析
[The hot topics and key words of educational research in China from 2000 to 2004: Based on 
the statistical analysis of CSSCI].高等教育研究 [The Journal of Higher Education], 27(9), 
1–9.
Goodchild, L. (2011). Higher education as field of study in the United States: Its history, knowl-
edge base and degree program development. Peking University Education Review, 9(4), 10–40.
Guo, L. (2011). 学科标准视域中的高等教育学科属性探析 [Higher education as a discipline? 
Perspectives from discipline criteria]. 北京大学教育评论 [Peking University Education 
Review], 9(4), 91–96.
Han, Y. (2009). 高等教育研究的主题分布——基于人大复印资料《高等教育》(1980-­2007
年)的分析 [thematic landscape of HE research in China: A study based on the analysis of 
Renda higher education research digest (1980–2007)], 现代大学教育 [Modern University 
Education], (3), 6–12.
7  Higher Education Research in China: An Independent Academic Field Under the State

142
Hayhoe, R. (2006). Portraits of influential Chinese educators. Hong Kong: Comparative Education 
Research Centre of The University of Hong Kong & Springer.
Hu, J.  (2003). 我国高等教育学学科发展的特殊性分析 [on the disciplinary development 
particularity of higher education in China]. 教育研究 [Educational Research], (12), 15–18.
Hu, J.  (2010). 潘懋元先生之于我国高等教育学科发展的意义 [On significance of Mr. Pan 
Maoyuan in the development of higher education discipline in China]. 高等教育研究 [The 
Journal of Higher Education], 31(8), 26–41.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education in Asia: A publication and co-publication analysis. 
Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Labaree, D. (1998). Educational researchers: Living with a lesser form of knowledge. Educational 
Researcher, 27(8), 4–12.
Li, J. (2005). 中国高等教育研究史 [History of higher education research in China]. Guangzhou: 
Guangdong Higher Education Press.
Liu, X. (2011). 学科还是领域:一个似是而非的争论 [Discipline or field: A paradoxical contro-
versy]. 北京大学教育评论 [Peking University Education Review], 9(4), 77–90.
Ministry of Education in China. (n.d.). Educational statistics in 2009. Retrieved on March 12, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.moe.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/s4958/index.html. 
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/newsandcomingevents/t20110428_402722244.htm.
Pan, M. (1995). 高等教育学科建设的回顾与前瞻[Review and outlook of constructing higher 
education as a discipline]. 高等教育研究 [The Journal of Higher Education], 16(3), 1–5.
Pan, M., & Chen, X. (2005). 依附、借鉴、创新?—中国高等教育建设之路[Dependency, reference, 
innovation?: The road to constructing the discipline of China’s higher education]. 北京大学教
育评论 [Peking University Education Review], 3(1), 28–34.
Pan, M., & Li, J. (2009). 高等教育研究60年 [Higher education research in 60 years]. 中国高等
教育 [Chinese Higher Education], (18), 15–19.
Pan, M. & Liu, X. (2006). 21世纪初我国高等教育研究的进展与问题 [Development and 
problems of higher education research in China in the twenty-first century]. 国家教育行政学
院学报 [Journal of National Academy of Education Administration], (8), 30–39.
Tang, J.  (2010). 中国高教研究地图——基于CSSCI高教研究论文的计量分析和可视化识别 
[Landscape of higher education research in China: Based on statistical analysis and visual 
identification of CSSCI HE research papers]. 中国高教研究 [Chinese Higher Education 
Research], (2), 22–26.
Teichler, U. (2011). The changing relationships between higher education research and higher 
education policy and practice in Europe. Peking University Education Review, 9(4), 2–9.
Terenzini, P. (1996). Rediscovering roots: Public policy and higher education research. The Review 
of Higher Education, 20(1), 5–13.
Tight, M. (2007). Research into higher education: An a-theoretical community of practice? Higher 
Education Research & Development, 23(4), 395–411.
Wang, J. (2004). 高等教育作为一门学科 [Higher education as a discipline]. 高等教育研究 [The 
Journal of Higher Education], 25(1), 69–74.
Wang, X. (2010). Higher education as a field of study in China: Defining knowledge and curriculum 
structure. Lanham: Lexington Books.
Wang, Q., & Liu, N.  C. (2014). Higher education research institutes in Chinese universities. 
Studies in Higher Education, 39(8), 1488–1498.
Yan, G. (2011). 高等教育研究的学科化:知识建构还是话语策略?[Higher education studies 
as a discipline: Knowledge construction or discourse strategy?]. 北京大学教育评论 [Peking 
University Education Review], 9(4), 62–69.
Yuan, B. (2011). 在学科与领域之间:制度化的高等教育研究 [Between discipline and research 
area: Institutionalized Higher Education Research]. 北京大学教育评论 [Peking University 
Education Review], 9(4), 70–76.
Zhang, Y. (2011). 超越学科论和研究领域论之争[Suspending the disputes over discipline or 
research field]. 北京大学教育评论 [Peking University Education Review], 9(4), 49–61.
L. Hu and S. Chen

143
Zhang, D., & Sun, J. (2009). 中国高等教育研究30年: 研究者与研究机构的分析[Higher education 
research in China for thirty years: Analysis of researchers and research institutes]. 现代教育管
理 [Modern Educational Management], (10), 13–16.
Zhong, B., Zhao, Y., & Hong, Y. (2009). 我国高等教育研究的现状分析与未来展望—基于近
三年教育类核心期刊论文量化分析的研究 [On the status quo and the prospect of higher 
education research in China: Based on the quantitative analysis on the papers of the core journals 
of higher education in the past three years]. 教育研究 [Educational Research], (7), 14–21.
Lifang Hu is an associate professor in the School of Education of Renmin University of China. 
Her major research interests are university governance and curriculum studies in higher education. 
She has published widely in Chinese on higher education.
Shuangye Chen is professor of the Institute of Curriculum and Instruction at East China Normal 
University. Her research interests are higher education, educational leadership, and policy, with a 
particular interest in theorizing educational practice in the Chinese societies. She has published on 
higher education policy and educational leadership internationally. She is one of the founding 
members of Society of Higher Education Research (Hong Kong) and has served as the founding 
chair (2014–2016).
7  Higher Education Research in China: An Independent Academic Field Under the State

145
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_8
Chapter 8 
Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: 
Context, Trends, and Vision  
William Yat Wai Lo and Felix Sai Kit Ng
Abstract  With the processes of inter- and intranationalization, higher education in 
Hong Kong has been rapidly expanding in an effort to develop the city into a regional 
education hub. This chapter explores the trends and developments of higher educa-
tion research (HER) in Hong Kong in the context of inter- and intranationalization. 
By drawing on the data from the Scopus database, this chapter analyzes a selection 
of journal chapters on higher education published in Hong Kong over the past three 
decades. Findings show that a significant growth and some new outputs have been 
seen in the field during the study period. In addition, local researchers have com-
plied with the rule by forming more transnational and intranational research teams 
and by conducting more nonlocal studies. Interestingly, many of them have not 
abandoned local collaboration and studies, but they further developed their roots. 
These findings reveal that some internal signs of cosmopolitanization have been 
recorded in the field.
Introduction
The development of higher education in Hong Kong can be observed in a dual trend, 
in which higher education in the territory has responded to the phenomenon of glo-
balization and its associated changes, and it has faced many local challenges espe-
cially during the period of the transfer of sovereignty. Specifically, on one hand, 
higher education in Hong Kong has been substantially influenced by international 
competition caused by the profound effects of globalization, as evident in many 
This chapter was mainly revised and adapted from the authors’ previously published article, Lo, 
W.Y.W. and Ng, F.S.K. (2015) Trends and developments of higher education research in Hong 
Kong: In pursuit of a cosmopolitan vision, Higher Education Policy 28(4): 517–534.
W.Y.W. Lo (*) 
Department of International Education and Lifelong Learning, The Education University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
e-mail: willlo@eduhk.hk 
F.S.K. Ng 
Department of Social Sciences, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany

146
other East Asian countries. In addition, Hong Kong, as the Special Administrative 
Region (SAR) of the People’s Republic of China (hereafter China or mainland 
China) after 1997, enjoys significant autonomy in various aspects, including educa-
tion, under the “One Country, Two Systems” principle. This special political status, 
together with the colonial history of the city, grants universities in Hong Kong the 
privileged position as the bridge between the international academic community 
and the higher education sector in China, but this position requires them to remain 
highly internationally and globally connected. On the other hand, universities in 
Hong Kong have to deal with the ascending “China factors” in the development of 
higher education since the confirmation of the return of the city to Chinese sover-
eignty. This contextual issue has become particularly important to the development 
in higher education in Hong Kong, given that the city is a part of a rising nation.
The study presented in this chapter explores the evolution and the characteristics 
of higher education research (HER) in Hong Kong within a special context where 
massification, neoliberalization, internationalization, and sinicization simultane-
ously drive the development of the universities and the academic community in the 
city-state. The study analyzes the outputs of HER in Hong Kong between 1984 and 
2014. The publication data on HER draws from the Scopus database and focuses on 
journal articles. The selection of articles is based on search keywords in academic 
journals. These keywords include “higher education,” “tertiary education,” or “post-
secondary education” contained in article titles, abstracts, and keywords and “Hong 
Kong” contained in the affiliation of authors. The selected research outputs will be 
analyzed by number, institutional affiliation, type of authorship, collaboration pat-
terns, and scope of themes and issues over the study period to initially demonstrate 
the general picture of HER in Hong Kong and to further examine the extent to which 
their research outputs are reflected on and have responded to the systemic changes 
in higher education over the last three decades. In connection with the transfer of 
sovereignty and the pursuit of being a regional education hub, this study will par-
ticularly look into the patterns of trans- and intranational research collaboration and 
research scope on which higher education researchers tend to focus throughout the 
period.
Context for the Study
Theoretical Orientations
The analytical basis of this study builds on the interface between the system context 
of higher education policy and the nature of HER. According to Gornitzka (2013: 
260–262), “the changes in the formal governance and policy linkages between the 
national political-administrative level and the higher education institutions” (HEIs) 
have significantly affected “the nexus between research on higher education and 
policy-making.” She argues that giving policy-relevant answers to the emerging 
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

147
questions in the context of higher education expansion and innovation provides an 
instrumental use for HER, whereas research on higher education can also play a 
monitoring role through the conceptualization of major changes in the sector. This 
argument indicates that orientations of HER can be responsive and proactive in 
terms of its relationship with policy-making. It also suggests that HER is sensitive 
to political–administrative changes at the system level.
This idea frames the present study. Despite the fact that the range of topics and 
facets in higher education is broad, they are oriented to respond to social changes 
and challenges (Teichler 1996, 2005). In this sense, although a major part of HER 
focuses on teaching, learning, and assessment1 (Horta and Jung 2014), trends in 
HER and changes are connected at the policy and systemic levels. Based on these 
ideas, this study intends to exemplify the nexus between the system context of the 
development in higher education and the characteristics of research on higher edu-
cation that are published in journals, thereby charting the trends and developments 
of HER in Hong Kong.
With regard to the theoretical orientations of the analysis, this chapter attempts 
to further explore the conceptual understanding of the management of knowledge 
networks with a focus on the emerging research community on higher education in 
Hong Kong, which leads in establishing international research networks in the 
region (Jung and Horta 2013). According to Postiglione, the model of knowledge 
networks in Hong Kong has two dimensions. The first is “a high degree of interna-
tionalism,” which promotes the emergence of a globally open academic environ-
ment. Thus, academics in the territory are able to closely integrate with the global 
academy. The second is “a highly valued but self-defined Chinese cultural heritage,” 
which emotionally connects academics in Hong Kong with the development of 
China (Postiglione 2013: 347). This cultural background facilitates the intensified 
research collaboration with universities in the Chinese mainland, whereas the 
Western-originated academic model makes the national vision and commitment in 
the collaborative engagements remain reflective. This concept is called “the cosmo-
politan model” (Postiglione 2013), in which the model successfully combines inter-
national elements with local and national traditions in the development of knowledge 
networks.
This chapter explores the response of the cosmopolitan model in HER in Hong 
Kong to the notion of transnationality embedded in the thesis of cosmopolitaniza-
tion by Beck (2011), which presents a new type of cosmopolitanism (Fine 2007). In 
the past, cosmopolitanism was theoretically constructed based on universalism ver-
sus particularism (see Goulder 1957; Merton 1968; Nussbaum 1994). However, 
Beck (2003) argues that localism and cosmopolitanism are not mutually exclusive 
by themselves, and localism is also an essential element in contemporary cosmo-
politanism, emphasizing the interaction between the global and the local. Hence, a 
cosmopolitan model is one that overcomes “the dominant opposition between cos-
mopolitans and locals” (Beck 2003: 17). The challenge of studying such a model is 
to avoid the state-centric perspective associated with the concepts of locals to 
replace the national “either/or” with a transnational/translocal “this, as well as that” 
(see Beck 2003, 2011). Furthermore, Beck (2011) also argues that we are living in 
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

148
an age of cosmopolitanization because global risks cannot be properly managed by 
a single nation-state in world-risk society. Transnational curiosity, empathy, and 
cooperation are necessary to deal with global risks, and social developments have 
been inevitably transnationalized. In accordance with this argument, employing the 
concept of transnationality, which stresses both the national self and the global oth-
ers, is necessary, and more empirical studies are needed to uncover and indicate 
signs that cosmopolitanization truly exists (Beck 2006).
Based on Beck’s thesis, this study examines whether and how the research com-
munity on higher education in Hong Kong has been transnationalized in its strategic 
management of research networks and practices. This chapter presents data on the 
trends in HER in Hong Kong that empirically examines the relevance of the ideas of 
cosmopolitanism and cosmopolitanization to the development of the field. In addi-
tion, given the specific background of Hong Kong where it was initially a British 
colony and is now a SAR of China, this chapter also uses the terms “intranational” 
and “intranationalization” to describe and conceptualize the intensification of inte-
gration between Hong Kong and China. Before starting the analysis, it is useful to 
provide a brief history of Hong Kong with a specific focus on the development of its 
higher education sector and of the field of HER in the territory during the last three 
decades.
Higher Education Development in Hong Kong, 1984–2014
Higher education in Hong Kong is special because of the historical background and 
the position of the city, which had been under the British colonial rule for over 
150 years. China resumed the sovereignty of Hong Kong in 1997, and thereafter the 
city became a SAR, which maintains its capitalist system, and enjoys autonomy 
under the “One Country, Two Systems” principle. The higher education system in 
Hong Kong is clearly established based largely on the British system because of its 
colonial history. According to Lin (2009), the establishment of the University of 
Hong Kong (HKU), the only government-funded, recognized university in the terri-
tory until 1963, carried a mission of extending the cultural influence of Britain to 
China and Asia. This connects university education in Hong Kong with British cul-
tural colonialism.
Hong Kong underwent the first wave of higher education expansion during the 
transitional period (1984–1997). The higher education system expanded mainly 
through granting of several postsecondary education institutions with a university 
status. Consequently, eight publicly funded institutions obtained a self-accreditation 
status, and the participation rate for undergraduates aged between 17 years and 
20 years surged in government-funded programs from 2% in the 1970s to 18% dur-
ing this expansion wave (UGC 1996). The second wave of higher education expan-
sion began after 1997. Compared to colonial rule, the SAR government put more 
emphasis on the importance of internationalization. For example, in 1997, the 
­government planned to increase the proportion of nonlocal students to 4% at the 
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

149
undergraduate level (Tung 1997). In 2010, the University Grants Committee (UGC) 
set a target of increasing quota places available for nonlocal students to 20% of total 
places (UGC 2010). Consequently, the number of nonlocal enrollment of UGC-­
funded programs has gradually increased from 1% in 1996/1997 to 15% in 
2013/2014 (UGC 2015). Furthermore, in 2000, the government set up a target of 
increasing the participation rate of tertiary education students to 60% by 2010 (Tung 
2000). Since then, the tertiary education sector has seen an exponential growth. 
According to the latest statistics, the university admission rate has reached nearly 
70% (Education Bureau 2014b).
There are several features in the post-1997 tide of the reform of higher education. 
Firstly, internationalism is somewhat reflected and emphasized in the reform initia-
tives (UGC 2004), as internationalization is considered as an important response to 
the effects of globalization on higher education (Scott 1998). The government set up 
a policy goal of developing the city into a regional education hub during the period. 
The expansion of the population of nonlocal students is essentially related to this 
ambition. Secondly, related to the vision of being an education hub, the education 
industry is also considered by the government as an engine for economic growth 
(Tsang 2008). In fact, the higher education sector in Hong Kong has been substan-
tially influenced by neoliberalism and entrepreneurialism since the early 2000s. 
Therefore, although the university admission rate has significantly grown, the new 
provision of higher education, especially in the sub-degree sector, is mainly run on 
the market-led, self-financing mode (Chan and Lo 2007). Only less than 23% of 
Hong Kong students enter publicly funded universities (Education Bureau 2014a). 
Thirdly, despite the emphasis on internationalization, the origin of the majority of 
nonlocal students in Hong Kong is mainland China. In 2013/2014, 78% of the 
nonlocal student population are from the Chinese mainland (UGC 2015). This fig-
ure is due to the many years of the pivotal role of Hong Kong as a bridge for the 
international mobility of mainland Chinese students (Postiglione 2005). Meanwhile, 
the city also considers its strong links with mainland China in terms of proximity 
and closed ties as the strong competitive edge over its regional competitors, particu-
larly in meeting higher education demands, developing a global center for China 
studies and strengthening research collaboration (UGC 2004, 2010). In fact, market 
integration is found in higher education between Hong Kong and the mainland (Li 
2011).2
Meanwhile, there was a worldwide expansion of HER, in the context of massifica-
tion of higher education (Sadlak and Altbach 1997). Indeed, HER has been a growing 
academic field sustained by an increase of academic programs and research centers 
and the progress of professionalization (Macfarlane and Grant 2012; Altbach 2014). 
Similar to many other places, Hong Kong sees growth in the research and teaching 
infrastructure of studies in higher education. For example, HKU established the 
Comparative Education Research Centre in 1994, in which HER is one of its research 
foci. It has also offered a specialization of higher education in its Master of Education 
programs since 2010 (Faculty of Education, HKU 2014a, b). The specialization 
covers courses in globalization, policy studies, leadership, and ­organizational studies 
in higher education. Since 2014, this specialization has been added to its Postgraduate 
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

150
Certificate in Advanced Educational Studies program. The Hong Kong Institute of 
Education (HKIEd) has recently launched the Master of Social Sciences in Higher 
Education Policy and Governance program, which focuses on providing students 
with skills in higher education policy analysis, governance strategies, and issues 
management. In addition, HKIEd is one of the core member institutions of the Asia 
Pacific Higher Education Research Partnership, which serves as a research network 
for specialists in HER in the Asia Pacific region. Furthermore, with the goals of pro-
moting research into policy and practice in higher education and stimulating research 
collaboration, higher education researchers from the Chinese University of Hong 
Kong (CUHK), HKIEd, and HKU started the Society for Higher Education Research 
of Hong Kong in 2014.3 On this basis, an active research community on higher edu-
cation in Hong Kong is reasonably notable.
Policy Orientations and Higher Education Research
The historical background and policy orientations that have been reviewed suggest 
the following four assumptions:
Assumption 1
This study assumes that massification of higher education results in the growth of 
research on higher education. Although higher education expansion seems to have a 
natural and direct causal effect on the growth of research on higher education, two 
waves of higher education expansion were observed in Hong Kong, and they have 
different features. The expansion in the 1990s relied on granting the existing degree 
providers (including colleges and polytechnics) with a university status. Only one 
new publicly funded institution was established, namely, the Hong Kong University 
of Science and Technology. In this regard, the effect of this round of expansion on 
the structure of higher education governance is relatively limited. Yet, the expansion 
in the 2000s was heavily characterized by the elements of privatization and marketi-
zation (Lo in press). A new sub-degree sector has emerged, which mainly consists 
of community colleges of public universities and private institutions. It is therefore 
noteworthy to examine the nexus between higher education expansion and the 
growth of HER.
Assumption 2
The rapid expansion of the sub-degree sector generates new type of publications to 
HER. In this regard, a new sub-degree sector that mainly provides two-year associ-
ate degree programs has rapidly grown in recent years. This marks move of Hong 
Kong from elite to mass higher education. However, the emergence of the 
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

151
sub-­degree sector has substantially changed the hierarchical structure of the higher 
education system of Hong Kong. On the one hand, institutions and personnel do not 
necessarily conform to the positions that are taken for granted in the differentiated 
model of governance. On the other hand, the shift to mass higher education has been 
clouded by complaints and criticisms (Kember 2010). In this regard, this study 
assumes that HER has further grown when problems in the sector emerge.
Assumption 3
The degree of transnationality of education in Hong Kong is reflected in HER. Hong 
Kong has served as a bridge between East and West, and this role is significantly 
shown in higher education provision (Li 2011) and academic research collaboration 
(Postiglione 2013). However, the internationalization of higher education is reiter-
ated and emphasized in the last decade, given that the city is pursuing to be a 
regional education hub (UGC 2004). As Hong Kong has become part of China, 
examining the way in which internationalism has been developed in terms of 
research orientation and collaboration in HER is important.
Assumption 4
The ascending “China factors” are reflected in HER. This produces a prediction that 
is possibly opposed to the ideas about internationalism presented in the last assump-
tion. At the system level in the post-1997 era, frequent connections and intensified 
integration with the Chinese mainland has been a trend in various domains, includ-
ing higher education (Lo and Ng 2013). At the institutional level, the increase of 
academic staff and students (especially research postgraduate ones) from mainland 
China is considered as a significant factor affecting the orientation and collaboration 
of HER in Hong Kong. Nevertheless, the “need” to embrace China does not neces-
sarily mean acceptance.
The Study
Methods
Although the Scopus database is unable to cover all the publications across the 
language-diverse world, it serves as the most comprehensive and largest biblio-
graphic database of peer-reviewed journal articles (Norris and Oppenheim 2007), 
containing approximately 53 million records, 21,915 titles, and 5000 publishers, 
according to Elsevier’s statistics (2014). The coverage of higher education publica-
tions consists of 38 international peer-reviewed journals, out of which 37 have the 
keywords “higher education” in their titles, and one has “tertiary education.”
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

152
By using the Scopus database, this study analyzes academic publications that 
contain the keywords “higher education” and its synonymies, “tertiary education,” 
and “postsecondary education” appearing in the titles, abstracts, and keywords. 
These studies, published between 1984 and 2014, were written by authors affiliated 
with HEIs and other relevant organizations in Hong Kong. The search starts from 
1984 because the first article on higher education appeared in this year. Publications 
in 2015 are not included because of incomplete data. In total, the period under study 
consists of the last three decades. The latest update on 11th September 2015 identi-
fies 889 publications in the original search results. Two rounds of screening are con-
ducted afterward to streamline the dataset. The first round of screening considers the 
content of the publications. Although “higher education” is used as a keyword in 
some of the shortlisted publications, they may not have direct and clear concerns 
over HER. For instance, 200 articles are included in the search results because higher 
education is shown in the name of a publisher, Higher Education Press. In some 
cases, the studies may consider “education level” as a categorical variable, and higher 
education qualification is therefore used as an independent variable and discussed in 
these articles. This scenario is particularly common in health science studies. 
Therefore, given that the themes of these articles are not related to the prominently 
identified theme in HER, these 127 items are excluded from our dataset. The second 
round focuses on the type of publications. The original search results contain differ-
ent types of publications. However, conference papers are filtered out because they 
are considered unpublished items and may possibly be published later (Tight 2012). 
Eighty-five items are thus excluded to avoid double counting in the analysis. In addi-
tion, in spite of Scopus being a comprehensive database on journal articles, it has 
apparently yet to be developed into a comprehensive dataset for analyzing other pub-
lication elements, such as book chapter. Hence, this study concentrates on analyzing 
journal articles by screening 148 items of work in total.
Following the two rounds of screening, the dataset has been reduced to 414 arti-
cles, which is around 47% of the original search results. As for the characteristics of 
these articles, only around 29% of them are published in journals with the terms 
“higher education” or “tertiary education” in their titles. This observation means 
that most of the outputs of HER are disseminated in nonspecialized journals. This 
trend reveals that many of these articles are written by researchers “who have a 
primary research subject but also do some higher education research,” as addressed 
by Harland (2012: 704). Given the relevance of these articles to the present study, 
they are incorporated in the dataset. In addition, similar to the note of Harland 
(2012), this trend indicates that HER is also an open-access field in Hong Kong. 
That is, HER is not limited to those mainly or exclusively working in the specific 
field of higher education.
Scientometrics was adopted to analyze the dataset in light of the policy orienta-
tions discussed in the previous section of the article. To test Assumption 1, the 
dataset was sorted to present the number of journal articles published on higher 
education by year and by the statistics on the institutional affiliations of local 
researchers on higher education.4 The resulting set aims to shed light on whether 
higher education expansion has increased the number of publications. To test 
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

153
Assumption 2, the percentage of journal articles by the type of institutional affilia-
tion and the number of journal articles, especially in the sub-degree sector, is used 
to investigate whether and how the newcomers may have made contributions to 
HER. Finally, to find out whether HER has undergone the processes of “internation-
alization,” “intranationalization,” or both (Assumptions 3 and 4), the article illus-
trates the complexity of the dual process by examining research collaboration 
patterns as well as the scope of HER.
Findings
Significant Growth of Higher Education Research
This section begins with an examination of the relationship between higher educa-
tion expansion and the development of HER in Hong Kong. Figure 8.1 illustrates 
the number of journal articles by publication year. An obviously significant growth 
of research outputs on higher education is observed. The growth of HER in Hong 
Kong can be divided into three phases. The first stage is the period between 1984 
and 1994 (Phase 1). During the period, the number of journal articles fluctuated 
around 0 to 3 every year, and only 11 journal articles on higher education were 
observed in total, which reveals that HER was unsurprisingly an inactive research 
field both locally and globally during the period. The observation probably reflects 
that the field of higher education was relatively small in terms of number of institu-
tions and the number of research outputs during the period.
1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 3 2 1 2 6 7 4 5 8 11
5 7
1
9
16 15
20 16
37
49
59
45
80
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
No.of Journal Articles Published
Year
No. of Journal Articles Published
Fig. 8.1  Number of journal articles on higher education between 1984 and 2014
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

154
Following this period, 1994 and onward show a gradual growth in the number of 
published articles. Hence, this study considers another 10-year period between 1994 
and 2003 as the second stage (Phase 2). Although the number of articles remained 
to be less than 10 during the period (except in 2001 when 11 journal articles were 
published), journal articles on higher education were published every year during 
the period, and a total of 56 articles were published, resulting in a fivefold increase 
from the first phase. The result shows that to a larger extent, this growth of HER can 
be attributed to the higher education expansion in the 1990s through the upgrading 
of colleges and polytechnics and the establishment of new universities. With more 
input of public higher education sector from the government, more social science 
particularly education-related faculties and schools simultaneously emerged or 
expanded in these new HEIs. With regard to the institutional affiliation of the publi-
cations (see Fig. 8.2), the number of publications in affiliation with the new publicly 
funded HEIs, namely, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, City 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, Lingnan University, and HKIEd, had grown considerably from 6 in the 
first phase to 39  in the second phase. On the contrary, their older counterparts, 
namely, HKU and CUHK, published only 20 articles, around half of those from the 
new HEIs during the period.5
The third stage refers to the period from 2004 onward (Phase 3). As shown in 
Fig. 8.1, a more rapid growth began in 2004. The number of journal articles increased 
from one in 2004 to nine in 2006. Since then, a proliferation of HER in Hong Kong 
was witnessed. In total, the number of articles has increased to 271 in the third 
stage, accounting for approximately 80% of the journal articles on higher education 
6
20
162
6
36
167
0
1
27
0
3
7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Phase 1: Before 1995
Phase 2: 1995-2004
Phase 3: 2005-2014
No. of Journal Article Published
Phases of Development
HKU, CUHK
New UGC-funded HEIs
Non-UGC-funded HEIs
Others
Fig. 8.2  Number of journal articles on higher education by the type of institutional affiliation 
(Note: The total number of articles does not add up to 414 because some coauthors are affiliated 
with different institutions in some jointly authored and multiauthored publications)
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

155
over the whole period. These findings show that the upward trend of HER is highly 
associated with the phenomenon of higher education expansion (Assumption 1).
New Sector in the Field
As previously discussed, the higher education sector was expanded through mar-
ketization. Consequently, a striking increase of postsecondary educational institu-
tions in Hong Kong that are self-financing was observed. These institutions, which 
mainly provide sub-degree programs including two-year associate degrees and two-­
year higher diplomas, accepted around 52,046 students in the academic year 
2013/2014 (iPASS 2015). This section analyzes the influence of this new self-­
financing sector of higher education, which mainly consists of sub-degree programs 
providers, to HER in the city.
Figure 8.3 indicates that researchers affiliated with self-financing HEIs have con-
tributed to the growth of HER in Hong Kong. In Phase 1, only the researchers from 
publicly funded HEIs were involved in HER, whereas researchers from self-­
financing HEIs were not engaged in studies in higher education. The situation did 
not significantly change in Phase 2, as only one article involved a researcher from a 
self-financing HEI.  The number, however, increased markedly in Phase 3, as 
researchers in the self-financing sector contributed 21 articles, which accounts for 
around 8% of the total during the period (see Fig. 8.3). In fact, the number of enroll-
Phrase 1: Before
1995
Phrase 2: 1995-
2004
Phrase 3: 2005-
2014
UGC-funded HEIs
100.00%
94.64%
92.49%
Self-financing HEIs
0.00%
1.79%
7.80%
Others
0.00%
5.36%
2.02%
0.00%
20.00%
40.00%
60.00%
80.00%
100.00%
120.00%
Fig. 8.3  Percentage of journal articles on higher education by the type of institutional affiliation 
(Note: The total is not equal to 100% because some articles involve interinstitutional 
collaborations)
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

156
ments of full-time self-financing programs climbed from 27,296 in the academic 
year 2004/2005 to 84,157  in 2013/2014 (iPASS 2015). However, as the self-­
financing HEIs are identified as teaching institutions, this new group that contrib-
utes to HER is not normally expected to act as researchers. Therefore, their research 
work was unlikely to have been financed by the government. This new sector in the 
higher education system does not bring only new researchers but also new research 
topics to the field. Seven journal articles, which are specifically related to the issues 
about the sub-degree sector, are found in the search. Overall, these findings reveal 
that the research interests of local researchers on higher education are connected 
with this round of higher education expansion (Assumption 2).
Increase in Research Collaborations
Figure 8.4 shows that many higher education researchers in Hong Kong conduct 
their studies alone rather than work in team. In Phase 1, more research outputs (6 
out of 11 publications) are solely authored. The situation did not change signifi-
cantly in Phase 2, as 4 out of 7 articles are solely authored during the period. Given 
the expansion of the field, both numbers of solely authored and jointly authored or 
multiauthored publications significantly increased in Phase 3. In addition, research-
ers seem to welcome teamwork in recent years, as over half (52%) of the research 
outputs are jointly authored or multiauthored publications, which have outnum-
bered solely authored work.
To further investigate the nature of research collaboration in the field, this study 
examines some characteristics of these coauthored publications. At this point, col-
laboration is classified into three types: local collaboration (those with researchers 
affiliated with the institutions in Hong Kong), intranational collaboration (those 
researchers affiliated with institutions in mainland China, Taiwan, or Macau), and 
transnational collaboration (those researchers affiliated with institutions in foreign 
countries). As shown in Fig.  8.4, all three types of research collaboration have 
grown considerably in the last three decades. This reveals the importance and rele-
vance of the development of knowledge networks in HER. Local collaboration is 
the most common form of collaboration throughout the three phases. However, the 
data also reveals significant growth in intranational and transnational collabora-
tions. In Phases 1 and 2, only a total of two intranationally collaborative publica-
tions were produced. The number increased to 20  in Phase 3. Meanwhile, 
transnational collaborations have grown more rapidly. No transnationally collabora-
tive publication was observed in Phase 1, and only four items were observed in 
Phase 2. However, the number increased to 60 in Phase 3. The increase of intrana-
tional collaboration partially demonstrates the influence of the rise of China over 
HER in Hong Kong (Assumption 3), although the trend is rather implicit. In other 
words, there is a stronger trend in the growth of transnational collaboration 
(Assumption 4). This strength exhibits a proliferation of transnationalism, which is 
associated with the result of the emphasis on internationalization in the higher edu-
cation sector in Hong Kong during the last decade (UGC 2004).
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

157
To further examine the pattern of the cross-border research collaborations, this 
study analyzes the origins of these higher education researchers. Figure 8.5 illus-
trates that many local researchers on higher education prefer to work with col-
leagues from the same institutions. Some of them may have collaborations with 
researchers from other local institutions. However, researchers from English-­
speaking countries are popular choices of local researchers for collaborators. As 
shown in the figure, 82% of transnational collaborations involve researchers from 
English-speaking countries. On the one hand, the emphasis on English can be seen 
as a British colonial heritage, which left a competitive advantage for local research-
ers who are used to and capable of working with researchers from English-speaking 
countries. On the other hand, this pattern sufficiently responds to the understanding 
of East Asian internationalization, which considers using English as an effective 
way of internationalizing higher education (Chan and Lo 2008). In addition, the 
term “intranational” is used to incorporate research collaborations among four 
Chinese societies (Hong Kong, mainland China, Taiwan, and Macau). However, 
collaborations with researchers in Macau did not exist, and those with researchers 
in Taiwan were rare. Establishing collaborations with researchers in mainland China 
and English-speaking countries are the major forms of regional and transnational 
collaborations in the field of HER in Hong Kong.
Phase 1: Before
1994
Phase 2: 1995-2004
Phase 3: 2005-2014
Solely authored articles
6
33
159
Local collaboration
5
22
97
Intranational collaboration
1
1
31
Transnational collaboration
0
4
77
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
No. of Journal Articles Published
Fig. 8.4  Collaboration patterns of local researchers on higher education (Note: The total number 
of jointly authored/multiauthored articles were 6 in phase 1, 23 in phase 2, and 187 in phase 3. 
Local, intranational, and transnational collaborations are not mutually exclusive, as some publica-
tions involve researchers from Hong Kong, the intranational region (mainland China, Taiwan, or 
Macau), and the transnational region (foreign countries) simultaneously)
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

158
The Scope of Higher Education Research
The increase of cross-border collaborations suggests changes in the themes and 
issues that higher education researchers are interested in. This study therefore cat-
egorizes the publications in the dataset into three types: local studies (focusing on 
higher education issues in Hong Kong), intranational studies (focusing on national 
issues or comparative issues between Hong Kong, mainland China, Taiwan, and 
Macau) and transnational studies (focusing on foreign countries or beyond these 
Chinese societies, although the research still includes them). Figure 8.6 indicates 
that HER in Hong Kong has experienced a rapid growth in local, intranational, and 
transnational studies, whereas local studies have been the mainstream research topic 
over the last three decades. Nevertheless, the situation has slightly changed, as local 
researchers on higher education have been more willing to conduct intranational 
and transnational studies. However, as shown in the figure, the proportion of intra-
national studies still remains at slightly over 26% between Phase 2 and Phase 3, 
although the actual number has increased. In contrast, the proportion of transna-
tional studies has increased from 1/19 in Phase 2 to over 1/4 in Phase 3. In short, this 
changing scope of research reflects the cosmopolitan model of knowledge networks 
in Hong Kong (Postiglione 2013) as well as the degree of transnationality in HER.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Phase 1: Before
1995
Phase 2: 1995-
2004
Phase 3: 2005-
2014
No. of Journal Articles Published
Phases
Hong Kong (with same
affiliation)
Hong Kong (with multiple
affiliations)
Macau
Taiwan
Mainland China
Other Asian countries
English-speaking countries
The rest of the world
Fig. 8.5  Detailed collaboration patterns of local researchers on higher education (Note: English-­
speaking countries include Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the UK, and the USA)
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

159
Conclusion
This chapter has reported several trends of HER in Hong Kong. First, the findings 
indicate a growing number of HER publications, which emerged in the context of 
massification of higher education in Hong Kong. Second, the emergence and expan-
sion of the sub-degree sector generates certain new inputs in terms of players and 
topics for the field of HER in the territory. Finally, the proliferation of HER has been 
influenced by the processes of internationalization (within the context of globaliza-
tion) and intranationalization (within the context of the closer integration with 
mainland China). However, although the findings indicate a growing number of 
publications, of which the research scope has gone beyond Hong Kong, local studies 
remain to be the mainstream research topic in the city.
Apparently, the findings do not show that players in the field of HER have inter-
nalized or absorbed (normative) “cosmopolitanism” by developing a cosmopolitan 
vision or embracing cosmopolitan core values, namely, cultural diversity and cosmo-
politan citizenship, in their practices of internationalization (as well as intranational-
ization). Instead, the limited evidence only reflects some signs of “cosmopolitanization” 
mainly as an expansion of scope in the field. However, the internationalization initia-
tives, which consist of expanding the higher education sector, recruiting nonlocal 
students and academic staff, developing more translocal research networks, and 
strengthening them by hiring more nonlocal researchers and junior academics, are 
based more or less on socioeconomic needs and political goals. This belief inevitably 
encourages or pushes more local players to act translocally.
8
31
138
2
15
88
1
3
96
1
7
23
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Phase 1: Before 1995
Phase 2: 1995 to 2004
Phase 3: 2005-2014
No. of Journal Articles Published
Phases
Local studies
Intranational studies
Transnational studies
Not applicable
Fig. 8.6  Number of local, intranational, and transnational studies on higher education (Note: “Not 
applicable” refers to the theoretical or conceptual articles or reviews without a geographical scope 
and those without indicating the geographical scope of their studies)
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

160
The findings of this study reveal that HER in Hong Kong is partially able to con-
nect with a larger research community without losing touch with the local commu-
nity. This “walking on two legs” approach may demonstrate the idea of “anchoring 
globalization” (Postiglione 2013) and provides a conceptual framework for concur-
rent engagement at the local, national, and global levels. Importantly, although HER 
in Hong Kong cannot become fundamentally translocal or transnational in the cur-
rent phase, the special historical background of the city-state allows it to be more 
easily relaxed from the state-centric perspective.6 This constitutes an argument that 
a cosmopolitan turn can exist in the dynamics and transformations of the research 
community on higher education in Hong Kong and in turn develop a cosmopolitan 
vision in the higher education sector.
Notes
	1.	 According to Tight (2004), two major approaches are used in HER: the policy 
approach and the teaching and learning approach (also see Horta and Jung 2014).
	2.	 An increasing integration and interdependence of socioeconomic domains is 
found between Hong Kong and mainland China during the post-1997 era.
	3.	 The authors wish to thank Anatoly Oleksiyenko, Lina Vyas, and Shuangye Chen 
for the information on the recent developments of HER at their universities.
	4.	 In this study, local researchers on higher education refer to higher education 
researchers who have affiliations with HEIs or other organizations in Hong 
Kong.
	5.	 These eight public HEIs, which are funded by the government through the UGC, 
form the core part of the higher education system in Hong Kong.
	6.	 Beck (2003) noted that cosmopolitanization refers to a transformation process 
with which all social development would become fundamentally transnational.
References
Altbach, P. G. (2014). The emergence of a field: Research and training in higher education. Studies 
in Higher Education, 39(8), 1306–1320.
Beck, U. (2003). Rooted cosmopolitanism: Emerging from a rivalry of distinctions. In U. Beck, 
N. Sznaider, & R. Winter (Eds.), Global America? The cultural consequences of globalization 
(pp. 15–29). Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Beck, U. (2006). The cosmopolitan vision. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Beck, U. (2011). We do not live in an age of cosmopolitanism but in an age of cosmopolitisation: 
The ‘global other’ is in our midst. Irish Journal of Sociology, 19(1), 16–34.
Chan, D., & Lo, W. (2007). Running universities as enterprises: University governance changes in 
Hong Kong. Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 27(3), 305–322.
Chan, D., & Lo, W. (2008). University restructuring in East Asia: Trends, challenges and pros-
pects. Policy Futures in Education, 6(5), 641–652.
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

161
Education Bureau. (2014a). Developing Tertiary Education, Increasing Government-Subsidized 
University Places and Improving Private Higher Education’s Programs, from http://www.edb.gov.
hk/tc/about-edb/press/insiderperspective/insiderperspective20140818.htm. Accessed 23 Oct 2014.
Education Bureau 2014b Legislative council brief  – Recurrent funding for University Grants 
Committee-funded institutions in the 2015/16 roll-over year. Hong Kong: The Legislative Council.
Elsevier. (2014). Scopus., from http://www.elsevier.com/online-tools/scopus. Accessed 23 Oct 2014
Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong [HKU]. (2014a). .Program Brochure 2014-15 
MEd & PCAES, from http://web.edu.hku.hk/f/page/864/2014-04-1st-02%2003-med&pcaes.
pdf, Accessed 2 May 2015.
Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong [HKU]. (2014b). .MEd & PCAES Information 
Session, from http://web.edu.hku.hk/f/page/2465/MEd_PCAES_InfoDayPPT_2015-Intake.
pdf. Accessed 17 Feb 2015.
Fine, R. (2007). Cosmopolitanism. New York: Routledge.
Gornitzka, A. (2013). The interface between research and policy: A note with potential relevance 
for higher education. European Journal of Higher Education, 3(3), 255–264.
Gouldner, A. W. (1957). Cosmopolitans and locals: Toward and analysis of latent social roles. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 2(3), 281–306.
Harland, T. (2012). Higher education as an open-access discipline. Higher Education Research & 
Development, 31(5), 703–710.
Horta, H., & Jung, J. (2014). Higher education research in Asia: An archipelago, two continents or 
merely atomization? Higher Education, 68(1), 117–134.
Information Portal for Accredited Post-secondary Programmes [iPASS]. (2015). Statistical 
Information., from http://www.ipass.gov.hk/edb/index.php/en/home/statheader/stat, Accessed 
2 May 2015.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Kember, D. (2010). Opening up the road to nowhere: Problems with the path to mass higher educa-
tion in Hong Kong. Higher Education, 59(2), 167–179.
Li, M. (2011). Border crossing and market integration: Mainland consumers meet Hong Kong 
suppliers. In D. W. Chapman, W. K. Cummings, & G. A. Postiglione (Eds.), Crossing borders 
in East Asian Higher Education (pp. 319–342). Hong Kong: Springer/Comparative Education 
Research Centre, University of Hong Kong.
Lin, A. (2009). Local interpretation of global management discourses in higher education in Hong 
Kong: Potential impact on academic culture. Inter-Asia Cultural Studies, 10(2), 260–274.
Lo, W. Y. W. (in press). A great leap forward: Changes and challenges for private higher educa-
tion in Hong Kong. In M. Shah & S. Nair (Eds.), Global trends and changes in private higher 
education. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Lo, W. Y. W., & Ng, F. S. K. (2013). A critical reflection on internationalization of higher education 
in Hong Kong: The search for a cosmopolitan alternative. Asia Pacific Journal of Educational 
Development, 2(1), 37–46.
Macfarlane, B., & Grant, B. (2012). The growth of higher education studies: From forerunners to 
pathtakers. Higher Education Research & Development, 31(5), 621–624.
Merton, R. K. (1968). Social theory and social structure. New York: Free Press.
Norris, M., & Oppenheim, C. (2007). Comparing alternatives to the web of science for coverage of 
the social sciences’ literature. Journal of Informetrics, 1(2), 161–169.
Nussbaum, M. C. (1994). Patriotism and cosmopolitanism. Boston Review, 19(3), 3–34.
Postiglione, G.A. (2005) China’s Hong Kong bridge. In C. Li (Ed), Bridging minds across the Pacific: 
U.S.-China Educational Exchanges, 1978–2003 (pp. 201–218). Lanham: Lexington Books.
Postiglione, G. A. (2013). Anchoring globalization in Hong Kong’s research universities: Network 
agents, institutional arrangements, and brain circulation. Studies in Higher Education, 38(3), 
345–366.
Sadlak, J., & Altbach, P. G. (Eds.). (1997). Higher education research at the turn of the new 
century: Structures, issues, and trends. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
8  Higher Education Research in Hong Kong: Context, Trends, and Vision

162
Scott, P. (1998) Massification, internationalisation and globalisation. In P. Scott (Ed.), The globali-
sation of higher education (pp. 108–129). Buckingham: Open University Press and Society for 
Research into Higher Education.
Teichler, U. (1996). Comparative higher education: Potentials and limits. Higher Education, 32(4), 
431–465.
Teichler, U. (2005). Research in higher education in Europe. European Journal of Education, 
40(4), 447–469.
Tight, M. (2004). Research into higher education: An a-theoretical community of practice. Higher 
Education Research & Development, 23(4), 395–411.
Tight, M. (2012). Researching higher education. Maidenhead: Society for Research into Higher 
Education and Open University Press.
Tsang, Y. K. (2008). The 2008 policy address: Embracing new challenges. Hong Kong: Government 
Printer.
Tung, C. H. (1997). The 1997 policy address: Building Hong Kong for a new era. Hong Kong: 
Government Printer.
Tung, C.H. (2000). The 2000 policy address: Serving community, sharing common goals. Hong 
Kong: Government Printer.
University Grants Committee [UGC]. (1996). Higher education in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: 
University Grants Committee.
University Grants Committee [UGC]. (2004). Hong Kong higher education: To make a difference, 
to move with the times. Hong Kong: University Grants Committee.
University Grants Committee [UGC]. (2010). Aspirations for the higher education system in Hong 
Kong – Report of the University Grants Committee. Hong Kong: University Grants Committee.
University Grants Committee [UGC]. (2015). .Statistics, from http://cdcf.ugc.edu.hk/cdcf/statEn-
try.do?lang=EN. Accessed 2 May 2015.
William Yat Wai Lo  is assistant professor in the Department of International Education and 
Lifelong Learning, Education University of Hong Kong.  His current research focuses on 
higher education policy and governance in East Asia. His work appears in international peer-
reviewed journals, including  Higher Education,  Higher Education Policy,  Comparative 
Education, and Compare. He is the author of the book University Rankings: Implications for 
Higher Education in Taiwan.
Felix Sai Kit Ng  is a doctoral researcher at the Humboldt University of Berlin. Before his PhD 
study in Germany, he was a teaching and research assistant in the Department of Applied Social 
Sciences, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, and obtained his MPhil in Social Development and 
Social Theory. He was also a visiting student at the University of Nottingham and the University 
of Queensland. Except for higher education development, he is currently studying the notions of 
cosmopolitanism and sustainable living in Greater China, focusing particularly on how Taiwanese 
and mainland Chinese green-living individuals recognize, perceive, and respond to climate change 
and severe pollution issues in the course of reflexive modernization.
W.Y.W. Lo and F.S.K. Ng

163
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_9
Chapter 9
Higher Education Research in South Korea: 
Research Themes and Methodologies  
in National Journals
Jisun Jung
Abstract  This chapter explores the development of higher education research in 
South Korea (Korea, henceforth) from international and national perspectives. It 
first presents a brief historical background of higher education research in Korea in 
terms of academic programs, related associations, and specialized journals. The 
chapter points out the limited international engagement of the higher education 
research community in Korea and particularly focuses on the analysis of higher 
education research publications in national journals in terms of research themes, 
methodologies, and levels of analysis. The results show that higher education 
research in Korea has been heavily focused on policy studies at the national level 
and some student issues at the individual level. Moreover, research has mostly been 
based on quantitative methodological approaches and document analysis. The study 
suggests that higher education research in Korea needs to be more internationally 
engaged and more diversified in terms of research themes and methodologies.
Introduction
Higher education research is widely regarded as a subdiscipline of education rather 
than an independent field of study, and it is object-focused based on a broad range 
of disciplines (Altbach et al. 2006; Teichler 1996). Higher education research has 
normally progressed when the system expands (Jones 2012) as it needs more structured 
information gathering and a broader academic lens to interpret certain phenomena 
and provide practical advices (Altbach et al. 2006). For this reason, there is a huge 
difference in the development of higher education research between regions depend-
ing on the maturity of their higher education systems. Some countries, such as the 
USA, have accumulated numerous documents for higher education research at the 
national and institutional levels, and they also have advanced academic programs at 
J. Jung (*) 
Division of Policy, Administration and Social Sciences Education, Faculty of Education,  
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China
e-mail: jisun@hku.hk

164
the master’s and doctoral levels (Altbach et al. 2006). Europe also has a relatively 
long history of higher education research although its focus is somewhat different 
from that in the USA (Tight 2008; Teichler 1996).
On the other hand, interest in higher education research in Asia only started very 
recently. Despite the rapid growth of higher education in Asia (Marginson 2011), 
its research community has had limited scope and audiences. Although some 
researchers, including Arimoto (2000) and Chen and Hu (2012), have examined the 
development of higher education research in Japan and China, these studies were 
not sufficiently conducted in other Asian higher education systems. Recently, some 
researchers such as Jung and Horta (2013, 2015) conducted an analysis of higher 
education research in Asia based on international publications and collaboration 
patterns, and they found that international publications in the higher education field 
among Asian authors were very limited and relied on collaboration with authors 
from English-speaking countries. Their studies are meaningful in that they shed 
light on the evolution of higher education research in Asia. However, their approach 
was limited since they only focused on international publications with a lack of 
understanding of the local context. As Marfarlane and Grant (2012) pointed out, 
understanding the development of higher education research cannot be done without 
reference to national systems. In fact, some East Asian countries have a long history 
in their national higher education research communities.
This chapter explores the development of higher education research in South 
Korea (Korea, henceforth). The Korean higher education system has grown rapidly 
during the last 60 years in terms not only of size and scale but also of quality. With 
the development of higher education, the higher education research also has become 
specialized and professionalized (Jung 2015). In this context, the chapter first briefly 
examines the historical background of higher education research in Korea in terms 
of academic programs, related associations, and specialized journals. The study also 
points out the limited international engagement of the higher education research 
community in Korea. The chapter particularly focuses on the analysis of higher 
education research publications in national journals in terms of research themes, 
methodologies, and levels of analysis.
From the 1960s to the 2010s
Higher education research in Korea began in the late 1960s, but the research agendas 
have mostly been driven by the government rather than by the academic community. 
Jung (2015) presented the initial organizations for higher education research in 
Korea at the government level, such as the Division of Higher Education Committee 
supervised by the Educational Policy Department, Ministry of Education (formed in 
1968), the Korean Educational Development Institute (KEDI) (formed in 1972), the 
Korean Council for University Education (KCUE) (formed in 1982), and the Korean 
Research Institute for Vocational Education and Training (KRIVET) (formed in 
1996). These institutes are fully or partially supported by the government in terms 
J. Jung

165
of funding resources, and due to the nature of the sources of funding, they have 
mostly conducted policy-oriented research and focused on publishing policy reports 
rather than academic journals. As other higher education systems have already 
experienced, the main functions of these institutions are to consult and support 
central and local governments on higher education issues (Chen and Hu 2012). For 
example, with the 5.31 Education Reform in 1995, the Korean government 
announced several higher education reform policies including quality assurance and 
a university evaluation system, an academic promotion system, and the restructur-
ing of several legal issues. Since then, higher education research has been highly 
active, focusing on the main policy reform issues from an academic perspective. 
This developmental process is similar to what happened in education research in 
different contexts. For example, as Hofstetter (2012) pointed out, education research 
becomes highly active and socially engaged when there is a need to respond to 
certain social and professional demands.
Higher education research in Korea is relatively new and underdeveloped but an 
emerging field (Jung 2015). It is difficult to define higher education research as an 
independent academic field in Korea as it still has a limited number of specialized 
academic programs and academic appointments. It also has a limited number of 
national scholarly associations and the emergence of core journals, which are the 
requirements of a new academic field (Bayer 1983; Blackwell and Blackmore 2003; 
Jones 2012). First of all, having an academic program matters as a response to 
demands for specialized knowledge and skills (Jones 2012). Jung and Horta (2013) 
have already pointed out the challenges to higher education research in East Asia, 
and these challenges are mostly related to the small number of academic programs 
specializing only in higher education. Exceptionally, China has 10 PhD and 60 mas-
ter’s higher education programs (Li 2005), and Japan has a few programs, but other 
countries in Asia have a very limited number of degree programs. Most universities 
do not have higher education programs at the postgraduate level. Although some col-
leges of education provide a small number of higher education-related curricula, they 
are mostly subprograms under the educational administration or lifelong education. 
Only three university research institutes exist that focus on higher education research 
in Korea (Rumbley et al. 2014), and other research institutes conduct higher educa-
tion research partly when they focus on education research in general. Most educa-
tion issues are related to primary and secondary schools, while higher education has 
been mostly ignored by researchers in the field of education, as Altbach et al. (2006) 
pointed out. Despite the small number of academic programs specializing in higher 
education, it is promising that more academics are specializing in higher education 
in recent years. A few major research universities in Korea, including Seoul National 
University, Korea University, Yonsei University, and Sungkyunkwan University, 
have recruited academics specializing in higher education, and they have been 
actively engaged in higher education nationally and internationally.
It is believed that having a core journal is essential to build a field of study (Bayer 
1983), but there is no academic journal exclusively focusing on higher education 
research in Korea. Instead, researchers publish their articles in education journals 
such as Educational Administration, the Journal of Economics and Finance of 
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

166
Education, and Educational Sociology (Shin et al. 2008; Byun 2009; Kim et al. 
2010). Higher education researchers in Korea have a scholarly association, which is 
called the Korean Society for the Study of Higher Education Policy and was formed 
in 1988; however, most members in the association overlap with the Korean 
Educational Administration Society instead of being exclusively affiliated with the 
higher education association. Moore’s (1989) comment, “higher education is a sister 
field of educational administration,” is still employed in the Korean context.
International Perspective
The increased interest in the research community based on a common identity com-
plements the development of higher education itself (Teichler 1996). In this process, 
engaging an international higher education research community is critical as several 
higher education systems share similar challenging issues regionally and globally, 
and they require mutual understanding to resolve issues (Jung and Horta 2013). 
However, higher education research in Asian countries has been nationally oriented 
for several decades (Arimoto 2000), and several scholars including Chen and Hu 
(2012) argue that more efforts are needed to strengthen the Asian higher education 
research community at the international level.
Higher education research in Korea is particularly less active in the international 
community. According to Jung and Horta’s (2013) research, which compared the 
number of publication in international higher education journals among Asia countries, 
Korea is ranked eighth. Authors affiliated with Korean institutions published only 
25 articles in higher education-specialized journals from 1980 to 2012. Compared 
to the scale (i.e., high enrollment rate) of higher education in Korea, this is some-
what disappointing. For example, academics in a small-scale higher education sys-
tem like Hong Kong produced five times as many articles in international journals 
during the same period. The results show the underrepresentation of Korean-based 
authors in international journals, and it is also presents a continuing national focus 
trend in higher education research in Korea. As Chen and Hu (2012) have already 
pointed out in the Chinese context, international higher education research in Asia 
is still limited since it is very much based on individual networks, foreign visitors, 
translations of classic works, and returning scholars educated overseas.
Jung and Horta (2013) also compared coauthorship patterns of each country to 
see the collaboration trend of higher education research in Asia. Authors in Korea 
rely heavily on international coauthorship when they publish articles in international 
journals. On other hand, the number of articles based on domestic collaboration is 
very unusual. For example, there have been 12 coauthored articles between Korean 
authors and international authors, but there have been only 2 articles between 
Korean authors. Interestingly, those 12 articles were all written with US-based 
coauthors, which indicates that collaboration with authors from Asian regions or 
other European countries is very rare. In the following analysis conducted by Jung 
and Horta (2015), which included a broad range of journals, not only higher 
J. Jung

167
education-­specialized journals but also social science journals, the result shows a 
similar trend. Of the coauthored articles related to higher education, 69% are 
coauthored by peers based abroad. In addition, Korea is the country with the lowest 
collaboration with other Asian countries in higher education research; instead, it 
relies overly on collaboration with US authors on issues that are of interest. 
Researchers attribute these results to the fact that the majority of academics in social 
science and education in Korea were trained in the USA for their PhDs, and their 
influence remains when they return to Korea and conduct their research, in terms 
not only of individual networks for coauthorship but also of the theoretical and 
methodological frameworks that they apply.
With these developmental trends, Jung (2015) discusses the challenges in 
balancing national and international perspectives in higher education research in 
Korea. Although higher education research in Korea has developed rapidly during 
the past three decades in terms of diverse themes and methodologies, its drivers 
have been focused on national peer-reviewed journals, and two academic communities 
at the national and international level are separately employing different participants 
and strategies.
Journals: Where Is Higher Education Research Being 
Published?
To explore the main research themes and methodologies in Korean higher education 
research, this study selected key national journals in the field of education. Since 
there is no independent journal specializing only in higher education, the study 
selected journals that include higher education research most frequently. Although 
a number of journals include higher education research themes, this study selected 
16 journals based on Jung (2015)’s classification. They are all peer-reviewed journals 
and registered in the Korean National Research Foundation. As Table 9.1 indicates, 
a number of journals are highly active in publishing articles in the field of education, 
and the total number of such articles from 1995 to 2012 was 7956. Among these 
7956 articles, 1385 articles are related to higher education, with an average of 17.4% 
of the content of each journal related to higher education. There are differences 
between journals in terms of the proportion of higher education research. For example, 
27.4% of the content of The Journal of Economics and Finance of Education is 
related to higher education research, while only 10.2% of the content of The Journal 
of Educational Evaluation concerns higher education-­related issues. Despite the 
differences between journals, it is common that the number of higher education-
related articles from all journals has increased in recent years. This study selected 
four main journals based on a reasonable number of articles for analysis and online 
accessibility: the Korean Journal of Educational Administration, The Journal of 
Career Educational Research, the Korean Journal of Comparative Education, and 
The Journal of Economics and Finance of Education.
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

168
Table 9.1  Number of articles in higher education
Journal
Total number 
of articles in 
1995–2012
Number of articles 
with higher 
education themes
Percent(%) of higher 
education research in 
a journal
Korean Journal of Educational 
Administration
1057
219
20.7
The Journal of Career 
Educational Research
502
132
26.3
Korean Journal of Comparative 
Education
490
124
25.3
The Journal of Economics and 
Finance of Education
420
115
27.4
The Journal of Vocational 
Education Research
543
103
19.0
Korean Journal of Educational 
Research
768
96
12.5
The Journal of Korean 
Education
592
91
15.4
Asian Journal of Education
441
85
19.3
The Journal of Educational 
Information and Media
419
68
16.2
Journal of Educational 
Technology
556
60
10.8
The Journal of Law in Education
294
58
19.7
Korean Journal of Sociology of 
Education
462
55
11.9
The Journal of Educational 
Evaluation
527
54
10.2
Journal of Vocational Education 
& Training
255
44
17.3
The Korean Educational Review
330
41
12.4
The Journal of Research in 
Education
300
40
13.3
Total
7956
1385
17.4
Themes: What Areas of Higher Education Have or Have Not 
Been Researched?
This study followed Tight’s (2004, 2012) eight categories to examine main research 
themes in higher education and added one new research theme, internationalization. 
The nine themes are related to the following issues:
•	 Teaching and learning: student learning, different kinds of students, teaching in 
higher education, the “how to” genre
•	 Course design: the higher education curriculum, technologies for learning, stu-
dent writing, assessment, postgraduate course design
J. Jung

169
•	 Student experience: accessing higher education, the on-course experience, suc-
cess and non-completion, the postgraduate experience, the experience of differ-
ent student groups, the transition from higher education to work
•	 Quality: course evaluation, grading and outcomes, national monitoring practices, 
league tables, system standards
•	 System policy: the policy context, national policies, comparative policy studies, 
historical policy studies, funding relationships
•	 Institutional management: higher education management practice, institutional 
leadership and governance, institutional development and history, institutional 
structure, economies of scale and institutional mergers, relations between higher 
education, industry, and community
•	 Academics: academic roles, academic development, academic careers, women 
and minority ethnic academics, the changing nature of academic work, academic 
work in different countries, nonacademic work
•	 Knowledge: the nature of research, disciplinarity, forms of knowledge, the nature 
of the university
•	 Internationalization
As Table  9.2 shows, research themes are very diverse in higher education 
although some research themes are much more popular than others. Articles about 
system policy are the most frequently published in educational journals (32.8%) 
even if we consider certain differences in the focus of journals. For example, The 
Journal of Career Educational Research is highly specialized in student issues 
(80.0%), while policy issues are less regarded in general. On the other hand, it is 
Table 9.2  Research themes in higher education
Korean Journal 
of Educational 
Administration
The Journal of 
Career 
Educational 
Research
Korean Journal 
of Comparative 
Education
The Journal 
of Economics 
and Finance 
of Education Total
Teaching and 
learning
5 (2.3)
–
–
–
8 (1.4)
Course design
13 (5.9)
18 (13.8)
18 (14.5)
1 (0.9)
51 (8.6)
Student experience
28 (12.8)
104 (80.0)
5 (4.8)
33 (28.7)
170 
(28.8)
Quality
30 (13.7)
2 (1.5)
31 (25.0)
10 (8.7)
73 
(12.4)
System policy
83 (37.9)
2 (1.5)
45 (36.3)
64 (55.7)
194 
(32.8)
Institutional 
management
39 (17.8)
2 (1.5)
6 (4.8)
6 (5.2)
53 (9.0)
Academics
17 (7.8)
1 (0.8)
9 (7.3)
–
27 (4.6)
Knowledge
3 (1.4)
1 (0.8)
–
–
4 (0.7)
Internationalization
1 (0.5)
–
9 (7.3)
1 (0.9)
11 (1.9)
Total
219 (100.0)
130 (100.0)
124 (100.0)
115 (100.0)
591 
(100.0)
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

170
clear that policy issues are the most popular ones in several key journals such as The 
Journal of Economics and Finance of Education (55.7%), the Korean Journal of 
Educational Administration, and the Korean Journal of Comparative Education 
(36.3). Student issues are also frequently published in several journals including the 
Journal of Career Educational Research, The Journal of Economics and Finance of 
Education (28.7%) and the Korean Journal of Educational Administration (12.8%). 
Student issues are less common in the Korean Journal of Comparative Education 
since a comparative perspective is more useful in discussing macro-level issues 
including policies rather than individual student matters. On the other hand, specific 
themes such as quality and internationalization (7.3%) are relatively important in 
the Korean Journal of Comparative Education (25%) as the concept itself has been 
initialized in the global context, and authors have interpreted issues from a com-
parative education perspective. Topics regarding institutional management are the 
most frequently published in the Korean Journal of Educational Administration 
(17.8%). Course design topics appear in some journals such as The Journal of 
Career Educational Research (13.8%) and the Korean Journal of Comparative 
Education (14.5%), while they are less regarded in different journals. Other topics 
such as teaching and learning, academics, and knowledge are not common in 
selected journals, and they are explored less frequently.
Although the nine research themes well describe in general what has or what has 
not been researched in higher education, it was difficult to see what specific issues 
were studied. Therefore, the study elaborated research themes based on subthemes, 
as Table 9.3 demonstrates. For example, topics regarding teaching and learning deal 
very little with learning experience, learning community, and teaching and learning 
competency. On the other hand, there are various other topics regarding course 
design, and many of them include case studies such as implementations of new 
courses. Some curriculum issues such as curriculum for freshmen, postgraduate 
education, teacher education, online learning, and general education are also impor-
tant in course design. It was expected that there would be a lot of different issues 
regarding students’ experience; however, the results showed that some topics are 
dominant in student issues. For instance, employment issues such as job search and 
job performance are regarded as extremely important, and other issues including 
access, admission, or student loan are also commonly studied. The issue of quality 
is mostly defined with a few dimensions such as university evaluation, program 
evaluation, organizational effectiveness, and quality assurance. The system policy 
theme includes several subtopics, with reform policy, finance, tuition and scholar-
ship, legal action, and marketization being well-developed research areas. In addi-
tion, when the government implements new policy programs, several articles are 
published to analyze the effectiveness of those programs. The theme of institutional 
management is intensively discussed in the Korean Journal of Educational 
Administration, and several topics have been discussed in the journal such as gover-
nance and culture, funding management, autonomy, student recruitment, leadership 
and presidency, and university social services. Regarding the theme of academics, 
most articles focus on the human resource management perspective such as recruit-
ment, salary, promotion, evaluation, and related legal issues rather than on academ-
J. Jung

171
Table 9.3  Research topics in higher education
Korean Journal of Educational 
Administration
The Journal of Career 
Educational Research
Korean Journal of 
Comparative Education
The Journal of Economics and 
Finance of Education
Teaching and learning
Learning experience (1)
Learning experience (1)
Learning community (1)
Learning competency (2)
Teaching competency (1)
Course design
Implementation of new courses 
(3)
Implementation of new 
courses (3)
Implementation of new 
courses (7)
Implementation of new courses 
(1)
Teacher education (2)
Programs for freshmen 
(1)
Teacher education (1)
Programs for freshmen (2)
Curriculum design (1)
Programs for freshmen (1)
General education (1)
Career development 
program (13)
General education (5)
Postgraduate education (2)
Credit system (1)
Credit system (1)
Curriculum design (3)
Online learning (1)
Course satisfaction (1)
Student experience
Access, enrollment, and dropout 
(6)
Access, enrollment, and 
dropout (3)
Self-esteem (1)
Access, enrollment, and dropout 
(4)
Student loan (2)
Extracurricular activities 
(1)
Academic achievement (1)
Student loan (6)
Academic achievement (5)
Job search (20)
Admission (2)
Academic achievement (2)
Extracurricular activities (1)
Job performance (2)
Job search (1)
Extracurricular activities (1)
Admission (4)
Gender (2)
Diverse background of learner 
(1)
Private tutoring (9)
Job search (3)
Career development (74)
Admission (1)
Job performance (5)
Cognitive development 
(2)
Job performance (10)
Graduation requirement (1)
Student mobility (1)
(continued)
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

172
Table 9.3  (continued)
Korean Journal of Educational 
Administration
The Journal of Career 
Educational Research
Korean Journal of 
Comparative Education
The Journal of Economics and 
Finance of Education
Quality
University evaluation (17)
Program evaluation (1)
University evaluation (19)
University evaluation (1)
Quality assurance (3)
Quality assurance (1)
Quality assurance (10)
Quality assurance (2)
Organizational effectiveness (2)
Organizational effectiveness 
(1)
Organizational effectiveness (5)
Course evaluation (8)
Quality of teaching (1)
Program evaluation (2)
System policy
University reform (17)
Admission policy (2)
University reform (24)
University reform (1)
Market (2)
Market (2)
Market (1)
Finance (7)
Finance (4)
Finance (23)
Public vs. private university (7)
Admission policy (13)
Public vs. private university (6)
Policy for local university (2)
Tuition and scholarship (1)
Policy for local university (2)
Admission policy (11)
New institutions (1)
Community college (3)
Tuition and scholarship (8)
Admission policy (1)
New institutions (7)
Tuition and scholarship (19)
New policy programs (12)
New policy programs (5)
Degree awarding system (3)
Science and research policy (2)
Science and research policy (3)
Legal issues (1)
Legal issues (4)
J. Jung

173
Korean Journal of Educational 
Administration
The Journal of Career 
Educational Research
Korean Journal of 
Comparative Education
The Journal of Economics and 
Finance of Education
Institutional 
management
Funding management (5)
Student recruitment (1)
Managing new institution (2)
Funding management (4)
Governance (4)
University-industry 
collaboration (1)
Institutional autonomy (1)
Student recruitment (2)
Managing new institution (2)
Student recruitment (1)
Institutional autonomy (6)
Program management (2)
Program management (2)
Student recruitment (2)
Administrative staff development (4)
University leadership and 
presidency (6)
Alumni (1)
Culture (1)
Environment (2)
Social service (3)
University-high school 
collaboration (1)
Academics
Academic recruitment (7)
Human resource 
management (1)
Academic recruitment (4)
Evaluation: promotion and 
tenure (4)
Evaluation: promotion and 
tenure (1)
Research productivity (2)
Salary (1)
Teaching activities (1)
Gender (1)
Academic freedom (1)
Professional development (1)
Patent (1)
Human resource management 
(1)
Legal right (1)
Knowledge
Research trend (1)
Research trend (1)
Academic capitalism (1)
Internationalization
Mobility program (1)
Foreign students (1)
Foreign students (1)
Internationalization policy (1)
International exchange program 
(1)
Internationalization policy (7)
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

174
ics’ daily activities. There is a lack of research on knowledge issues in general. The 
internationalization theme focuses on foreign students’ experience or government 
policy for internationalization strategy.
Methodologies: How Has Higher Education Been Researched?
This study also examined the research methodologies that were used in selected 
publications following Tight’s (2004, 2012) classification. Those methodologies are 
as follows (see Tight 2012 for more details):
•	 Case study: practices in specific departments or institutions (as described by 
authors)
•	 Action research: small-scale, evaluative case studies, which mainly examine the 
application of innovative practice or policy within a course, department or 
institution
•	 Ethnography: the study of people in their natural settings (i.e., examining the 
lives of academics and students within universities)
•	 Document analysis: most studies include documentary analysis, but this indi-
cates text analysis no further than a reference to the existing research or policy 
literature on the topic (i.e., historical studies, literate reviews)
•	 Interviews: asking people questions and listening to their responses (i.e., structured, 
semi-structured, unstructured, conversational, depth, individual, group or focus)
•	 Multivariate: quantitative in nature, based on questionnaires offering multiple-­
choice answers
•	 Critical: taking a critical perspective on the issues, seeking solutions
•	 Conceptual: concerned with ideas and their contested meanings
•	 Auto-/biographical: qualitative in nature, focusing on individual experience
As Table 9.4 indicates, multivariate studies were the most common analytical 
method in some journals, in particular, studies about students’ careers and the financ-
ing of higher education frequently apply quantitative research methods. In other jour-
nals such as the Korean Journal of Educational Administration and the Korean 
Journal of Comparative Education employ document analysis and ­conceptual analy-
sis in many studies. The results are consistent with previous studies in different con-
texts. Volkwein et al. (1988) showed that multivariate studies based on survey or 
secondary data sources are the most common method of analysis in higher education 
research, and other methods including descriptive policy critiques and small-scale, 
evaluative case studies are also common (Hayden and Parry 1997; Tight 2003). Tight 
(2011) pointed out that there is a lack of diverse methodological approaches to higher 
education research, and new methods need to be introduced, including auto/bio-
graphical and observational studies. For a long time, higher education research in 
Korea has relied on documentary analysis, and authors have focused on introducing 
policy documents from government or secondary documents from other countries’ 
cases; however, empirical analysis has been increasing in recent (Jung 2015).
J. Jung

175
Table 9.4  Research methodologies in higher education
Korean Journal of 
Educational 
Administration
The Journal of 
Career Educational 
Research
Korean Journal of 
Comparative 
Education
The Journal of 
Economics and 
Finance of 
Education
Total
Action research
11 (5.0)
8 (6.1)
–
3 (2.6)
22 (3.7)
Biography
1 (0.5)
1 (0.8)
–
–
2 (0.3)
Case study
14 (6.4)
–
6 (4.8)
3 (2.6)
23 (3.9)
Conceptual
24 (11.0)
–
1 (0.8)
2 (1.7)
27 (4.6)
Critical
19 (8.7)
–
1 (0.8)
9 (7.8)
29 (4.9)
Documentary
78 (35.6)
10 (7.6)
112 (90.3)
33 (28.7)
233 (39.5)
Ethnography
–
–
–
Interview
5 (2.3)
4 (3.0)
1 (0.8)
–
10 (1.7)
Multivariate
65 (29.7)
108 (81.8)
3 (2.4)
65 (56.5)
241 (40.8)
Scientometrics/bibliographic
2 (0.9)
1 (0.8)
–
–
3 (0.5)
Total
219 (100.0)
132 (100.0)
124 (100.0)
115 (100.0)
590 (100.0)
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

176
Research methodologies are also related to the limited levels of analysis. The 
majority of the analyses focused on either the individual or the national policy level, 
as shown in Table  9.5. For example, in the Korean Journal of Educational 
Administration, 20.5% of the studies were at the individual level, while 27.9% were 
at the national level. Studies at the individual level were also common in the Journal 
of Career Educational Research (75.8%) and in the Journal of Economics and 
Finance of Education (27.8%), and they mostly focused on student issues. Studies 
at the national level were also popular in the Korean Journal of Comparative 
Education (37.1%) and the Journal of Economics and Finance of Education 
(27.8%). The results show the lack of a multilevel approach in higher education 
research, which suggests the need for research on a variety of issues at different 
levels such as department and regional levels.
Conclusion: Issues and Challenges
Higher education research in Korea has progressed significantly during the last two 
or three decades in terms of the number of publications; however, engagement with 
the international community is still limited. Only a few academics publish their 
research in international journals, with most academics preferring to publish their 
research in national journals. Although we note the difficulties that non-English-­
speaking authors have in publishing their articles in international journals (Kwan 
2013), there is value to be had in engaging with the international research commu-
nity to share research ideas and findings in a global context. As higher education has 
Table 9.5  Level of analysis in higher education research
Korean Journal 
of Educational 
Administration
The Journal 
of Career 
Educational 
Research
Korean 
Journal of 
Comparative 
Education
The 
Journal of 
Economics 
and 
Finance of 
Education
Total
Individual
45 (20.5)
100 (75.8)
4 (3.2)
32 (27.8)
181 (30.7)
Course
9 (4.1)
20 (15.2)
16 (12.9)
1 (0.9)
46 (7.8)
Department
5 (2.3)
–
2 (1.6)
–
7 (1.2)
Discipline
3 (1.4)
1 (0.8)
–
–
4 (0.7)
Institution
67 (30.6)
9 (6.8)
29 (23.4)
28 (24.3)
133 (22.5)
Policy 
(program)
20 (9.1)
2 (1.5)
17 (13.7)
18 (15.7)
57 (9.7)
Region
6 (2.7)
–
–
3 (2.6)
9 (1.5)
Nation
61 (27.9)
–
46 (37.1)
32 (27.8)
139 (23.6)
International
3 (1.4)
–
10 (8.1)
1 (0.9)
14 (2.4)
Total
219 (100.0)
132 (100.0)
124 (100.0)
115 (100.0)
590 (100.0)
J. Jung

177
become globally important and shares common issues across higher education 
systems, involvement in the international research community offers new chances 
for academics to have access to new, international research networks of scholars and 
to disseminate knowledge in the broader research community. This will eventually 
contribute to the development of policy and practices that might be locally available 
(Jones 2012).
As Jones (2000) mentioned, a higher education research community emerges 
during a time when the system has expanded. Higher education research in Korea 
has also increased in terms of the number of publications, especially in national 
journals, in line with the expansion of higher education, and it is important to main-
tain national roots and engage in a national research dialogue. However, even if 
many educational journals include higher education topics in national education 
journals and its coverage has increased, the themes and methodologies are still 
limited. One main finding of this analysis is that policy issues are dominant themes 
in journals, and most of them are highly contextualized national agendas such as 
reform policy, new funding schemes, new legal actions, and admission policies 
including entrance exam issues. Even if we consider the nature of higher education 
research with an emphasis on social relevance (Teichler 1996), research themes 
need to be diversified.
A second finding is that some research themes at the individual level, such as 
academics and students, are also excessively related to the policy dimension to policy 
dimensions. For example, research on academics mainly concerns personnel policy 
such as recruitment, evaluation, salary, or legal issues of adjunct academics, and 
there is a lack of studies about culture, values, ideas, and practices among academ-
ics. Regarding student issues, many articles focus on employment problems or 
admission policy rather than on students’ lives at university. In addition, many studies 
focus on institutionalization rather than practice (Jung 2015). For example, studies 
on institutional leadership describe the process and regulations for presidency 
selection rather than the impact of leadership on university culture or governance. A 
lot of studies on quality focus on indicators and methodologies for evaluation rather 
than on what the real changes are caused by these evaluation policies (Jung 2015).
Third, there are also many comparative studies in Korean national journals. In 
general, comparative research is supposed to involve internationally collaborative 
articles (Kosmutzky & Krucken 2014). However, in Korea, comparative studies 
are mainly based on existing document analysis without any collaboration with 
international academics or field research. In many cases, they are simply transla-
tions or summaries of policy reports and literature from secondary documents in other 
languages. This is consistent with the concerns of Teichler (1996), who stated that 
comparative study often tends to provide sketchy, incomplete knowledge, with a 
lack of theoretical and methodological rigor despite the growth of its popularity 
with more accessible information.
Regarding research methodology, although there have been more empirical studies 
since 2000, the majority of papers are still prescriptive in nature, providing implica-
tions for national policies and their implementation, and many of them are based on 
reviews of the literature including policy reports.
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

178
In conclusion, there is still not enough critical mass (Jones 2012, p. 711) in 
higher education research in Korea. Having critical mass is important for moving 
the field forward as it requires a larger number of core members working on research 
and a greater investment in research infrastructure. There also needs to be more 
integration and collaboration between academics from diverse disciplines, and more 
attention needs to be paid to graduate education to train higher education experts. 
The results also suggest that higher education researchers in Korea need to be more 
engaged in the international academic community, applying their research to inter-
national discourses. Having diverse perspectives and various actors in research 
design and the interpretation of findings is important for higher education research 
(Teichler 1996).
There is no doubt that higher education research has become important both 
globally and nationally. Higher education research is expected to have a substantive 
academic growth, and it is also important to have roots in the research imperative 
and the dynamics of disciplines (Clark 1996). It is also important to realize “what 
really matters is whether a piece of research is based on sound methods, has 
something interesting or useful to say and has been properly peer reviewed before 
publication” (Macfarlane 2011, p. 127).
References
Altbach, P. G., Bozeman, L. A., Janashia, N., & Rumbley, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Higher education: 
A worldwide inventory of centers and programs. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Arimoto, A. (2000). Recent developments of higher education research and higher education policy 
in Japan. In I. S. Schwarz, & U. Teichler (Eds.), The institutional basis of higher education 
research: Experiences and perspectives (pp. 93–106). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Bayer, A. E. (1983). Multi-method strategies for defining “core” higher education journals. The 
Review of Higher Education, 6(2), 103–113.
Blackwell, R., & Blackmore, P. (Eds.). (2003). Towards strategic staff development in higher 
education. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Byun, K. Y. (2009). An exploratory study on the characteristics and knowledge base of the study of 
higher education. The Journal of Research in Education, 33, 147–176. in Korean.
Chen, S., & Hu, L. (2012). Higher education research as a field in China: Its formation and current 
landscape. Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 655–666.
Clark, B. (1996). Substantive growth and innovative organization: New categories for higher 
education research. Higher Education, 32(4), 417–430.
Hofstetter, R. (2012). Educational sciences: Evolutions of a pluridisciplinary discipline at the 
crossroads of other disciplinary and professional fields (20th century). British Journal of 
Educational Studies, 60(4), 317–335.
Jones, G. A. (2000). Higher education research and policy in Canada. In U. Teichler & J. Sadlak (Eds.), 
Higher education research: Its relationship to policy and practice (pp. 71–80). Oxford: IAU.
Jones, G. A. (2012). Reflections on the evolution of higher education as a field of study in Canada. 
Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 711–722.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Jung, J. (2015). Higher education research as a field of study in Korea: Inward but starting to look 
outward. Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 495–515.
J. Jung

179
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2015). The contribution of East Asian countries to internationally published 
Asian higher education research: The role of system development and internationalization. 
Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 419–439.
Kim, K. T., Sohn, B. L., & Lee, S. Y. (2010). An analysis and reflection of higher education 
research published in “The Journal of Educational Administration”. The Korean Journal of 
Educational Administration, 28(3), 181–204. in Korean.
Kosmutzky, A., & Krucken, G. (2014). Growth or steady state? A bibliometric focus on interna-
tional comparative higher education research. Higher Education, 67(4), 457–472.
Kwan, B. S. C. (2013). Facilitating novice researchers in project publishing during the doctoral 
years and beyond: A Hong Kong-based study. Studies in Higher Education, 38(2), 207–225.
Li, J. (2005). History of higher education research in China. Guangzhou: Guangdong Higher 
Education Press. (in Chinese).
Macfarlane, B. (2011). Prizes, pedagogic, and teaching professors: Lowering the status of teaching 
and learning through bifurcation. Teaching in Higher Education, 16(1), 127–130.
Macfarlane, B., & Grant, B. (2012). The growth of higher education studies: From forerunners to 
pathtakers. Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 621–624.
Marginson, S. (2011). Higher education in East Asia and Singapore: Rise of the Confucian model. 
Higher Education, 61(5), 587–611.
Moore, K. M. (1989). A revealing chart for the future: Reflections on higher education research. 
The Review of Higher Education, 13(1), 128–136.
Rumbley, L. E., Altbach, P. G., Stanfield, D. A., Shimmi, Y., Gayardon, A., & Chan, R. Y. (2014). 
Higher education: A worldwide inventory of research centers, academic programs, and journals 
and publications. Boston: Center for International Higher Education, Boston College.
Shin, J. C., Jung, J., Kim, Y. S., & Park, E. K. (2008). Trends of higher education research topic 
analysis. The Journal of Korean Education, 35(3), 167–193. in Korean.
Teichler, U. (1996). Comparative higher education: Potentials and limits. Higher Education, 32(4), 
431–465.
Tight, M. (2003). Researching Higher Education. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Tight, M. (Ed.). (2004). The RoutledgeFalmer reader in higher education. London: 
RoutledgeFalmer.
Tight, M. (2008). Higher education research as tribe, territory and/or community: A co-citation 
analysis. Higher Education, 55(5), 593–605.
Tight, M. (2011). Eleven years of studies in higher education. Studies in Higher Education, 36(1), 
1–6.
Tight, M. (2012). Research in higher education. Berkshire: Open University Press.
Volkwein, F., Carbone, D., & Volkwein, E. (1988). Research in higher education: Fifteen years 
ofscholarship. Research in Higher Education, 28(3), 271–280.
Jisun Jung  is an assistant professor in the Faculty of Education at the University of Hong Kong 
since September, 2015. She received a PhD from Seoul National University, Korea, in 2011, and 
she was a postdoctoral fellow and lecturer at the University of Hong Kong. She has been involved 
in the international comparative project “The Changing Academic Profession” since 2009. Her 
current research focuses on academic profession, doctoral education, employment and postgradu-
ate studies, and higher education research in Asia. She is the co-editor of two special issues, 
“Higher Education Research in East Asia: Regional and National Evolution and Path-Dependencies” 
in Higher Education Policy and “Graduate Employment and Higher Education in East Asia” in the 
International Journal of Chinese Education, and also a coeditor of the book Changing Academic 
Profession in Hong Kong published by Springer in 2017. She has many publications in internation-
ally refereed journals such as Higher Education, Studies in Higher Education, Minerva, Tertiary 
Education and Management, and Higher Education Quarterly and has authored several book 
chapters in Springer books. She is currently the principal investigator of the project, “Students’ 
Motivation and Expectation for Career Advancement in Self-Financed Master’s Program: Hong 
Kong Case.”
9  Higher Education Research in South Korea: Research Themes and Methodologies…

181
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in  
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_10
Chapter 10
What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: 
A Status Report on Higher Education 
in Macau and Its Research
Zhidong Hao
Abstract  This paper examines what is happening in higher education in Macau, 
what has been done in its research, and what more needs to be done in the future. 
We find that higher education research in and about Macau is resembling its history: 
short, atomized, dispersed, and sketchy. There are few in-depth studies in the form 
of well-developed papers and books, and they tend to be in English; most are short 
introductory papers published in Chinese venues in mainland China. And most 
researchers are from outside Macau. Nonetheless, available research does point to 
some very important issues such as the problem of vocationalization, the academic 
and political roles of the professoriate, the professionalization, or the de- and re-­
professionalization of faculty, among other things. We believe that future research 
should deal with not only the above issues, but other issues as well such as the mis-
sion of higher education, the role of the government in higher education assessment 
and quality control, student learning experiences, and the postcolonial mentality in 
higher education development in Macau especially regarding the pursuit of world-­
class statuses. Research on such issues is very much lacking. We hope that this 
paper will shed light on the future development of higher education and its research 
in Macau.
Macau is situated at the west of the Pearl River estuary opposite of Hong Kong at an 
hour’s boat ride in the southern tip of China, and it has a population of over 600,000. 
But this mini society has a semicolonial and colonial history of 450 years since 
1553 before it was returned to China in 1999. There used to be a Catholic college, 
the College of St. Paul, established by the missionaries in 1594, but it was closed in 
1762 after 168 years. As we will discuss below, attempts to build colleges did not 
succeed until about 200 years later in the early twentieth century. And the major 
Z. Hao (*) 
University of Macau, Macau SAR, China
e-mail: zdhao@umac.mo

182
university, the University of East Asia, in Macau was not built until 1981. Right now 
there are 10 postsecondary schools of different orientations and sizes.
Research on Macau’s higher education is comparable to its history: intermittent, 
spotty, and stumbling, and its research community atomized and dispersed. 
Nonetheless, available research in higher education in Macau does present many of 
the issues and problems that are manifest in other geographical areas, such as the 
mission of higher education, whether it meets the needs of the society where it is 
located, higher education management, institutional autonomy, public and private 
divide of the higher educational institutions (HEI), the funding of the institution, the 
role of the professors in governance, etc. This paper attempts to describe (1) the his-
tory of higher education in Macau, (2) the findings from the current research on 
higher education, and (3) what needs to be done in the future.
A Brief History of Higher Education in Macau
When higher education in Macau is discussed in the literature, researchers will inevita-
bly mention the College of St. Paul (sometimes called the St. Paul University College). 
Indeed, this is the first HEI in Macau established by the Jesuits shortly after the 
Portuguese settled in the territory. It was a Catholic school financed by the Portuguese 
King and the city senate and supplemented by donations from other Catholics and lay 
people (Li Xiangyu 2001:109). The size of the college was small, usually with fewer 
than 100 students, and fewer than 10 teachers (Li Xiangyu 2001:137–39). The college 
did teach languages, including Latin, Japanese and Chinese, theology, philosophy, eth-
ics, and arts. Later they added natural science subjects like physics, astronomy, and 
medicine (Li Xiangyu 2001:79–87). It was closed in 1762 because the Jesuits were 
arrested and transported to Portugal as a result of the Rites controversy.
Somehow the Portuguese Macau government did not establish an HEI in the next 
200 years. In 1900–1904, Gezhi College, the predecessor of Lingnan University, 
moved to Macau but it did not last long. And then around the 1950s, some Chinese 
scholars established Huaqiao (overseas) University (1950), Huanan (South China) 
University (1950), Yuehai Wen Shang (humanities and business) College (1949), 
and Zhongshan College of Education (Zhongshan Jiaoyu Xueyuan) (1950). But 
they did not last long either partly because the Portuguese Macau government did 
not allow them to register, and apparently there was not enough social support. 
Students then had to go elsewhere for their college education (Lau Sin Peng 2002; 
Ma Zaoming 2010a). In 1981, some Hong Kong businessmen were able to convince 
the Macau government to allow them to establish the University of East Asia (UEA). 
Although two-thirds of the students were from Hong Kong, at least Macau students 
now had a choice to go to a local university. But if the College of St. Paul was more 
of a humanities school featuring theology, UEA was mainly a market-oriented and 
commercialized business school (Ma Zaoming 2010a: 33).
This did not change until 1988 when the government purchased UEA and later 
changed its name into the University of Macau (UM). Humanities, science and tech-
Z. Hao

183
nology, and other social sciences were gradually introduced. Meanwhile, other col-
leges and universities were established. Table 10.1 is a summary of the colleges and 
universities including the date of their establishment and the size of the HEI regard-
ing students and faculty as of 2012/2013.
Table 10.1  HEIs in Macau as of 2012/2013
Year established
Number of students 
as of 2013 (full time 
unless specified)
Number of 
faculty as of 
2013 (both part 
time and full 
time)
Nature of 
the school
University of 
Macau (UM)
1981 (UEA)
8481
598
Public
1991 (UM)
Macau  
Polytechnic 
Institute (MPI)
1991
2961
351
Public
Institute for 
Tourism Studies 
(IFT)
1995
1573
109
Public
Macau Security 
Force Superior 
School (MSFSS)
1988
73
  42
Public
City University of 
Macau (CityU)
1992 (AIOU)b
1296 + 482 (part 
time) = 1778
109
Private
2011 (CityU)
University of St. 
Joseph (USJ)
1996 (IIUM)c
1684
145
Private
2009 (USJ)
Kiang Wu Nursing 
College of Macau 
(KWNCM)
1999
246 + 59 (part 
time) = 305
  32
Private
Macau University 
of Science and 
Technology 
(MUST)
2000
10,365
466
Private
Macau Institute of 
Management 
(MIM)
1984
362 (part time)
  38
Private
Macau  
Millennium 
College (MMC)a
2001
194
  26
Private
Sources of data: Mark Bray et al., with Roy Butler, Philip Hui, Ora Kwo & Emily Mang (2002), 
Higher Education in Macau, pp. 19–26; Tertiary Education Services Office of Macau government 
(2013), Tertiary Education Services Office Annual Book 2012. For the table and the discussion of 
the history of Macau’s higher education, see also Hao 2015a, “In Search of a Professional Identity.”
aThe Macau Millennium College’s Chinese name is Zhong Xi Chuangxin Xueyuan (Sino-Western 
Innovation College), under the auspices of SJM (Sociedade de Jogos de Macau, S.A.), a corpora-
tion whose main business is gambling.
bAIOU stands for The Asia International Open University (Macau), the previous name of CityU.
cIIUM stands for The Inter-University Institute of Macau, a joint initiative by the Catholic 
University of Portugal and the Diocese of Macau. It is the previous name of USJ.
10  What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: A Status Report on Higher Education…

184
From the names of the HEIs in Macau, one can see that most of them, MPI, IFT, 
KWNCM, MSFSS, MIM, and MMC, are focused on vocational training, and few 
are comprehensive to some extent. That raises the question of the mission of higher 
education, which we will touch on in the following pages. But before we do that, we 
will summarize what the current research on higher education finds.
Findings from the Current Research on Higher Education 
in Macau
There are several characteristics of research on higher education in Macau. First, very 
few researchers are based in Macau. Most of them are from mainland China universi-
ties and a few are also from Hong Kong. There is really no community of scholars or 
an independent academic field in higher education studies in Macau. The few who are 
based in Macau have touched on higher education research only as one of their 
research interests and have not published on higher education consistently. These may 
include Lau Sin Peng (2002, 2009), Li Xiangyu (2000, 2001), Shan Wen Jing and 
Ieong Sao Leng (2008), Jinting Wu and Sou Kuan Vong (2015), Hebert Yee (2009), 
and Zhidong Hao (2014, 2015a, b), among others. Second, most of the research is not 
by local scholars and is published in Chinese journals based in mainland China rather 
than in English journals elsewhere, and they tend to be short introductory papers of the 
history and development of Macau’s higher education. These may include among oth-
ers Zhong Haiyi (2000), Xu Fengshan (2004), Yuan Changqing, and Jiang Jian (2012) 
(see the bibliography for more examples). Even the few books on Macau’s education, 
which touch on higher education, tend to be introductory in nature (see, e.g., Feng 
Zengjun and Li Yiming 1999; Ramsey Koo and Ma Qingtang 1994). Third, there are 
very few in-depth papers and books, and they tend to be comparative studies between 
Macau, Hong Kong, and/or other places, for example, Yung Man Sing (2002), Hui 
Kok Fai and Poon Lai Man (2002), Ma Hing Tong (2002), Bill Chou (2012), Zhidong 
Hao (2014, 2015a, b), Jinting Wu and Sou Kuan Vong (2015), Mark Bray et al. (2002), 
and Mark Bray and Ramsey Koo (2004), and they tend to be in English.
Fourth, nonetheless, it is fair to say that the available research has pointed out the 
major issues on higher education research in or about Macau. These major issues 
include (1) the mission of higher education and its vocationalization, (2) the role of 
the government and the autonomy of higher education governance, and (3) aca-
demic freedom, professionalization, and the role of professors. In the following 
pages, we will discuss these issues, respectively.
The Mission of Higher Education and Its Vocationalization
As we mentioned earlier, vocationalization of higher education is one major feature 
in Macau. The University of East Asia was established for profits and featured com-
mercial and business programs in its curriculum (Ma Zaoming 2010a:33). In a way, 
Z. Hao

185
it was meant to train professionals, although it began to develop into a comprehen-
sive university after the government bought it in 1988. The Macau Polytechnic 
Institute (MPI) also emphasizes applied and technical disciplines, supplying Macau 
with people with practical skills. MPI’s website states that it “is a public institution 
of higher education with an emphasis on applied knowledge and skills.”1 Indeed, 
MPI has six schools, the names of which indicate their orientations: Languages and 
Translation, Business, Public Administration, Physical Education and Sports, Arts, 
and Health Sciences. The Institute for Tourism Studies (IFT) is similar. It “offers 
degrees and professional programmes in a wide range of tourism-related disciplines 
such as hospitality, tourism business, heritage, events, retail and marketing, leisure 
and entertainment, sports and recreation, creative and cultural studies, and culinary 
arts.”2 If the nursing school and the security force school are specifically built to 
train professional and technical workers, then Macau Institute of Management and 
Macau Millennium College are training only management personnel. In fact, even 
if the UM, CityU, USJ, and MUST all seem to strive to be comprehensive universi-
ties, they have large programs of business administration and other applied 
disciplines.
The question is then what the mission of a college or university is, and whether 
it is enough to train only skilled workers and professionals. Do comprehensive 
universities have enough courses on humanities and social sciences? Should non-­
comprehensive universities, or polytechnics, also have humanity and social sci-
ence training for their students? The MUST has a general education program. 
Should that be a way for other technical schools to deal with this problem? In their 
study on higher education in Macau, Bray et al. (2002:81–84) discuss in some 
length about this binary system with universities on one hand and polytechnics on 
the other. They suggest that the binary system be maintained, and MPI should not 
be upgraded into a university. But even if that is the case, more humanities and 
social sciences should be offered in polytechnics so that a university or college 
graduate is equipped with a well-rounded training to be able to face with life’s 
many challenges.
At any rate, the mission of the college or university and the vocationalization of 
universities merit researcher’s serious attention. This is true not only with polytech-
nics but with universities as well. General education may be a must in both kinds of 
institutions. I will also discuss below the issue of corporatization and 
­commercialization, which is related to the mission of the university and the problem 
of vocationalization.
1 See MPI’s website at http://www.ipm.edu.mo/en/general_information.php, last accessed on 
January 18, 2015.
2 See IFT’s website at http://www.ift.edu.mo/EN/information/Home/Index/126, last accessed on 
January 18, 2015.
10  What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: A Status Report on Higher Education…

186
The Role of the Government and Autonomy of University 
Governance
The government has always played a key role in higher education in Macau. As we 
mentioned above, the Portuguese government played a big role in the financing of 
the College of St. Paul. The Portuguese Macau government did not want to register 
the colleges around the 1950s, which is one of the reasons why they were disbanded 
(Ma Zaoming 2010a:32). The government bought the University of East Asia partly 
because it wanted the University to teach Portuguese (Ma Zaoming 2010a:33). 
Financially the government rules and regulations also constrain how public univer-
sities spend their money on purchases and personnel (Xie Anbang and Zhang 
Hongfeng 2009). The government has not only invested heavily in the public insti-
tutions, such as the UM, MPI, and IFT, but private ones as well such as the MUST, 
CityU, and USJ, although the funding of some private universities is often viewed 
as favorite treatment of government officials’ own political allies (Bill Chou 2012:9; 
Ng Kuok Cheong 2009:41).
Whatever is the case, there is a lack of studies on the government’s rationale in 
financing some and not others. And there is no study on how the money is spent and 
whether it is spent wisely. The investment in the new campus of the UM far exceeded 
its budget, almost double its amount to about 2 billion USD, but no one knows 
exactly why. And no one knows why so much money was spent but the workman-
ship was so substandard (Wu Jinting and Vong Sou Kuan 2015). The faculty has no 
voice in budget planning and its execution.
Other than financial investment and lack of consultation with faculty on how 
the money is spent, the government has largely left the universities to manage 
themselves. Quality control is pretty much done with whatever methods the uni-
versities themselves want (Ma Zaoming 2010b). There has been, however, dis-
cussion as to an overall evaluation system both in terms of academic and 
administrative affairs, and the government’s Tertiary Education Services Office 
may play a more important role in assisting the evaluation (Ma Zaoming 2009; 
Zhang Hongfeng 2012; Zhang Yunhong and Feng Zengjun 2011). The University 
of Macau has also been rewriting its charter to become more independent of the 
government in the use of government money and other areas of management. But 
these are all work in progress, and there are no in-depth studies of the rationale 
and processes of the reform.
Meanwhile, however, some researchers point out that there is a lack of university 
autonomy and academic freedom. One researcher points out that public universities 
are constrained by government wills in terms of curricular issues and academic 
management (Xie Anbang 2010). But this researcher does not give much detail as to 
how that works. We will examine these issues now.
Z. Hao

187
Academic Freedom, Professionalization, and the Role of Faculty
Although the government role is important, academic freedom and professionaliza-
tion may have more to do with each and every college and university than with 
government policies. Zhidong Hao (2015a) studied one university in Macau and 
found that faculty are largely powerless in terms of curricular planning, recruitment 
and promotion of faculty, recruitment of academic managers from department 
chairs up to the deans and rectors, and involvement in the university budgeting, all 
of which are indicators of academic freedom. In fact, this is not only an issue of a 
lack of academic freedom, but one of de-professionalization. In other words, faculty 
are losing their academic calling and professional autonomy, and they are more like 
alienated workers in the manufacturing industry.
In another paper, Zhidong Hao (2015b) points out that professors play not only 
academic roles of teaching, research, and service but also political roles of the 
organic (serving the government, business corporations, and established social 
movements), professional (keeping a distance to politics), and critical (of the powers 
that be). Most professors play the organic and professional roles, and few play a 
critical role. They are encouraged to play the organic role to the government, but 
their other roles are greatly hampered. When two professors were dismissed in 2014 
for allegedly political reasons, that means their critical role is in jeopardy. And if the 
process of dismissal was lacking in faculty participation, as it was the case with these 
two professors, their academic freedom is in jeopardy (see Zhidong Hao 2014).
Professors’ academic freedom and role playing is hampered by the global trends 
of corporatization and commercialization (C&C) (Zhidong Hao 2015b). University 
managers are increasingly seeing themselves as CEOs of a corporation, faculty as 
increasingly seen as workers, and students as customers. The traditional idea of the 
university as a community of scholars and relationship between professor and stu-
dent as partners in learning is being lost. C&C are also infringing on academic 
freedom and de-professionalizing the faculty.
As Xie Anbang (2010) points out, universities in Macau need to develop a set of 
principles of academic autonomy and freedom, a culture that can resist the pressures 
from outside so that professors can do their job in a more relaxed environment. 
Professor Xie does not elaborate on what he means here, but the implication is obvi-
ous. More studies are needed on the issues of academic freedom and professional-
ization of faculty. We will discuss what needs to be done below.
What Needs to Be Done in the Future
First, researchers have to continue to study how the colleges and universities in 
Macau define their mission. Policymakers and higher education practitioners need to 
pay more attention to the trend of vocationalization and the need of at least general 
education in humanities and social sciences. As David Chan (2008:28, 30) points 
10  What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: A Status Report on Higher Education…

188
out, colleges and universities have to clarify whether the primary mission of the 
university is to prepare students for jobs or “to prepare well-rounded personalities 
with critical minds capable of making major contributions to culture, democracy, 
science, economy and society at large.” They need to be clear about what a “world-
class university” means and whether the ruthless pursuit of “world-class university” 
status dictated by Western standards is serving the local social needs and whether it, 
in fact, harms faculty morale and performance. Only when they have fulfilled this 
primary mission of training well-rounded persons can they talk about training pro-
fessionals for the tourist and casino industries or striving for global rankings.
Second, more studies need to be done to find how professors define and play their 
roles. What roles are professors playing? Are they playing both academic (teaching, 
research, and service) and political (organic, professional, and critical) roles? How 
are they playing them? What are the problems they encounter? How do they solve 
those problems? Are there faculty organizations? Do they function in terms of fac-
ulty benefits, workload, and staff development? How well do they function? Is there 
any faculty or shared governance? If not, should it be there? How can they develop 
faculty governance? Can an HEI be of world class if it does not have much faculty 
governance or academic freedom?
Third, related to the role of faculty and faculty morale, more research is needed 
in the professionalization, de-professionalization, and re-professionalization of fac-
ulty. From Table 10.2, we can see that part-time faculty constitute 50% to 95% of all 
Table 10.2  The number of full-time and part-time faculty 2012/2013
Full 
time
Part 
time
% of 
part-time 
faculty
% of faculty 
without a PhD
University of Macau (UM)
524
74
12
30
Macau Polytechnic Institute (MPI)
232
119
34
60
Institute for Tourism Studies (IFT)
73
36
33
71
Macau Security Force Superior School
2
40
95
70
City University of Macau (CityU)
48
61
56
41
University of St. Joseph (USJ)
68
77
53
69
Kiang Wu Nursing College of Macau
21
11
34
66
Macau University of Science and 
Technology (MUST)
275
191
41
52
Macau Institute of Management
5
33
87
85
Macau Millennium College
5
21
81
35
Total
35a
49b
Source of data: Tertiary Education Services Office of Macau government (2013), Tertiary 
Education Services Office Annual Book 2012, pp. 119. For the table and discussion of the profes-
sionalization issue, see also Hao 2015a, “In Search of a Professional Identity.”
aThe percentages given in the source book are of the number of full-time faculty members. The 
percentages given here are the results of subtraction of the full-time faculty members from the total 
percentage.
bThe percentages given in the source book are the number of faculty members with a PhD degree. 
These percentages are the results of subtraction of those with a PhD degree from the total percentage.
Z. Hao

189
faculty in five of the ten colleges and universities in Macau, 30–40% in four of 
them, and only the University of Macau has fewer part-time faculty, but it still has 
12% of them. The faculty, administrators, and policymakers all need to realize that 
college teaching as a profession needs a great deal of academic credentials, aca-
demic freedom, autonomy, and above all a calling. How to train graduate students 
who will be the future teachers in the profession needs to be studied. Once they are 
on the job, how can they prevent de-professionalization under the influence of cor-
poratization and commercialization? If they are de-professionalized, how can they 
be re-professionalized? Here is one example.
If we view full-time employment as a greater amount of job security, and a PhD 
degree as an indication of greater professionalization, more than a third of college 
and university faculty in Macau have less job security and about a half are not pro-
fessionalized to a great extent. Does this mean that the part-time faculty and those 
without a PhD do not enjoy the kind of professional autonomy and academic free-
dom they are supposed to enjoy? Of course, one can also argue that even full-time 
faculty do not have job security and do not enjoy a great deal of academic freedom, 
since there is no tenure system in Macau. This is evidenced when two full-time 
professors were dismissed in 2014 partly because of their political views and with-
out due process, as I mentioned above (Zhidong Hao 2014). If full-time faculty with 
PhDs can be dismissed without due process, one can imagine what part-time faculty 
may experience in terms of the amount of academic freedom and professional 
autonomy. But these issues of professionalization and academic freedom have to be 
studied.
Fourth, researchers have to continue to study on how higher education in Macau 
can maintain its autonomy and find its niches in a globalized world. Bray et al. 
(2002); Chen Wei (2010); Hu Weiquan and Chen Qinlan (2011); Wu Jinting and 
Vong Sou Kuan (2015); Yu Rushuang and Chen Xiaohong (2009); Wu Nan, Chen 
Jian, and Liang Zhenhong (2014); and Yu Yuwen (2013) have all considered the 
smallness of Macau and how Macau might find its niches in the globalized or glo-
calized world with the geographical, social, and political constraints. On the one 
hand, Macau is situated in a prosperous part of China, and its economy based on 
gambling revenues has been largely healthy despite occasional setbacks. It has a 
history of East-West exchange, especially cultural and religious exchanges, that few 
places in China can claim. Politically and socially Macau enjoys more freedoms 
than in mainland China under the “one country, two systems” formula. But on the 
other hand, the smallness of Macau also makes it vulnerable to external influences. 
Macau is already facing a serious challenge of mainlandization economically, polit-
ically, and socially (see Hebert Yee 2009; Zhidong Hao 2014), and a competition for 
global rankings (Zhidong Hao 2015a, b).
So the relationship between the government, society, and the university has to be 
sorted out (Zhang Yunhong and Ma Zaoming 2009). So is the relationship between 
Macau and mainland China, i.e., the political influence of mainland China on Macau 
in its academic freedom. Does the mainland constraint on what university profes-
sors can say influence the freedom of speech on the part of professors in Macau (see 
Zhidong Hao and Zhengyang Guo manuscript)? Are student organizations operated 
10  What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: A Status Report on Higher Education…

190
in similar ways as the mainland university student organizations? In what way and 
to what extent? Studies need to be done on how Macau’s higher education can main-
tain its autonomy so as to not only serve the needs of the society but also build true 
colleges and universities that do not lose its mission to train students with critical 
and creative thinking skills.
Fifth, equally important to study are students and their learning experiences. 
Who goes to college, and what kind of colleges and universities do they go to? 
What are their studying experiences? Are they equipped with critical and creative 
thinking skills? There is little study on those issues. For example, is there a strati-
fication of Macau’s HEIs? Do students of different socioeconomic backgrounds 
have the same opportunities to attend the university they want? Li Mei’s and Mark 
Bray’s (2006) research on mainland Chinese students in Hong Kong and Macau 
found that it is virtually impossible for students from workers and peasants fami-
lies to pay their own costs of education. So those self-paying students tend to 
come from middle or upper middle class families. What about Macau students? 
What kind of schools do students from different socioeconomic backgrounds go 
to? Do they get the kind of training they should get in a university? Lam Fat Iam 
(2007) criticized some universities for recruiting thousands of MA students with-
out accountability of what they had learned. We do not seem to have any research 
on these and other issues on students and student learning outcomes.
Sixth, we mentioned de-professionalization above, a related question that is 
mentioned in the literature but lacks research in is the issue of postcolonialism. 
A postcolonial mentality can be defined as benchmarking Western universities 
in managerialism, corporatization, and commercialization, as seen in the pur-
suit of rankings or world-class universities, even if these concepts have been 
criticized often by Western scholars. The widespread use of contingent faculty 
in the USA, who teach more than 50% of the courses in colleges and universi-
ties, has been a serious issue in higher education, a key indicator of de-profes-
sionalization and marketization. The problem here is that the decolonized 
peoples may still rely on the colonizers’ (in this case colonizers in general, not 
particularly the Portuguese or the British) policies and philosophies of gover-
nance rather than basing those on their own culture and a glocalized vision (see 
Bill Chou 2012:98; Law 1997; and Mok and Cheung 2011 on colonization 
issues in Hong Kong; Lin Rongce 2008). Local and indigenous knowledges are 
marginalized, while professors are de-professionalized. Maybe further decolo-
nization is needed, and higher education needs to strike a balance between local 
and global knowledges (see also David Chan 2008 and Soudien 2008 on neoco-
lonial and post-colonial perspectives in higher education) and between the man-
agement and the faculty.
Z. Hao

191
Conclusion
In this paper, I have first of all briefly described the history of higher education in 
Macau, and its current status, including the general characteristics of the ten HEIs. 
In terms of their nature and sizes, we find that six of these institutions are vocational 
in nature, and four of them each enrolled from 73 to 305 students, while others each 
enrolled 1573 to 10,365 students as of the year 2012/2013. Regarding the research 
on higher education in Macau, we find that most researchers are from outside 
Macau, and most of the research is published in short papers in Chinese. There is a 
lack of in-depth studies on higher education in Macau. More scholars based in 
Macau are just beginning to do some in-depth studies now.
Notwithstanding the limitations of the current research on higher education in 
Macau, scholars do point out a host of interesting issues to study: vocationalization 
of higher education, a more positive role of the government and more autonomy of 
higher education governance, the lack of academic freedom, professionalization, 
and the problems of professors’ role playing. What the current research deals with 
and what it does not deal with all point to the need of future research in the mission 
of higher education, autonomy of colleges and university and how they may find 
their niches in glocalization, the academic and political role of professors, (de-, re)
professionalization of faculty, student learning experiences, and how higher educa-
tion can couch their thinking in these issues through the lens of neocolonialism, 
postcolonialism, and decolonization.
In sum, higher education research in Macau is still a work in progress. Yet the 
problems it encounters are also problems encountered elsewhere. This paper has 
examined these problems, and I hope that this analysis will complement other peo-
ple’s research on these important yet understudied issues. I hope that the analysis in 
this paper will be of some use to both policymakers and higher education practitio-
ners. Colleges and universities are engines of social, economic, and political devel-
opment of a society, so the studies of how they work and do not work should be of 
paramount importance and be a serious concern by policymakers and practitioners. 
It should be a priority item on their research agenda.
References
Bray, Mark, with Roy Butler, Philip Hui, Ora Kwo & Emily Mang. (2002). Higher education 
in Macau: Growth and strategic development. Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research 
Center.
Bray, M., & Koo, R. (Eds.). (2004). Education and society in Hong Kong and Macao: Comparative 
perspectives on continuity and change. Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre, 
The University of Hong Kong, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Chan, D. K. K. (2008). Revisiting post-colonial education development: Reflections on some criti-
cal issues. Comparative Education Bulletin, 11, 21–36.
10  What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: A Status Report on Higher Education…

192
Chen Wei. (2010). “Quyu Gaodeng Jiaoyu Hezuo de Xin Tansuo” (New attempts at regional coop-
eration in higher education: The case of the Hengqin campus of the University of Macau). 
Fudan Jiaoyu Luntan (Fudan education forum), 8(4), 63–67.
Chou, K. P. C. (2012). The paradox of education quality and education policy in Hong Kong and 
Macau: A postcolonial perspective. Chinese Education and Society, 45(2), 96–110.
Feng Zengjun, & Li Yiming (eds.). ( 1999). Aomen Jiaoyu Gailun (An introduction to education in 
Macau). Guangzhou: Guangdong Jiaoyu Chubanshe (Guangdong education press).
Hao, Zhidong (2014, December 22). Aomen, ‘Yiguo Liangzhi’ de Dianfan? (Macau, an example 
of ‘one country, two systems?”) Financial Times (Chinese edition). http://www.ftchinese.com/
story/001059779?full=y, last accessed on the same day
Hao, Zhidong. (2015a). In search of a professional identity: Higher education in Macau and the 
academic role of faculty. Higher Education. doi:10.1007/s10734-015-9940-4.
Hao, Zhidong. (2015b). Commercialization and corporatization versus professorial roles and aca-
demic freedom in the United States and Greater China. Chinese Sociological Review, 47(2), 
103–127.
Hao Zhidong and Zhengyang Guo. (manuscript). The multifaceted identities and synchronic roles 
of professors as intellectuals: A case study of a University in Mainland China.
Hu Wei-quan, Chen Qin-lan. (2011). Aomen Gaodeng JIaoyu Pinpai Yingxiao Fenxi (Analysis 
of brand marketing of Macau’s higher education). Keji he Chanye (Science, technology, and 
industry), 11(3), 64–69.
Hui Kwok Fai, Philip and Poon Lai Man, Helen. (2002). Higher education, imperialism and colo-
nial transition. In Mark Bray & Ramsey Koo (Eds.), Education and Society in Hong Kong and 
Macao (pp. 109–126). Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research Center, The University 
of Hong Kong/Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Koo, Ramsey (Gu Dingyi) and Ma Qingtang (eds.) (1994). Aomen Jiaoyu: Jueze yu Ziyou 
(Education in Macau: choice and freedom). Macau: Macau Foundation.
Lam Fat Iam (Lin Faqin). (2007). Aomen Jiaoyu Shengsi (Reflections on education in Macau). 
Macau: Aomen Lishi Jiaoyu Xuehui (Macau Historical Education Association).
Lau Sin Peng (Liu Xinbing). (2002). Aomen Jiaoyu Shi (A history of education in Macau). Beijing: 
Renmin Jiaoyu Chubanshe (People’s Education Press).
Lau Sin Peng. (2009). A history of education in Macau (Sylvia S.L. Ieong & Victoria L. C. Lei, 
Trans.). Macau: Faculty of education, University of Macau.
Law, Wing-Wah. (1997). The accommodation and resistance to the decolonisation, Neocolonisation 
and recolonisation of higher education in Hong Kong. Comparative Education, 33(2), 187–209.
Li Mei, & Mark Bray. (2006). Shehui Jieceng yu Kuajing Gaodeng Jiaoyu: Zhongguo Dalu 
Xuesheng zai Xianggang yu Aomen (Social strata and cross-border higher education: Mainland 
students in Hong Kong and Macau). Quanqiu Jiaoyu Zhanwang (Global Education), 11, 61–67.
Li Xiangyu. (2000). Huigui hou Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu de Fazhan Luxiang Chutan (An explora-
tion of the directions of Macau’s higher education development after it was returned to China). 
Zhongguo Gaodeng Jiaoyu (Higher Education in China), 8, 38–40.
Li Xiangyu. (2001). Aomen Sheng Baolu Xueyuan Yanjiu (A study on the College of St. Paul in 
Macau). Macau: Aomen Ribao Chubanshe (Macao Daily Press).
Lin Rongce. (2008). Gang Ao Gaodeng Jiaoyu de Bijiao yu Fazhan Tansuo (A comparative explo-
ration of higher education in Hong Kong and Macau). Heilongjiang Jiaoyu Xueyuan Xuebao 
(Journal of Heilongjiang College of Education), 27(11), 40–43.
Ma Hing Tong. (2002). Higher education and the labor force. In Mark Bray & Ramsey Koo (Eds.), 
Education and Society in Hong Kong and Macao (pp. 127–139). Hong Kong: Comparative 
Education Research Center, The University of Hong Kong/Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ma Zaoming. 2009. “Huigui hou de Aomen Gaodeng Jioayu Fazhan yu Biange” (the develop-
ment and transformation of Macau’s higher education after the handover). Bijiao Jiaoyu Yanjiu 
(comparative education review), No. 11, pp. 8–12.
Z. Hao

193
Ma Zaoming. (2010a). Wenhua Shiye xia de Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu (The transformation 
of Macau’s higher education in a cultural perspective). Gaojiao Tansuo (Higher Education 
Exploration), 2, 2010.
Ma Zaoming. (2010b). Huigui hou de Aomen Gaodeng Jioayu: Wenti yu Duice” (Macau’s higher 
education after its return to China: Problems and coping policies). Jiangsu Gaojiao (Higher 
education in Jiangsu), 2, 149–151.
Mok, Ka Ho, & Anthony B.L. Cheung. (2011). Global aspirations and Strategising for world-class 
status: New form of politics in higher education governance in Hong Kong. Journal of Higher 
Education Policy and Management, 33(3), 231–251.
Ng, Antonio Kuok Cheong. 2009. “Huigui hou gang Ao tequ zhengfu xingzheng yu lifahui de 
guanxi” [the relationship between the executive and legislative branches of the Hong Kong and 
Macau governments after reunification]. Pp. 23-43 in Tale of Two Cities III—Past and Future 
Political, Economic and Social Development in Hong Kong and Macau, ed. Zhen Yu, Jinjun 
Kuang, and Yu Yongyi. Macau: Macau social science Institute.
Shan, Wen Jing Peter and Ieong Sao Leng Sylvia. (2008). Post-colonial reflection on education 
development in Macau. Comparative Education Bulletin, No., 11, 37–68.
Soudien, Crain. (2008). What are the questions that post-colonialism asks of comparative educa-
tion. Comparative Education Bulletin, No., 11, 4–20.
Wu Jinting and Sou Kuan Vong. 2015. “Macau higher education expansion in flux: A critical spa-
tial perspective.” A paper in progress.
Wu Nan, Chen Jian, & Liang Zhenhong. (2014). Aomen Daxue Banqian Hengqing dui Yue Ao 
Liangdi Kechixu Fazhan de Yingxiang Fenxi (The relocation of the University of Macau and 
its influence on the sustainable development in both Guangdong and Macau). In Chinese 
Environmental Science Association (Ed.), Zhongguo Huanjing Kexue Xuehui Xueshu Nianhui 
Lunwen Ji (A collection of papers from the annual meeting of the Chinese Environmental 
Science Association, pp. 955–64). Beijing: Chinese Environmental Science Press.
Xie Anbang. 2010. “Dazhonghua Lilun Shiye xia Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu Fazhan de Yanjiu” (a 
study on the development of higher education in Macau from the theoretical perspective of 
massfication of higher education). Zhongguo Gao Jiao Yanjiu (studies in China’s higher educa-
tion). No. 3, pp. 14–18.
Xie Anbang and Zhang Hongfeng. 2009. “Aomen Huigui Shi Nian Gaodeng Jiaoyu de Fazhan 
Licheng Yanjiu” (a study on the ten years of development history of Macau’s higher education 
after its return to China). Gaojiao Tansuo (higher education exploration), No. 6, pp. 5–9.
Xu Fengshan. 2004. “Xin Jingji Xingshi xia de Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu Fazhan” (Macau’s higher 
educational development under the new economic circumstances). “Liaoning Shidfan Daxue 
Xuebao” (Journal of Liaoning Normal University—social Science Edition). 27(4)75–78.
Yee, Hebert. (2009). The theory and practice of ‘one country, two systems’ in Macau. An unpub-
lished personal manuscript.
Yu Rushuang, & Chen Xiaohong. (2009). “Gaodeng Jiaoyu Shengtai Xue Shiye zhong Aomen 
Gaodeng Jiaoyu de Fazhan” (the development of higher education in Macau from the perspec-
tive of higher education ecology). Ligong Gaojiao Yanji (Journal of higher education in sci-
ence & technology)., 28(3), 108–110.
Yu Yuwen. (2013). Yue Ao Gaodeng Jiaoyu Jiaoliu yu Hezuo Tanxi (An exploration of higher 
educational exchange and cooperation between Guangdong and Macau). Shijie Jiaoyu Xinxi 
(Journal of World Education), 16, pp. 70–72.
Yuan Changing, & Jiang Jian. (2012). Huigui yu Zhanwang: Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu Zhiliang 
Baozhang yu Tisheng de Zhanlue Sikao. (Retrospect and prospect: Macau’s higher education 
quality assurance and enhancement). Jiangsu Jiaoyu Yanjiu (Education research in Jiangsu), 
2012-07A, 19–22.
Yung Man Sing Andrew. (2002). Higher education. In Mark Bray, & Ramsey Koo (Eds.), Education 
and society in Hong Kong and Macao (pp.  61–72) Hong Kong: Comparative Education 
Research Center, The University of Hong Kong/Kluwer Academic Publishers.
10  What It Is Like and What Needs to Be Done: A Status Report on Higher Education…

194
Zhang Hongfeng. (2012). Weixing Kaifang Xitong zhong Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu Zhiliang de 
Baozhang” (The quality assurance of higher education in a mini-open system of Macau). 
Dangdai Jiaoyu Kexue (Contemporary science of education), 1, pp.53–56.
Zhang Yunhong, & Feng Zengjun. (2011). Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu Zhiliang Pinggu Baozhang 
de Xin Fazhan (New developments in Macau’s higher education quality evaluation and assur-
ance). Xiandao Jiaoyu Guanli (Modern Educational Management), 9, 57–60.
Zhang Yunhong, & Ma Zaoming. (2009). Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu Zhiliang Pinggu zhong Zhengfu, 
Shehui, Gaoxiao San Zhe Guanxi Tantao (An exploration of the relationship between the gov-
ernment, society, and higher education institutions in quality evaluations of Macau’s higher 
education). Daxue, Yanjiy yu Pingjia (Higher education research & evaluation), 7/8, 106–111.
Zhong Haiyi. (2000). Fazhan zhong de Aomen Gaodeng Jiaoyu (Macau’s higher education in 
development). Huainan Shizhuan Xuebao (Journal of Huainan Teachers College), 2(5), 53–55.
Zhidong Hao  is a professor of sociology at the University of Macau. Having obtained his PhD in 
sociology from the City University of New York, he has researched in political sociology; com-
parative sociology of China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan; historical sociology of Greater 
China; sociology of intellectuals and professionals; higher education; development; gambling; and 
religion. His English publications include Social Issues in China: Gender, Ethnicity, Labor, and the 
Environment (coedited, 2014), Macau History and Society (2011), “Professors as Intellectuals in 
China: Political Identities and Roles in a Provincial University” (2016, coauthored), “In Search of 
a Professional Identity: Higher Education in Macau and the Academic Role of Faculty” (2016), 
and “Commercialization and Corporatization Versus Professorial Roles and Academic Freedom in 
the United States and Greater China” (2015). He is currently coediting a book on a comparative 
study of academic freedom in higher education in East Asia, the USA, and Australia.
Z. Hao

195
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_11
Chapter 11
The Development and Progress of Higher 
Education Research in Taiwan: Massification 
Matters
Sheng-Ju Chan and Ting-May Huang
Abstract  This paper aims to explore the evolution and characteristics of the higher 
education research community in Taiwan. In echoing the development of the East 
Asian region, Taiwan has made substantial progress during the past two decades. 
The massification of higher education itself has played a major role in promoting 
the academic differentiation or division of labour, including higher education 
research area. With the momentum gathered since the 1990s, we have seen the 
appearance of a professional society and its official journal. A national quality 
assurance agency and its research arms also promote the deepening of higher educa-
tion research in Taiwan. Despite more emphases initially on instrumental or 
management-­oriented purposes, higher education research in Taiwan today is mov-
ing in diverse and balanced directions, with a variety of themes and methods. 
However, the lack of a university-level degree program due to constrained graduate 
employment prospects is inconsistent with the development of massification in 
higher education. In addition, the incoming large-scale higher education restructur-
ing due to the rapidly declining birth rate has become an unstable factor to the 
development of this emerging field.
Introduction
Based on the past research conducted in wider academic fields, scholars have come 
to the conclusion that the scope or nature of academic fields varies substantially 
according to the dominant methodologies, research foci, knowledge traditions and 
beliefs, and even key participants. These relevant factors substantially define or 
S.-J. Chan (*) 
National Chung Cheng University, Chiayi, Taiwan
e-mail: ju1207@ccu.edu.tw 
T.-M. Huang 
National University of Tainan, Tainan, Taiwan

196
demarcate the shape, format, content, and even applications of this particular sub-
ject. These strong characteristics and features of different academic regimes gradu-
ally constitute a unique space and boundary, thereby enabling researchers to conduct 
their scientific study. In view of the importance of knowledge power and norms, 
Becher and Trowler (2001) called these phenomena ‘academic tribes’ with territo-
ries, rules, and standards.
Higher education, as a subfield of education or an interdisciplinary topic, has 
gained wider acceptance among academics across the globe since the 1970s (Clark 
and Neave 1992). Notable advancements come from several leading scholars in the 
United States, such as Burton R. Clark, Philip G. Altbach, Clark Kerr, and Martin 
Trow. Similarly, we have witnessed the prosperous development of higher educa-
tion research in the European context (Teichler 2013), whereas a wide range of 
specialized journals and alliances were established. In a similar vein, Asian scholars 
have paid much more attention to higher education research since the mid-1990s 
(Jung and Horta 2013). One remarkable case is that of China. Highly connected to 
the nation-state and communist support, Chinese higher education research has 
attracted much more attention through the institutionalization of master’s level and 
doctoral programs (Chen and Hu 2012). Some leading scholars from Japan, Korea, 
Hong Kong, China, and Taiwan sought to establish an Asia Pacific Higher Education 
Research Association in 2014. All such developments indicate the trend that research 
in higher education has become an emerging field in the Asian region.
This paper deals with the evolution and characteristics of the higher education 
research community in Taiwan. The knowledge that gleaned from the empirical find-
ings suggests a rather complicated picture. On one hand, higher education research 
has increasingly been regarded as an independent academic area in recent years; on 
the other hand, the lack of a university-level degree program and the limited graduate 
employment market pose challenges to the formation of a mature subject. Studies 
were mainly concentrated on policies and systems and institutional management and 
practices in the initial stage. Such an instrumental approach should be supplemented 
by the research in teaching, learning, curriculum, course design, etc.
This paper comprises five major parts. First, attention will be devoted to a brief 
review of the higher education research community. The second section deals with 
the research methods employed in detailing how data and information are garnered. 
This is followed by an exploration of the interlinked relationship between massifica-
tion and higher education research in Taiwan in relation to social, cultural, and 
economic contexts. The fourth part concentrates on professional societies, journals, 
and agencies in higher education research. In the fifth part, our analysis extends to 
the dynamic relationship between the unsuccessful institutionalization of a degree 
program within the university campus and the constrained graduate labour market. 
Research themes and methods in Taiwanese higher education research are discussed 
in the sixth part. After reviewing these main traits and developments, a comprehen-
sive discussion on driving forces, growths, and core issues is presented with a focus 
on massification.
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

197
Higher Education as a Research Community
After more than 100 years of evolution, higher education research has, without a 
doubt, become a diverse community. According to Harland (2009, 580), this com-
munity includes three different groups. First, several persons carry out rigorous 
research in higher education and regard this as their primary discipline. Most par-
ticipants in this group, coming from faculties of education or social sciences, devote 
their academic life to higher education research. The second group tends to consist 
of part-time researchers, who are typically academics from other disciplines or 
administrators whose main focus is on teaching and learning in their fields (e.g. 
designing a chemistry course or program for undergraduate students). The final 
group within the higher education research community involves those ‘who simply 
have an interest in the field’. The current study focuses on the first group of indi-
viduals, who conduct generic higher education research instead of disciplinary 
higher education research. However, we realize that the higher education commu-
nity gains support from subgroups and other academic subjects with their own pro-
fessional journal in higher education. The Journal of Geography in Higher 
Education is an example from the field of geography. Our subsequent investigation 
into the Taiwanese scenario also echoes this point that other disciplinary researchers 
somehow expand the scope and content of this emerging field in Taiwan.
In defining higher education research as a community of practice, Tight (2008, 
596) asserted that, if a better understanding into this research community is intended, 
we have to explore ‘the topics they study, the methodologies they use, the journals 
they publish in, their disciplinary backgrounds or some combination of these’. This 
claim provides a basis for examining the features or characteristics of any research 
community. Moreover, these distinctive configurations with respect to topics, meth-
odologies, journals, and disciplinary backgrounds present indispensable ingredients 
to form the topic’s identity or recognition from academic peers. Similarly, while 
discussing the nature of a discipline, Becher and Trowler (2001, 41) argued that the 
emergence of the international community, professional associations and specialist 
journals, and differentiated departments/programs are important indicators for 
assessing the development of this particular field. In this study, we adopt the con-
ceptual frameworks proposed by Tight (2008) and Becher and Trowler (2001) by 
exploring professional associations, specialized journals, differentiated program, 
research themes and topics, disciplinary backgrounds, etc.
As previously outlined, higher education research could have diverse natures and 
complex academic origins or backgrounds. A brief summary about the main themes 
or topics from three different periods of time can serve to illuminate the changing 
content of this young research community. Traditionally, major international works 
before the 1970s focused on the philosophical and historic analysis of the university 
and their relationship with the wider society, as Cardinal Newman did. However, the 
main components of themes indexed by Clark and Neave (1992) changed dramati-
cally, including national systems of higher education, higher education and society, 
the institutional fabric of the higher education system, governance, administration 
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

198
and finance, faculty and students, teaching, learning and research, disciplinary per-
spectives on higher education, and academic disciplines. Almost 10 years later, 
Tight (2003) proposed a classification with respect to research issues in higher edu-
cation. Eight categories cover teaching and learning, course design, student experi-
ence, quality, system policy, institutional management, academic work, and 
knowledge. Along with the increasing progression of internationalization/globaliza-
tion, David (2011) identified three major topics in the globalized context: social 
stratification and mobility in relation to the labour market, widening access and 
participation in global higher education, and finally social transformation of global 
higher education. These topics point to the fact that the internationalization of 
higher education should become another critical issue in the higher education com-
munity. In this study, we employ some of Tight’s (2003) categories in our subse-
quent analysis of journal articles.
Research Methods
In order to explore the entire spectrum of the higher education research community 
in Taiwan, three research methods are adopted to examine this academic field: docu-
ment analysis, database analysis, and interview. Document analysis is useful for 
providing relevant information and materials for the current research. In general, the 
main sources of documents include public records, published materials, meeting 
minutes, websites, and even regulations/rules (Bryman 2012). In this case, we 
reviewed academic publications (books and articles) and relevant organizations’ 
websites and content to understand the real outcomes and features of the higher 
education research community over the past two decades. As professional higher 
education associations and journals were established in the early 2000s, their insti-
tutional missions, activities, and publications are under review as well. In particular, 
we did a rather thorough analysis of the leading domestic journals with respect to 
the articles’ themes or topics. The in-depth information gleaned from these articles 
provides insightful perspectives on the focus and development of higher education 
research in Taiwan.
On top of the document analysis, a major local Chinese database, Airiti Library 
(華藝線上圖書館, http://www.airitilibrary.com/), is used as the main source for 
analysing the research topics/theme and methods of higher education. This online 
library is one of the most comprehensive databases garnering all types of academic 
and professional Chinese journals including social sciences and education in gen-
eral. We used ‘higher education’ as keyword to do search in November 2015 and 
obtained 989 papers in total between 1990 and 2015. The collected articles from this 
survey can provide diverse information with respect to the general development of 
higher education research in Taiwan for the past two decades. Our focus here is 
directed on the total publication volume, research themes, and methods.
In addition to the document analysis and database analysis, three key persons 
were interviewed in 2013 in order to broaden the information sources of this study. 
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

199
The three interviewees were the JHE editor-in-chief (Interviewee A), Taiwan Higher 
Education Society’s (THES) secretary general (Interviewee B), and the director of 
the Office of Research and Development, Higher Education Evaluation and 
Accreditation Council of Taiwan (HEEACT) (Interviewee C). All interviews were 
conducted in January 2013. The interviewees are experienced academics in this 
field and have comprehensive knowledge about the higher education research in 
Taiwan because of their professional positions. During the 1-hour interview, they 
were asked to identify the wider backdrops and incentives for the emergence of the 
higher education research community; the establishment of specialized academic 
associations, organizations, and journals; the mainstream research topics and 
themes; and the provision of higher education programs. Such information is criti-
cal in terms of answering research questions.
Massification and Higher Education Research
According to the reviewed documents and interviewees, the increasingly prominent 
role that higher education research has played since the 1990s is highly related to 
social, educational, political, and economic transformation. We can even argue that 
a strong sense of instrumental purpose in problem-solving exists in the higher edu-
cation community. The most frequently mentioned driver inspiring the emergence 
of higher education research community is the process of the massification of higher 
education itself and the relevant issues involved (Interviewees A and B). Since the 
1980s, the Taiwanese higher education system has expanded its scope and size by 
allowing the establishment of more new colleges and universities (mainly private 
ones) and admitting more secondary school leavers (Wang 2003). This transition 
from an elite system to a massified system was driven by a series of factors. 
Economically, as one member of the ‘four little dragons’, Taiwan’s industries had 
been going through structural transformation from an agriculturally and manually 
oriented entity to a more technology-, capital-, or even knowledge-oriented econ-
omy. Based on the crucial need to provide a more skilled workforce at the tertiary 
level, the higher education system was encouraged to enlarge so as to cultivate more 
graduates for the then-emerging labour market. The developments taking place in 
Taiwan created a more diverse and larger higher education system in a short period 
of time (Chou and Wang 2012).
Around the same time, the political democratization movement set the major 
landscape at the societal level. Some politicians and scholars urged all of society to 
become further democratized by removing inappropriate and illegal regulations and 
engaging diverse stakeholders in participatory decision-making during the political 
procedure. Universities in Taiwan were formerly part of governmental organiza-
tions and under direct bureaucratic control. The spirit of democratization provoked 
a general belief that higher education should be liberalized in pursuit of academic 
freedom and autonomy without governmental intervention (Chan 2010). Based on 
such objectives, the Education Reform Committee, a high-level advisory board to 
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

200
the Executive Yuan (行政院), was created in 1995 and advised that the higher edu-
cation sector should be free from political constraints. The relationship between 
higher education and government was thus redefined, and universities were granted 
more decision-making rights and autonomy. A wide range of relevant issues require 
academic inputs and professional judgments, thereby creating a positive atmosphere 
for higher education research.
In addition to the economic and political factors in reforming the higher educa-
tion sector, educational rationale was responsible for providing the required incen-
tives for the formation of the higher education research community. The ‘universal 
establishment of university and senior high school’ (廣設高中大學), endorsed by 
the Civil Educational Reform Movement in 1994, was a major appeal in order to 
cater to the demands for wider access to higher education. In principle, this reform 
agenda was adopted and transformed into policy by the then (and subsequent) gov-
ernments, which resulted in a rapid expansion of higher education with respect to 
the growth in net enrolment rate from 20.98% in 1991 to 68.27% in 2011 (Ministry 
of Education 2014). The parallel effect on the higher education research commu-
nity, due to such massification, is the prevalence of academic department/programs 
in the education field, including centres for teacher education. More undergraduate 
and postgraduate programs have been established and in turn recruited more aca-
demic staff (Interviewee A). These increased academic populations paved the path 
for new educational research, including higher education. As a matter of fact, we 
have witnessed new buds appearing during the same period, such as educational 
administration and policy, curriculum and instruction, and educational technology 
and learning. Therefore, further academic specialization and differentiation, in 
response to the diverse needs of social and economic development, have become 
common during the massification of higher education.
The discussion thus far highlights the critical impact of higher education massi-
fication upon the formation of new research areas. Reviewing academic publica-
tions and archives, few scholarly higher education works were found in Taiwan 
before the 1990s. Among them, some publications dealt with reforms in the admis-
sion system with an eye to easing the pressure of access to higher education. 
Interestingly, these works are highly related to the comparative education fields, as 
these scholars were keen to borrow foreign systems for local implementation. This 
linkage has led to a lasting impact upon the subsequent overlapping of key partici-
pants in higher education and comparative education. Moreover, other active authors 
in higher education came from other specialized disciplines, such as law, sociology, 
or economics. For example, in order to attract public support for democratizing the 
higher education system in 1994, law school professor De-fen Ho (賀德芬) pub-
lished the book The Rebirth of University (大學之再生). James Hsueh (薛承泰), a 
sociologist focusing on population and education, reviewed the education reform 
movement in 1994 by publishing the comprehensive book Ten-Year Education 
Reforms for Whose Dream? (十年教改 為誰築夢?). The disciplinary approach 
points out that higher education research can be diverse, with multiple orientations 
and purposes. However, it was clear that, prior to the 1990s, no scholar in Taiwan 
claimed that he or she specializes exclusively in the higher education field. Along 
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

201
with the increasing internationalization or globalization, more local researchers and 
faculty members aware of the worldwide concerns in higher education also paid 
attention to this field. Interviewee B asserted that the growing exchange with 
Mainland China inspired greater involvement of the Taiwanese side in this emerging 
field. Some well-known scholars specializing in higher education research in China, 
such as Maoyuan Pan (潘懋元) at Xiamen University, inspired the Taiwanese inter-
ests in developing this embryonic area. The further occurrence of cross-border 
higher education cooperation and activities also brought about new incentives for 
engaging in relevant research (Interviewee C). Therefore, after two decades of accu-
mulation and development, the new identity and recognition steadily formed and 
attracted different stakeholders to this field. In the next section, we turn to the accu-
mulative achievements with respect to the professional association, journal, and 
agency examined herein.
Taking Shape: The Emergence of a Specialized Society, 
Journal, and Agency
As we mentioned earlier, wider social backdrops in the 1990s provided the neces-
sary foundation for higher education research. The concrete outcomes began to take 
shape in the mid-2000s. If we define community as a sort of institutional coopera-
tion, then we see the formation of THES and its publication of JHE, both in 2006, 
as excellent examples. With the financial support of the Ministry of Education 
(MOE), HEEACT also started operations in 2005. Through the investigation into 
these two organizations and the relevant research publication platform (journals), 
we can gain an in-depth understanding of the evolution and characteristics of this 
field in recent years.
When it comes to the establishment of specialized associations for higher educa-
tion research, some discussions started in the late 1990s (Interviewee A and B). Due 
to the expanded higher education sector and the complicated governance and man-
agement issues involved, a small group of scholars, led by Professor Yuan-tsun Liu 
(劉源俊), a private university president, sought to form a professional higher educa-
tion society in about 1998. However, this attempt was not successful for several 
reasons. Following this, Tamkang University (淡江大學), another private university 
in Taiwan, introduced a Higher Education Research Forum (高等教育研究論壇) 
with about one dozen members who presented, discussed, and even published 
research findings through this platform. This forum was later transformed into the 
Centre for Higher Education Research in 2002, the first such centre in Taiwan, with 
missions to engage in literature collection, host conferences, publish proceedings, 
carry out research projects, and provide advisory services (Tamkang University, 
n.d.). This pioneer experiment aimed to ‘strengthen the capacity to do research on 
policy and governance so as to improve the university practice in a scientific ­manner’ 
(Interviewee C). Although it had not existed for a long time, this centre quickly 
became the main basis of THES.
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

202
In 2006, THES was established with comprehensive support from Tamkang 
University. If we examine the constituents of directors and the supervisors, many 
representatives from this institution were responsible for daily operations (THES 
n.d.). In order to effectively expand the society’s outreach, influence, and participa-
tion in policy formation, key persons from THES came from diverse backgrounds 
such as the university president, MOE officials (current and former), managers of 
relevant university agencies, and higher education researchers. This diversified 
component of the society’s representative conveys an important message that this 
newly established society was attempting to engage in the policymaking arena, 
internal university governance and management, and the enhancement of research 
capacity. This policy- and management-oriented strategy can have direct links with 
policymakers and the institutional manager by providing professional services to 
different higher education segments. The configuration of THES, therefore, aims to 
fulfil the mandated mission of ‘providing advices to higher education policy’ (THES 
n.d.). In enhancing the power of higher education experts and debating critical 
issues in higher education reforms, the JHE—the official publication of THES—
began its biannual publication in 2006. This journal is academically oriented, with 
an editorial board composed exclusively of (higher) education researchers. In other 
words, the positioning of this journal does not target primarily university practitio-
ners or managers. The key participants of THES and contributors to JHE come from 
academic backgrounds of sociology, comparative education, educational adminis-
tration and policy, etc. Such experts tend to be concerned with macro forces and 
issues at the systemic or institutional level and ignore meso- or even micro topics. 
These main actors in higher education research have a direct influence on the 
choices of mainstream themes/topics to be investigated later.
In addition to THES, a new agency that deserves our attention is HEEACT, estab-
lished in 2005 with financial support from MOE and constituent domestic colleges 
and universities. HEEACT aims to enhance the quality of higher education through 
a variety of activities, including research. Its main task is to implement the external 
evaluation and accreditation of colleges and universities so as to install quality 
assurance mechanisms nationwide. Therefore, the nature of this organization 
focuses great attention on institutional evaluation, accountability measurement, 
quality enhancement, or even university ranking with respect to teaching, research, 
and industry–academic cooperation (HEEACT 2013a). This semi-autonomous 
entity established the Office of Research and Development, which is responsible for 
a series of research projects and book publications focusing on higher education 
evaluation and quality assurance in major countries. As far as publication is con-
cerned, the main topics include quality assurance systems in different countries or 
regions, ranking and research evaluation, student learning outcomes assessment, 
internationalization, and faculty development (HEEACT 2014). These works tend 
to focus on institutions/systems, policies, management, and teaching and learning. 
These traits are actually consistent with the expertise of the previously identified key 
participants in the higher education community. With an eye to constructing a new 
higher education evaluation system in Taiwan, major efforts (including research/
publication) have been included in the appropriate regime and management.
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

203
In addition to setting up a new evaluation system, HEEACT contributed to the 
higher education research community by supporting an all-English journal entitled 
Higher Education Evaluation and Development (HEED). Positioning itself as an 
international platform for worldwide audiences, HEED is a scholarly refereed jour-
nal aimed at ‘encouraging research in higher education evaluation and development, 
raising standards of evaluation research, and sharing outcomes of evaluation and 
higher education worldwide’ (HEED 2013). Unlike JHE supported by THES, 
HEED is international, and its contributors are mainly abroad, discussing compre-
hensive topics related to higher education, evaluation, and development. According 
to one of the interviewees, its internationalized character reflects a strong belief that 
‘we have to understand other countries due to greater internationalization’ 
(Interviewee C). However, this internationally oriented journal does not present 
domestic features or characteristics in Taiwan. Another publication warranting 
attention, also supported by HEEACT, is Evaluation Bimonthly. This professional 
newsletter has many readers online and focuses ‘on the latest evaluation knowledge, 
newest trends, in hopes of creating a platform for sharing evaluation knowledge 
with the aim of allowing the public to understand the importance of evaluation’ 
(HEEACT 2013b).
We can argue that the establishment of the professional association, journals, and 
quality assurance agency rapidly crystalized the fundamental configuration of the 
higher education research community in Taiwan. After obvious massification of 
higher education, these institutionalized organizations and academic journals 
attracted the participation of policymakers, institutional managers, and researchers. 
The main functions of these organizations and journals are mainly twofold: to pro-
vide professional advice or assistance to practical issues in the higher education 
sector and to raise the research capacity. Their main concerns, echoing Clark and 
Neave’s (1992) and Tight’s (2003) classifications, concentrate on national policies, 
governance, institutional management, and even quality assurance, while the inter-
nationalization of higher education has become an emergent issue to be addressed 
(David 2011).
Dynamics of the Constrained Labour Market and Its Impact 
on Degree Programs
For any disciplinary development, the institutionalization of the formal degree pro-
gram at a university would constitute an important indicator for judging its success, 
influence, and maturity (Becher and Trowler 2001). Despite the successful experi-
ences in forming research organizations and journals, the pursuit of such develop-
ment has proved a failure. Several attempts have been made to build master’s level 
programs at different universities, but most cases have failed. The main challenge, as 
suggested, could relate to the limited labour market for graduates of such programs.
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

204
In the early 2000s, some universities expressed an interest in establishing higher 
education programs at the master’s degree level. Tamkang University, the most 
active institution in this academic field, realized the vision and established its 
Graduate Institute of Higher Education in 2006 to ‘cultivate talent on higher educa-
tion planning and management’ (Tamkang n.d.). Unfortunately, this master’s degree 
program was short lived and ended with a merger with the Graduate Institute of 
Education Policy and Leadership in 2008. As a result, the higher education master’s 
degree program was no longer an independent unit but a division of educational 
policy and administration. The short-term existence of this program was attributed 
to the limited source of students and the pressure of program evaluations (Interviewee 
B). In fact, all three interviewees stressed that the main negative factor was the very 
limited employment prospects for graduates. Graduates of programs who specialize 
in many aspects of higher education naturally would expect to work in the univer-
sity sector. However, those employed in this sector are actually qualified civil ser-
vants working at a public university in Taiwan, meaning they would need to pass the 
official national examination rather than specialize in higher education. Similarly, 
private universities have their own policies for recruiting personnel. Instead of 
emphasizing the professional skills of higher education management, these private 
institutions tend to select employees from larger pools with certain qualifications/
thresholds, such as computers skills, English proficiency, and other professional 
licences. This misalignment prevents students from enrolling in higher education 
degree programs and applying professional skills and knowledge in the real world. 
Many higher education programs exist in Mainland China, and most of their gradu-
ates become university staff who help complete educational projects, institutional 
planning, and even management (Chen and Hu 2012). If their professional knowl-
edge and skills are not valued by universities, the employment opportunities are 
substantially limited at other industries.
After the closure of this program at Tamkang University, a new spark was lit at 
National Taichung University of Education in 2012. The Master of Higher Education 
Management was created to explore ‘theories and emerging issues on higher educa-
tion management, higher education institutions and policies in developed countries, 
and problems faced in Taiwanese higher education’ (National Taichung University 
of Education n.d.). Program graduates are expected to become the ‘critical work-
force of higher education institution management’. This mission statement shows 
the strong intention of combining higher education theories, policies, management, 
and practices in order to strengthen the effective governance at the institutional 
level. If examined closely, we can discover that this program’s objective is consis-
tent with Tamkang University’s. This similarity is not coincidental and highlights 
two important points. First, Taiwanese colleges and universities really require a pro-
fessional workforce to raise management effectiveness and efficiency in a system-
atic way. This is true, at least, in the eyes of higher education researchers or scholars. 
Second, as we have already argued, the higher education research community in 
Taiwan has an instrumental or practical feature, as evident in these two programs 
devoted to improving policymaking and enhancing higher education management.
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

205
In addition to the limited employment prospect, another minor factor in relation 
to academic differentiation prevents the appearance of programs of higher educa-
tion. Most Taiwanese researchers in education seem to regard higher education as a 
subfield of educational administration and policy studies. If this is the case, the 
higher education research community will not have an independent identity. 
Moreover, this confusion also relates to the overemphasis on the linkage with the 
policymaking arena and application to management practices. This intertwined dis-
ciplinary development between educational administration and higher education 
deserves further investigation.
Research Themes and Methods: Towards Diversification
In this section, we decipher the main themes and methods in the Taiwanese higher 
education community. To this end, we use two methods: interview results and data-
base analyses (journal article). The first perspective we have is from the interview-
ees’ responses. Their answers are similar to each other. They point out that policy 
studies, institutional research, and higher education reforms are mainstream themes. 
Interviewee A even stressed that higher education evaluation and rankings could be 
the current focus, while enterprise theory and practices are used to explore leader-
ship and management at universities. In addition to echoing Interviewee A, our sec-
ond respondent added that internationalization/globalization, marketization, and 
world-class universities have been popular topics. In recent years, quality assurance, 
evaluation, and governance have also gained attention. Our final interviewee claimed 
that comparative or foreign studies constitute another major thread, as most of the 
key participants in higher education have academic backgrounds in comparative 
education (Interviewee C). This concise exploration of the main themes leads to the 
conclusion that higher education research tends to concentrate on national policies, 
institutional management, and conceptual topics such as globalization. We also 
sense a strong preference for issues like quality assurance, rankings, and evaluation. 
From these preliminary results, we can infer that research focuses are highly related 
to the missions of THES and HEEACT.
Turning to other major source of research orientations, 989 journal articles col-
lected from the database provide slightly different scenarios in terms of research 
methods and themes. In echoing the process of massification of higher education, 
Fig. 11.1 indicates a growing trend of published articles from 1990. During the 
1990s, the figure is entirely below 10 including zero in 1991, 1992, 1993, and 1997. 
Except 2004 and 2008, we have seen continuous growth every year in the first 
decade of twenty-first century. In 2014, there were even more than one hundred 
papers in higher education field, ten times more than in 1990s. We can argue that the 
formation of higher education research is emerging dramatically after 2000. This 
might also relate to the establishments of professional associations, journals, and 
evaluation agency in higher education as indicated previously.
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

206
Along with the obvious progress in higher education research, research methods 
employed is the essential issue to be investigated. Surprisingly, among the 989 
papers reviewed, up to 86% are based on qualitative approach while only 14% is 
conducted by quantitative methods. The qualitative approach in this study covers 
case study, content analysis, interview, comparative education method, literature/
document analyses, historical review, action research and ethnography, etc. Such 
tendency towards qualitative approach, on one hand, might point to the unique 
nature and needs of higher education research. On the other hand, this also reflects 
the difficulties of mobilizing statistical and quantitative analyses in Taiwan. For 
example, the response rate is generally low (about 10% to 20% in general) while 
distributing questionnaire and survey. The absence of large-scale official database 
and survey further plagues the adoption of quantitative research. In hope of bridging 
this gap, the recent launch of Taiwan Institutional Research Association in 2016 
may provide systematic dataset for statistical examination so as to tackle the prob-
lems of decision-making at the university level.
Finally, we aim to decipher the main themes explored in these 989 articles. Based 
on previous literature, we synthesize the different categories from Clark and Neave 
(1992), Tight (2003), and David (2011). There are nine themes including teaching, 
curriculum design, student experiences, quality/evaluation, system/policy, institu-
tional management, academic work, knowledge, and internationalization. The major 
proportion of research themes explored in Fig. 11.2, as previous interviews have 
revealed, focused on system/policy (33%) and quality/evaluation (16%). They are 
followed by curriculum design (11%), student experiences (9%), teaching (9%), and 
academic work (9%). This distribution highlights that management-oriented research 
to some extent dominates the field. However, it is noted that teaching and learning is 
another major area as indicated by Horta and Jung (2014) across Asia. Some emerg-
ing themes such as academic work (9%) and internationalization (5%) attract greater 
attention and diversify the higher education research themes in Taiwan.
39
1
2
5
3
9
6 11 15
33
27
88
50 52
89
77
64
86 84
94
118
33
1990
1994
1995
1996
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Fig. 11.1  The publication volume in higher education field from 1990 to 2015
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

207
Discussions of the Driving Forces, Growth, and Core Issues
The overall development of the higher education research community has been highly 
related to the process of massification since the 1990s. The evolution and character-
istics of this community can be summarized with four layers, as shown in Fig. 11.3. 
In this section, we explain their dynamic relationships among different layers.
The drivers for forming a research community can vary significantly. For exam-
ple, China’s higher education research is strongly linked to the nation-state or even 
communist party (Chen and Hu 2012). The nation plays a major role in assisting the 
formation of the Chinese higher education community. Alternatively, the appear-
ance of new knowledge production and methodology typically inspires the creation 
of new research fields or even disciplines. Our previous analysis highlighted that 
massification, as shown in the top layer of Fig. 11.3, plays a major role and tends to 
be the stimulus for greater ‘academic differentiation’. More specialized, differenti-
ated, and professional fields or areas gradually develop from an expanded higher 
education sector based on the notion of labour division (Becher and Trowler 2001). 
In addition to higher education research, we also found a similar proliferation of 
research areas in the education field, including educational administration and pol-
icy, curriculum and teaching, and sociology of education, throughout the 1990s and 
2000s in Taiwan. Indeed, massification fundamentally paves the basis for the forma-
tion of a higher education research community by providing a ‘critical mass’ of 
institutionalized agencies, self-identified researchers, and relevant issues and topics. 
These new elements help define this emerging research field. Thus, massification 
Teaching
9炴
Curriculum design
11炴
Student experiences
9炴
Quality/evaluation
16炴
system/policy
33炴
Institutional 
management
4炴
academci 
work
9炴
Knowledge 
4炴
Internationalization
5炴
Fig. 11.2  Research themes
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

208
has been a major driving force in Taiwan to differentiate the higher education com-
munity from the larger educational studies.
With an expanded, differentiated, and diverse higher education sector, Taiwan 
indeed has faced a wide range of challenges and issues at the national and institu-
tional levels. Higher education research community in Taiwan, as demonstrated ear-
lier, initially concentrated on instrumental or management-oriented functions (see 
the second layer of Fig. 11.3) to meet the needs of rapid systematic transformation 
and restructuring nationwide. In other words, the research emphasis on the national 
policies, management, and governance, as previously revealed, was directly affected 
by the process of massification as well because the expanded and more complicated 
higher education sector required better management, good governance, and novel 
initiatives and policies to achieve new social and economic objectives. Further mas-
sification and the management-oriented research reinforce each other and constitute 
an interlinked cycle. The recent establishment of Taiwan Institutional Research 
Association in 2016, aiming to use big data and information to facilitate ­institutional 
decision-making and management, further confirms such dynamic relationship.
The maturity of higher education research community is mainly composed of 
specialized associations, journals, expanding research themes, and degree programs 
at universities. The third layer of Fig. 11.3 has demonstrated some signs of these 
elements. We have seen the establishment of professional organizations and their 
corresponding research arms, such as academic journals and the research and devel-
opment office of the HEEAC.  The development of the research production and 
knowledge application has grown increasingly mature during the past two decades. 
Massification of 
Higher education
Higher education 
Research 
Community
Organizations 
and Journals
Growingly 
mature
Research themes 
and Methods
Increasingly 
diverse and 
balanced
Degree Program
at University
Constrained 
transition to 
labour market
Management-
oriented 
Development
Fig. 11.3  Evolution and characteristics of a higher education research community
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

209
Using Tight’s (2003) classification of higher education research themes as the 
benchmark, Taiwanese higher education research themes and methods are gradually 
diversifying and developing rather balanced coverage as a whole. More attention is 
being paid to student learning, university teaching, academic work, institutional 
management and knowledge, etc. The publication of the English-language journal 
HEED, sponsored by HEEACT, even symbolizes the immersion of higher educa-
tion research into internationalization, as David suggested (2011). This research 
theme has attracted more and more attention in recent years.
The only inconsistent development between the massification process in Taiwan 
and the formation of a high education community, as shown in the bottom layer of 
Fig. 11.3, is the unsuccessful institutionalization of degree programs at universities. 
This is mainly due to the limited employment prospects in the labour market because 
graduates cannot easily find positions at higher education institutions. Indeed, if 
these graduates can apply their expertise and professional knowledge in running or 
even managing higher education institutions, then management-oriented function 
research can be valued and supported. Moreover, their presence within the higher 
education sector can offer professional assistance in addressing challenging issues 
in a massified system like Taiwan. Therefore, as Fig. 11.3 indicates, a higher educa-
tion degree program is closely related to the development of management-oriented 
research as well as higher education massification. Unfortunately, the degree pro-
gram might be the missing link in this mutually reinforced system.
Conclusions and Prospects
In considering the changes in the higher education research community in Taiwan, 
we are left with a positive impression of the rapid development over the past two 
decades. Using professional or specialized associations and journals as criteria to 
judge the formation of this research field, the higher education community has 
achieved some domestic visibility, credibility, and even recognition from a wide 
variety of stakeholders, such as policymakers, university managers, and scholarly 
researchers. This achievement, as we have argued, is based on the massification 
process since the 1990s. This period also dealt with certain political (democratiza-
tion and institutional autonomy), economic (industry upgrading and structural trans-
formation), and educational (greater participation and equal access) agendas. With 
such differentiated demands, the higher education research community concentrated 
its major efforts on dealing with policymaking, institutional management, and learn-
ing foreign systems. This problem-solving or management-oriented approach is 
effective for responding to social changes and challenges (Teichler 1996).
The Taiwanese higher education research community is facing a critical moment. 
Based on past achievements, this field has been expanding and thriving, but it has 
encountered a lack of institutionalized academic programs within universities. This 
has significant implications for the research community, policymakers, and institu-
tional managers. In addition, the emphasis on an instrumental approach has to be 
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

210
supplemented with studies at the meso- or micro levels, such as teaching and stu-
dent learning, which should become the main themes for a massified higher educa-
tion system like in Taiwan (Shin and Teichler 2014). The current achievements and 
accomplishments of Taiwan’s higher education research community have been sup-
ported by the continuous massification process. The declining birth rate and insuf-
ficient student recruitment in recent years, resulting in possible comprehensive 
institutional mergers or closures, has posed a potential threat to this newly emerging 
field. If the ‘de-massification’ of higher education is gradually taking place, the 
potential impacts on this research field warrant further study.
References
Becher, T., & Trowler, P. R. (2001). Academic Tribes and Territories. Buckingham/Philadelphia: 
Open University Press.
Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods (4th ed.). Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Chan, S. J. (2010). Shifting governance patterns in Taiwanese higher education: A recentralised 
future? In K. H. Mok (Ed.), The Search for New Governance of Higher Education in Asia 
(pp. 139–152). London/New York: Palgrave.
Chen, S. Y., & Hu, L. F. (2012). Higher education research as a field in China: Its formation and 
current landscape. Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 655–666.
Chou, C. P., & Wang, L. T. (2012). Who benefits from the massification of higher education in 
Taiwan? Chinese Education and Society, 45(5–6), 8–20.
Clark, B. R., & Neave, G. (Eds.). (1992). The encyclopedia of higher education (Vol. 4). Oxford: 
Pergamon Press.
David, M. E. (2011). Overview of researching global higher education: Challenge, change or cri-
sis? Contemporary Social Science, 6(2), 147–165.
Harland, T. (2009). People who study higher education. Teaching in Higher Education, 14(5), 
579–582.
HEED. (2013) Aims and scope of HEED. Higher Education Evaluation and Development, 7(1), 
Cover page.
Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan (HEEACT). (2013a). 
Organizational regulation of HEEACT. March 3 2014, Retrieved from http://www.heeact.edu.
tw/public/Attachment/43281171019.pdf
HEEACT. (2013b). Evaluation bimonthly, 10 November 2014, Retrieved from http://www.heeact.
edu.tw/ct.asp?xItem=15075&CtNode=458&mp=4
HEEACT. (2014). Book series in higher education evaluation, 3 .March 2014 Retrieved from 
http://www.heeact.edu.tw/lp.asp?ctNode=464&CtUnit=201&BaseDSD=43&mp=2
Horta, H., & Jung, J. (2014). Higher education research in Asia: An archipelago, two continents or 
merely atomization? Higher Education, 68(1), 117–134.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Ministry of Education. (2014). Educational statistics indicators. 10 February 2014, Retrieved 
from https://stats.moe.gov.tw/files/ebook/indicators/101indicators.xls
National Taichung University of Education. (n.d.). Introduction to the master program of higher 
education management. 20 March 2014. Retrieved from http://he.ntcu.edu.tw/introduce.php
Shin, J.  C., & Teichler, U. (Eds.). (2014). The future of the post-massified University at the 
Crossroads. London/New York: Springer.
Taiwan Higher Education Society (THES). (n.d.). Name list of directors and supervisor. 22 
February 2014, Retrieved from https://sites.google.com/site/thes2005/home
S.-J. Chan and T.-M. Huang

211
Tamkang University. (n.d.). The history of college of education., 22 February 2014. Retrieved from 
http://edcollege.tku.edu.tw/main01-2.htm
Teichler, U. (1996). Comparative higher education: Potentials and limits. Higher Education, 32(4), 
431–465.
Teichler, U. (2013). Academically ambitious and relevant higher education research: The legacy of 
the consortium of higher education researchers. European Journal of Higher Education, 3(3), 
242–254.
Tight, M. (2008). Higher education research as tribe, territory and/or community: A co-citation 
analysis. Higher Education, 55(5), 593–605.
Tight, M. (2003). Researching higher education. Berkshire: Open University Press.
Wang, R. J. (2003). From elitism to mass higher education in Taiwan: The problems faced. Higher 
Education, 46(3), 261–287.
Sheng-Ju Chan  is professor of Higher Education in the Graduate Institute of Education and chief 
executive officer of the International Program in Educational Leadership and Management 
Development at the National Chung Cheng University, Taiwan. His areas of special interest are 
higher education policy, comparative education, and higher education management. He is the 
author of over a dozen publications in Chinese and English and also a higher education policy 
advisor to the Ministry of Education in Taiwan. Specializing in education in East Asia, Professor 
Chan is the associate editor of the international journal Asian Education and Development Studies 
published by Emerald. He is also the coeditor of a book series, Higher Education in Asia, sup-
ported by Springer. Professor Chan is substantially involved with the comparative education stud-
ies community and is the former secretary general of the Chinese Taipei Comparative Education 
Society in Taiwan receiving the Society’s research award in 2011.
Ting-May Huang  is a Ph.D. student in the Graduate Institute of Education Entrepreneurship and 
Management at National University of Tainan in Taiwan and also a full-time project assistant in the 
University Learning Ecosystem for Taiwan Program at National Chiayi University. She received a 
master degree at National Chung Cheng University and worked as a part-time research assistant. 
Her Ph.D. dissertation focuses on the cross-border higher education mobility between Taiwan and 
ASEAN. Academically, her research interest lies in the field of higher education, transnational 
higher education, comparative education and higher education policy.
11  The Development and Progress of Higher Education Research in Taiwan…

213
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in  
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_12
Chapter 12
Higher Education Research in Mongolia 
During the Transition Period of Development
Nyamjav Sumberzul and Shagdarsuren Oyunbileg
Abstract  The first higher education institution (HEI) in Mongolia was established 
in 1942. During the transition period from a centralized economy to a market econ-
omy, which began in the early 1990s, there was a marked increase in the number of 
HEIs. Mining, construction, transport, and communication have become the fastest-­
growing sectors; they have potential absorptive capacity for the younger population 
and demand technical, vocational, and engineering skills. The changing socioeco-
nomic context has introduced progress and innovation in higher education; how-
ever, we have also faced some emerging problems and challenges. This has 
stimulated increased demand for higher educational research, and we here outline 
the current landscape of higher education as a research field in Mongolia on the 
basis of the quantity and themes of published journal articles and monographs.
We reviewed the Mongolian Foundation for Science and Technology (MFST) 
database, which was established in 1993, as well as some academic journals that 
publish peer-reviewed, research-based, discipline-specific articles. The journals do 
not focus specifically on higher education, but they occasionally include articles 
related to higher education research. State-owned universities play a key role in 
such research; therefore, the summary of annual academic publications by faculty 
members and researchers of those universities is a reasonable source of information 
to find relevant articles. We reviewed 380 publications, most of which were related 
to common problems of higher education in Mongolia, such as educational policy, 
capacity building, faculty development, etc. In their conclusions and recommenda-
tions, the authors of the studies primarily stated that education management and 
human resource development, training methods, and content must be improved.
We concluded that higher education research is in its initial stage of develop-
ment and that its role as a field of science, in planning for future actions, in evalu-
ating the results and outcomes of interventions and changes in higher education, 
and in providing policy developers and decision-makers with scientific evidence, 
is increasing.
N. Sumberzul (*) • S. Oyunbileg 
Mongolian National University of Medical Sciences, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia
e-mail: sumberzul@mnums.edu.mn

214
Formation, Expansion, and Composition of the Field
Mongolia is a landlocked country in central Asia and has a population of 3 million. 
The first higher education institution (HEI) in the country, the National University 
of Mongolia (NUM), was established in 1942 with three faculties: physics and 
mathematics, veterinary medicine, and medicine. Since then, the development of 
HEIs has increased, and the faculties of agriculture and medicine have been sepa-
rated from the NUM and have become independent institutes (Batbaatar and 
Lkhagvasuren 2012; Mongolian State University of Life Science [MSULS] 2015). 
As Mongolia transitioned from a centralized socialist economy to a market econ-
omy in the early 1990s, the demand for higher skills in the labor market has increased 
and has led to a marked expansion of HEIs (World Bank [WB] 2010). Since 1990 
the number of HEIs increased significantly, initially it was eight in 1990, peaking at 
185 in 2002, and then decreased to 101 HEIs; concurrently, the number of enrolled 
students rose from 17,338  in 1990 to 178,295  in 2014 (Ministry of Education, 
Culture and Science [MECS] 2015) (Fig. 12.1).
This increase is not surprising, given that people aged 20–24 years represented 
the largest group in the population (in 2013); the demand for whom, particularly 
those who have completed high school, is also the highest. Some of this high 
demand was met by foreign HEIs during the socialist era; thousands of Mongolian 
students studied in the former Soviet Union and Eastern European countries, such 
as Hungary, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Bulgaria. However, since the tran-
sition, a comparatively low number of students have studied aboard, for example, in 
Germany and in Asian countries, such as China, Korea, Japan, and Singapore, due 
to a significant reduction in the state grant and in people’s capacity to pay the tuition 
fees for foreign education. As a result, the expansion of higher education in Mongolia 
was largely centralized in the capital, because almost all HEIs are situated in 
Ulaanbaatar, and a significant part of it was expansion of private HEIs (WB 2010). 
Fig. 12.1  Number of students in higher education institutions in Mongolia (Source: Ministry of 
Education, Culture, and Science, 2015; http://www.meds.gov.mn/highereducation)
N. Sumberzul and S. Oyunbileg

215
According to the 2014 statistics from the Ministry of Education, Culture, and 
Science (MECS), 103,650 students were studying in 16 state-owned HEIs, 74,233 
students were in 80 private HEIs, and 412 students were studying in branch colleges 
of foreign HEIs. The management of private and international joint universities has 
received relatively less attention than state-owned HEIs within the higher education 
research areas.
Higher education has been very sensitive to market demand, as it is believed that 
Mongolia’s competitiveness will improve if it produces qualified professional and 
technical human resources to meet the needs of the economy and improves the 
equity of access and the level of efficiency of public resources use.
Data from the Living Standard Measurement Study undertaken by the World 
Bank show that mining is the fastest-growing sector; in the 25–34 years age group, 
employment in this industry increased by 671% between 1998 and 2007. It is fol-
lowed by the construction sector, in which the growth rate was 368%, and then 
transport and communication, with 110% growth in this age group, during the same 
period. This suggests that the labor market has potential absorptive capacity for the 
younger population, and it demands technical, vocational, and engineering skills 
(WB 2010). In comparison, the distribution of students in HEIs between 2007 and 
2014 shows that the percentage of those studying in the engineering, manufacturing, 
and construction fields continuously increased from 15.9 to 18.6% and in health and 
welfare from 8.2 to 11.6% (Fig.  12.2). According to the health statistics of the 
Ministry of Health and Sport, almost 80% of health facilities were state-owned in 
1995, but this dramatically changed during the transition period, such that 68.3% of 
health facilities belonged to the private sector by the end of 2013 (Ministry of Health 
and Sport 2014). Consequently, there is a need for highly skilled health profession-
als to address market competition in healthcare and service delivery. Tuul (2010) 
10.6
13.3
12. 7
9.6
8.6
7.1
10
9.1
7
29.7
26.7
26.2
3.6
3.4
4.6
3.1
3.6
2.8
15.9
17.1
18.6
2.9
2.8
2.9
8.2
9.8
11. 6
6.4
5.6
6.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2007
2010
2014
Services
Health and welfare
Agriculture, forestry, fisheries and veterinary
Engineering, manufacturing and construction
Information and communication technology
Natural sciences, mathematics and statistics
Business, administration and law
Social sciences, journalism and information
Arts and humanities
Education
Fig. 12.2  Distribution of students in higher education institutions by the International Standard 
Classification of Education (ISCED), 2013 (Source: MECS 2015; http://www.meds.gov.mn/
highereducation)
12  Higher Education Research in Mongolia During the Transition Period…

216
reported that studies related to higher educational management and curriculum 
development have dominated since 1990.
Challenges to the Current Landscape and Research Level 
of Higher Education
The new context of socioeconomic development and the rapid growth of the higher 
education sector have introduced progress in, and challenges for, higher education. 
This has resulted in innovation in the training curriculum, the use of the Bologna 
system of higher education instead of the Soviet model, institutional and program 
accreditations, unification of similar programs in public universities, and the credit 
transfer system. With advanced information technology (IT), higher education devel-
opment, particularly the carrying out of distance and online training, was changed. In 
comparison with other sectors of the economy, IT is rapidly developing in Mongolia.
However, it has also been associated with some emerging problems, such as low-­
cost, low-quality education, a mismatch between demand and supply of skills, and 
inequitable opportunities of access between urban and rural areas and rich and poor. 
The increased involvement of the private sector in the higher educational service has 
meant that curriculum development, administration, financial management, quality 
assurance, capacity building, and human resource strengthening in private HEIs 
have become urgent problems that must be addressed by appropriate and evidence-­
based decisions. The financing of HEIs changed during the transition period; the 
government budget sharply decreased, and tuition fees became their primary finan-
cial source. Indeed, HEIs in Mongolia now receive over 90% of their income from 
tuition fees. Therefore, the MECS developed a strategy to transform HEIs into 
research-oriented and entrepreneurial universities, which have multiple sources of 
financing, such as results-based grants, development funds, research and innovation 
projects, and start-up companies (MECS 2013).
Higher Education Research in Mongolia: Who Conducts This 
Research?
In return, these changes have stimulated an increased demand for higher educational 
research and have been involved in shaping which faculty members in the HEIs have 
played a significant role. Higher educational research was primarily carried out by 
researchers, faculty members of state-owned HEIs, and the Institute of Education 
under the MECS. The Institute of Education has a sector for vocational and higher 
education research, in which there are six researchers. During the transition period, 
the basic legal environment of higher education in the new market economy context 
was established. The Great Khural (the parliament) and the government of Mongolia 
N. Sumberzul and S. Oyunbileg

217
passed the state policy of education (1995), and the law of higher education (2002), 
as well as related legislative documents, and these legislations not only focus on 
higher education but also on technical and vocational education and training. In addi-
tion, several professional educational associations, such as the Mongolian Medical 
Education Association (MMEA), the Mongolian Association for Higher Education 
Research, the Center for International Higher Education, etc., were established. One 
of the biggest achievements in higher education was the introduction of the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) International 
Standard Classification of Education (ISCED 2013) in 2014.
Nowadays, all HEIs in Mongolia conduct bachelor’s degree training through 181 
educational programs; this number has been reduced from 817 professional pro-
grams in accordance with an order from the MECS, because the previous tendency 
to differentiate HEIs on the basis of narrow, professional training programs, has 
been changing to a direction of unified, basic, broad educational programs. These 
programs have great significance for HEIs, because they have a unified policy and 
common terminology and offer a convenient environment for credit transfer; flexi-
ble programs; graduates with common competencies; comparability with interna-
tional HEIs; mutual recognition of diplomas; common requirements for the 
development of educational programs; interrelationships; continuity of education 
through undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate training; etc. As such, the num-
ber of HEIs is decreasing, due to mergers and acquisitions, in order to become more 
powerful, multi-professional, and research-oriented institutions.
In association with the new context of socioeconomic development in Mongolia, 
educational purpose, content, methodology, and requirements were newly deter-
mined; the subjects of educational research, including higher education, were 
expanded. For example, history, philosophy, legislation, management, and psychol-
ogy of education were developed as new directions of study, and research on a 
development model of Mongolian education was initiated.
Higher Education Research in Mongolia: What Publications 
Does It Have?
Here, we outline the current landscape of higher education as a research field in 
Mongolia, on the basis of the quantity and themes of published journal articles and 
monographs. Several articles and monographs were published during transition 
period, such as “Education in Mongolia” (1996) and “Theoretical and methodological 
issues of Education” (1996) by Begz, “Theory and methodology of student centered 
training” (1996) by Vanchigsuren, “Certain issues of educational philosophy” 
(1996) by Bujidmaa and Begz, “Philosophy of education” (1997) by Khavkh, 
“Management and standardization of modern higher education” (1999) by 
Munkhdalai (Mongolian Academy of Science, 2000), and “Medical Education” 
(2001) by Sumberzul and Oyunbileg. Research articles evaluating Mongolian 
12  Higher Education Research in Mongolia During the Transition Period…

218
higher educational management and its most important problems, such as “Current 
context of legal coordination of higher educational innovation” by Gonchigdorj, 
“Psycho-social basics of education management” by Begz and Badarch, “Innovation 
of lecturer and student’s responsibility and rights” by Batrinchin and Baterdene, 
“Priority problems of higher education content and technology” by Vanchigsuren, 
“New integration model of education and research in field of agriculture” by 
Tumurjav, and “Current situation and future trends of Mongolian private HEIs” by 
Dashnyam, were published in 1995.
In Mongolia, several academic journals that include peer-reviewed, research-­
based, discipline-specific articles, not focused specifically on higher education, are 
published every year. In the journals articles on higher education are occasionally 
included, except the journal of Medical Education. Innovation in higher education 
in Mongolia, led by state-owned universities, particularly the Mongolian University 
of Science and Technology (MUST), has resulted in numerous changes in manage-
ment, curriculum development, methods, and evaluation of training in HEIs. 
Therefore, the annual academic publications summary of the faculty members and 
researchers of the MUST constitutes a reasonable source of information in which to 
find research articles that are related to higher education. We currently do not have 
a journal that specifically focuses on higher education research; the Mongolian 
Association for Higher Education Research is trying to create peer-reviewed scien-
tific journal on it.
The Research Focus of Higher Education
Classification of educational studies, in which educational management, theory and 
history, philosophy, and sociology were included, has been approved by the MECS 
(MECS, 2010). Since 2014, the ISCED (2013) has been introduced, and research has 
been divided into educational studies, education management, education technology, 
and didactic methods (MECS, 2014). The Mongolian Foundation for Science and 
Technology (MFST) was established in 1993 and created a database of Mongolian 
researchers’ achievements, dissertations, publications, and articles in science and 
technology. By the end of 2014, 5015 scientific publications (including dissertations) 
were included in this database (MFST, 2015). Upon reviewing dissertations in the 
MFST database using the keywords “higher education” and “higher education 
research,” we identified 81 dissertations related to higher education research from a 
total of 1742. We divided the research topics and objectives into history, philosophy, 
management, curriculum development, methodology, and evaluation of higher 
education in Mongolia. Looking at these categories, the majority referred to higher 
educational management and administration (24 dissertations) and didactic methods 
and technology (24 dissertations), along with some other popular topics, such as 
curriculum development (12 dissertations) and training evaluation (10). In catego-
rizing according to professional field, publications related to general higher educa-
tion (36), philology (12), and medical education (11) were common.
N. Sumberzul and S. Oyunbileg

219
The education research conducted by the Institute of Education under the MECS 
encompassed a broad area of education management, history, philosophy, sociology, 
curriculum, and faculty development and primarily focused on primary and secondary 
level education. The Institute of Education has been publishing the peer-­reviewed jour-
nal Education since 2002, in a total of 108 volumes. We reviewed 988 research articles 
from 99 volumes, of which 109 articles were associated with higher education, includ-
ing 44 on higher educational management and organization, 18 on the history of higher 
education in Mongolia, and 16 articles on training evaluation (Table 12.1).
As previously mentioned, the MUST, led by Professor Badarch, was one of the 
leading universities in higher education innovation, particularly with regard to intro-
ducing a credit system, curriculum development, and a university management 
information system. We revealed that higher education studies conducted in the 
MUST primarily addressed the priority issues of university and education manage-
ment and listed these in the annual academic publication summary. Our selected 
annual summaries, between 2000 and 2010, listed 1185 publications, of which 62 
were on the topic of higher education research.
The journal Lavai is published by the Mongolian National University of 
Education (MNUE), which is the only state-owned university in the field of educa-
tion. We reviewed 252 articles, published in 10 volumes of the journal; 16 of these 
were related to higher education, and by area of education study, six of them were 
on the management of higher education.
The MMEA, led by Professor Lkhagvasuren, was established in 1994 and 
encompasses state and private HEIs in the field of health. The Mongolian National 
Table 12.1  Publications related to higher education research from the selected database, by their 
topics
No
Areas of higher 
education study
Dissertation 
database at 
Mongolian 
Foundation 
for Science 
and 
Technology
Journal of 
Education
Summary of 
academic 
publications 
at 
Mongolian 
University 
of Science 
and 
Technology
Journal 
of 
Lavai
Journal of 
Medical 
Education
Total
1
History
  4
18
  3
  1
  –
26
2
Philosophy
  4
3
  1
  –
  –
8
3
Legislation
  2
9
  –
  2
  –
13
4
Management
24
44
33
  6
46
153
5
Financing
  1
4
  2
  –
  –
7
6
Curriculum 
development
12
8
  8
  2
36
66
7
Didactic 
methods
24
7
  9
  2
8
50
8
Evaluation
10
16
  6
  3
22
57
Total
81
109
62
16
112
380
12  Higher Education Research in Mongolia During the Transition Period…

220
University of Medical Sciences (MNUMS) plays a leading role in the association, 
as it introduced the block integrated undergraduate medical curriculum (from 
Groningen University, Netherlands, through the Tempus/Tacis project of the 
European Union in 2000), which became a turning point of medical education 
research in Mongolia. Since 2007, the association has been publishing its own 
biannual journal, Medical Education, which includes research articles related to 
medical education (112 articles in 5 volumes), with the majority of the articles being 
on curriculum development and educational management.
Of all 380 publications related to higher education research mentioned above, 
197 articles examined the common problems of higher education, such as educational 
policy, capacity building, faculty development, learning methods, and environment 
regarding the subject matter. Outstanding topics are more specific, for example, 61 
articles were on medical education, 33 were on technical education, 20 were on 
social science, and 14 articles were on utilization of information technology.
State-owned universities play a key role in higher education research; written 
dissertations were primarily reviewed, discussed, and approved by the academic 
board of the MNUE, the MUST, the MNUMS, the NUM, and the Mongolian 
University of the Humanities. In order to study in depth, 73 dissertations out of 
81  in the MFST database, related to higher education research, were analyzed, 
because 8 dissertations were written based on foreign data. Among 73 dissertations 
reviewed, 87% were conducted in the abovementioned universities. Two research 
designs were used in these studies: pre-experimental and true experimental designs 
(Tuckman, 1999). The majority of studies (54.3%) used the pre-experimental 
design, which includes the one-shot case study and one-group pretest-posttest 
designs. The true experimental design, which includes a posttest-only control group 
and a pretest-posttest control group, was used in 35.6% of studies. Row data collec-
tion methods were divided into quantitative, qualitative, and mixed. Quantitative 
and qualitative methods were separately used for data collection in 34.1% of stud-
ies, but the majority (65.8%) used both methods together. In their conclusions and 
recommendations, the study authors primarily stated the need to improve education 
management and human resource development (35.5%), training methods (31.5%), 
and content (19.7%).
Conclusion
Higher education research is currently in its initial stage of development. Its role as 
a field of science, in planning for future actions, in evaluating results and outcomes 
of interventions and changes in higher education, and in providing policy developers 
and decision-makers with scientific evidence, is increasing. Reforms and innovations 
in higher education are becoming more quality than quantity oriented, and further 
studies would help to illustrate the link between, and effects of, higher education 
reform and quality of education. Some themes and topics (e.g., management of 
private and international joint universities, analysis of demand and supply of some 
N. Sumberzul and S. Oyunbileg

221
attractive professions, such as business administration and law, and financial 
management of HEIs) have been studied relatively less than others, and research 
capacity building through the establishment of a research unit is required and should 
be considered for future funding and support.
References
Batbaatar G., & Lkhagvasuren, T. S. (2012). 70 years – Chronicles of HSUM. Ulaanbaatar. p. 8.
Bruce, W. (1999) Tuckman. Conducting Educational Research (5th edn, pp. 159–164). New York: 
Harcourt Brace College Publishers.
Introduction of Mongolian State University of Agriculture, history. http://www.msua.edu.mn/
view_news_sub.php?id=185&sub=193. Last entered 21 Jan 2015.
Ministry of Education and Science, Mongolia. Statistical indicators 2012. Ulaanbaatar, p. 27.
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science. (2013). Policy on educational quality innovation 
2012–2016. (p.99). Ulaanbaatar. http://www.meds.gov.mn/data/1501/higher.pdf. Last entered 
24 Jan 2015.
Ministry of Health and Sports. (2014). Health Indicators -2013. Health facilities and human 
resources. Ulaanbaatar: Centre for Health Development. http://www.chd.mohs.mn/images/pdf/
sma/2013/English%20indicator-2013.pdf. Last entered 25 Jan 2015.
Mongolian Academy of Science. Science in Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar. 2000. p. 111
Tuul, L. (2010). Mongolian higher education research. Journal of Education, 7(65), 43–47.
World Bank. (2010). Mongolia policy note. Tertiary Education in Mongolia: Meeting the 
Challenges of the Global Economy. Report No. 52925-MN. June 2010.
Nyamjav Sumberzul  was born in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, in 1965 and graduated from Mongolian 
National University of Medical Sciences as a pediatrician in 1989. He got his PhD degree from 
MNUMS (2003) and finished continue medical education course on pediatrics in Yonsei University 
Medical Center, Korea (1994), and international fellowship in medical education in the University 
of Washington, USA (2000). He did several research works in the field of pediatrics, public health, 
and medical education with his team. Prof. N. Sumberzul published papers in scientific journals 
such as Women’s Health, Pediatrics, the International Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, the American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 
World Hospitals and Health Services, and The Siberian Medical Journal.
Shagdarsuren Oyunbileg  was born in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, and graduated from Mongolian 
National University of Medical Sciences as a pediatrician in 1989. She got her PhD degree from 
the National Taiwan University (2009) and MA in health management planning and policy from 
Nuffield Institute for Health, University of Leeds (2000). She is highly motivated and passionate 
about making changes and is a result-driven specialist who has over 20 years of experience in 
health management and public health and 7 years in project management. She is skilled in numer-
ous fields – M&E, HR, maternal and child health, etc. She published several research articles in 
internationally recognized scientific journals such as the Journal of Women’s Health, Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine, the International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health, 
and the American Journal of Industrial Medicine.
12  Higher Education Research in Mongolia During the Transition Period…

Part III
Southeast Asia

225
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_13
Chapter 13 
Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s 
Global Education Hub”: Major Themes 
in Singapore
Michael H. Lee
Abstract  Higher education studies as a field of academic research have become 
more developed and important in Singapore since the 1980s when the city-state 
placed more emphasis on reforming and restructuring its higher education sector to 
achieve the status of “Asia’s global education hub”. The past few decades witnessed 
a more significant growth of the research work and literature on higher education in 
Singapore, which have covered several trends of development and major issues aris-
ing from changes facing the higher education system in Singapore. With reference 
to the research of higher education studies in Singapore over the past three decades, 
this chapter probes into major characteristics, trends and issues closely related to 
higher education development in Singapore, which are most appropriately repre-
sented by such themes as “centralized decentralization”, entrepreneurialization, 
globalization, internationalization, marketization and massification. It also exam-
ines the factors affecting the development of higher education in Singapore. It is 
believed that important lessons can be drawn from Singapore’s experience of higher 
education development for other countries, no matter they are small or large, devel-
oping or developed, to develop their higher education systems in order to strive for 
survival in a highly competitive global market.
Introduction
One of the most important achievements accomplished by Singapore over the past 
50 years since her independence in 1965, as what this city-state’s first Prime Minister 
Lee Kuan Yew claimed, is its successful transformation from being a Third World 
ex-British colony to a First World independent nation in Asia (Lee 2000). With 
manpower as the only resource which Singapore can rely on for long-term 
M.H. Lee (*) 
Department of History, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong
e-mail: michaellee@cuhk.edu.hk

226
sustainable development, higher education is perceived as a crucial and strategic 
policy instrument facilitating the Singapore government to fulfil its goals of nation-­
building and economic development by improving the quality of human resources 
and also ensuring a stable supply of well-educated upper-level workforce, compris-
ing professionals, managers and technicians to keep this Asia’s global city growing 
and moving on.
The mentality of “developmentalism” and the developmental state model adopted 
by the ruling party, the People’s Action Party, which has enjoyed political hegemony 
over the past five decades, can explain the strong role of the state in Singapore’s 
system of higher education. It is because the state’s intervention in economic poli-
cies and various social institutions, such as education, social security and housing, is 
justified for the sake of maximizing national and economic interests (Castells 1988, 
1992; Chua 1995; Gopinathan 2007; Low 2001). Some scholars argue that Singapore 
is more aptly understood as “government made” (Low 1998). Moreover, the 
Singapore government’s strong emphasis on higher education also reflects its belief 
in both meritocracy and elitism as higher education institutions, especially universi-
ties, are playing an important role to identify and nurture social elites and future 
leaders, who are merit based and subject to individuals’ academic performance in a 
highly competitive system (Barr and Skrbis 2008; Tan 2008; Tan and Ng 2007). 
Therefore, higher education is indispensable for the nation-building of Singapore.
The past few decades witnessed the emergence of major themes of higher educa-
tion research in Singapore, ranging from the origins and historical development of 
higher education system of Singapore to the most recent concerns about the impacts 
of globalization with special reference to the transformation of Singapore as a 
global education hub in Asia. Assembling major research literature on Singapore’s 
higher education, major trends and issues shaping the development of the higher 
education system can be revealed and synthesized. It is common for scholars to 
highlight the close relationship between higher education and the state, which used 
to rely on strong interventionist policy and implementation strategy to ensure the 
higher education system to serve the national and economic interests of the young 
nation of Singapore (Goh and Tan 2008; Gopinathan 1984, 1989; Selvaratnam 
1994; Tan 2006). In this sense, higher education is not totally independent from the 
state system as it must work with the government in order to achieve goals of 
national development. Since the mid-1980s, when Singapore experienced the first 
economic recession since independence, the Singapore government’s policy on 
expanding the higher education system for upgrading the quality of labour force to 
prepare for economic restructuring. This denotes the transition from elite to mass 
higher education in Singapore as similar as other Western developed countries 
(Trow 1973). It changed the landscape of higher education development in Singapore 
even though elitism remains a core ideology for the Singapore government.
Moreover, the research focus in recent years has been turned from quantitative 
expansion to qualitative enhancement with questions posed on how to achieve and 
maintain academic excellence in face of challenges arising from massification and 
globalization, which has brought about fundamental changes in higher education 
policymaking that adheres to such notions as marketization (Lee and Tan 2002; 
Mok 2000; Mok and Tan 2004; Tan 1998) and internationalization (Daquila 2013; 
M.H. Lee

227
Lee and Gopinathan 2007; Mok 2008; Olds 2007; Olds and Thrift 2005; Sidhu 
2006, 2009a, 2009b; Sidhu et al. 2011, 2014; Tan 2006; Toh 2012; Waring 2014; 
Ziguras 2003). Focusing on the issues related to higher education governance in 
Singapore, there were studies on the trend moving towards “centralized decentral-
ization” (Lee and Gopinathan 2003) or “decentralized centralism” (Tan and Ng 
2007) with the state playing its role as a “market accelerator” (Mok 2011). More 
recently, there were also research works on the entrepreneurialization of higher edu-
cation with reference to the linkages between higher education and industrial devel-
opment (Ho et al. 2010; Mok 2015; Wong et al. 2007).
The main thrust of this chapter is to document and analyse the changes that have 
appeared in the themes and orientations of higher education research in Singapore. 
It is argued that the changing focuses of higher education research are not only 
linked to the prominent trends prevailing in the international academic community, 
but they are also tightly linked to the changing higher education policies of the 
Singapore government. It also examines the factors affecting the development of 
higher education in Singapore. It is believed that important lessons can be drawn 
from Singapore’s experience of higher education development for other countries, 
no matter they are small or large, developing or developed, to develop their higher 
education systems in order to strive for survival in a highly competitive global mar-
ket. Apart from this introductory section, there are five sections in the remaining of 
this chapter. Firstly, it gives a brief overview of the research community of higher 
education in Singapore. Secondly, it highlights the factors affecting the develop-
ment of higher education in Singapore. Thirdly, it provides a review of major themes 
of Singapore’s higher education system with reference to the existing research lit-
erature. Fourthly, it turns to discuss lessons to be learnt from Singapore’s experience 
of developing and reforming higher education. Finally, it concludes with some 
observations about implications for the future research agenda of higher education 
in Singapore.
Higher Education Research Community in Singapore
The growing importance of higher education in Singapore has drawn more attention 
among government policymakers and academic researchers of higher education 
studies especially since the 1980s when there have been more frequent and signifi-
cant policy changes in higher education in line with the ever-changing local, regional 
and global contexts. In Singapore, rather than being treated as an independent aca-
demic field, higher education is considered as one of the education policy research 
areas undertaken by researchers from a range of disciplines like business adminis-
tration, economics, education, geography, history, international relations, public 
management and policy and sociology. Among these scholars, for instance, 
S. Gopinathan and Jason Tan of the National Institute of Education have been work-
ing consistently over the years on education policy research, including higher edu-
cation, which covers a wide range of topics such as the impacts of major policy 
changes in Singapore initiated by the government with reference to the development 
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

228
of a global schoolhouse or education hub, a strong emphasis on research and devel-
opment, the integration of skill formations into higher education and also some 
other issues like higher education quality assurance and ethnic inequality of higher 
education in Singapore.
Referring to the significant role played by the government in directing the devel-
opment of higher education, the research on higher education in Singapore is related 
to both national policy issues and international trends. Although there is not any 
research institute, academic degree programme, nor academic journal specialized in 
higher education in Singapore specifically for higher education studies, there is a 
non-government policy think-tank dedicated to this research area in Singapore. The 
Head Foundation, together with S. Gopinathan, who serves as Academic Director of 
the think-tank, has been engaging actively in higher education research in and out 
of Singapore over the past few years. It has organized seminars and workshops on 
higher education in Asia and forged research collaborations with internationally 
renowned scholars in the field of higher education studies such as Philip Altbach 
and overseas institutions such as Boston College’s Centre for International Higher 
Education, East-West Centre’s Asia Pacific Higher Education Research Partnership 
and the UCL Institute of Education. In addition, a new publication Higher Education 
in Southeast Asia and Beyond was launched in 2016 to provide a venue for Singapore 
and overseas higher education studies researchers to share their research and pro-
vide insights on higher education developments in Southeast Asia, including 
Singapore (Gopinathan 2016). Meanwhile, at the regional level, Regional Centre 
for Higher Education and Development (RIHED) of Southeast Asian Ministers of 
Education Organization (SEAMEO) specializes in regional higher education devel-
opment in Southeast Asia, including Singapore.
Moreover, higher education policy research in Singapore has also been under-
taken by the government. In order to enable smooth policy implementation, the 
Singapore government used to conduct policy research and reviews on higher edu-
cation concerning university governance and financial accountability (Ministry of 
Education 2000), institutional autonomy of the state universities (Ministry of 
Education 2005), further expansion of the university sector (Ministry of Education 
2008) and diversification of higher education pathways (Ministry of Education 
2012). In addition, the Singapore government has turned to pay more attention on 
how to forge a close link between higher education and skills formation and upgrad-
ing so as to better equip the workforce for promoting lifelong learning and sustain-
ing long-term economic growth in Singapore with the introduction of the SkillsFuture 
policy in 2015 (Shanmugaratnam 2015). Therefore, higher education research is 
considered instrumental for the government to plan for the long-term development 
of higher education policies which are supposed to serve the needs of the national 
and economic developments in Singapore.
Being an independent academic field in Singapore, there has been a growing 
interest among academics, think-tanks and even the government to engage in higher 
education research in recent years. International collaborations have also been 
forged between Singapore and international scholars and research institutions for 
researching other countries’ higher education policy and reform experiences to be 
learnt and adopted in Singapore, together with spreading out Singapore’s experi-
M.H. Lee

229
ence in developing higher education to other developing countries, especially those 
in South and Southeast Asia and also the Middle East.
Developmental State, Globalization and Higher Education
From a historical perspective, the state has played an irreplaceable role in directing 
the development of higher education in Singapore after 1965. Therefore, the state 
factor should be taken into account. The People’s Action Party-led Singapore gov-
ernment since the late 1950s has concerned how to make this island state without 
any natural resources but a strategic location in the international trade network in 
Southeast Asia to survive. Economic growth, social stability, political hegemony, 
racial harmony and educational excellence are policy goals prioritized by the ruling 
party in Singapore through a self-government in 1959, a merger with Malaysia in 
1963 and eventually an independent nation in 1965. In fact, “striving for survival” 
is not conceived as a mere political slogan for the Singapore government, but it is a 
crucial theme for mobilizing popular support for implementing domestic and for-
eign policies and also for winning and strengthening the ruling party’s political 
legitimacy to rule and govern the nascent nation-state of Singapore (Chan 1971). 
The government’s ability to maintain a stable socio-political environment in 
Singapore very much depended on whether it could bring about a strong economy 
for ensuring full employment and provide quality social infrastructures like educa-
tion, housing and health care for the populace.
Developmental State and Higher Education in Singapore
Between the 1950s and the mid-1970s, Singapore experienced the transformation 
from being a fragile state to a strong state for the state was not only aimed for striv-
ing for survival but also determined not to let the nascent independent nation-state 
to fail. The Singapore state built its political legitimacy, which is largely based on 
its past performance, on the basis of fostering racial harmony and vibrant economic 
development as well as delivering on its promises (Chan 1971; Chua 1995). As a 
consequence, social control and state intervention in every aspect of lives are justi-
fied with the developmental state’s strong ability to generate and implement plans 
for continued economic growth to boost productivity without facing strong political 
opposition. Until nowadays, the state in Singapore and its control over the economy 
and society remains strong. This reflects the Singapore model of state-led develop-
ment which is characterized by high public tolerance for interventionist policies by 
the state in the economic and social spheres (Gopinathan 1997). Education also 
serves to facilitate economic growth and development as it is a key driver for 
improving the educational qualifications and skill levels of the workforce to enable 
Singapore to compete in the highly competitive global market. Likewise, higher 
education is used instrumentally as a tool of economic development as the Singapore 
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

230
government decided to put more emphasis on high value-added industrial and ser-
vice sectors after the economic recession in the mid-1980s (The Economic 
Committee 1986). This reveals the fact that how higher education should be devel-
oped in Singapore is largely subject to the state’s policies to serve the interests of 
both national and economic developments.
Since the mid-1990s, the government has constantly demonstrated its strong 
determination to develop the publicly funded higher education institutions, espe-
cially universities into ones whose academic standards, research quality and mana-
gerial efficiency can be up to the level attained by world-class universities. This aim 
coincides with the government’s goal and commitment to develop Singapore into a 
global education hub in Asia which is capable to pull in foreign students and aca-
demics and also make them to stay in Singapore. Nevertheless, the expansion of 
higher education institutions should be carried out without sacrificing the quality of 
education and compromising the academic standards of university students. 
Therefore, the expansion of higher education has to be carried out by the state in a 
more cautious manner in order to avoid the negative impacts of unlimited expansion 
of higher education like oversupply of university places and non-employability of 
university graduates to occur as in other universal higher education systems in cer-
tain developed and newly developed countries (Gopinathan and Lee 2011).
Challenges from Globalization on Higher Education 
in Singapore
While the state factor is crucial, it is also noticeable that coping with challenges 
arising from globalization is always deemed as the strongest reason for reforming 
and restructuring the existing higher education system. Globalization refers to 
global practices of quality assurance and audit systems and also stronger emphasis 
on international rankings, both of which induce pressure on higher education insti-
tutions for greater accountability for their own performance and resource allocation 
(Gopinathan and Morriss 1997). This was reflected in the policy of “corporatizing” 
the existing state universities as publicly funded autonomous universities in 2005 
with greater flexibility and autonomy in managing financial and human resources 
(Lee and Gopinathan 2008).
On the other hand, globalization points to global war for talents that it is even 
more critical for Singapore where there are very limited human resources (Brown 
and Lauder 2001; Ng 2013). In order to make up the “brain-drain” problem and the 
trend towards an ageing society with very low birth rate, the policies of 
­internationalizing higher education and making Singapore an education hub in Asia 
are not only for the sake of enhancing the international standing of local higher 
education institutions but also for recruiting more non-local and international stu-
dents to study and eventually stay and work in Singapore. The call for foreign talents 
through the means of building an education hub also serves the needs of population 
and immigration policy to get more foreign talents into Singapore for they are con-
sidered capable to generate new knowledge in creative and innovative ways.
M.H. Lee

231
Globalization also implies more direct economic challenges facing Singapore 
from other less developed or newly developed economies, such as Brazil, Russia, 
India and China, which are also known as BRIC economies. In view of these new 
challenges, Singapore’s higher education system has to engage more in research to 
contribute to the existing manufacturing and financial service sectors and explore 
new niches such as biomedical research and info-communication technology to be 
further developed in order to maintain Singapore’s competitive advantage in the 
global market by upholding its leading position in those economic sectors in order 
to remain attractive as an investment destination from multinational corporations, 
which have long been a major source of foreign direct investment in Singapore since 
the 1960s when the city-state embarked on its process of industrialization 
(Gopinathan and Lee 2011).
What Singapore has done is not to be challenged by globalization but instead to 
co-opt globalization in order to keep the nation moving with new directions of eco-
nomic growth and development being identified. It is clear that higher education has 
to play a significant role to create new knowledge through R&D, which is heavily 
financed by the Singapore government, to favour the commercialization of scientific 
research outcomes into new technologies, products and services following the 
model of Silicon Valley. Furthermore, without sacrificing the quality of higher edu-
cation, the Singapore government insists on pulling in world-class universities to 
the city-state and forging a number of alliances and partnerships between local 
higher educations, including universities and polytechnics, and those world-class 
universities to improve the international rankings and prestige of universities in 
Singapore. Apart from consistently increasing financial input into the higher educa-
tion sector and R&D, such strategic alliances and partnerships are proved to be 
highly instrumental to make Singapore as a global education hub within a rather 
short period of time since the World-Class Universities programme and the Global 
Schoolhouse initiative managed by the Economic Development Board were 
launched between the late 1990s and the early 2000s. The collaboration with world-­
class universities overseas is vital for newly established and young universities like 
Singapore Management University and Singapore University of Technology and 
Design for they are capable to compete for the best students, faculty and resources 
with other established higher education institutions in and out of Singapore. In this 
sense, strategic alliances and partnerships between local and overseas higher educa-
tion institutions are definitely a core element of the emerging “Singapore model of 
higher education”.
As what has been discussed in this section, it is clear that both the developmental 
state and globalization factors are the most important factors determining the ways 
higher education has to be developed in Singapore especially since the 1990s. The 
Singapore state has long been emphasizing the role of higher education in propel-
ling national and economic developments over the past five decades since 1965. 
This is to justify the interventionist state in Singapore’s higher education for the 
state leaders are the ones who are best qualified to find the ways out for the nascent 
nation’s progress and development in the long run. The state is therefore not only a 
major financier of higher education but also a regulator, provider, promoter and 
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

232
facilitator of international collaborations and partnerships. The state-centred 
approach of higher education development is obviously found in Singapore. 
Globalization, on the other hand, has never weakened the role of the state in 
Singapore’s higher education, but it is sophistically manipulated by the government 
to reorient its influence and control over higher education institutions. The develop-
mental state and globalization factors are intertwined and continue to have profound 
impacts on the development of higher education in Singapore.
Main Research Themes in Singapore Higher Education
Reviewing major themes of higher education studies in Singapore, it is most appro-
priate to begin with the relationship between higher education and the state in 
Singapore, which is a developmental state which consistently plays a significant 
role in boosting economic growth, facilitating export-led industrialization, regulat-
ing market competition, propelling social progress and strengthening racial har-
mony since its independence in 1965 (Castells 1992; Johnson 1982; White and 
Wade 1988). For Singapore, education is perceived as a key driver of strengthening 
human capital in order to maintain the competitive edge of the Singapore economy 
in a highly competitive global market. Likewise, from the Singapore government’s 
perspective, heavy investment in the higher education system is deemed necessary 
for it has contributed well to economic growth (Gopinathan and Lee 2011). The 
higher education system has a definite role to play to achieve national development 
priorities so that it has to be placed under direct policy guidance from the state’s 
administration rather than leave a free hand to academics to govern higher education 
institutions themselves (Selavaratnam 1994).
Centralized Decentralization
For the sake of national interests, the state retains its control over higher education 
institutions and universities in Singapore (Lee 2003). In the 1960s, shortly after 
Singapore’s independence, there were signs, such as the appointment of a cabinet 
minister as the University of Singapore’s Vice-Chancellor and the prohibition of 
forming trade unions of academic staff, showing a departure of Singapore’s higher 
education system from a British model and tradition, which modelled along classical 
principles of university autonomy and academic freedom into one in which govern-
ment influence and control became the norm (Goh and Tan 2008; Gopinathan 1989; 
Khoo 2005; Mukherjee and Wong 2011). The state intervention in higher education 
can also be demonstrated in the case of closing down the private Chinese-­medium 
Nanyang University in 1980, when it was merged with the English-medium University 
of Singapore into the National University of Singapore, for it could not survive with-
out enrolling sufficient quality students and recruiting sufficient quality academics. 
That university was discontinued for it lacked economic viability in Singapore where 
M.H. Lee

233
English has been adopted as the lingua franca instead of Chinese despite of a majority 
of the Chinese population there (Gopinathan 1989). Moreover, it might also be related 
to political reasons for the government to close down the Chinese-medium university 
for it was once the political hotbed in the 1960s; a number of political and student 
activists were affiliated with the Chinese-medium university which the government 
under the ruling party, the People’s Action Party, would like to tackle the problem of 
having a very much politicized Chinese-medium university and eventually to close it 
down not purely because of economic reasons (Wong 2000, 2002).
It was not until the early 2000s when the Singapore government proposed to 
grant greater autonomy to higher education institutions in the management of finan-
cial and human resources that the state control over higher education was relaxed in 
order to pave the ways for corporatizing higher education institutions (Lee 2003; 
Ministry of Education 2000, 2005). Nevertheless, the policy of corporatization 
should not be interpreted as means for the state to divest its influence over those 
institutions (Tan 2006). Greater autonomy being granted to higher education institu-
tions is not without precondition, which simultaneously requires those institutions 
to adhere to the principle of public and financial accountability. It is through the 
institutionalization of quality assurance and audit systems that the performance of 
institutions is also subject to external scrutiny. Meanwhile, the prominent role of the 
state in higher education is not only confined to scrutinizing institutional perfor-
mance, but also it is the most important financier for the higher education system, in 
which the Singapore government still provides heavy financial subsidies to higher 
education institutions. Lee and Gopinathan (2003) refer to such change of univer-
sity governance as “centralized decentralization”, which demonstrates the combina-
tion of centralization and decentralization strategies for reforming and restructuring 
higher education. This concept refers to the devolution of mainly financial and 
human resource control which is matched by the centralization of policy and 
decision-­making power and strategic command in top management of higher educa-
tion institutions with the state authority steering the sector from a distance. As a 
strategy for higher education reform, the concept of centralized decentralization has 
three implications. First, it brings about changes in the role of the state in higher 
education as it is a service purchaser instead of a provider. Second, decentralization 
does not necessarily mean a sharing of decision-making and managerial powers 
among academics, but they are more centralized with the top management. Third, 
there is a reorientation of higher education institutions which are more likely run as 
corporate enterprise-like public service institutions (p. 128).
Massification
Apart from addressing the prominent role of the state, most researchers note the 
impacts of massification on Singapore’s higher education system. The policy of 
higher education expansion, which came after the first economic recession in 
Singapore in the mid-1980s, was considered viable means to upgrade the skills and 
quality of workforce so as to facilitate economic restructuring (The Economic 
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

234
Committee 1986). The participation rate of higher education, including the univer-
sity and polytechnic sectors, has increased significantly since then. For the univer-
sity sector, the ratio increased from a mere 5 per cent in 1980 to 21 per cent in 2001, 
25 per cent in 2010 and 30 per cent in 2020 (Singapore Department of Statistics 
2002; Ministry of Education 2008, 2012). This massification of higher education is 
marked not only by a significant rise of student population but also a steady growth 
of higher education institutions, including both universities and polytechnics, and 
funding for higher education and research and development (R&D). By the year 
2015, Singapore’s higher education system was comprised of five publicly funded 
autonomous universities, namely, National University of Singapore, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore Management University, Singapore University 
of Technology and Design and Singapore Institute of Technology; privately funded 
SIM University (which became publicly-funded and was renamed as Singapore 
University of Social Sciences in 2017); as well as five diploma-awarding polytech-
nics, including Singapore Polytechnic, Ngee Ann Polytechnic, Nanyang Polytechnic, 
Temasek Polytechnic and Republic Polytechnic. It is noteworthy that the five poly-
technics have enrolled over 40 per cent of the age cohort since the beginning of the 
twenty-first century (Ministry of Education 2014).
Quality and Excellence
Most studies in higher education research are concerned about how to strike a right 
balance between expansion and excellence amidst the process of massification. In 
Singapore, as what mentioned earlier, it has witnessed a significant expansion of 
higher education; the quality of higher education is maintained through imposing 
strict admission criteria together with a highly competitive system for the selection 
of students. Tan (2005) highlights the government’s decision in the year 2000 to 
reform the university admission system to make it not only relying on the GCE 
A-level examination but also the SAT I reasoning test, project work and participa-
tion in co-curricular activities. The change was considered to be in line with the 
education reform initiatives of “Thinking Schools, Learning Nation” (Goh 1997) to 
better equip students with the essential skills for national survival in a knowledge-­
based economy. However, the inclusion of SAT I test results as a criterion for uni-
versity admission aroused widespread concerns and controversies over whether the 
test is really effective in improving the existing admission system or instead putting 
more pressures on students to prepare for the SAT I test on top of the existing 
A-level examination. Subsequently, in 2004, the SAT I test was removed as a man-
datory admission requirement for the universities in Singapore partly in response to 
the revision of the A-level curriculum to incorporate greater thinking skill compo-
nents as well as the reforms of the senior secondary school and junior college sys-
tem and curriculum (Ministry of Education 2002). This reveals that even though the 
higher education system has been expanded, the government’s elitist belief largely 
remains unchanged for universities are seen to be reserved for quality students with-
out compromising admission standards and quality of students.
M.H. Lee

235
Not only the quality of students but also the recruitment and retention of talented 
and outstanding academics are always a core concern for Singapore’s higher educa-
tion system to enhance quality. Stringent academic recruitment policy is adopted to 
ensure that local and international academics with high professional and academic 
standards are engaged in order to strengthen the academic leadership and scholar-
ship in Singapore’s higher education institutions. A highly stringent tenure policy is 
imposed with only 40 per cent of the academic staff is tenured. A local academic 
staff needs to fulfil two 3-year contracts, show teaching and research capabilities 
and publish in international journals in particular, in order to be tenured (Selavaratnam 
1994). It is therefore understandable that junior academics are under much greater 
pressure to do research and publish in top international journals on top of their 
heavy teaching duties in order to attain tenure term and promotion (Lee 2003). 
Beside academic recruitment, the quality of teaching, research and services pro-
vided by academics is also regularly assessed with quality assurance mechanisms as 
stipulated in the Quality Assurance Framework for Universities, which aims to 
enhance the quality of universities through a systematic process involving institu-
tional self-learning and external review. External reviews will be appointed to con-
duct evaluation of individual universities’ self-assessment report and make 
recommendations for improvement. The first quality audit was conducted in 2003 
and it is conducted every 5 years (Ministry of Education 2013 – External Audits of 
NUS, NTU and SMU – Parliamentary Replies, 14 January).
Globalization
Another major theme which has been widely covered and delved into by researchers 
in Singapore’s higher education studies over the past two decades especially from 
the mid-1990s onwards is concerned about how globalization would affect the 
development of higher education in the city-state. Globalization presents Singapore 
with certain policy challenges. Has globalization weakened Singapore’s develop-
mental state’s strategies? What strategies are needed to transform an industrial era 
economy to a post-industrial one? What roles do the higher education and other 
knowledge-using and knowledge-producing centres have? It is certain that global-
ization has profound impacts on Singapore’s higher education strategy, which has to 
cope with economic challenges the young nation faces. For Singapore where its 
economy is largely based on multinational corporation-led and export-led industri-
alization alongside the more vibrant manufacturing and service sectors, a workforce 
being capable of generating and using new knowledge in creative and innovative 
ways deems to be essential for the future success of the Singapore economy in the 
context of globalization. Therefore, the higher education sector has to be more 
engaged in research, which is reflected in various indexes of research citations, 
impact factors and university rankings to see how well higher education institutions 
can perform. Whether Singapore would be able to preserve its competitive and com-
parative advantages in the global market, universities have definitely a clear role to 
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

236
play in not only producing highly skilled labour but also, more importantly, new 
knowledge and ideas for the future of Singapore economy to build on the Silicon 
Valley experience to provide the critical mass of advanced knowledge sources, 
including universities, advanced public and corporate research laboratories, venture 
capital, entrepreneurial talents, knowledge workers, specialized professional ser-
vices and sophisticated end users (Gopinathan and Lee 2011; Wong 2007).
Marketization
In this globalization context, market and competition are major elements to be taken 
in consideration to plan for the future development of higher education. The concept 
of “marketization” aptly illustrates the situation facing most higher education insti-
tutions (Lee and Tan 2002; Mok 2000; Mok and Tan 2004; Tan 1998). More empha-
sis is placed on the importance of market relevance when higher education 
institutions have to develop their curriculum and pedagogy. Widespread attention is 
given to the employability of graduates and how much they earn for they have 
become important indicators to demonstrate how well higher education institutions 
perform and whether they are responsive to market needs. With more resources 
pledged by the Singapore government to fund R&D activities and scientific research 
projects, it is expected that higher education institutions have to play a highly stra-
tegic role in reinventing the Singapore economy towards the goals of becoming 
more research-intensive, innovative and entrepreneurial. Meanwhile, the Singapore 
government, which plays a market accelerationist role, makes use of market forces 
to stimulate competition between local and foreign universities not to cure the finan-
cial stringency problem, which is non-existent in the city-state, but improve mana-
gerial efficiency and cost-effectiveness in higher education institutions. This comes 
with the diversification of higher education finance to explore alternative or non-­
government sources of funding before financial stringency occurs (Lee 2002; Mok 
2011; Mok and Tan 2004).
Internationalization
Closely related to the trend of marketization, Singapore’s higher education has been 
profoundly affected by another trend of internationalization as noted by scholars like 
Daquila (2013), Lee and Gopinathan (2007), Mok (2008), Sidhu (2006, 2009a, b), 
Olds (2007), Olds and Thrift (2005), Sidhu et al. (2011, 2014), Tan (2006), Toh 
(2012), Waring (2014) and Ziguras (2003). These scholars’ research focuses on the 
“Global Schoolhouse” initiative of the Singapore government’s Economic 
Development Board, which launched the World-Class Universities programme in 
1998 with an aim to attract at least ten world-class universities, most of which are 
research-intensive American institutions (Sidhu et al. 2011), to Singapore by the 
M.H. Lee

237
year 2008. This initiative was based on the Singapore government’s intention to turn 
Singapore into the “Boston of the East” modelling after Harvard University and the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The Global Schoolhouse, which is not only 
an education policy but also a population and immigration policy to draw in foreign 
talents and students (Ng 2013; Tan 2006), has an implication to transform education, 
in particular higher education, as an export service industry to boost the reputation 
of Singapore as a global education hub in Asia and to generate national incomes for 
the city-state. Through various forms of linkages and partnerships formed between 
local publicly funded bedrock universities and branding world-class universities 
from overseas, it was expected that Singapore could be developed as a “global 
knowledge hub” dedicated to new knowledge production and innovation, R&D 
activities and also university-industry linkages (Olds 2007), even though the Global 
Schoolhouse project is not without setbacks as seen from both failed alliances with 
Johns Hopkins University from the United States and also the University of New 
South Wales from Australia (Sidhu 2009a), together with the relocation of the 
Chicago Business School’s Asia campus from Singapore to Hong Kong since 2014.
Entrepreneurialization
More recently, higher education research has focused more on the entrepreneurial-
ization, which is interpreted as the ways higher education institutions add a more 
entrepreneurial aspect to their research and educational activities such as the com-
mercialization of knowledge and research and the cultivation of entrepreneurial 
spirit among graduates (Ho et  al. 2010). Another perspective concerns about 
university-­industry linkage as well as university-enterprise cooperation in Singapore. 
As Mok (2015) observes, higher education is the main driving force to promote the 
development of knowledge economy. As a consequence, the interaction between the 
state, universities and industries would be strengthened further. In Singapore, the 
government as a major financier of R&D and scientific research, as what has been 
mentioned earlier, plays a leading role in facilitating cooperation between universi-
ties and enterprises. The development of an “entrepreneurial university model” is 
aimed to make higher education institutions to shoulder more responsibilities and 
make more contributions to the local economy with the government’s proactive role 
in providing infrastructure and financial resources as well as forging strategic coop-
eration and alliances between local higher education institutions and multinational 
corporations. In this sense, higher education is more closely affiliated with the pol-
icy of economic development and technological innovation as a vital component for 
the ongoing economic restructuring policy, which has been complemented by 
knowledge innovation and commercialization and the recruitment of more foreign 
talents (Wong et al. 2007).
In summary, this section has provided a review of major higher education 
research literature since the mid-1980s, from which a few themes and issues related 
to the development of higher education in Singapore have been synthesized. These 
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

238
trends and issues concern the changing relationship between the state and higher 
education, the dilemma between expansion and quality and the impacts of global-
ization on higher education development with special reference to three closely 
related issues, including marketization, internationalization and entrepreneurializa-
tion, all of which aptly illustrate changes and challenges facing Singapore’s higher 
education system. In the following section, it delves into the three most important 
factors affecting higher education in Singapore.
Lessons from Singapore’s Experience
Is there any lessons can be learnt from Singapore’s experience of higher education 
development as what scholars have been researching over the past few decades? 
Unlike other First World countries, higher education in Singapore remains to be 
elitist although the participation rate of local universities reached 25 per cent in 
2015. A majority of students are studying in polytechnics and Institute of Technical 
Education for postsecondary education in Singapore. Universities mainly cater for 
the best students, and those with outstanding performance would be awarded differ-
ent kinds of bonded scholarships offered by the government or its affiliated institu-
tions like the Public Service Commission and Singapore Armed Forces to study in 
top universities overseas (Lee 2011). This reflects the generosity of the state to offer 
a certain quantity of scholarships for students every year as a means to retain local 
talents and also recruit as many as foreign talents as possible. Universities, which 
include the ones in Singapore and top universities overseas, are not surprisingly 
considered as elitist institutions to nurture future leaders and elites in Singapore.
Meanwhile, higher education is well resourced for it is substantially financed by 
the state and public money. Instead of facing the critical problem of financial strin-
gency as those developed countries have experience in recent years, the Singapore 
government has consistently allocated more funding to the higher education system 
although the city-state was also severely affected by the global economic downturns 
and fluctuations as similar as other developed countries. This reveals an 
­extraordinarily strong commitment of the state to develop higher education within a 
relatively short period of time. This is because higher education is regarded as an 
investment for Singapore, where there is no natural resources but only manpower. 
Higher education is clearly aligned to the needs of the local and global economy. 
Apart from financing higher education, the state also commits itself to support R&D 
with heavy investment of public funding in this area. More emphasis has been 
placed on improving Singapore’s international competitiveness in science and tech-
nology and enhancing its research and development capability to match with the 
other developed and newly developed countries. In view of the need to strengthen 
Singapore’s R&D, higher education institutions are asked to nurture skilled person-
nel in key technologies who should be developed with innovative and creative skills 
(Tan 2006). For Singapore, the strong state’s commitment and its significant finan-
cial input are indispensable to a relatively rapid growth and development of higher 
M.H. Lee

239
education. Nonetheless, it should also be noted that, besides substantial financial 
inputs, which are considered as investment instead of expenses, it is necessary to 
have clear policy goals as well as swift and effective policy implementation strategy 
to enable such a rapid growth and improvement of higher education as what is 
shown in the case of Singapore during the time when many higher education institu-
tions around the world have suffered from financial stringency. (Selavaratnam 1994; 
Tan 2006).
Strong emphasis on internationalization, which largely reflects on the strategy of 
forging international collaborations with top universities overseas, is a means 
adopted by the Singapore government to raise the international standing of the city-­
state’s higher education system to develop Singapore as a global education hub in 
Asia for retaining local talents and attracting foreign talents. Most foreign talents 
are coming from emerging economies like the People’s Republic of China, India 
and certain Southeast Asian countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and 
Vietnam. However, it can be foreseen that with the growth of global education mar-
ket in the years to come, there will be more competitors to join the race as Singapore’s 
higher education institutions will also have to face much greater pressure to deliver 
excellent and outstanding performance to among the top rankings in Asia and the 
world so as to maintain its competitiveness. Meanwhile, it is doubtful to see 
Singapore’s universities can be in a position like those top and prestigious universi-
ties to attract enough world-class academics and researchers as well as best students 
from other First World countries outside Asia to move to Singapore.
In spite of these achievements, it is important to note some unresolved issues to 
be tackled in Singapore’s higher education system. There is always a question 
whether the state’s highly interventionist approach to govern higher education insti-
tutions would be able to deliver a genuinely entrepreneurial and innovative environ-
ment for academics, researchers and students to be cultivated with the entrepreneurial 
and innovative spirit. Closely related to the state’s interventionist approach in higher 
education governance, it should not be surprising to foresee questions and debates 
on such matters as academic freedom and institutional autonomy, both of which are 
more likely to be considered by top universities overseas to determine if Singapore 
will be a suitable point for them to expand their presence in Asia. In addition, Tan 
(2006) draws our attention to the problem of ethnic disparities in educational attain-
ments with reference to the enrolment figures of higher education institutions, espe-
cially universities, where Malays and Indians are found to be disadvantaged. This 
will pose a challenge to the Singapore government for higher education opportuni-
ties are unevenly distributed as it may probably result in the widened differences 
between ethnicities in terms of their socio-economic status. These are the unre-
solved issues that the Singapore government must note and tackle more cautiously, 
and both of them should deserve further research and detailed analysis in the future.
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

240
Conclusion
This chapter has provided a review of the existing research literature of higher edu-
cation studies in Singapore. Synthesizing from these research works, a few major 
themes and issues on higher education in Singapore have been identified. Firstly, it 
is about the relationship between the developmental state and higher education and 
the role of government in higher education development. In the case of Singapore, 
the strong state, together with its strong commitment in financing higher education 
and R&D, is instrumental for a more rapid growth of higher education without com-
promising its academic standards and quality. Secondly, the trend of massification 
was also widely researched by scholars to see how Singapore would not follow the 
footstep of other countries which experienced the same trend that the quality of 
higher education would not be sacrificed. Admission criteria for Singapore’s univer-
sities have become more stringent to maintain their elitist character. In the mean-
time, institutional performance is subject to the scrutiny of quality assurance 
systems, which comprise self-assessments and external reviews. Thirdly, the land-
scape of higher education development in Singapore has been altered by globaliza-
tion, which is closely related the trends of marketization, internationalization and 
entrepreneurialization.
It is observable from the existing research works that the development of higher 
education in Singapore is largely determined by the state and globalization factors. 
The developmental state in Singapore, whose political legitimacy is based on its 
past achievements and performance, has been playing an irreplaceable role in gov-
erning higher education for the interests of both national and economic develop-
ments. The state’s involvement in higher education is not confined to setting major 
policy directions but also providing substantial financial resources for higher educa-
tion institutions to expand and provide a pool of skilled labours and researchers who 
can cope with the needs of economic restructuring since the 1980s. When the pro-
cess of globalization has gained its momentum in the 1990s, there has been a chang-
ing focus on such global practices like quality assurance and audit systems and 
international rankings especially for universities. Particularly for Singapore, global-
ization denotes a global war for talents to make up the existing “brain-drain” prob-
lem, which can only be solved with retaining local talents and attracting foreign 
talents simultaneously. It also points to how higher education institutions contribute 
to the future of the Singapore economy by creating new niches in high value-added 
industries and economic sectors to maintain Singapore’s competitive advantages. 
These reveal the fact that higher education is more likely seen as an economic 
instrument from the Singapore state’s perspective.
Some lessons can be drawn from Singapore’s experience of developing higher 
education being diagnosed in this chapter. It is undeniable that the strong role of the 
state makes it possible for Singapore’s higher education system to experience a 
more rapid and sustainable growth and expansion. Singapore’s higher education is 
claimed to benefit from the strong state’s commitment in the sector. Other higher 
education institutions worldwide should envy their counterparts in Singapore whose 
funding would not be affected by global economic crises in recent years. R&D is 
M.H. Lee

241
also an area that is strongly committed by the Singapore government, which tends 
to take a proactive role in forging international collaborations for higher education 
institutions. Nevertheless, it is not known if those institutions in Singapore can 
directly compete with top universities overseas to get enough world-class research-
ers and students out from Asia. Being top in Asia should not be enough for Singapore 
to develop as a genuinely global education hub in Asia in face of keen competition 
in the emerging global market of higher education. There are also some unresolved 
issues facing Singapore’s higher education system in the coming years: How to 
promote innovation and entrepreneurial spirit in higher education institutions, 
which are still bounded by the heavy presence of the state? How to solve the 
dilemma between strong state intervention in higher education and the core aca-
demic values of academic freedom and institutional autonomy? How to rectify the 
existing ethnic disparities in higher education institutions, particularly in universi-
ties? These questions can be included in the future research agenda for higher edu-
cation studies in Singapore.
References
Barr, M., & Skrbis, Z. (2008). Constructing Singapore: Elitism, ethnicity & nation-building proj-
ect. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Brown, P., & Lauder, H. (2001). The future of skill formation in Singapore. Asia Pacific Business 
Review, 7(3), 113–138.
Castells, M. (1988). The developmental city-state in an open world economy: The Singapore expe-
rience. Berkeley: Institute of International Studies, University of California at Berkeley.
Castells, M. (1992). Four Asian tigers with a dragon head. In R. P. Applebaum & J. Henderson 
(Eds.), State and development in the Asian Pacific Rim (pp. 33–70). London: Sage.
Chan, H. C. (1971). Singapore: The politics of survival 1965–1967. Singapore: Oxford University 
Press.
Chua, B. H. (1995). Communitarian ideology and democracy in Singapore. London: Routledge.
Daquila, T. C. (2013). Internationalizing higher education in Singapore: Government policies and 
the NUS experience. Journal of Studies in International Education, 17(5), 629–647.
Goh, C. T. (1997). Shaping our future: Thinking schools, learning nation. In Speech by Prime 
Minister Goh Chok Tong at the opening of the 7th international conference on thinking on 2 
June 1997. Singapore: Ministry of Education.
Goh, C. B., & Tan, L. (2008). The development of University in Singapore. In S. Lee, C. Goh, 
B. Fredriksen, & J. Tan (Eds.), Toward a better future: Education and training for economic 
development in Singapore since (Vol. 1965, pp. 149–166). Washington, DC: The World Bank 
& National Institute of Education, Singapore.
Gopinathan, S. (1984). Intellectual dependency and the indigenization response: Case stud-
ies of three disciplines in two third world universities. Unpublished PhD dissertation, State 
University of New York, Buffalo, NY.
Gopinathan, S. (1989). University education in Singapore: The making of a National University. In 
P. Altbach & V. Selvaratnam (Eds.), From dependence to autonomy: The development of Asian 
universities (pp. 207–224). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Gopinathan, S. (1997). Singapore educational development in a strong Developmentalist state: The 
Singapore experience. In W. Cummings & N. McGinn (Eds.), International handbook of edu-
cation and development: Preparing schools, students and nations for the twenty-first century 
(pp. 587–605). Oxford: Pergamon.
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

242
Gopinathan, S. (2007). Globalisation, the Singapore developmental state and education policy: A 
thesis revisited. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 5(1), 53–70.
Gopinathan, S. (2016). Editorial. Higher Education in Southeast Asia and Beyond, Issue 1, July, 
pp. 1–2.
Gopinathan, S., & Lee, M.  H. (2011). Challenging and co-opting Globalisation: Singapore’s 
strategies in higher education. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, 33(3), 
287–299.
Gopinathan, S., & Morriss, S. (1997). Trends in university reform in the context of massification. 
RIHE international seminar reports, 10, 127–160.
Ho, Y.-P., Singh, A., & Wong, P.-K. (2010). National university of Singapore. In M.  Fetters, 
P. Greene, M. Rice, & J. Butler (Eds.), The development of university-based entrepreneurship 
ecosystems: Global practices (pp. 149–176). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Johnson, C. (1982). MITI and the Japanese miracle: The growth of industrial policy, 1925–1975. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Khoo, K. K. (2005). 100 years the University of Malaya. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya 
Press.
Lee, K. Y. (2000). From third world to first: The Singapore story. Singapore: Prentice Hall.
Lee, K. Y. (2011). Lee Kuan yew: Hard truths to keep Singapore going. Singapore: Straits Times 
Press.
Lee, M. H. (2002). A tale of two cities: Higher education reforms in Hong Kong and Singapore. 
Australian Journal of Education, 46(3), 255–286.
Lee, M. H., & Gopinathan, S. (2003). Centralized decentralization of higher education in Singapore. 
In K. H. Mok (Ed.), Centralization and decentralization: Educational reforms and changing 
governance in Chinese societies (pp. 117–136). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Lee, M. H., & Gopinathan, S. (2007). Internationalizing university education in Singapore: Future 
directions. Higher Education Forum, 4, 87–112.
Lee, M. H., & Gopinathan, S. (2008). University restructuring in Singapore: Amazing or a maze? 
Policy Futures in Education, 6(5), 569–588.
Lee, M.  H., & Tan, J.  (2002). The impacts of marketization on higher education reform in 
Singapore. Educational Policy Forum, 5(2), 43–64. [in Chinese].
Lee, M. N. N. (2003). The academic profession in Malaysia and Singapore: Between bureaucratic 
and corporate cultures. In P. Altbach (Ed.), The decline of the Guru: The academic profession 
in developing and middle-income countries (pp. 137–165). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Low, L. (1998). The political economy of a city-state: Government-made Singapore. Singapore: 
Oxford University Press.
Low, L. (2001). The Singapore developmental state in the new economy and polity. The Pacific 
Review, 14(3), 411–441.
Ministry of Education. (2000). Fostering autonomy and accountability in universities: A review 
of public university governance and funding in Singapore. Singapore: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2002). Report of the junior college/upper secondary education review 
Committee. Singapore: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2005). Autonomous universities: Towards peaks of excellence: Report of 
the steering Committee to review university autonomy, governance and funding. Singapore: 
Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2008). Report of the Committee on the expansion of the university sector: 
Greater choice, more room to excel. Singapore: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2012). Report of the Committee on University Education Pathways beyond 
2015 (CUEP). Singapore: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2013). External audits of National University of Singapore, Nanyang 
Technological University and Singapore Management University. In Parliamentary replies, 14 
January. Singapore: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2014). Education statistics digest 2014. Singapore: Ministry of Education.
Mok, K. H. (2000). Impact of globalization: A study of quality assurance systems of higher educa-
tion in Hong Kong and Singapore. Comparative Education Review, 44(2), 148–174.
M.H. Lee

243
Mok, K. H. (2008). Singapore’s global education hub ambitions: University governance change 
and transnational higher education. International Journal of Educational Management, 22(6), 
527–546.
Mok, K. H. (2011). The Quest for regional hub of education: Growing Heterarchies, organizational 
hybridization, and new governance in Singapore and Malaysia. Journal of Education Policy, 
26(1), 61–81.
Mok, K. H. (2015). The Quest for global competitiveness: Promotion of innovation and entrepre-
neurial universities in Singapore. Higher Education Policy, 28, 91–106.
Mok, K. H., & Tan, J. (2004). Globalization and marketization in education: A comparative analy-
sis of Hong Kong and Singapore. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Mukherjee, H., & Wong, P.-K. (2011). The National University of Singapore and the University of 
Malaya: Common roots and different paths. In P. Altbach & J. Samil (Eds.), The road to aca-
demic excellence: The making of world-class research universities (pp. 129–166). Washington, 
DC: The World Bank.
Ng, P. T. (2013). The global war for talent: Responses and challenges in the Singapore higher edu-
cation system. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, 35(3), 280–292.
Olds, K. (2007). Global assemblage: Singapore, foreign universities, and the construction of a 
“global education hub”. World Development, 35(6), 959–975.
Olds, K., & Thrift, N. (2005). Cultures on the brink: Re-engineering the soul of capitalism – On 
a global scale. In A. Ong & S. Collier (Eds.), Global assemblages: Technology, politics, and 
ethnics as anthropological problems (pp. 270–290). Malden: Blackwell Publishing.
Selavaratnam, V. (1994). Innovations in higher education: Singapore at the competitive edge. 
Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Shanmugaratnam, T. (2015). Budget 2015: Building our future, strengthening social security. 
Singapore: Ministry of Finance.
Sidhu, R. K. (2006). Universities and globalization: To market, to market. Mahwah: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Sidhu, R. K. (2009a). The “brand name” research university goes global. Higher Education, 57, 
125–140.
Sidhu, R.  K. (2009b). Running to stay still in the knowledge economy. Journal of Education 
Policy, 24(3), 237–253.
Sidhu, R.  K., Ho, K.  C., & Yeoh, B. (2011). The global schoolhouse: Governing Singapore’s 
knowledge economy aspirations. In S. Marginson, S. Kaur, & E. Swair (Eds.), Higher edu-
cation in the Asia-Pacific: Strategic responses to globalization (pp.  255–271). Dordrecht: 
Springer Science.
Sidhu, R. K., Ho, K. C., & Yeoh, B. (2014). Singapore: Building a knowledge and education hub. 
In J. Knight (Ed.), International education hubs: Student, talent, knowledge-innovation models 
(pp. 121–143). Dordrecht: Springer Science.
Singapore Department of Statistics. (2002). Yearbook of Singapore Statistics 2002. Singapore: 
Department of Statistics.
Tan, J. (1998). The marketisation of education in Singapore: Policies and implication. International 
Review of Education, 44(1), 47–63.
Tan, J. (2005). Reforming the university admission system in Singapore: Lessons for Hong Kong. 
In L. S. Ho, P. Morris & Y.-P. Chung (Eds.), Education reform and the quest for excellence: The 
Hong Kong story (pp. 63–79). Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Tan, J. (2006). Singapore. In UNESCO Asia and Pacific Regional Bureau for Education (Ed.). 
Higher education in South-East Asia (pp.  159–186). Bangkok: Asia-Pacific Programme of 
Educational Innovation for Development, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization.
Tan, K.  P. (2008). Meritocracy and elitism in a Global City: Ideological shifts in Singapore. 
International Political Science Review, 29(1), 7–27.
Tan, C., & Ng, P.  T. (2007). Dynamics of change: Decentralized centralism of education in 
Singapore. Journal of Educational Change, 8, 155–168.
13  Researching Higher Education in “Asia’s Global Education Hub”: Major Themes…

244
The Economic Committee. (1986). The Singapore economy: New directions. Singapore: Ministry 
of Trade and Industry.
Toh, M.-H. (2012). Internationalization of tertiary education Services in Singapore. Tokyo: Asian 
Development Bank Institute.
Trow, M. (1973). Problem in the transition from elite to mass higher education. Berkeley: Carnegie 
Commission on Higher Education.
Waring, P. (2014). Singapore’s global schoolhouse strategy: Retreat or recalibration? Studies in 
Higher Education, 39(5), 874–887.
White, G., & Wade, R. (1988). Developmental states and markets in East Asia: An introduction. In 
G. White (Ed.), Developmental states in East Asia (pp. 1–29). New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Wong, T. H. (2000). State formation, hegemony, and Nanyang University in Singapore, 1953 to 
1965. Famosan Education and Society, 1, 59–85.
Wong, T. H. (2002). Hegemonies compared: State formation and Chinese school Politics in post-
war Singapore and Hong Kong. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Wong, P-K. (2007). The remaking of Singapore’s high-tech Enterprise ecosystem. In H. Rowen, 
M. Hancock & W. Miller (Eds.). Making IT: The rise of Asia in high tech (pp. 123–174). 
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Wong, P.-K., Ho, Y.-P., & Singh, A. (2007). Towards an “Entrepreneurial University” model to 
support knowledge-based economic development: The case of the National University of 
Singapore. World Development, 35(6), 941–958.
Ziguras, C. (2003). The impact of the GATS on transnational tertiary education: Comparing 
experiences of New Zealand, Australia, Singapore and Malaysia. The Australian Educational 
Researcher, 30(3), 89–109.
Michael H. Lee  who received his doctorate in the field of higher education studies 
at the University of Hong Kong, is a Lecturer in the Department of History of the 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, teaching and researching in the area of educa-
tional history, development and policy in Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore. 
Some of his journal articles were published in Asia Pacific Education Review, 
Australian Journal of Education, Higher Education Research and Development and 
Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management as well as book chapters in 
Changing Governance and Public Policy in East Asia, Crossing Borders in East 
Asian Higher Education, Globalization and Higher Education in India, Globalization 
and the Singapore Curriculum: From Policy to Classroom and International 
Handbook on Globalization, Education and Policy Research. He recently coedited 
a book on Making Sense of Education in Post-Handover Hong Kong with Thomas 
Kwan-Choi Tse.
M.H. Lee

245
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in  
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_14
Chapter 14
Higher Education as a Field of Study 
in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic 
Community of Practice 
Norzaini Azman and Morshidi Sirat
Abstract  Interest in the field of higher education in Malaysia rose dramatically at 
the beginning of the twentieth century as the higher education sector grew rapidly. 
At the same time, scholarly interest in higher education increased as the result of the 
reforms and transformations that occurred at both systemic and institutional levels. 
Based on a review of policies, graduate programme documents and data on HE 
research from the Ministry of Higher Education, this chapter provides a general 
introduction to some salient features of the evolution and current state of higher 
education as a field of study in Malaysia. It reviews the emerging nature of higher 
education as a field of study and the political and social forces that have shaped and 
contributed to its development. It also highlights certain characteristics, issues and 
developing trends which would provide a better understanding of both the present 
stage of development and the line of progress expected to emerge in the future. The 
chapter concludes that greater emphasis needs to be placed on research infrastruc-
ture, especially mechanisms for funding, storing and sharing research reports and 
materials.
Introduction
Research in higher education in Malaysia is relatively new compared to studies on 
primary and secondary education. Prior to 1996, most of the education development 
and research projects focused on primary or secondary schooling. Higher education 
was only a subset of studies on education, with its main emphasis on teaching 
methodology, which was often borrowed from school pedagogy. Mature higher 
education fields in developed countries have research, academic programmes and 
N. Azman (*) 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
e-mail: zaini.azman@yahoo.com 
M. Sirat 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia

246
professional associations to prepare and train scholars and professionals. By com-
parison, the higher education field in Malaysia is considered still very young, as is 
true for most of the developing countries around the world.
Higher education as a field of study in Malaysia effectively gained momentum 
between 2000 and 2010, possibly as a consequence of the reforms in 1996 and 
1997. However, it did not flourish until after 2004 with the establishment of the 
Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE). Within a mere decade, the emergent field 
began to be considered seriously by higher education institutions and policymakers. 
This was in response to the practical and scholarly needs to study the increasingly 
complex issues of a booming higher education sector in Malaysia, particularly the 
private higher education sector. The development of the field coincided with the 
rapid expansion and transformation of higher education as outlined in the National 
Higher Education Strategic Plan (2007–2020) (NHESP). Thus, to a considerable 
extent, the expansion and reforms in the Malaysian higher education system brought 
out the essence and importance of higher education study and determined not only 
its orientation but also its contents and priorities. As such, in the field’s formative 
years, a handful of researchers were preoccupied with the immediate policy and 
practical issues in the expansion and transformation of Malaysian higher education, 
in areas such as of governance, funding and graduate employability.
As the study of higher education research in Malaysia is relatively new, no study 
related to the antecedents and consolidation of higher education research in the 
country is available. Neither has any study been reported concerning higher educa-
tion that would indicate its current status and validity as a field of study. According 
to many scholars (Chen and Hu 2012; Altbach et al. 2006; Tight 2004; Jones 2012), 
as fields of study emerge and develop, they often gain recognition or acceptance 
through a number of means. One is the offering of courses of degree programmes in 
these emerging fields by numerous graduate departments. The fields are also repre-
sented by professional societies or associations, their legitimate areas of concern are 
discussed through scholarly journals, and extensive bibliographies identify other 
publications in the area. Recognition is also gained, quite often, by virtue of the 
sheer numbers of persons interested in, and departments devoted to the area (Chen 
and Hu 2012; Altbach et al. 2006; Tight 2004; Jones 2012). Using these indicators, 
could higher education be recognized as a valid field of study in Malaysia? It is 
important to reiterate though that there is yet no research analysing the history of the 
field of higher education in Malaysia.
In order to ascertain and demonstrate the status of research and the availability of 
graduate programmes in higher education, the authors carried out a simple analysis 
of written documents from the education faculties through their websites, and data 
on research from the Ministry of Higher Education. The aim was to examine the 
course offerings and programme structure of the masters and doctoral programmes 
in the field of higher education in Malaysian public universities. To identify the 
research areas, the authors examined data on the research projects approved and 
funded by the MoHE through its Institution of Higher Education Excellence 
Planning Division (BPKI). The key features and themes of funded research were 
analysed to provide a basic view of the current contours of higher education research 
N. Azman and M. Sirat

247
field, including key areas or topics of inquiry. Due to the unsystematic and not  
up-­to-­date national databank on research (only a list), the authors admit and are 
cautious of the fact that there may be other research on higher education topics, 
particularly on institutional research, that have been or are being funded by indi-
vidual institutions. Following the brief review of postgraduate programmes and 
research documents, important higher education policy documents and the authors’ 
reflective analysis as scholars in higher education, this chapter then outlines the 
evolution of the field, issues and trends observed, as well as the initiatives taken to 
strengthen higher education as a field in Malaysia.
This chapter begins with a general introduction to some salient features of the 
evolution and current state of higher education as a field of study in Malaysia. It 
reviews the emerging nature of higher education as a field of study, and the political 
and social forces that have shaped and contributed to its development. An overview 
of the status of higher education training and research that is taking place follows, 
highlighting certain characteristics, issues and trends that would enhance under-
standing of both the present stage of development and the line of progress expected 
to emerge in the future.
Evolution of the Field
Interest in the field of higher education in Malaysia upsurged in response to the 
rapid growth of higher education following several reforms in the higher education 
system introducing regulatory and supervisory frameworks for both public and pri-
vate higher education in 1996. In addition, a continuum from primary to tertiary 
education had also been made explicit in terms of policy connection. Since the late 
1990s, the Malaysian higher education system has gone through the following 
major developments: expansion of the higher education system, expansion of enrol-
ment, emergence of private higher education, restructuring of curriculum and pro-
grammes, development of community colleges, reform of governance and 
administrative systems, diversification of higher education institutions and quality 
assurance mechanisms (Azman et  al. 2011, 2014). Interest in higher education 
research and studies grew with the changing landscape and the changing context of 
higher education.
Higher education needs to be studied by scholars and practitioners to inform 
theoretical foundations, long-term development and strategic plans and manage-
ment strategies to implement comprehensive reforms of universities and colleges. 
This became particularly compelling after the NSHEP in 2007 with its accompany-
ing action plans; both scholars and competent academic leaders were much needed 
to administer and manage the higher education sector. The Higher Education 
Leadership Academy (AKePT), established by the Ministry of Higher Education, 
also included a research arm mandated to carry out research into higher education 
leadership and governance, including teaching and learning. This resonates with 
Altbach’s (2001, 2014) assertion of an increasing interest in higher education, and 
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

248
an expansion of research, service and training programmes geared towards serving 
higher education systems and institutions. Higher education is not only a new area 
of research; it is a new area of policy.
Higher education consequently became a major policy concern in Malaysia, 
leading to the establishment of the Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE) in 2004. 
Since then, Malaysia has undertaken a series of comprehensive reforms in higher 
education, which have implications for teaching and learning, and governance of 
higher education institutions. Subsequently, all these reforms were encapsulated in 
the strategic plan for higher education with implementation schedules. The develop-
ment of higher education became a priority in the policy agenda of the NSHEP 
2007–2020.
The landmark for the beginning of higher education as a field of study in Malaysia 
was the establishment of the National Higher Education Research Institute (IPPTN). 
IPPTN is a research institution established by the National Council of Higher 
Education in 1997 to serve as a consulting organization in policy research for the 
Council and the Department of Higher Education. However, it was only 7 years later 
that the institute took on a leadership role in higher education policy research. At 
that time, the issue of unemployment among university graduates was becoming 
increasingly serious, especially with high rates of unemployment among graduates 
of certain disciplines and ethnic groups. The institute undertook a study on graduate 
employability which moved it into a bigger and more prominent role in the develop-
ment of higher education policy research. The establishment of MoHE in 2004 and 
the launch of the strategic plan for higher education in 2007 provided the right 
platform for IPPTN to assert its role in the national and, later, regional higher educa-
tion landscape. However, from 1997 to 2007, research activity and compilation of 
literature in higher education by the institute were limited and sporadic. This was 
attributed to the lack of talent and competencies in studying and analysing higher 
education. After 2007, more academics showed interest in higher education, most of 
whom were affiliated to IPPTN. Furthermore, funding for higher education policy 
research was rather generous with ample time granted to complete each study. 
However, since 2013, when the MoHE merged with the MoE, IPPTN has been 
mandated to conduct and coordinate only research deemed important by the MoE. It 
is important to note that in July 2015, the MoHE was reinstated as a specific govern-
ment entity for higher education.
In August 2013, another organization, an entity essential to the development of 
higher education, named the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Facility (CTEF), 
was established by the MoE and the Commonwealth Secretariat, London. For 
Malaysia, CTEF is critical for the field, as it creates a network of communities of 
researchers and practitioners throughout the Commonwealth countries (see www.
CTEF.com.my). The Commonwealth comprises 53 member countries in Africa, 
Asia, the Americas, Europe and the Pacific, all former colonies of Britain. CTEF 
will hold periodic meetings and workshops that bring together their members and 
often others with related interests, throughout the Commonwealth countries. 
Malaysia now has two centres focusing on the field of higher education supported 
by the MoHE.
N. Azman and M. Sirat

249
The new Malaysian Education Blueprint- Higher Education (2015-2025) 
MEB-HE (2015-2025), launched in April 2015, put forward another fundamental 
transformation for the higher education system and higher learning institutions in 
terms of access, quality, equity, unity and efficiency. It has been postulated that with 
this latest reform, studies in higher education may not be as popular as they have 
been as no prescriptive strategies are needed at the central level. However, we argue 
that it is both necessary and possible, based on the achievements in the previous era, 
to consolidate and deepen higher education research in a planned manner. Both 
reform and development need theories and best practices for guidance and evalua-
tion. From a long-term perspective, the prospects for higher education research in 
Malaysia are still bright.
To ensure that higher education thrives and succeeds in establishing itself as a 
discipline in its own right, its roots need to spread and be strengthened by develop-
ing graduate programmes, growing expertise in theoretical research and disseminat-
ing knowledge via publications, while cultivating a community of practice that will 
sustain and continue developing the discipline. The following subsections will dis-
cuss critically each of these aspects and point out what needs to be done to further 
establish higher education as a field of study.
Graduate Programmes in Higher Education
The foundation of any academic discipline or profession begins with a set of core 
beliefs and practices (Dill and Morrison 1985; Sadlak and Altbach 1997). Once 
adopted, those core principles provide the source from which the group transfers 
knowledge to its members. Hence, as the study of higher education evolves into an 
academic area of scholarship, certain taught and research courses and programmes 
should be developed by educators to provide some form of cohesion to the higher 
education discipline (Altbach 1997; Jones 2012).
The creation of graduate programmes of study in higher education, particularly 
at the doctoral level, represents a major step in the direction of developing the 
needed understanding and expertise (World Bank 1994; Altbach 1997, 2002; Jones 
2012; Kehm 2015). Unfortunately, the growth of higher education research oppor-
tunities in Malaysia has not spurred the growth of higher education graduate pro-
grammes that would have led to opening up the field of higher education studies. 
There is hardly any master’s programme that provides an opportunity to study the 
complexity of higher education in terms of how it impacts, and is shaped by, the 
social, political and economic environment. Clearly, in Malaysia, professional 
development of higher education policy, leadership and management capacity as 
well as academic interest in higher education has been largely absent or, at best, 
fragmented. There is no tradition of and subsequently no structure for educating and 
training higher education policymakers and leaders/managers, or for studying 
higher education. Even in top selected education faculties, training and research in 
higher education is fragmented, with a number of small units and programmes 
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

250
conducting research and teaching in higher education with little reference to  
one another.
Although the precise number of Malaysian universities offering master’s and 
doctoral programmes in higher education has not been ascertained by a proper eval-
uation, a document analysis carried out by the authors indicates that, thus far, there 
seems to be only one specialized doctoral programme (EdD) in higher education 
established in one of the public universities in Malaysia. Another new initiative is 
being carried out at the Department of Policy and Leadership Education, Faculty of 
Education, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), to set up a taught master’s 
course in higher education. No other course work is offered regularly in the other 
public universities for the purpose of providing professional preparation to gradu-
ates who would be entering careers in institutions of higher education. Suffice it to 
say that the development of graduate programmes in higher education is constrained 
by the lack of professionally trained leaders and scholars in the higher education 
field as well as by the lack of understanding of the importance of the field as an area 
of study or scholarly work.
Started in 2014, the UKM EdD programme is managed by the Faculty of 
Education and the Academic Professional Development Centre of UKM. It was 
established in the first place to meet the growing demand for academic and admin-
istrative staff at universities. As such, it follows a generic EdD curriculum, available 
as a part-time study option with four phases (pre-practicum/thesis) amounting to 
40 units of modules, while phase 5 involves a practicum (6 units) and phase 6 is 
for research (40  units) (see http:/www.ukm.my/professional-ukm/wp-content/
upload/2014/09/senarai-kursus-berkredit-EdD.pdf). Presently, 25 students are 
enrolled in the EdD programme. However, based on our review of the programme 
documents, we argue that there are major weaknesses in the EdD curriculum, par-
ticularly in the course content. Most of the courses only describe general observa-
tions and focus on minor matters relating to current practices in higher education. 
The courses do not appear to present a consistent framework or a consistent set of 
theoretical presuppositions, nor is there a blend of research, theory and practice. 
Moreover, the courses are conducted by academics with neither in-depth knowledge 
of epistemology and theories nor vast experience in research into higher education. 
The majority of the faculty members teaching the EdD courses have been trained in 
other disciplines, with experience in secondary and primary education. In part, this 
may reflect the dismal lack of experts in higher education as indicated by the lack of 
key higher education literature listed in the course synopsis. As argued by Skolnik 
(1991), having such a small number of core faculty working in higher education 
programmes simply cannot create the critical mass necessary to move the field for-
ward. It is therefore doubtful that the programme can make an important contribu-
tion to the professionalization of the field.
In Malaysia, higher education seems to have naturally developed as part of edu-
cation studies that are frequently located at the teacher education faculties or at least 
close to them. A document analysis on the types of PhD in education by research 
carried out by the 12 education faculties in the public universities showed that 
higher education is explicitly included as one of the subtopics for full research in 
N. Azman and M. Sirat

251
education in only three of the faculties (in these universities, Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia (UKM), Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM) and Universiti Teknologi 
MARA (UiTM)). The normal situation in most of the graduate education pro-
grammes in Malaysia is to have a higher education line or topic included in the 
programme, with some academics teaching a general topic on higher education and 
directing dissertations on higher education themes, but awarding a final degree in 
education, educational sciences or pedagogy, not in higher education. Teacher edu-
cation is unsurprisingly considered a prominent theme. Hence, higher education has 
not been the strongest area in the education faculties. The very few academics that 
are involved in important research efforts and participating actively in the field 
remain a minority in their institutions. Undoubtedly, the existence of so few masters 
and doctoral programmes in higher education is a weak point in the development of 
the field in Malaysia.
Thus, it is generally recognized that despite the rapid expansion and develop-
ment of higher education in Malaysia, the shortage of trained professionals in the 
field of higher education has hampered efforts to implement the policies and man-
age the institutions. In response to the urgent need for leaders and scholars in the 
field of higher education, some universities are in the midst of establishing doctoral 
programmes in the field. However, these institutions are introducing doctoral pro-
grammes in higher education with inadequately prepared staff, and inadequate 
instruction. As the courses are new and some are being developed, it is not known if 
the curricula and experts can support the mission of these doctoral and master’s 
programmes. It has to be stressed that in the preparation of higher education gradu-
ate programmes, it is essential for the providers to build the subject up as a genuine 
discipline of considerable breadth and depth rather than to merely offer one or two 
very general courses about higher education.
Admittedly, higher education studies borrow heavily from the various disciplines 
to examine and explain phenomena related to the field (Kehm 2015; Teichler 2003, 
2005). A discipline has been described as a community of individuals who share a 
specialized area of study, a tradition, a method of inquiry, a language and a concep-
tual structure (Huber and Morreale 2002; Altbach 2001; Jones 2012). The curricular 
offerings of a higher education doctoral programme should undoubtedly include 
courses on the financing of higher education (economics), the models of higher 
education (history), student development (psychology), organization and gover-
nance (political science), philosophy of education (philosophy) and others that have 
a particular disciplinary focus. As a field of study that relies heavily on other disci-
plines, it is not surprising that it is often pulled in different directions; as a result, 
students are challenged to find the appropriate lens with which to frame their 
research work. Wright (2007) and Dressel and Mayhew (1974) acknowledged simi-
lar concerns about the higher education field lacking a general body of knowledge, 
a unique vocabulary, specific techniques for theory testing, a standard methodology 
for research and practices. However, Wright (2007) felt that borrowing from the 
other social science disciplines helped move the field closer towards meeting the 
criteria of a specialized field of study.
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

252
Evidently, the emerging field of postgraduate study in higher education faces 
many different types of problems. One problem is limited research on postgraduate 
programmes due to their relative newness in higher education. Another is that the 
few available programmes in higher education have not developed a conceptual 
framework for analysing and describing their course offerings. Hence, the nature 
and structure of doctoral programmes in higher education in Malaysian universities 
remain unknown and therefore undefined. Finally, the knowledge, expertise and 
skills needed for building capacity in higher education and for developing the capac-
ity to study higher education are also still inadequate.
Research
Research is the basis for developing higher education as a field of study, for teaching 
programmes that have relevant content and for informing decision-makers. The 
best, but not exclusive, way of understanding what higher education research is 
being done in Malaysia is to map research output in terms of publication. 
Nevertheless, this is an impossible task as there is no database available for higher 
education research or expertise. The only resource centre that has a specialist col-
lection on higher education research is IPPTN which has been steadily building up 
its collection over the past 8 years.
With regard to the development of higher education research, we argue that it has 
achieved impressive progress in the last one decade. This is attributed to the increas-
ing government funding for research towards improving the higher education sys-
tem, which is considered as the main factor for the development of higher education 
as a field of specialty worldwide (Altbach 2001, 2006). The Malaysian government 
requires national data and research for the purpose of informing higher education 
policy and strategic planning with the new transformation plan. Not surprisingly, we 
tend to see that with the MoHE and MoE as the main funders for higher education 
research, the bulk of the research tends to be more closely related to government 
policymaking. Within such an environment, where the research does not contribute 
much to the corpus of knowledge, the building of a systematic, programmatic 
knowledge base in the field of higher education remains unlikely to materialize.
Consequently, theory development and underpinning are found to be among the 
most underdeveloped dimensions of the Malaysian higher education policy research 
output. Only a couple of fragmented theories, or rather theoretical elements, are 
uncovered from the empirical research projects. Few researchers employ any theo-
ries to undergird their studies, and as researchers come from all fields, researchers 
with an intention to develop or enhance theories are even fewer, particularly when 
the aim is to recommend strategic policies. This is further compounded by the fact 
that a section on ‘theory’ in the design of the many policy studies tends to take sec-
ond place, and even when it is available, it lacks meaningful analysis and synthesis. 
Consequently, the field in Malaysia has what Jones (2012, p.714) describes as  
N. Azman and M. Sirat

253
‘a pond-like quality’ which comprises a diverse body of interdisciplinary scholarship 
encompassing a broad territory, but with little depth in treatment.
In reality, there is no real planning for higher educational research at the national 
level. Nationally, educational research is planned and coordinated by the Institution 
of Higher Education Excellence Planning Division, under the Department of Higher 
Education, MoHE (Bahagian Perancangan Kecemerlangan Institusi—BPKI) which 
vets proposals and provides funding for higher education policy research. Priority is 
given to projects that have strategic importance for national higher education devel-
opment with potentially extended social and political benefits. The selection of pro-
posals depends largely on the understanding of the evaluation panel committee of 
the day with little input from higher education scholars. In many instances, the 
minister’s office and the top administration of the ministry have some control over 
what projects are legitimate and worthwhile funding.
Content analysis of the four-year research projects (2011–2014) approved by 
BPKI indicates that the topics approved for funding are dominated by issues relating 
to governance reforms, transition in national higher education systems and graduate 
employability, all of which account for slightly more than 50 per cent (of 104 proj-
ects). Other topics approved include audit and quality measures, access and equity, 
and issues around globalization and regionalization (internationalization and stu-
dent mobility). However, the chief weakness in the studies is the glaring lack of 
meta-analysis. The 104 studies are contextualized at the national or subnational 
level, such as those concerning teaching systems, and the labour market. Research 
projects of international scope comparing Malaysia with several countries are 
hardly funded. Similarly, studies on the philosophy of higher education (i.e. society/
state-centred philosophy) and studies on the relationship between higher education, 
economic and social developments do not get any aid from the top-down policy 
research fund. This means that comparative, historical and philosophically dialecti-
cal studies in higher education do not have a place in the policy research agenda. It 
is also quite difficult to get a research project in this field financed by the Fundamental 
Research Grant Scheme (a national research public fund scheme under MoHE) as 
evaluators do not see higher education as a fundamental topic. It is likely that the 
infrastructure of higher education research will be further weakened under the 
increasingly tightened government budget.
Evidently, the majority of the research topics are concerned with practical issues 
in higher education, which suggests that higher education research in Malaysia is, 
for the most part, an applied area of study. Frequently, theoretical paradigms are 
either inadequate or absent. Instead, these paradigms seem to be replaced by the 
government’s policy statements. This has been criticized or even condemned as the 
‘politicization’ of higher education research (Anderson and Johnson 1998; Sawyer 
1996; Tight 2004). It appears that most government-funded Malaysian higher edu-
cation studies result in research reports on practical issues that tend to be loosely 
structured and unsystematically analysed, with few clear strategic policy conclu-
sions. It could be said then that studies in higher education in Malaysia tend to treat 
a given topic from theory to practice, which may appear to be more systematic, but 
has limited and superficial scholarly appeal. As argued by Conrad (1988) and 
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

254
Conrad and Gunter (2000), some higher education research projects have produced 
narrow, fragmented and straightforward products that fail to provide compelling 
impressions of the higher education landscape. They argued that inadequate training 
of new researchers leads to what Colbeck (2000) describes as the unintelligible 
nature of higher education research.
We argue that in the first five years after the first national higher education trans-
formation plan, much funding was allocated to research on higher education with 
some side-effects associated with this positive movement. Firstly, repetition of proj-
ects was commonplace; and secondly, most of the studies are of low quality with 
little contribution to sound policy and new theory. Realistically, some of the side-­
effects were inevitable, given the lack of expertise, new tradition and the research 
situation of higher education in Malaysia. In addition, we argue that the MoHE, 
through its various organizations, tends to commission a proliferation of ad hoc 
studies produced by teams of researchers that form and reform in order to bid for 
one competitive grant after another. Ultimately, the criticism levelled against the 
higher education policy research projects was that they did not seem to do much to 
advance the field and the policy and practice.
While the document analysis of approved research projects does not provide use-
ful descriptions and analyses of the research project processes and outcomes, we 
argue that a number of issues in higher education policy research funded by the 
MoHE are prevalent. These include lack of theory building, inadequate methodol-
ogy, divorce of theory from practice, repetition of projects and few quality outputs 
in terms of publications. In sum, higher education research is still heavily embedded 
in policy and practice questions, being more concerned with the external factors of 
higher education research that have influenced and shaped the field. The implication 
of having studies in higher education predominantly oriented heavily towards pol-
icy will mean that little is on theory building and methodology.
Publication
As in the case of the number of graduate programmes, significant discrepancies are 
found among specialized journals on higher education. Many of the education jour-
nals address school teachers’ issues and tend to specialize in educational research. 
As domestic readership has not reached a critical mass, there are not many journals 
in the field of higher education research or policy in Malaysia except for two jour-
nals, namely, the Asian Journal of University Education (AJUE) and the ASEAN 
Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education (AJTLHE). The AJUE is 
published twice a year by the Asian Centre for Research on University Learning and 
Teaching (ACRULeT), Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM). The journal which 
started in 2005 publishes research and discussion on all aspects of university educa-
tion such as internationalization of higher education, teaching methodology, learn-
ing styles, assessment, curriculum development, educational leadership, educational 
management and administration, leadership, gender issues and quality assurance in 
N. Azman and M. Sirat

255
higher education. The ASEAN Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher 
Education (AJTLHE) which started in 2009 is published by the Centre of Academic 
Development, UKM.  It is a web-based journal devoted to the dissemination of 
information on teaching and learning in higher education contexts. It therefore con-
centrates on the teaching and learning aspects of higher education. Despite both 
journals being open access and thus easier to locate, they are locally indexed and 
therefore have little impact beyond the sponsoring university. The journals are 
therefore less recognized and not visible in the higher education field. Hence, we 
argue that these journals have not had any significant influence on research trends or 
practice-policy debates in the field of higher education in Malaysia.
In short, periodical literature is sparse on the specifics of higher education as a 
field of study. Likewise, there is very little writing concerning the centres and insti-
tutes for the study of higher education (such as the ACRULeT in UiTM). This insti-
tution, however, like IPPTN, is such a recent establishment that more could hardly 
be expected at this time.
IPPTN as the centre for research in higher education policy has published a few 
reviews and reports on higher education in Malaysia and in countries of the region. 
There are also reports on a variety of developmental projects which are related to 
the impact of on-going reforms on systems and universities. At the same time, aca-
demic research papers and publications by a few higher education researchers have 
started to appear more frequently in international journals. This is evident from the 
report on comparative higher education research output by 11 countries in Asia by 
Jung and Horta in 2013. The performance of Malaysian researchers’ publications on 
the topic of higher education research in 38 specialized higher education journals 
from 1980 to 2012 is encouraging as Malaysia is ranked third in the production of 
articles after Hong Kong and Japan (Jung and Horta 2013).
Although the IPPTN has succeeded in publishing many books on higher educa-
tion since 2007, an analysis of these books, however, shows that work on the ontol-
ogy and epistemology of higher education is lacking. Many of the books are 
collections of papers that share views, experience and practice pertaining to various 
areas of higher education. Many of the edited books lack an overarching conceptual 
framework. Beyond its descriptive ‘portraits’ of case studies, many of the edited 
books add relatively little to theory and knowledge and understanding of higher 
education development. Even though the books are most likely to appeal to those 
interested in particular case studies and practices in higher education, arguably, 
some of the books could have been more cohesive and in-depth if the work had been 
situated within a more evident conceptual framework.
Overall, the higher education field as reflected in the analysis of selected research 
projects and publications would appear to be in the early stages of technical devel-
opment; or it could be that the selected research and publications have given very 
general descriptions and analyses of the field and therefore contain few denotative 
facts, theories, methodologies and variables. To a large extent, research on higher 
education in Malaysia with its small community of researchers has been carried out 
largely in isolation, without referring to the theoretical and methodological 
­developments made in other countries. Although the outside world knows a little 
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

256
more about the current state of higher education research in Malaysia, there is still 
little dialogue between the Malaysian and international higher education research 
communities in the current literature. This, we argue, is a severe obstacle to the 
advancement of the field.
The next section describes an initiative to develop a community of practice as a 
means of advancing the field, followed by a discussion of issues identified as imped-
iments to its advance, with sound suggestions for addressing them.
Community of Practice in Higher Education
In essence, following Wenger (2000:229), communities of practice are the basic 
building blocks of a social learning system because they are the social ‘containers’ 
of the competencies that make up such a system. A community of practice (CoP) is 
a group of people who share a craft and/or a profession and share common interest 
in a particular domain or area. It is through the process of sharing information and 
experiences with the group that the members learn from each other and have an 
opportunity to develop themselves personally and professionally (Wenger 2000). 
Wenger further purported that the establishment of such a community requires a 
combination of three elements of competencies. First, members are bound together 
by their collectively developed understanding of what their community is about, and 
they hold each other accountable to this sense of joint enterprise. To be competent 
is to understand the enterprise well enough to be able to contribute to it. Second, 
members build their community through mutual engagement. They interact with 
one another, establishing norms and relationships of mutuality that reflect these 
interactions. To be competent is to be able to engage with the community and be 
trusted as a partner in these interactions. Third, communities of practice have pro-
duced a shared repertoire of communal resources—language, routines, sensibilities, 
artefacts, tools, stories, styles, etc. To be competent is to have access to this reper-
toire and to be able to use it appropriately (Wenger 2000 p. 229).
The emergence of a community of practice in higher education (PenDaPaT) in 
Malaysia is a planned move to seriously develop higher education as a field of study 
and research. This initiative started in early 2014 when a group of ten university 
academics and researchers in various fields were recruited to undergo specifically 
tailored training in Research on Higher Education, Development and Innovation 
(RHEDI) Executive Leadership Programme in Durban, South Africa, conducted by 
the LH Martin Leadership Institute, University of Melbourne, Australia. From 
Malaysia’s perspective, this programme met its objective of creating a pool of 
policy-­relevant researchers with adequate academic understanding of what higher 
education as a field of study/research is about. On their return to Malaysia, it was 
decided to capitalize on their knowledge and skills to create an awareness of higher 
education as a field of study, and for this a plan was put in place to establish a 
Malaysian society of higher education researchers. A sponsoring committee was 
N. Azman and M. Sirat

257
formed among these returnees to lay the groundwork for the establishment of such 
an organization.
Subsequently, a pro tem committee was elected with a mandate to establish a 
Malaysian association for research and higher education policy development tenta-
tively named the Malaysian Society for Higher Education Policy and Research 
Development (MySHEPaRD). This initial work culminated in the establishment of 
a Malaysian Society for Research and Higher Education Policy Development or, in 
Malay, Pertubuhan Pembangunan Penyelidikan dan Dasar Pendidikan Tinggi 
Malaysia (PenDaPaT) in early 2015 (see http://www.pendapat-malaysia.org/). 
PenDaPaT comprises a group of people who share a concern or a passion for mat-
ters relating to higher education and learn how to comprehend fast-changing devel-
opments in Malaysian higher education as they interact regularly. Arguably, in the 
case of Malaysia, by participating in PenDaPaT, we can then define and determine 
the competencies of members to contribute to higher education as a field of study/
research for national development. In short, PenDaPaT is expected to play a signifi-
cant role in the consolidation of the field and in the reform of Malaysian higher 
education.
HE as a Discipline: Issues and Implications
After unprecedented developments in the late 2000s, Malaysian higher education 
research has entered the age of emergence. In spite of the somewhat positive devel-
opment, there are a plethora of issues and challenges facing Malaysian higher edu-
cation as a field of study as highlighted before. We have further identified and 
summarized those issues into four main areas with regard to the study of higher 
education in Malaysia.
Short-Term Projects, Funding and Infrastructure
Firstly, many research projects have been short-term, funded un-programmatic proj-
ects dependent heavily on government-funding agencies. In most cases, there is a 
mismatch of timescale between the funder and the researchers. Understandably, the 
funders face time and political pressure as well as unexpected shift in priorities. 
Nevertheless, good scientific research requires ample time to collect and present 
evidence. Compounding this problem, higher education research, which is mostly 
funded by the MoHE, is all too often driven by political motives or the funder’s 
agenda. Another sign of the overt influence of politics is the fact that higher educa-
tion studies have been used to justify the ideas of political leaders and predeter-
mined government policies. Thus, between the latest transformation initiative of 
government (MEB-HE (2015-2025)), and the associated sudden interest in specific 
issues such as employability and funding, research often becomes little more than 
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

258
consultancy, and is merely another competing voice in the transformation agenda. 
Within such an environment, the building of a systematic, programmatic knowledge 
base in the field of higher education remains unlikely. The sustainability and knowl-
edge building in higher education are thus undermined by constantly shifting inter-
ests and funding patterns.
These structural issues need to be addressed if Malaysian higher education as a 
field of study is to make steady progress. More financial support should be given to 
worthwhile research topics and long-term research projects. This is not an easy 
issue to resolve as the proportion of funding from the government (MoHE) for 
higher education as a whole has been decreasing. Therefore, diversification of fund-
ing channels is an increasing necessity. In addition, greater attention needs to be 
paid to research infrastructure, especially mechanisms for storing and sharing 
research reports and materials emerging from increasingly diverse research topics. 
Also, a more systematic, research-informed knowledge base about higher education 
needs to be in place to avoid duplication and repetition of research. As suggested by 
Teichler (2005), it would be fruitful to strive for a generally accepted map or themes 
of higher education research for this would facilitate the establishment of consistent 
information systems and the provision of overviews on the state of knowledge in the 
field.
Theory Development and Methodology
Theory development and methodology are two aspects that have been perceived as 
the weakest areas in Malaysian higher education inquiry. It is acknowledged that 
higher education in Malaysia, as in other countries, is not a discipline, but an inter-
disciplinary, applied field without commonly accepted methodologies, or even gen-
eral agreement on what counts as knowledge (Brennan and Teichler 2008; Kehm 
2015). If the ‘interdisciplinary approach’ is worthwhile maintaining, it requires that 
those involved in it revisit their original fields from time to time to draw further 
strength within a ‘disciplinary perspective’ to contribute better to the ‘interdisciplin-
ary perspective’. It is important to clarify that even when theoretical elements have 
been drawn from different disciplines, they are not contradictory; they come from 
different disciplinary territories, but they are neighbouring or adjacent epistemo-
logically (Kezar 2000; Neave 2000).
Theoretical thinking is needed to reach beyond the specific phenomenon and 
form to grasp the nature and the inherent laws of higher education through induc-
tion, deduction, abstraction and conceptualization, achieving the goals of interpreta-
tion and prediction. Empirical research requires a fundamental change of attitude on 
the part of Malaysian higher educationists and a major shift of the academic culture 
from the logico-deductive tradition to the empirical paradigm (Kaneko 2000). 
However, it is important to note that studies in higher education have several tiers, 
with each assuming a different function—basic research, applied research and 
development research (Zhou and Cheng 1997). This differentiation of functions is 
N. Azman and M. Sirat

259
not only useful but also necessary in the Malaysian context. The relative indepen-
dence of scholarly activities in higher education from policies, practice and admin-
istrative organizations should always be maintained.
There is also a need to promote empirical research, especially research with the-
oretical underpinnings. Theory building means revealing and clarifying the research 
issues, the epistemological origins of the concepts discussed and their appearances 
and applications (Tight 2004). The way academics teach in higher education pro-
grammes will be driven primarily by their beliefs or, even more importantly, by the 
commonly agreed consensus within an academic discipline about what constitutes 
valid knowledge in the subject area (Tight 2013, 2014, 2015). But, we argue that 
there are very few Malaysian scholars who have been genuinely preoccupied with 
the issues. The ‘patting-on-the head’ mode of doing scholarship, and the overt polit-
ical influence and interference, has constrained the field’s progress. The state of the 
art of higher education research in other countries remains largely unfamiliar to 
Malaysian higher education researchers. The absence of methodological and theo-
retical paradigms at the field/disciplinary level and the vital influence of ideology 
and politics on methodology all suggest that there is still a long way to go towards 
building the scientific mechanism into the Malaysian higher education inquiry.
Critical Mass of Scholars
It is acknowledged, however, that strengthening and building the field of higher 
education requires far more than research funding (Jones 2012). In order for the 
field to flourish, it needs adequately trained researchers who can advance higher 
education as a field of study and also bring about greater coordination in knowledge 
production, transfer and dissemination. The researchers must also be able to facili-
tate better links/interactions with international higher education researchers and 
domestic policymakers, institutional leaders, policymakers and other HE stakehold-
ers. Moving the field forward requires a larger number of core faculty working 
within higher education programmes and a higher capacity in research.
The situation regarding the number of scholars dedicated to educational research 
is unclear. It is difficult to get the specific numbers of those who work in higher 
education research except those who have been appointed by IPPTN as research 
associates. Even then, there is no doubt that the scholars are academics with multi-
disciplinary backgrounds, and this characteristic is applicable to the epistemic com-
munity. There are also a growing number of people who are primarily in charge of 
administrative and service functions in higher education institutions, but are inter-
ested in conducting research in higher education, and have actually succeeded. 
While this is considered a healthy development in increasing capacity, we caution 
that while the occasional researcher-practitioners or partial researchers contribute to 
the application of existing concepts on information gathering in a pragmatic man-
ner, little is relevant to an improvement of the theory and concept of higher educa-
tion research. The limited number of core professors, and the fact that most of the 
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

260
academic programmes in the field have only one or two faculty, means that higher 
education as a field of scholarship in Malaysia still lacks the critical mass necessary 
to make great improvements for advancing the field.
Furthermore, what is seriously lacking is the knowledge, expertise and skills 
needed for building policy, for developing leadership and management capacity in 
higher education at all relevant levels and for developing the capacity to study 
higher education. In North America, Europe, Japan and China, a number of higher 
education graduate programmes and research centres established over the last 30 to 
40 years (Kehm 2015; Tight 2004; Kaneko 2000; Zhou and Cheng 1997) have laid 
the foundation for the professionalization of institutional management and leader-
ship, and the steady development of the field of higher education studies. In con-
trast, Malaysia’s efforts to professionally develop policy, leadership and management 
capacity are, at best, fragmented if not largely absent. This also applies to academic 
interest in higher education as a field of study. Clearly, the barriers to further devel-
opment of the field are the lack of a critical mass of core faculty in higher education 
programmes.
Evidently, the subspecialization of knowledge in higher education is also a cur-
rent reality. It now seems difficult to accept proficiency in higher education in gen-
eral without specifying a particular theme-focused area of research. Malaysian 
higher education researchers need to identify themselves with focus research areas 
or subfields of higher education so as to legitimize research theories, methods and 
field knowledge in the claimed subfields in order to become genuine experts.
Academic Community and Internationalization
With the internationalization of higher education as a field of scholarship, higher 
education scholars should be prioritized for funding and encouraged to access new, 
international research networks of scholars working in related subspecializations 
within the field. Scholars also need new opportunities to participate in scholarly 
conferences and learn about research advances in other countries, and to be given 
opportunities to engage in international/comparative scholarship. Malaysian higher 
education researchers need to be associated with transnational scientific networks or 
epistemic communities which normally comprise those engaged in interpreting, 
legitimating and advocating shared and often specialized forms of knowledge and 
expertise. Besides, the creation and active engagement in knowledge networks and 
means of sharing information are central to the establishment of any scientific field 
(Altbach 2014).
Recently, there have been strict budgetary regulations that effectively limit the 
ability of higher education researchers to travel outside Malaysia. Thus, it is 
expected that even fewer higher education researchers would be able to attend inter-
national higher education research conferences and meetings.
Important adjuncts in the field of higher education are centres and institutes for 
the study of higher education, of which there are still too few in Malaysia. These 
N. Azman and M. Sirat

261
organizations are essential for the field, as they create a community of researchers 
and practitioners, are hubs of communication and often sponsor journals, books, 
research and other reports. These important organizational units must therefore 
build their strength through research and service and be able to attract significant 
sums of research grants from other institutions, including the government, in order 
to have the autonomy to pursue more comprehensive research agendas.
In addition, national organizations such as IPPTN and PenDaPaT can be change 
agents working at the system level to assist in building bridges between researchers, 
practitioners and policymakers. This effort requires the institute and the association 
to become more familiar with researchers in higher education and to use their annual 
conferences and publications to make practitioners aware of the importance of 
research in informing their practice and policy development. The change of status 
of IPPTN from a research arm of MoHE to a centre of excellence, an entity endorsed 
by the USM senate, will hopefully not only give the institute greater autonomy to 
undertake research based on its research agenda but also enable it to offer post-
graduate programmes. As an academic entity, it will also help to resolve the issues 
relating to lack of theory and methodology in its work.
Finally, higher education research as a specialized field is still struggling for 
recognition. Malaysian research reports on higher education do not attract a lot of 
attention in the academic world nor from the public. Most often, the media and the 
public are more interested in the Programme for International Student Assessment 
(PISA) research reports which have little to do with higher education except in the 
preparation of teachers. In the last 10 years, there has been a growing interest in 
university rankings, which is generally limited to the same question of why so few 
of the public universities are ranked in the top 100 institutions. There is certainly a 
need to improve public appreciation of science and how research in higher educa-
tion can benefit the institution, the government and the society. The key question is 
how to make higher education research findings newsworthy to the higher education 
stakeholders and to the public. Research findings in higher education in Malaysia 
need to be more broadly accessible (in terms of both language and visibility) to 
institutional managers, policymakers and the public. IPPTN and PenDaPaT should 
articulate ideas and research findings on policy and practice as well as interpret a 
holistic array of issues from varying perspectives to the media and the public to dis-
seminate knowledge about higher education. Both organizations must continue to 
conduct workshops, seminars, conferences and other outreach opportunities, and 
publish more actively, to create environments for the formation and sustenance of 
an epistemic community in higher education.
Concluding Remarks/Epilogue
Within a matter of one decade and a half, higher education research in Malaysia has 
achieved impressive progress and has grown steadily. However, many issues have 
yet to be addressed; many challenges need to be met, both from the field’s internal 
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

262
pressure to develop into a respectable and independent area of scholarly study and 
from its external accountability. Metaphorically, with another new transformation 
plan accompanying many other national blueprints, Malaysian higher education 
research is again at a crossroad. Clearly, the emergence and development of higher 
education as a field of study have taken on many of the features associated with the 
political movements in the Malaysian context.
Despite the shortcomings, the small number of Malaysian higher educationists 
has made impressive efforts at building higher education into a respectful discipline 
in academia and has claimed it to be a ‘new’ or ‘emerging’ discipline. However, 
whether such efforts will be successful depends, to a large extent, on the progress of 
the study rather than the enthusiasm and expectations on the part of the higher edu-
cationists. It is hoped that higher education research in Malaysia will eventually 
develop into a full-fledged discipline that will enjoy the respect and status of other 
established social sciences such as economics and sociology. For this to happen, and 
for the field to develop in a healthy manner, both the internal and external conditions 
need to be improved.
References
Altbach, P. G. (1997). Research on higher education: Global perspectives. In J. Sadlak & P. G. 
Altbach (Eds.), Higher education research at the turn of the century: Structures, issues and 
trends (pp. 3–24). Paris: UNESCO.
Altbach, P. G. (2001). Research and training in higher education: The state of art. In P. G. Altbach 
(Ed.), Higher education: A worldwide inventory of centers and programs (pp. 1–24). Phoenix: 
Oryx Press.
Altbach, P. G. (2002). Research and training in higher education: The state of the art. Higher 
Education in Europe, 27, 153–168.
Altbach, P. G. (2006). Research and training in higher education: The state of the art. In P. G. 
Altbach, L. A. Bozeman, N. Janashia, & L. E. Rumbley (Eds.), Higher education: A worldwide 
inventory of centers and programs (pp. 1–24). Chestnut Hill: Center for International Higher 
Education.
Altbach, P. G. (2014). The emergence of a field: Research and training in higher education. Studies 
in Higher Education, 39(8), 1306–1320.
Altbach, P. G., Bozeman, L. A., Janashia, N., & Rumbley, L. E. (2006). Higher education: A 
worldwide inventory of centres and programs. Chestnut Hill: Center for International Higher 
Education.
Anderson, D., & Johnson, R. (1998). University autonomy in twenty countries. Higher education 
division evaluations and investigations program, Canberra: Australian Government Publishing 
Service.
Azman, N., Pang, V., Sirat, M., & Md Yunus, A. (2014). Teaching and research in Malaysian public 
universities: Synergistic or antagonistic? In J. C. Shin, A. Arimoto, W. K. Cummings, & U. 
Teichler (Eds.), Teaching and research in contemporary higher education: Systems, activities 
and rewards. Dordrecht: Springer.
Azman, N. Sirat, M. & Jantan, M. (2011). Malaysia: Perspectives of university governance and 
management within the academic profession. In W. Locke, K. Cummings, & D. Fisher (Eds.), 
Changing governance and management in higher education: The perspectives of the academy 
(pp. 83–106). Dordrecht: Springer.
N. Azman and M. Sirat

263
Brennan, J., & Teichler, U. (2008). The future of higher education and of higher education research. 
Higher education looking forward: An introduction. Higher Education, 56(3), 259–264.
Chen, S., & Hu, L. (2012). Higher education research as a field in China: Its formation and current 
landscape. Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 102–118.
Colbeck, C. L. (2000). Reshaping the forces that perpetuate the research-practice gap: Focus on 
new faculty. In A. Kezar & P. Eckel (Eds.), Moving beyond the gap between research and 
practice in higher education: New directions for higher education (pp. 35–47). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
Conrad, C. (1988). Meditations on the ideology of inquiry in higher education. Review of Higher 
Education, 12, 199–220.
Conrad, C. F., & Gunter, R. (2000). To be more useful: Embracing interdisciplinary scholarship 
and dialogue. In A. Kezar & P. Eckel (Eds.), Moving beyond the gap between research and 
practice in higher education: New directions for higher education (pp. 49–62). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
Dill, D. D., & Morrison, J. L. (1985). Ed.D. and Ph.D. research training in the field of higher edu-
cation: A survey and a proposal. The Review of Higher Education, 8, 169–186.
Dressel, P. L., & Mayhew, L. B. (1974). Higher education as a field of study: The emergence o f a 
profession. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Huber, M., & Morreale, S. P. (2002). Disciplinary styles in the scholarship of teaching and learn-
ing: Exploring common ground. Menlo Park: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of 
Teaching.
Jones, G. A. (2012). Reflections on the evolution of higher education as a field of study in Canada. 
Higher Education Research & Development, 31(5), 711–722.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Kaneko, M. (2000). Higher education research policy and practice: Contexts, conflicts and the new 
horizon. In U. Teichler & J. Sadlak (Eds.), Higher education research: Its relationship to policy 
and practice (pp. 47–58). Oxford: IAU Press/Pergamon/UNESCO.
Kehm, B.  M. (2015). Higher education as a field of study and research in Europe. European 
Journal of Education, 50(1), 60–74.
Kezar, A. (2000). Still trees without fruit: Higher education research at the millennium. The Review 
of Higher Education, 23(4), 443–468.
Neave, G. (2000). On fate and intelligence: The institutional base of higher education research. 
In S.  Schwarz & U.  Teichler (Eds.), The institutional basis of higher education research: 
Experiences and perspectives (pp. 57–71). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sadlak, J., & Altbach, P. G. (Eds.). (1997). Higher education research at the turn of the new cen-
tury: Structures, issues and trends. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
Sawyer, R. (1996). Decision theory models for validating course placement tests. Journal of 
Educational Measurement, 33(3), 271–290.
Skolnik, M.  L. (1991). On the study of higher education in Canadian universities. Canadian 
Journal of Higher Education, 21(3), 96–114.
Teichler, U. (2003). The future of higher education and the future of higher education research. 
Tertiary Education and Management, 9, 171–185.
Teichler, U. (2005). Research on higher education in Europe. European Journal of Education, (4), 
447–469.
Tight, M. (2004). Research into higher education: An a-theoretical community of practice? Higher 
Education Research and Development, 23, 395–411.
Tight, M. (2013). Discipline and methodology in higher education research. Higher Education 
Research & Development, 32(1), 136–151.
Tight, M. (2014). Discipline and theory in higher education research. Research Papers in 
Education, 29(1), 93–110.
Tight, M. (2015). Theory application in higher education research: The case of communities of 
practice. European Journal of Higher Education, 5(2), 111–126.
14  Higher Education as a Field of Study in Malaysia: Towards an Epistemic…

264
Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice and social learning systems. Organization, 2000(7), 
225–246.
World Bank. (1994). Higher education: The lessons of experience. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Wright, D. (2007). Progress in the development of higher education as a specialized field of study. 
In D. Wright & M. T. Miller (Eds.), Training higher education policy makers and leaders: A 
graduate program perspective (pp. 19–34). Charlotte: Information Age Publishing.
Zhou, N., & Cheng, F. (1997). Research on higher education in China. In J. Sadlak & P. G. Altbach 
(Eds.), Higher education research at the turn of the new century: Structures, issues, and trends. 
Paris/New York: UNESCO Publishing /Garland Publishing, In.
Norzaini Azman  is Professor of higher education at the Faculty of Education, Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia. She also serves as an Associate Research Fellow at the National Higher 
Education Research Institute (IPPTN). She is currently the Chair to the Malaysian Society for 
Research and Higher Education Policy Development (PenDaPaT) (2017-2019). Her main research 
interests include policy and governance of higher education, the academic profession and higher 
education leadership. She has collaborated with the Malaysian Ministry of Higher Education, the 
Malaysian Higher Education Leadership Academy, the International Educational Planning Paris, 
the Asian Development Bank, SEAMEO-RIHED and UNESCO Bangkok and the Malaysia-
Australia Institute in various research projects. She has authored books on academic leadership, 
academic mobility and succession planning in the Malaysian university system and chapters and 
articles on higher education policies, the academic profession and academic leadership in local and 
international journals and books.
Morshidi Sirat  is the Founding Director of the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Facility 
(CTEF) based at Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia. Morshidi has served as the Director 
at the National Higher Education Research Institute (IPPTN) between 2002 and 2010. In February 
2011, Morshidi was appointed as Deputy Director-General in the Department of Higher Education 
(Public Sector) and subsequently as the Vice-Chancellor of Universiti Malaysia Sarawak 
(UNIMAS) in 2013. In April 2013, Morshidi was appointed as the Director-General of Higher 
Education/Registrar General for Private Institutes of Higher Education, Ministry of Higher 
Education, Malaysia. Morshidi publishes widely on higher education policy and management in 
the East Asia and the ASEAN region and is actively engaged as member of the editorial boards of 
higher education journals. Morshidi has undertaken consultancy work for the ADB, the World 
Bank, IIEP Paris, British Council and UNESCO-APEID Bangkok.
N. Azman and M. Sirat

265
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_15
Chapter 15
Higher Education Research in Thailand: 
Current Trends and Development
Nopraenue Sajjarax Dhirathiti
Abstract  To understand the current trends and development of higher education 
research in Thailand, it is vital to examine the role of higher education in promoting 
teaching, learning and research in higher education institutions as well as the gov-
ernment policy in steering research directions of the country. On the one hand, 
research on higher education in Thailand, by itself, is a product of the courses and 
programmes provided by HEIs. On the other hand, the trends of higher education 
research itself are seen to be navigated by the national government and funding 
agencies in the country which have played parts in promoting the research in this 
area. In this chapter, apart from assessing the trends and development of higher 
education research through the lens of teaching courses and programmes, the 
national policy framework on education and higher education research, the current 
fields of research interests in higher education and the nature of higher education 
publication in Thailand are also examined.
The Role of Higher Education in Promoting Teaching, 
Learning and Research
The re-engineering of Higher Education provision and services, in accordance with 
the 1999 Education Act in Thailand, has impacted the restructuring of higher educa-
tion institutions (HEIs). This re-engineering has also refined the aim of Higher 
Education provision and services to focus on promoting academic and research 
excellence (OHEC 2008a). The Bureau of Cooperation and Promotion, which falls 
under the purview of the Office of Higher Education Commission (OHEC), is the 
unit directly responsible for research financing and the development of innovation 
and for knowledge transfer. The other organisation that is deemed by its role to sup-
port, enhance and assure the quality of Higher Education is the Bureau of Standards 
and Quality. The OHEC is presumably the main policy engine that provides 
N.S. Dhirathiti (*) 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand
e-mail: nopraenue.dhi@mahidol.edu

266
guidelines and measures for HEI governance. This governance includes research and 
development, as well as teaching and learning through the development of mecha-
nisms such as the Thailand Qualification Framework and Thailand as well as ASEAN 
Citation Index.1 Within the scope and mandate of the OHEC, the focus of the national 
organisation therefore lies within the issue of managing HEIs rather than incubating 
knowledge in Higher Education through research.2 Following the reform of Higher 
Education in 1999, the current Higher Education system and its policy have been 
based on the national economic and social development plans and shifted towards 
more autonomy among HEIs. Operating under the OHEC, HEIs are managing their 
core businesses with more independence and flexibility through major higher educa-
tion policies and mechanisms. This is particularly visible in teaching and research, 
human resource management, budgeting as well as quality assurance.3
As a result of the Autonomous University Acts that do not allow newly estab-
lished universities to obtain the status of “governmental organisation” and that 
encourage the existing HEIs to transform themselves into “autonomous universi-
ties”, one might consider the case of Thailand as more peculiar than others within 
the region as the level of autonomy of Thai HEIs is extremely high. While central 
agencies such as the OHEC monitor higher education policy and regulations, the 
role of HEIs in enhancing and stimulating research in the sector is more prominent. 
That is to say, within the context of high autonomy, HEIs in Thailand enjoy rela-
tively higher levels of academic freedom in designing their own courses in terms of 
research emphases and directions (Dhirathiti 2012).
Currently, the Higher Education landscape in Thailand is clearly distinguished 
by the differentiation between teaching-intensive HEIs and research-intensive HEIs. 
Therefore, the sense of division of labour in teaching and learning vis-à-vis research 
is clear. The former (also known as Rajabhat universities) will be providing most of 
the educational services to the public via teaching. The latter HEIs provide educa-
tional services either through teaching or research. Some of the latter HEIs have 
been chosen by the OHEC as national research-intensive universities (NRUs) and 
are expected to prioritise their core academic activities in research (OHEC 2008b).
1 The full implementation handbook of Thailand Qualification Framework was developed by 
OHEC in 2006, and together with the King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology (KMUTT), National 
Research Council of Thailand and
Thailand Research Fund, OHEC has been the major supporter for the development of Thailand 
Citation Index Centre and ASEAN Citation Index database (OHEC 2006 and http://www.kmutt.
ac.th/jif/public_html/history.html).
2 The role and mandates of the Office of Higher Education Commission (Thailand) include the fol-
lowing provisions: (1) the guidance for driving higher education policy and cultivating interna-
tional networking; (2) the coordination and the development of educational human resource and 
student academic activities; (3) the research coordination for national development; (4) the guid-
ance on the establishing, merging or terminating HEIs or community colleges; (5) the monitoring 
and assessing quality of HEIs as well as developing a database for HEIs; and (6) the secretariat role 
for the OHEC.
3 The Secretariat of the House of Representatives (n.d.)
N.S. Dhirathiti

267
Higher Education is the area where both types of HEIs share the mutual responsibil-
ity of promoting courses and programmes as well as strengthening research capacities. 
However, following the 1999 Education Reform in Thailand, teaching colleges or those 
institutes formerly focused on training education personnel have been transformed into 
full-fledged comprehensive universities. Their academic visions and missions have 
been altered to suit the competing landscape of the massification of Higher Education 
by expanding services to cover areas larger than education. These areas include the 
Sciences or Social Sciences in some institutes. The transformation of the former teach-
ing colleges to Rajabhat universities has, in a way, redirected the former teaching col-
leges to compete and excel in new areas of the playing field. On the one hand, it may 
help Thailand in addressing the problem of access and equity by instating another 40 
comprehensive universities in Thailand. On the other hand, their previous strengths in 
offering courses and programmes in Curriculum and Instruction Development, 
Pedagogy or Subject-based Teaching with the aim to produce graduates who would 
continue their careers as teachers or educators have also somewhat diminished. The 
upgrade of Rajabhat universities was also perceived as the expansion of higher educa-
tion at the expense of education quality (Lao 2015). As will be discussed later in section 
“Current status of programmes offered in the area of education and higher education”, 
courses and programmes offered in the area of education in many Rajabhat universities 
have become rather limited, even at the level of bachelor’s degree programmes, not to 
mention the lack of tangible courses and programmes at the postgraduate level in these 
institutions.
The prospect of strengthening Higher Education as a discipline in Thailand is 
more evident among research-intensive or traditional public HEIs. Teaching and 
research usually go hand in hand in leading HEIs through the Faculty of Education. 
Examples of these HEIs include Chulalongkorn University, Srinakharinwirot 
University, Khon Khaen University, Prince of Songkla University and Chiang Mai 
University. Education research has emerged in these universities based on a large 
pool of subjects, areas of concentration, teaching courses, learning courses and pro-
grammes in these universities. Popular areas of research include Instruction and 
Curriculum Development, Educational Research and Educational Psychology, 
Educational Policy and Management, Education Technology, Adult Learning and 
Subject-based Education. The aforementioned freedom enjoyed by HEIs in 
Thailand, aided by a situation where the OHEC has not included education as one 
of the areas of research excellence for centres of excellence (CoEs), has resulted in 
a situation where the future and prospects of education teaching and learning, as 
well as research, lie very much in the hands of individual institutions. As described 
in Table 15.1, the main distinctions between the two types of HEIs, Rajabhat uni-
versities and research-intensive universities, are as follows.
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

268
Thailand’s Policy on Higher Education Research
Thailand’s education policy through the main national agency, the OHEC, is focus-
ing on the access to and equality of higher education. In the area of Higher Education, 
as a discipline, emphasis is placed on Instruction and Curriculum Development and 
Quality Assurance. Therefore, the OHEC’s key mission has been the promotion of 
research. Examples of these areas of research that are promoted by the OHEC are 
the development of Qualification Framework, Higher Education Reform and 
Curriculum Development (OHEC 2008a). More concrete plans to promote 
Education or Higher Education research as a national policy agenda, however, are 
still nowhere to be seen with the exception of the NRU project mentioned in section 
“The role of higher education in promoting teaching, learning and research”. In 
addition, the key characteristic of the OHEC’s policy towards strengthening the 
country’s research in higher education is to boost the research capacity of the coun-
try through the selection of “winners” among HEIs and CoEs. In a way, the policy 
helped strengthen research in research-intensive universities, especially those 
selected as national research universities. However, the ability of some other public 
and Rajabhat universities in promoting research without the support from the 
OHEC remains in question.
Thailand’s OHEC came up with the national policy to boost research efforts in 
HEIs in the country in the year 2000. This effort was jointly undertaken with the 
Science and Technology Postgraduate Education and Research Development Office 
(PERDO) and was repeated in 2012 under the NRU projects. The idea was to select 
Table 15.1  Main distinctions between Rajabhat universities and research-intensive universities
Policies towards 
Higher Education 
research
Rajabhat universities
Research-intensive universities
Courses and 
programmes
* Subject-based, especially 
for Primary Education
* In accordance with the institutional 
missions
Research
* Focuses on Pedagogy, 
Education or School 
Management
* Wide range of research on Education 
and Higher Education
Indicators in 
Higher Education 
research
* Limited Higher Education 
research
* Robust research on Higher Education 
including such areas as Educational 
Management, as well as Teaching and 
Learning
* Limited publication on 
Higher Education*
* Higher Education is offered as 
postgraduate degrees
* Publication on Higher Education is 
noted
Types of Higher 
Education 
research
* Mainstream research 
including Pedagogy, 
Curriculum and Instruction 
Development especially in 
Basic Education
* Higher Education research is evident 
especially in the area of Pedagogy, 
Curriculum and Instruction Development, 
Comparative Studies on Different Systems 
of Education and Higher Education Policy
N.S. Dhirathiti

269
areas of research excellence and designate each particular research-intensive uni-
versity to strengthen their research and innovation in specific areas through the 
financial support from the national government research budget. Currently, there are 
ten CoEs that focus on Chemicals, Chemical Management, Toxic Waste 
Management, Petroleum, Energy and Environment, Agriculture and Biotechnology, 
Mathematics, Physics, Biodiversity and Harvesting. In September 2015, a seminar 
to reify the third strategic plan for the development of the centre of excellence will 
be held in order to ensure the smooth operation of the promotion of scientific and 
research excellence in the country.4
Although the OHEC does not choose to directly support the areas of Education 
or Higher Education, the policy and research infrastructure webbed through the 
establishment of networking, especially international networking, for HEIs are evi-
dent in the country. These units, such as Thailand Cyber University or UniNet, as 
well as those regional organisations based in Thailand such as the SEAMEO 
Regional Centre for Higher Education and Development (SEAMEO RIHED), the 
Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning (ASAIHL-Thailand) 
and the ASEAN University Network (AUN), are financed partially by the OHEC 
while having obtained the status of regional organisation. Their missions, apart 
from promoting cooperation among HEIs in general, are promoting research as one 
of the main areas of academic activities in the form of international networking. 
However, research in Education or Higher Education is still not considered a prior-
ity in Thailand. The scenario is coupled with the fact that the trend of student admis-
sions into universities in the country has been leaning towards Science-based 
subjects. This is due to both higher scores required for admission and popularity of 
Science-based subjects among secondary students.5 Accordingly, Thailand’s 
National Research Policy through the Central Agency could be seen as placing more 
emphasis on the Sciences rather than on the Social Sciences or on Education. In 
practice, by promoting the autonomy among HEIs, the OHEC leaves the issue of 
teaching and learning as well as research under the jurisdiction of each institution. 
Whether or not Education and Higher Education would be promoted as a flagship 
discipline apparently depends on the consideration of each HEI.
In a nutshell, the Higher Education Research Policy in Thailand is not a stand-­
alone policy, but has been webbed through the establishment of CoEs. The role of 
the Central Higher Education Agency in terms of research stimulation is limited 
when compared to research funding agencies like the Thailand Research Fund 
(TRF) or the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT). This limitation of 
Higher Education research in Thailand could be derived from the following factors. 
Firstly, with limited funding from the OHEC, the targeted research areas are mostly 
Science and Technology based. Higher Education seems not to be in the mainstream 
of research in the country. Secondly, the existing Higher Education research in 
Thailand is somewhat multidisciplinary, especially the mixture of Higher Education 
and Management or Public Policy (this will be discussed in more detail in section 
4 PERDO, (n.d.). http://www.perdo.or.th/centres_of_excellence_thai.aspx
5 The Central University Admission System, OHEC (http://admission.cuas.or.th/adm57mxmn/)
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

270
“Trends in higher education research in Thailand” on the trends of Higher 
Education research in Thailand). Thirdly, and probably most importantly, Higher 
Education is offered as a degree, especially in the form of postgraduate degrees only 
in a few higher education institutions, such as in Chulalongkorn University and 
Srinakharinwirot University. This has inevitably led to a smaller volume and 
­number of research projects focusing on Higher Education as an area of study in the 
country.
Current Status of Programmes Offered in the Area 
of Education and Higher Education
Education and Higher Education as disciplines have been recognised as fields of 
study in Thai HEIs for more than a century6. This fact is traceable through the 
examination of courses and programmes available in Thai HEIs. In the past, 
Education was a discipline or a field of study that focused on teacher training. This 
was most clearly seen in the establishment of teaching colleges or wittayalai krue 
since the late nineteenth century. These teaching colleges were later conferred the 
status of a university as a result of the reform of Higher Education in Thailand in 
1999. These teaching colleges were renamed “Rajabhat University” and began to 
offer more courses and programmes that are not limited to teaching or Education. 
However, the culture of integrating Education as one of the leading disciplines in 
the institutions of higher learning known as “Rajabhat University” is still apparent. 
This has made Education an important area of concentration in such institutions.
Upon closer inspection by reviewing curriculum and programmes structure in 
leading pubic and autonomous HEIs in Thailand including six public/autonomous 
and three Rajabhat universities using information available on the institution’s web-
sites, there are approximately 50 HEIs offering courses and programmes related to 
Education under the actual affiliation of “Faculty” or “College” at present in 
Thailand. These faculties and colleges usually offer courses and programmes at the 
bachelor’s degree through to doctoral degree levels in various subfields of educa-
tion. As demonstrated in Table 15.2, six out of nine research-intensive universities 
in Thailand offer a wide range of bachelor’s degree courses in education including 
Curriculum and Instruction Development Education; Arts, Music and Theatrical 
Arts; Research and Educational Psychology; Education Policy and Educational 
Management/Leadership; 
Education 
Technology; 
Lifelong 
Learning/Adult 
6 Details could be found in the philosophy and principles of the establishment of the Faculty of 
Education or College of Education throughout Thailand. The first teaching institute to produce 
teachers for Thai education system can be dated back to the early twentieth century during the 
reign of King Rama V. Under the Civil Servant School (or known in Thai as Rongrian Karachakarn 
Polarouen), a teaching division was established and has been transformed into the Faculty of 
Education under Chulalongkorn University in 1957.
N.S. Dhirathiti

271
Table 15.2  Courses and programmes offered at bachelor’s degree level in HEIs by institutions and 
subareas
Department/courses 
and programmes
Research-intensive HEIs
Rajabhat universities
CU
SWU
KKU
KU
PSU
CMU
CMRU
CRRU
SDRU
Curriculum and Instruction Development
Curriculum and 
Instruction 
Development
x
Early Childhood 
Education
x
x
x
x
x
X
Primary Education
x
x
X
Secondary Education
x
Health or Physical 
Education
x
x
x
x
x
x
Special Education
x
X
Arts, Music and Theatrical Arts
Arts Education
x
x
x
x
x
Music Education
x
Educational Research and Educational Psychology
Educational 
Psychology and 
Counselling
x
x
x
x
Educational Evaluation
x
x
x
x
Education Policy and Educational Management/Leadership
Business Education 
(including Home 
Economics Education)
x
x
x
x
Industrial Education
x
Education Technology
Computer/ Information 
Education
x
x
x
x
Lifelong Learning/Adult Education/Alternative Education
Non-formal and 
Informal Education
x
Subject-based Teaching/Education
Linguistics and 
Language Educationa 
(Language Teaching)
x
x
x
x
Social Science 
Education (Social 
Science Teaching)
x
x
x
Agricultural Education 
(Agricultural Teaching)
x
Math/Science 
Education (Science 
Teaching)
x
x
x
x
x
aLinguistics and Language Education covers various courses providing linguistic studies, includ-
ing English, Japanese, Chinese, Thai and so on. Each HEI has different focuses in providing 
courses relating to languages
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

272
Education/Alternative Education; Linguistics and Language Education7 (Language 
Teaching); Social Science Education (Social Science Teaching); Agricultural 
Education (Agricultural Teaching); and Math/Science Education (Science 
Teaching). Higher Education research, as a separate discipline, is not present at the 
level of bachelor’s degree programmes. Among HEIs offering programmes in 
Education are Chulalongkorn University and Chiang Mai University. Both are 
research-intensive universities offering a large number of programmes covering 
almost all areas of Education. Primary Education, Health and Physical Education, 
Arts Education and Math/Science Education seem to be the most popular areas of 
teaching and learning at the level of bachelor’s degree at these universities.
It is interesting to see that at the level of bachelor’s degree, programmes that 
specialise in Higher Education are virtually non-existent. Fundamentally, HEIs in 
Thailand focus more on either Early Childhood Education or Primary Education. In 
other words, the country seems to be emphasising more on Basic Education as a 
discipline of studies and also on developing contents as well as teaching techniques 
and evaluation in Languages, Science, Social Sciences and Arts. This seems to be 
the case because the majority of students in the national pipeline are still at the level 
of Basic Education rather than Higher Education. In the past 20 years, the number 
of students from Basic Education going through to Higher Education has accounted 
for about 35 percent of the whole student population in the country.8 Compared to 
other developing and developed countries, the needs for developing Basic Education 
still outweigh those of Higher Education. The provision of programmes and courses 
in Basic Education in HEIs in Thailand, therefore, corresponds to the demand of the 
students and the overall population as a whole. Another explanation is that Education 
has been a discipline that originated in Thailand from teaching colleges and not 
HEIs. As mentioned earlier in the introductory part of this chapter, teaching colleges 
played a greater role in forming the body of knowledge. It is, in essence, the epitome 
of the current design of programmes and courses in many HEIs in Thailand.
At the postgraduate level, especially at the level of master’s degree, the courses 
and programmes offered in Thai HEIs are not much different from those offered for 
bachelor’s degree students. Higher Education, as a separate course of study, is still 
nowhere to be seen. The majority of courses still focus on Basic Education. This 
includes Curriculum and Instruction Development, Early Childhood Education, 
Primary Education, Vocational Education, Health or Physical Education and Special 
Education. The courses and programmes offered in the areas of Educational 
Research and Psychology, Educational Policy and Management and Education 
Technology have also been popular, especially among research-intensive universi-
ties. Rajabhat universities rarely offer courses at the postgraduate levels. This may 
be due to the inadequacy of resources.
7 Linguistics and Language Education cover various courses providing linguistic studies, including 
English, Japanese, Chinese, Thai and so on. Each HEI has different focuses in providing courses 
relating to languages.
8 The 11th Higher Education Development Plan (http://www.mua.go.th/~bpp/developplan/down-
load/higher_edu_plan/PlanHEdu11_2555-2559.pdf)
N.S. Dhirathiti

273
Among major research universities, popular areas are still in Curriculum and 
Instruction, specifically in the areas of Curriculum and Instruction Development, 
and Health and Physical Education. Moreover, other programmes and courses 
offered in the research-intensive universities are in the areas of Educational Research 
and Educational Psychology, such as Educational Psychology and Counselling, 
Educational Research and Methodology and Educational Evaluation. Another popu-
lar area is Education Policy and Management. The most popular area is in Educational 
Management, which usually focuses on the development of management skills and 
leadership of educational personnel. Computer and Information Education, as part 
of the development of teaching and learning materials and tools, is also another area 
of interest that guarantees high enrolment. Contrary to the programmes and courses 
offered at the bachelor’s degree level, Subject-based Teaching/Education at the mas-
ter’s level are available in some research-intensive universities, especially Math and 
Science Education, Social Science Education and Language Education.
At the level of doctoral degree, courses and programmes provided by non-­
research-­intensive HEIs are very limited. Even among research-intensive HEIs, 
courses and programmes in Education are not as abundant as those available at the 
bachelor’s degree level. Areas of courses and programmes offered are centred on the 
area of Curriculum and Instruction, especially in Curriculum and Instruction 
Development. Other key areas of courses and programmes offered include 
Educational Research Methodology, Education Management and Computer and 
Information Technology for Education. Interestingly, Higher Education is being 
offered as a doctoral degree programme at Chulalongkorn University with the focus 
on Critical Analysis in Education and Sustainable Development, Principles of 
Higher Education, College Student Development, Curriculum and Instruction in 
Higher Education, Management and Leadership in Higher Education, Academic 
Administration in Higher Education, Problems of Professionals in Higher Education 
and Educational Research Methodology.9
In terms of courses and programmes offered in leading HEIs, Chulalongkorn 
University, Khon Kaen University and Srinakharinwirot University are the key uni-
versities in Thailand with almost all-inclusive areas of studies in Education. 
Chulalongkorn University is the leading university that offers programmes and 
courses in every area and at all levels, from bachelor’s degree through to doctoral 
degree programmes. Prince of Songkla University and Chiang Mai University are 
also extremely active in offering courses and programmes at the level of bachelor’s 
degree, especially in the area of Subject-based Teaching/Education. Khon Kaen 
University and Kasetsart University are also the leading institutions offering courses 
and programmes at master’s degree programme. While Khon Kaen University is 
specialised in the area of Curriculum and Instruction Development, Kasetsart 
University focuses on Subject-based Teaching and Education at this level. At the 
level of doctoral degree programmes, Chulalongkorn University and Khon Kaen 
University are the leading institutions offering programmes and courses in almost all 
areas including Curriculum and Instruction, Educational Research and Educational 
9 http://portal.edu.chula.ac.th/edu58/
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

274
Psychology, Education Policy and Management, Education Technology and Lifelong 
Learning and Alternative Education. It is also important to note that areas of studies 
offered from bachelor’s through to doctoral degree are Curriculum and Instruction 
Development, Primary Education, Health and Physical Education, Arts Education, 
Educational Psychology and Counselling, Educational Evaluation, Computer and 
Information Education, Non-formal and Informal Education and Subject-based 
Teaching/Education in the area of Math and Science Education. These areas have 
gained attention from the demand and supply sides, both Higher Education providers 
and students, because Thailand’s main focus on education is still very much on the 
level of Primary Education. This is because it was not until 2007 that Thailand pro-
mulgated the law to set up a higher provision for formal education up to 15 years of 
age or up to the level of Secondary Education (Tables 15.3 and 15.4).
Table 15.3  Courses and programmes offered at master’s degree in HEIs by institutions and 
subareas
Department/courses 
and programmes
Research-intensive HEIs
Rajabhat universities
CU
SWU
KKU
KU
PSU
CMU
CMRU
CRRU
SDRU
Curriculum and Instruction Development
Curriculum and 
Instruction 
Development
x
x
x
x
x
x
Early Childhood 
Education
x
x
Primary Education
x
x
Secondary Education
Vocational 
Development 
Education
x
x
Health/Physical 
Education or 
Recreation 
Education
x
x
x
x
Special Education
x
x
Arts, Music and Theatrical Arts
Arts Education
x
Music Education
x
Educational Research and Educational Psychology
Educational 
Psychology and 
Counselling
x
x
x
x
Educational 
Research 
Methodology
x
x
x
x
Educational 
Evaluation
x
x
x
(continued)
N.S. Dhirathiti

275
Department/courses 
and programmes
Research-intensive HEIs
Rajabhat universities
CU
SWU
KKU
KU
PSU
CMU
CMRU
CRRU
SDRU
Educational 
Statistics
x
Education Policy and Educational Management/Leadership
Education/Learning 
and Human  
Resource 
Development
x
x
Education 
Management
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Supervision and 
Curriculum 
Development
x
Business Education 
(including Home 
Economics 
Education)
x
Education Technology
Computer/
Information 
Education
x
x
x
x
x
x
Lifelong Learning/Adult Education/Alternative Education
Non-formal and 
Informal Education
x
x
x
Subject-based Teaching/Education
Linguistics and 
Language Educationa 
(Language Teaching)
x
Social Science 
Education (Social 
Science Teaching)
x
x
x
Environment 
Education 
(Environmental 
Teaching)
x
Math/Science 
Education (Science 
Teaching)
x
x
x
x
aLinguistics and Language Education covers various courses providing linguistic studies, includ-
ing English, Japanese, Chinese, Thai and so on. Each HEI has different focuses in providing 
courses relating to languages
Table 15.3  (continued)
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

276
Table 15.4  Courses and programmes offered at doctoral degree in HEIs by institutions and 
subareas
Department/courses and 
programmes
Research-intensive HEIs
Rajabhat universities
CU SWU KKU KU PSU CMU CMRU
CRRU
SDRU
Curriculum and Instruction Development
Curriculum and  
Instruction  
Development
x
x
x
x
Primary Education
x
Vocational  
Development  
Education
x
Higher Education
x
Health/Physical  
Education or  
Recreation Education
x
x
Arts, Music and Theatrical Arts
Arts Education
x
Educational Research and Educational Psychology
Educational Research 
Methodology
x
x
x
x
Educational Evaluation
x
x
x
Education Policy and Educational Management/Leadership
Education/Learning and 
Human Resource 
Development
x
x
x
x
Education and Social 
Development
X
Education Management
x
x
x
x
x
Leadership in  
Education
x
Education Technology
Computer/ 
Information  
Education
x
x
x
x
Lifelong Learning/Adult Education/Alternative Education
Non-formal and Informal 
Education
x
x
Subject-based Teaching/Education
Math/Science  
Education (Science 
Teaching)
x
x
N.S. Dhirathiti

277
Trends in Higher Education Research in Thailand
Interestingly, while programmes and courses offered in Higher Education as a sepa-
rate discipline can be considered as fewer than any other type of educational pro-
gramme, research in Higher Education is fairly abundant. The types of research are 
varied, ranging from graduation thesis, individual research by scholars in the field 
and research commissioned by leading funding agencies such as the Thailand 
Research Fund (TRF) and the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT). 
Some of the research in Higher Education is also directly funded for specific pur-
poses, such as to find best practices in Higher Education Management or with the 
aim for capacity building of HEIs through governmental agencies (for instance, the 
Office of Higher Education Commission, Thailand (OHEC), and the Office of the 
National Education Commission, Thailand (ONEC). Therefore, it could be asserted 
that Higher Education research is an area of interest along with other education-­
related research in Thailand.
The compilation of approximately 1500 research items in Higher Education 
between 1995 and 2015 through the database of leading HEIs, the TRF and NRCT 
both in book form and in a research report, shows that areas of research interests 
relating to the Higher Education sector in Thailand can be divided into many subar-
eas.10 The data were collected through the data available in the library and institu-
tions’ websites of the above-mentioned research institutes and HEIs. The data were 
sorted in groups by dividing into subareas of Higher Education research including 
Theory and Policy in Higher Education, Higher Education Governance and 
Management, Comparative Higher Education Policy, Human Resource Development 
in Higher Education, Higher Education Reforms and Course and Curriculum 
Development in Higher Education.
The first area of research, Theory and Policy in Higher Education, focuses on the 
issue of the philosophy of Thai Higher Education in different time periods. Such 
research keeps track of the philosophical development of Thai Higher Education 
using different techniques. These different techniques include the historical 
approach, case studies and also the critical approach in discussing theoretical and 
philosophical premises of Thai Higher Education. Examples of such research can be 
seen through the titles of works such as “Postmodernism and Higher Education”, 
“King Rama the IX’s Higher Education Philosophy”, “Critiques of Thai Higher 
Education” and “The New Paradigm of Thai Higher Education” (Prachyapruit 2011; 
Ruanglertboon 2003; Sinlarat 1999, 2003, 2005). Examples of case studies, particu-
larly those addressing contemporary issues of higher education, can also be found in 
issues such as the impact of GATS and the liberalisation of Higher Education ser-
vice, the globalisation of Thai Higher Education or the implication of decentralisa-
10 From around 1500 research items collected, theories and policy in Higher Education consists of 
21 items, Higher Education Governance and Management consists of 334 items, Comparative 
Higher Education Policy consists of 15 items, Higher Education Development consists of 96 items, 
Higher Education Reform consists of 11 items, Teaching and Learning and Curriculum 
Development consists of 289 items and other miscellaneous issues consist of 135 items.
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

278
tion in Thailand and the governance of Thai Higher Education (Chandrasuta 2006; 
Metkarunjit 2010). In later years, research that directly addresses the needs and 
strategic improvement for Higher Education research in private HEIs, critical issues 
in Thai Higher Education, philosophy and teaching and learning process for specific 
areas such as non-formal education in HEIs are also highlighted by funding agencies 
(Jai-ngam 2004; Kamdit 1988; Sangmahachai 2002).
The second area of research in Higher Education in Thailand is concerned with 
Higher Education Governance and Management. It could be argued that this area of 
Higher Education Management has gained most research interest among scholars, 
students and Higher Education practitioners. The reason being is the research in this 
area is based on Higher Education Management programmers offered in Thai HEIs. 
In addition, the national policy in encouraging public HEIs to transform themselves 
to autonomous institutions has also alleviated the interests among scholars and 
practitioners in the areas of university management. Within the scope of Higher 
Education Governance and Management, issues for research range from general to 
more specific techniques in managing universities. The general tone of research 
would include topics on the recruitment and role of the top executives in Thai HEIs, 
governance and management in Thai HEIs, ethics among HEI administrators, the 
marketing and commercial strategies for public and private HEIs, good governance 
in HEIs or the implication of national regulations such as the qualification frame-
work and the management of HEIs (Pearntunyakorn 1988; Wannapairo 2012). More 
specific areas of research relating to Higher Education Governance and Management 
are those in Higher Education Laws and Regulations as a result of the promulgation 
of the Autonomous University Act, Quality Assurance and Frameworks, Procurement 
in HEIs, Financial and Budget Management in HEIs, Student and Community 
Relations and Management of HEIs, Management of Communication Channels in 
HEIs, Human Resource Management and Compensation Scaling, Accreditation 
Process and Adjustment (Chaichan 2011; Chusit 2012; Dhirathiti 2012). This area 
of Higher Education research has gained much attention from national research 
funding agencies as the number of grants awarded for those conducting research 
relating to this area has amounted to almost 300 projects in the past decade. This 
number is higher than any other area funded by the TRF.
Among those subtopics mentioned previously, the issue on quality assurance has 
been one that dominates the research landscape of Higher Education Research on 
Management and Governance in Thailand. This has been the case since the start of 
the reform of the Higher Education sector in 1999 during which issues such as qual-
ity, autonomy and internationalisation of Higher Education have come to the fore 
(Sookvaree 2011). Issues on Student and Community Relations have also become 
one of the main highlights in Higher Education research in Thailand, especially 
when they relate to behaviours and attitudes of students in Higher Education set-
tings (OHEC 2005). The research on the role of HEIs and the community, or some-
times known as University Social Responsibility (USR), has also been on the rise. 
Some examples can be found in the research focusing on the compatible role of 
universities, schools and communities (Tritilanunt 2006).
N.S. Dhirathiti

279
Additionally, trends of recent research on university governance have also taken 
into account the shift of Education, including Higher Education, from a public to a 
commercialised commodity. Therefore, the strategies in offering the educational 
services are tilted towards the demand rather than supply side. Research in such 
areas as Customer Relationship Management (CRM) for improving efficiency in 
HEIs, Student Satisfaction Improvement or Organisational Communication and the 
increase of enrolment has increasingly attracted the attention of national funding 
agencies (Deeprasert 2008; Patanasitubol 2010). Other areas that have gained atten-
tion among researchers and also among HEI administrators are the areas of 
Organisation Culture, Organisational Commitment and Engagement, Quality of 
Life and Work Morale in HEIs (Kan-asa 2007; Noichun 2007). These research top-
ics have spread widely through several layers of Higher Education research, from 
in-house research within HEIs conducted in the format of Routine to Research 
(R2R) by HEI supporting staff, governmental organisations relating to Higher 
Education, undertaken as pure academic research under degree programmers or as 
designated by funding agencies.
The third category of Higher Education research in Thailand is Comparative 
Higher Education Policy. This subarea of research has gained attention, not only 
among scholars in higher education policy but also practitioners and administrators 
in the governmental Higher Education sector. This occurred specifically during the 
latter half of the 1990s, because it was during this time period that the movement to 
reform the Higher Education sector occurred. Therefore, most of the research in this 
area had been mainly comparative cases and lessons learned from conducting stud-
ies in several Higher Education systems in countries like Japan, Australia, New 
Zealand, Finland, Hong Kong, the UK, Singapore, Malaysia and some other coun-
tries in the European Union (Krongkaew 2005). It might be important to note that in 
this time period when research on comparative Higher Education flourished, the 
main funding agency was the ONEC as its main function was to offer recommenda-
tions for possible reform of the Higher Education sector in Thailand.
Another source of funding for comparative research on Higher Education in 
Thailand is development agencies such as the World Bank, the Asian Development 
Bank or a regional Higher Education organisations like SEAMEO RIHED, where 
published research monographs and edited volumes could be found in areas such as 
Higher Education Governance in Asia or the comparative cases on career develop-
ment of Higher Education personnel or the lessons learned from the harmonisation 
of Higher Education for Southeast Asia (UNESCO 2006). It is worth mentioning 
that comparative research in Higher Education in Thailand is still very limited and 
has not gained much interest among either domestic research funding agencies or 
individual scholars.
The fourth group of research topics focuses on Human Resource Development in 
Higher Education. This area of research interest is the most popular among practitio-
ners as Higher Education in the country has undergone tremendous change through 
the 1999 reform and the changing status of the Higher Education sector to a more 
autonomous style of management. Under the new autonomous governance system, 
Higher Education personnel in Thailand, both academics and general staff, are sub-
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

280
ject to a new performance appraisal and competency evaluation schemes with tougher 
and more articulated standards. In other words, their changing status from govern-
ment officials to university employees requires them to improve their skills and work 
competencies. Accordingly, research on skill development and improvement among 
Higher Education personnel has become one of the main areas of research after the 
Higher Education Reform of the previous decade (Suthammanon 2014).
Research to strengthen human resource skills at the level of academics and staff 
is not the only focal point of contemporary work on Human Resource Development 
in Higher Education. Studies relating to the preferable traits and managerial out-
comes of higher education administrators and executive, as well as University 
Council members or members of the Board of Trustees, have also been on the rise 
in the last decade (Suthakavatin 2005). Several studies have been conducted to 
reveal strategies to improve the performances of HEI administrators and executives. 
Some scholars have also put effort in addressing the human resource management 
issues relating to those serving HEIs. Examples of this include Knowledge 
Management Techniques, Quality of Life or Life-Work Balance of HEI Personnel, 
Learning Organisations and finally Organisational Engagement. The latter issue on 
Organisational Engagement has become one of the popular issues in Higher 
Education research as many HEIs in Thailand are faced with the dilemma of brain 
drain and talent management. Many have agreed that recruiting and retaining talents 
require entirely different management techniques. Against the backdrop of the lib-
eralisation of Higher Education and the autonomous universities, both academics 
and general staff talents could be moving elsewhere at an unprecedented rate. 
Therefore, research in areas such as Organisational Engagement and Commitment 
as well as Job Satisfaction among both academics and non-academic staff has been 
on the rise in recent years (Sirisunhirun and Dhirathiti 2015).
The fifth area of Higher Education research in Thailand centres on the issue of 
Higher Education Reform. This is especially true during the reform period prior to 
the second Higher Education sector reform in 1999. The majority of the research 
was funded by governmental agencies such as the OHEC and the ONEC. This is 
simply the case because these two national agencies were tasked with overseeing 
the overall strategies of Higher Education Reform in the nation. The common char-
acteristics of research in this area focus on the preparation of the Higher Education 
sector and personnel with skills for the twenty-first century, governance as well as 
teaching and learning strategies for HEIs and the lessons learned from Higher 
Education globally. The latter was specifically funded by the ONEC in a series of 
comparative studies by examining the issues of Higher Education Reform, gover-
nance systems and teaching and learning mechanisms from various nations, includ-
ing several models in the UK, Japan, Australia, New Zealand and the USA (World 
Bank 2013). Unlike other areas of Higher Education research in Thailand, research 
on Higher Education Reform was rarely academic or the focus of graduation thesis 
research. Research on Higher Education Reform was more often categorised as 
commissioned or consultancy research by government agencies.
The final category of Higher Education research in Thailand is on Teaching, 
Learning and Curricular Development. It is perhaps the largest pool of resources 
N.S. Dhirathiti

281
both in the form of commissioned and academic research. The reason being is that 
most of the leading HEIs that are offering degrees in Education are all opening 
courses and programmes in this particular area. As mentioned in section “Current 
status of programmes offered in the area of education and higher education”, 
research topics in this area usually include Classroom Teaching and Learning 
Evaluation, Teaching and Learning Resource Management, Web-based Teaching 
and Learning Instructions, Information Technology and Teaching, Ethics in 
Teaching and Learning and Teaching Strategies in various disciplines that cover a 
range of Languages, Arts, Sciences and Social Sciences (Anantasate 2001; 
Laohacharassang 2002; Osathanugrah 2006; Phuwiphadawat 2006). Recently, apart 
from research on Classroom Teaching and Learning Evaluation, which is the main-
stream of Higher Education research in Thailand, research and studies on Curricular 
Development and the Qualification Framework has also been on the rise due to the 
shifting policy of the OHEC in tightening quality assurance measures in HEIs 
(Sinlarat 2009, 2011).
Trends and strategies in teaching and learning are also another area of research 
interest among students and scholars, especially when these topics are related to 
Teaching and Learning for different cohorts of students in HEIs. This kind of 
research reflects the emphasis of Higher Education research in Thailand on the 
development of techniques of teaching and learning and in founding an environ-
ment that is conducive to effective learning among students as a result of the quality 
assurance measures and Thailand’s qualification framework.
Publication in Higher Education Research
In order to examine the journals in the area of higher education research, the database 
available in the Thailand Citation Index (TCI) was thoroughly checked in terms of 
scopes and titles of the journals relating to education. When examining a vast array of 
publications referenced in the TCI database, journals being published by HEIs and 
other research institutes in the area of Education is presently enormous (TCI 2015). 
However, journals focusing only on Higher Education are probably nowhere to be 
found. The features of journals in the area of Education can be summed up as follows. 
Firstly, most of the journals in Education are published by HEIs where there is a 
Faculty of Education present. Examples of such universities are Khon Kaen University, 
Silpakorn University, Chulalongkorn University and Chiang Mai University. Some of 
the journals are limited to subareas, such as Research Methodology, Education and 
Communication Technology and Teaching and Learning. These subareas are seen in 
the Journal of Research Methodology (Chulalongkorn University), the Education and 
Communication Technology Journal (Sukhothai Thammathirat University) and 
Journal of Rangsit University: Teaching and Learning (Rangsit University), respec-
tively. Other journals have set their objectives and named their titles in a broader 
scope and style to offer more room for publication.
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

282
Secondly, Education is an area of study that is strongly associated with the Social 
Sciences. Therefore, journals with the objective of including all fields of the Social 
Sciences basically take Education as one of the publishable areas of studies. 
Examples of this include the Humanities and Social Sciences Journal (Khon Kaen 
University) and the Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies (Mahidol University). 
Finally, journals published by organisations other than HEIs also offer venues for 
Higher Education research, such as ASAIHL-Thailand Journal (published by 
ASAIHL) or the Journal of the Association of Researchers. As summarised in 
Table 15.5, examples of journals that publish research on Higher Education and 
Education in general are abundant and published by many HEIs.
Table 15.5  List of journals publishing research and articles on Education
Journals
Publishing Institutions
Journal of Education Graduate Studies Research
Khon Kaen University
Journal of Cognitive Technology
Journal of Educational Administration
Humanities and Social Sciences Journal
SWU Educational Administration Journal
Srinakharinwirot University
STOU Education Journal
Sukhothai Thammathirat University
Education and Technology Journal
KKU Journal of Education
Kasetsart University
Journal of Education
Journal of Education
Naresuan University
Journal of Educational Measurement
Mahasarakham University
Journal of Education
Journal of Education
Silpakorn University
Journal of Education
Prince Songkla University
Journal of Education
Burapha University
Kasetsart Educational Review
Kasetsart University
Chulalongkorn Educational Review
Chulalongkorn University
Journal of Education Studies
Journal of Research Methodology
Chiang Mai University Journal of Social Sciences  
and Humanities
Chiang Mai University
Journal of Education
Rajabhat Mahasarakham
Journal of Education
Rajabhat Bansomdejchaopraya
Journal of Rangsit University: Teaching and Learning
Rangsit University
Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies
Mahidol University
SDU Research Journal Social Sciences and 
Humanities
Rajabhat Suan Dusit
ASAIHL-Thailand Journal
ASAIHL
N.S. Dhirathiti

283
Conclusion
The current status of and trends in Higher Education research in Thailand must be 
assessed in parallel with the trends of teaching and learning or programmes offered 
in HEIs as well as the grant schemes funded by leading national research agencies. 
In terms of the national policy, the OHEC is the key player in promoting Higher 
Education research, but the emphasis has been more or less on the promotion of 
research excellence in specific areas, especially in the Sciences and not in Higher 
Education per se. The launching of the policies such as the establishment of the 
CoEs or NRUs has also been attempted to elevate the profile of HEIs in acting as the 
key engine for the country’s research and development promotion. Higher Education 
research in and of itself has never been on the agenda at the national level. Despite 
this, it gained attention from national research funding agencies.
Courses offered in HEIs include, but are limited to, Course and Curriculum 
Instruction, Education Management, Education Technology and Subject-based 
Education. Leading public universities usually offer courses covering almost all 
areas including Higher Education at the postgraduate level. Therefore, research in 
the form of theses and dissertations typically correspond to the programmes and 
courses provided in each HEI.
Research funded by national agencies differs widely and includes Theory and 
Policies of Higher Education, Governance and Management of Higher Education, 
Comparative Higher Education Policy, Educational Personnel and Human Resource 
Development, Higher Education Reform and Teaching and Curriculum Development. 
These areas would still be the future trends of teaching, learning and research in 
many HEIs, especially in the field of Instruction and Curriculum Development and 
Educational Management. In terms of research in Higher Education, research in the 
area of Higher Education Governance and Management as well as Instruction and 
Curriculum Development will be the main areas of interest. Other areas, especially 
in Special Education or Lifelong Learning, might be seen as less popular fields of 
research and studies in Thailand.
References
Anantasate, B. (2001). The development of a teaching and learning process to promote learn-
ers’ autonomy for university students. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok.
Chaichan, T. (2011). The Office of the Higher Education Commission’s method on efficient man-
agement of supply operation. Unpublished master dissertation. Silpakorn University, Bangkok.
Chandrasuta, N. (2006). A proposal of higher education law to cope with free trade in educational 
services. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
Chusit, P. (2012). A development of transfer of credit system in higher education institution. 
Unpublished research report. Rajamangala University of Technology Phra Nakhon, Bangkok.
Deeprasert, J. (2008). Factors contributing to the selection of HEIs among students. Unpublished 
research report. NRCT, Bangkok.
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

284
Dhirathiti, N. S. (2012). Administration and governance of higher education in Asia: Patterns and 
implications. Asian Development Bank (ADB): Manila.
Jai-ngam, S. (2004). A proposal of policies and operational plans for special education in higher 
education institutions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
Kamdit, S. (1988). The proposed guidelines for the development of graduate studies in humanities. 
Unpublished master dissertation. Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
Kan-asa, P. (2007). Relationship between organisational culture and behaviours of leaders in 
learning organisations. Unpublished research report. NRCT, Bangkok.
Krongkaew, T. (2005). A comparative studies on government support for higher education in 10 
countries. Bangkok: Office of the Education Council.
Lao, R. (2015). A critical studies of Thailand’s higher education reforms: The culture of borrow-
ing. Oxon: Routledge.
Laohacharassang, T. (2002). Learning approach model for the educational technology gradu-
ate programme via semi-distance education. Chiangmai: Faculty of Education, Chiangmai 
University.
Metkarunjit, M. (2010). Participatory approach to education management: People, local adminis-
tration and government. Bangkok: Book Point.
Noichun, N. (2007). Organizational culture and the efficiency in higher education administration. 
Unpublished research report. NRCT, Bangkok.
OHEC. (2005). A study on foreign students in Thai higher education institutions. Bangkok: OHEC.
OHEC. (2006). National qualifications framework for higher education in Thailand. Bangkok: 
OHEC.
OHEC. (2008a). The second 15-year long range plan on higher education of Thailand. Bangkok: 
OHEC.
OHEC. (2008b). Thailand National Research Universities: Enhancing academic excellence and 
competitiveness. Bangkok: OHEC.
Osathanugrah, N. (2006). Framework for developing moral principles and ethics among the Thai 
higher education students following discourse by his Majesty the King Bhumibol. Bangkok: 
Thai National Defence College.
Patanasitubol, N. (2010). Attitudes on customer relationship management in HEIs. Unpublished 
research report. NRCT, Bangkok.
Perntunyakorn, S. (1988). An analysis of administrative structures of Thai Higher Education 
Institutions. Unpublished master dissertation. Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
Phuwipadawat, P. (2006). Quality development of teaching and learning through classroom 
assessment. Chiangmai: Faculty of Education, Chiangmai University.
Pratchyapruit, A. (2011). Postmodernism and higher education. Bangkok: Inthapas.
Ruanglertboon, F. (2003). Higher education philosophy of his majesty King Bhumibol Adulyadej. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
Sangmahachai, K. (2002). The crisis of higher education in Thailand and the ways to overcome 
problems. Bangkok: Office of Higher Education Commission.
Secretariat of the House of Representatives (n.d.). Document for consideration: Autonomous 
universities. [online]. http://www.parliament.go.th/ewtcommittee/ewt/education/download/
article/article_20130320190602.pdf. Retrieved 16 March 2015.
Sinlarat, P. (1999). A compilation of Thai higher education critiques. Bangkok: Faculty of 
Education, Chulalongkorn University.
Sinlarat, P. (2003). A new paradigm in Thai higher education management. Bangkok: Faculty of 
Education, Chulalongkorn University.
Sinlarat, P. (2005). Principles and basics of higher education. Bangkok: Faculty of Education, 
Chulalongkorn University.
Sinlarat, P. (2009). A comparative studies on qualification framework abroad. Bangkok: Office of 
the Educational Council.
Sinlarat, P. (2011). National qualifications framework for higher education in Thailand: From 
research to practice. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University Press.
N.S. Dhirathiti

285
Sirisunhirun, S., & Dhirathiti, N. S. (2015). Job characteristics and a happy workplace in Thai 
higher education institutions. The Organization Development Journal, 33(1), 71–89.
Sookvaree, E. (2011). Strategies for the development of an internal quality assurance system for 
performance excellence for higher education institutions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
Suthakavatin, T. (2005). HEI administrator development strategies. Bangkok: NIDA.
Suthammanon, L. (2014). The roles of University Council in Human Resource Management. 
Panyapiwat Journal, 5(Special Issue), 145–155.
TCI. (2015). Thailand citation index centre: History. [Online]. http://www.kmutt.ac.th/jif/pub-
lic_html/history.html. Retrieved 15 February 2015.
Tritilanunt, P. (2006). The development of strategic planning for a local higher education institu-
tion with an emphasis on collaboration with communities to strengthening the community’s 
capacity in drug addict prevention: A case study of Rajabhat Rajanagarindra University. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
UNESCO. (2006). Higher education in Southeast Asia. Bangkok: UNESCO.
Wannapairo, S. (2012). Management Strategies for the Preparation of Thai Higher Education 
Institutions for ASEAN Community (Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation). Chulalongkorn 
University. Bangkok.
World Bank. (2013). The overall picture of higher education which accommodating the skill and 
research development for economic growth in East Asia. Bangkok: World Bank.
Nopraenue Sajjarax Dhirathiti  is an Associate Professor in Public Policy at the Faculty of 
Social Sciences and Humanities, Mahidol University. She also currently serves the university as 
Assistant to the President for Academic Affairs. She has been conducting research in higher educa-
tion policy and governance both in Thailand and Asia Pacific. Recently, she has focused on the 
issue of co-production and lifelong learning policy, especially among the elderly people in Thailand 
and Japan. Her interest is also in the area of human security and the way in which people can be 
empowered through education. She has joined the UNESCO in ERI-Net research projects on aca-
demic promotion of teaching personnel in Asia and on the development of regional qualification 
framework. Before joining Mahidol, she worked as Senior Specialist in Higher Education Research 
at the ASEAN University Network Secretariat (AUNS), SEAMEO Regional Centre for Higher 
Education and Development (SEAMEO RIHED), and an international consultant for the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB).
15  Higher Education Research in Thailand: Current Trends and Development

287
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in  
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_16
Chapter 16
Higher Education Research in the Philippines: 
Policies and Prospects
Christian Bryan S. Bustamante
Abstract  This chapter is about higher education research in the Philippines. It pro-
vides an overview about the status and challenges of Philippine higher education 
research. The focus of the discussion is on the policies of the Philippines’ 
Commission on Higher Education (CHED) on improving higher education research 
in the country. The chapter starts with a discussion on the status of the scientific 
research in the Philippines 67 years ago. It is followed by a discussion on the status 
of higher education research and on the current policies initiated by the CHED as 
well as the research trends and prospects in order to develop the culture of research 
and the quality of research output in Philippine higher education.
Research in higher education becomes a key priority because of its vital importance 
to development and innovation. Its significance in “supporting technological inno-
vation” is growing (The World Bank 2012, p. 30). That is why its critical objective 
is not only to produce graduates who are proficient and innovative (The World Bank 
2012, P. 30) but also to deliver quality research. Higher education research has 
evolved to a concept that is “equated with publication” (Blake et al. 1998, p. 67). It 
is a research that is “recognized by peers and that pushes back the frontiers of 
knowledge as well as can be measured and communicated” (Altbach 2004, p. 2).
Research is also one of the indicators used in measuring the quality of higher 
education. “World-class universities” are recognized because of their superior out-
puts: well-qualified graduates, leading-edge research published in top scientific 
journals, and contribution to technical innovations through patents and licenses 
(Salmi 2009, p. 17). Following the path of “world-class universities,” higher educa-
tion institutions are exerting effort to attract, recruit, and retain competent and lead-
ing academics and to source out abundant and sustainable funds in order to produce 
quality research output (Altbach and Salmi 2011, pp. 326, 329, 331). Integrating 
C.B.S. Bustamante (*) 
San Beda College, Manila, Philippines
e-mail: brye0811@gmail.com

288
research in undergraduate programs becomes a key requirement in order to produce 
quality research (Altbach and Salmi 2011, p. 335).
This chapter is about higher education research in the Philippines. It provides an 
overview about the status and challenges of Philippine higher education research. 
The focus of the discussion is on the policies of the Philippines’ Commission on 
Higher Education (CHED) on improving higher education research in the country. 
The chapter starts with a discussion on the status of the scientific research in the 
Philippines 67 years ago. It is followed by a discussion on the status of higher edu-
cation research and on the current policies initiated by the CHED as well as the 
research trends and prospects in order to develop the culture of research and the 
quality of research output in Philippine higher education.
Higher Education Research: A Glimpse of the Past
What is the status of research in Philippine higher education?
In his paper, The Present Status of Scientific Research in the Philippines, published 
in 1949, Dean L.B.  Uichanco of the College of Agriculture, University of the 
Philippines, describes scientific research in the Philippines in these words, “there is 
every reason to expect an assured growth and development of scientific work in the 
Philippines” (1949, p. 2). His optimistic statement about the future of scientific 
research in the Philippines was inspired by the support of the government and peo-
ple of the United States of America to the Philippines in terms of publications, valu-
able scientific equipment and supplies, sharing of expertise and knowledge transfer, 
and scholarship to study in American universities (Uichanco 1949, p. 2). Such sup-
port was important not only for the development of scientific research but more so 
for the economic and general well-being of the Philippine society and of the Filipino 
people ravaged by the World War II.
Uichanco had optimistic words about the future of scientific research in the 
Philippines but such changed when he described the realities of research during his 
time. He laments about the lack of consciousness about the vital importance of 
science in the life of the country and the great responsibility of scientists in that 
regard (Uichanco 1949, pp. 2–3). This lack of consciousness on the “vital impor-
tance” of scientific research in nation building was translated into government 
policy of “relatively meagre and uncertain support” to scientific institutions which 
resulted to small funding and salaries. The inadequacy of resources and support 
made it difficult to Filipino scientists to keep scientific research activities “attuned 
to the progress of the world” (Uichanco 1949, p. 3). Scientific research also became 
less attractive to “superior young men and women with adequate preparation and 
ability” (Uichanco 1949, p.  3). Such situation obstructed the development of 
research.
He describes such reality of scientific research as “unwholesome situation” – a 
situation that “will work to the great detriment” of the Philippine society (Uichanco 
C.B.S. Bustamante

289
1949, p. 3). Hence, there was a need to solve the situation for the reason that scien-
tific research is essential to the growth and development of a post-World War II 
Philippines. It is an instrument that could make the Philippines competitive in the 
modern world by having “strong scientific units and utilize to the fullest extent all 
available resources of science” (Uichanco 1949, p.  3). However, due to the 
“unwholesome situation” brought about by lack of support from the government, 
local scientific output was insufficient. The Philippine society borrowed research 
findings from foreign countries and adapted them for local use. It has made the 
Philippines parasitic to foreign research findings (Uichanco 1949, p. 3).
Research activities became personal for Filipino researchers. Researches were 
conducted due to the interest and initiative of the researcher as well as through pri-
vate funding (Uichanco 1949, p. 3). These research activities, however, were limited 
only to educational purposes such as writing master’s thesis and doctoral disserta-
tion. But most of these theses and dissertations and other researches were never 
been read and heard, because these were never published. The “job of writing in 
many cases is fully as hard as or harder than the actual conduct of research” 
(Uichanco 1949, p. 5).
That was the situation of research in Philippine higher education 67 years ago in 
the eyes of Uichanco. There was lack of funding that resulted to poor research activ-
ity in terms of quality and quantity. Beyond the issue of funding was a more serious 
problem of lack of consciousness about the importance of research to national 
building. That research should not be confined within the walls of academic institu-
tions and should not be seen only as an academic exercise and activity. Research 
provides new knowledge that could be used to solve the problems of the Philippine 
society and new knowledge that could be utilized for growth and development. 
Because of this lack of consciousness, another more serious problem has occurred – 
the parasitic attitude. It is an attitude of borrowing of foreign research findings to be 
applied locally.
The Present Status of Higher Education Research
After 67 years, research in Philippine higher education is still “at its infancy age” 
(see Licuanan 2014, p. 6). This is a challenging reality that led Philippine higher 
education to give emphasis on research. Research has become one of the three inte-
gral missions that define a higher education institution (Licuanan 2014, p. 6). The 
other two are instruction and community extension. The integration of research to 
instruction and community extension means that doing research in higher education 
is building the research capacities of the young Filipinos through classroom instruc-
tion and community extension (Licuanan 2014, p. 6). On the other hand, it also 
means that research produces knowledge that enhances the quality of classroom 
instruction and knowledge that can improve the well-being of stakeholders outside 
the campus and of the larger Philippine society (Licuanan 2014, p. 6).
16  Higher Education Research in the Philippines: Policies and Prospects

290
Higher education is defined as “prime units for knowledge advancement and 
generation, production and transmission” (Juanillo 2014, p. 23). It must contribute 
to the advancement, generation, and reuse of knowledge and to the translation of 
accurate and tested knowledge (Juanillo 2014, p. 23). Hence, higher education is the 
“cradle of Philippine research” (Licuanan 2014, p. 7). As such, it must “step up to 
the challenge of building the capacity of the young to seek and solve problems, 
think critically and analytically, conduct independent research and innovate, and 
mold the future of Philippine research” (Licuanan 2014, p. 7).
With the goal of increasing the quantity and upgrading the quality of research, 
the Philippine government through the CHED increased the budget on research. In 
2012, it reached 840 million and 278 million for the years 2013 and 2014, that is, 
for a total of 1.1 billion in less than 5 years (Licuanan 2014, p. 6). Such amount was 
three times the total spend by the government on research during the entire 10 years 
(Licuanan 2014, p. 6). Despite of the increase in research funding, it remains as a 
continuing challenge. The Philippines has the lowest research and development 
expenditure in 2014 (0.1%) compared to its ASEAN neighbors (see the Human 
Development Report 2014, cited in Commission on Higher Education 2014b).
The additional budget for research was intended to improve the capacity of 
higher educational institutions to do research and to increase their research output. 
The Philippines has the lowest research output (see Thompson Reuters, cited in 
Pascual 2013) and impact (Juanillo 2014, p. 32) compared to its ASEAN neighbors. 
That is why the number of publication as well as its impact are some of the chal-
lenges that Philippine higher education needs to overcome.
To promote research and to develop the culture and environment of research in 
higher education, the CHED published the Education Research Journal (see Garcia 
2001). So far, the journal has two issues. The first one was in 2001 and the latest was 
in 2006. These two issues published the researches funded by the CHED. These 
journals are not only years apart. There themes are also extremely different. The 
articles published in the 2001 issue are on education. Articles discuss about support 
structures for education program, teaching expertise in higher education, university-­
industry linkage, supply and demands for graduates, and practices of centers of 
excellence. The 2006 issue published articles on marine protected areas in the 
Visayas Islands, Philippines. These articles discuss about the “biophysical assess-
ment and monitoring and social profiling of local communities and stakeholders 
who are dependent on coastal and marine resources and are responsible for the 
protection and management of these resources in the Visayas” (see Alcala 2006).
It is very clear that in the span of 5 years, there is a change in research themes, 
from education to marine science (i.e., marine protected areas). The change in the 
themes is due to the shift in the research thrust in higher education, that is, to high-
light research as an integral component of national development. That is why the 
CHED would like to give emphasis on agriculture, natural resources, industry, envi-
ronment, and social issues. This shift is also geared toward addressing the problems 
of poverty, food security, and the impact of climate change. The CHED defines now 
a good research in higher education as that contributes not only to existing knowl-
edge and classroom instruction but also to the developmental needs of the society.
C.B.S. Bustamante

291
The shift in the thrust of research as integral component of national development 
led to the organization of the 2014 National Research Conference organized by the 
Commission on Higher Education – Higher Education Regional Research Center 
(CHED-HERRC). The topics presented are on food security and fisheries, economic 
and livelihood, agriculture, energy, health, biodiversity, environment, education, 
social sciences, and sociocultural. The CHED is also working closely with state 
universities and colleges (SUCs) in “generating research and developing new tech-
nologies in agriculture and fisheries that address food security issues in the face of 
climate change” (Office of Planning Research and Knowledge Management 2014). 
It “has supported several SUCs in conducting inter-university collaborative research, 
development and extension program/s projects on climate change resiliency that 
directly impact on the country’s food security, protect the livelihood of farmers and 
fishermen, alleviate poverty among the country’s poorest sectors, and foster inclu-
sive growth” (Office of Planning Research and Knowledge Management 2014).
Policy Reforms and Research Direction
The shift in the research thrust is extensively articulated in the National Higher 
Education Research Agenda 2 (NHERA 2) 2009–2018. It defines higher education 
institution as a “major agent of economic growth” (see Angeles 2009). It is a 
“Research and Development laboratory and a mechanism through which the nation 
builds its human capital to enable it to actively participate in the global economy” 
(Angeles 2009). Hence, higher education is expected to produce quality research 
that will “advance learning and national development, as well as international com-
parability of the Philippine higher education system” (Angeles 2009).
It is stated in the NHERA 2 document that the main function of higher education 
is research (Angeles 2009, p. 1). Higher education is “expected to lead in the con-
duct of discipline-based, policy-oriented, technology-directed and innovative/cre-
ative researches that are locally responsive and globally competitive” (Angeles 
2009, p. 1). To be globally competitive, the research capability of higher education 
needs to be improved by providing funds to support graduate scholarships and fel-
lowships. It is also equally important to enhance research productivity by providing 
funds, by recognizing outstanding researchers and outstanding research programs 
and outputs, and by adopting a system of accreditation of research journals (Angeles 
2009, pp. 2–4). To be locally responsive, it identifies the priority areas for research 
grants. These are biodiversity and environmental management; human resource 
development; agriculture and agri-based micro-, small-, and medium-scale enter-
prises; tourism; and ICT-related concerns (Angeles 2009, p. 4). It also prioritizes 
research that “aimed at developing innovative programs in cutting edge higher edu-
cation fields” such as nanotechnology, biotechnology, information and communica-
tions technology, and material science (Angeles 2009, p. 4). Based on these priority 
areas, the following are identified as priority discipline clusters in research: science 
and mathematics, education, health, information and communication technology, 
16  Higher Education Research in the Philippines: Policies and Prospects

292
engineering, maritime, architecture, agriculture, environmental science, humanities, 
and social sciences (Angeles 2009, p. 8). It clearly shows that the direction of higher 
education research is to conduct research that will boost the Philippine economy 
and address the perennial problem of poverty. The focus of research is on disci-
plines that can contribute to the country’s growth and development such as the sci-
ences, information technology, agriculture, and environment.
In line with NHERA 2’s agendum of making higher education research competi-
tive and credible, the CHED prescribed a mechanism through which a national stan-
dard for peer review and journal refereeing system can be implemented uniformly 
for all printed and online journals of researches published by Philippine colleges 
and universities (Commission on Higher Education 2009a, b, 2012). This mecha-
nism is known as the Journal Accreditation Service (JAS) where colleges and uni-
versities submit their respective journals for accreditation. Journals that passed the 
evaluation process are given corresponding CHED Journal Codes (CJC) to signify 
compliance with the nationally accepted standards and practices of refereeing and 
peer review.
Thirty-four research journals from colleges and universities were accredited by 
the CHED in 2010. These research journals published articles in the field of medical 
science, natural science, life science, veterinary medicine, agriculture, fisheries and 
rice research, breeding and genetics, education, political science, social science, 
history, humanities, business management, public administration and economics, 
and ecosystem (Commission on Higher Education 2010a). It was followed by 
accreditation of 11 research journals in 2014 that published articles in the humani-
ties as well as in science, technology, and engineering (Commission on Higher 
Education 2014a).
The CHED identified research priority areas in the social sciences (Commission 
on Higher Education 2010c) as well as in the natural sciences (Commission on 
Higher Education 2010b). This is to provide direction in research that has economic 
and social impact. In the social sciences, the priority areas are the following:
•	 Drivers, processes, and consequence of community transitions, labor migration, 
and changing family structure
•	 Evolution of social institutions in response to changes in family and community 
structures
•	 Alignment of human capital development goals in school, in communities, and 
in Philippine society
•	 Social processes and factors that shape educational policies and process at the 
national, community, school, and individual levels
•	 Efficacy of educational processes in the development of quality human capital
•	 Social processes and dimensions of educational reforms and institutions
•	 Social antecedents of disaster and social determinants of vulnerability to disas-
ter, social response to disaster mitigation and adaptation, and social processes in 
relief and developmental responses to disaster
•	 Short-term and long-term consequences on well-being of individual and com-
munities in disaster-stricken and vulnerable areas
C.B.S. Bustamante

293
•	 Description and analysis of changes in social institutions; social dimensions of 
adoption and utilization of ICT in individuals, organizations, and communities; 
and social analysis of virtual communities and interactions
On the other hand, the priority areas in natural sciences are:
•	 Physical oceanography, marine coastal geology
•	 Engineering geology, volcanology, hydrology, seismology
•	 Vulnerability of biodiversity, persistent organic pollutants, heavy metals, 
mariculture-­derived pollution
•	 Instrumentation, materials science
•	 Systems biology, genetics, biodiversity, and three-domain scheme
•	 Intelligent systems, molecular simulation/modeling, natural products, materials 
research, greener technologies for minerals, coal, geothermal, petroleum
•	 Bioassays, diagnostics, drug/cure discovery, biosensors
•	 Biochemistry, biotechnology, molecular biology
In its revised policy for the grants-in-aid funds for research and development, the 
CHED identifies critical and urgent challenges in higher education research 
(Commission on Higher Education 2015). These challenges are improving research 
capability; increasing research productivity; upgrading quality and impact; stepping 
up linkages with community, business, and industry; using products of research as 
inputs to policy initiatives and reforms; and building up a steady pipeline of young 
talented researchers (Commission on Higher Education 2015). In order to address 
these challenges, the CHED explains the deeper purpose of higher education and 
that is “to contribute to the development of a strong research culture and innovative 
ecosystem that enables researchers and scientists in colleges and universities to 
explore new frontiers that may lead to a new technological innovations and better 
ways to solve economic and social issues in partnership with a wide range of stake-
holders” (Commission on Higher Education 2015). It also identifies priority areas 
that will be given grants-in-aid funds. These are food production and security, envi-
ronment, disaster prevention, climate change and energy, biodiversity and conserva-
tion, smart analytics and engineering innovation, health systems, and education 
(Commission on Higher Education 2015). Researches on these areas must be guided 
by the principles of collaboration, multidisciplinary, gender sensitivity and gender 
balance, and training ground for young researchers (Commission on Higher 
Education 2015).
These policy changes provide direction for higher education research. As an aca-
demic undertaking, higher education must be able to produce research outputs that 
will make Philippine colleges and universities globally competitive. These are the 
types of research that do not only contribute to the development of a particular dis-
cipline or discover new knowledge but also engage scholars in the different parts of 
the world in a meaningful discourse. These changes also set the tone of research 
which is to address local and global problems such as poverty, food security, and 
climate change.
16  Higher Education Research in the Philippines: Policies and Prospects

294
Conclusion
Based on the current policies discussed, the Philippine government has seen the 
importance of research in improving the quality of higher education institutions and 
international standing of Philippine higher education. Furthermore, the government 
has realized the significance of research in addressing the problems and issues of the 
society. These paved the way for the formulation of policies that will improve the 
conduct of research in higher education and the identification of priority areas in 
research. The prioritization of research in the areas of agriculture, fisheries, technol-
ogy and engineering, health, environment, ecology, economy, and livelihood does 
not only address the challenge of improving the quantity and quality of scientific 
research in the country but will also address the pressing social problems brought 
about by poverty, unemployment, and climate change.
The prospects of higher education research in the country will take time to be 
realized. It needs to be strengthened by sustaining the support provided by the gov-
ernment to higher education institutions in terms of developing young researchers 
as well as providing resources needed in the conduct of quality research. Higher 
education institutions cannot do it alone. They need to be given proper support by 
the government. At the end of the day, the success of higher education research 
depends on the political will of the government to allocate funding as well as to 
provide the appropriate environment for the development of research in higher edu-
cation. It is high time for the Philippine government to recognize the reality that 
world-class universities in Asia achieved their level of international status because 
of the support provided by their own government.
References
Alcala, A. C. (2006). Introduction. Higher education research papers. Pasig City: Commission on 
Higher Education.
Altbach, P.  G. (2004, January–February). The cost and benefits of world-class universities. 
Academe Online.
Altbach, P. G., & Salmi, J. (Eds.). (2011). The road to academic excellence: The making of world-­
class research universities. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Angeles, E.  Y. (2009). Foreword. National higher education research agenda (NHERA)  – 2, 
2009–2018.
Blake, N., Smith, R., & Standish, P. (1998). The universities we need: Higher education after dear-
ing. London: Kogan Page.
Commission on Higher Education. (2009a). Guidelines for CHED accreditation of research jour-
nals and providing incentive therefor. Commission on Higher Education Memorandum Orders 
No. 13 Series of 2009.
Commission on Higher Education. (2009b). Implementing rules and regulations(IRR) for CMO. 
Commission on Higher Education Memorandum Orders No. 42 Series of 2009.
Commission on Higher Education. (2010a). CHED accredited research journals. Commission on 
Higher Education Memorandum Orders No. 9 Series of 2010.
C.B.S. Bustamante

295
Commission on Higher Education. (2010b). CHED priority areas in the natural sciences. 
Commission on Higher Education Memorandum Orders No. 42 Series of 2010.
Commission on Higher Education. (2010c). CHED priority areas in the social sciences. Commission 
on Higher Education Memorandum Orders No. 41 Series of 2010.
Commission on Higher Education. (2012). Revised guidelines for CHED accreditation of research 
journals and providing incentives therefor. Commission on Higher Education Memorandum 
Orders No. 05 Series of 2012.
Commission on Higher Education. (2014a). CHED accredited research journals. Commission on 
Higher Education Memorandum Orders No. 23 Series of 2014.
Commission on Higher Education. (2014b). Statistical bulletin on ASEAN higher education. 
Retrieved from ched.gov.ph
Commission on Higher Education. (2015). Policy reforms for the grants-in-aid funds of the 
Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for research and development, and extension. 
Commission on Higher Education Memorandum Orders No. 03 Series of 2015.
Garcia, E. A. (2001). Foreword. Higher education research papers (Vol. 1). Pasig City, Philippines: 
Commission on Higher Education.
Juanillo, N. K., Jr. (2014). Reexamining research directions in the Philippine higher education. 
Talk presented at the CHED-HERRC National Research Conference: Higher Education 
Institutions’ R&D for National Development, Davao City.
Licuanan, P. B. (2014). Message to conference participants. Message presented at the CHED-­
HERRC National Research Conference: Higher Education Institutions’ R&D for National 
Development, Davao City.
Office of Planning Research and Knowledge Management. (2014). Higher ed alerts: Snapshots of 
higher education in the Philippines.
Pascual, A.  E. (2013). Talk presented at the Conference on education competitiveness in an 
ASEAN integrated era, Manila, Philippines.
Salmi, J. (2009). The challenge of establishing world-class universities. Washington, DC: The 
World Bank.
The World Bank. (2012). Putting higher education to work: Skills and research for growth in East 
Asia (World Bank East Asia and Pacific Regional Report). Washington, DC: The World Bank
Uichanco, L. B. (1949). The present status of scientific research in the Philippines. Paper presented 
at the United States Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Paris.
Christian Bryan S. Bustamante  is a full professor in the Department of Social Sciences and the 
Humanities, College of Arts and Sciences, San Beda College. At present, he is the dean of the 
College of Arts and Sciences. He earned his doctoral and master’s degrees in Philosophy from the 
University of Santo Tomas, Manila, Philippines, and his degree in Master of Public Administration 
major in Public Policy and Program Administration from the University of the Philippines, 
Diliman, Quezon City. He took up A.B. in Philosophy and Human Resource Development in San 
Beda College, Manila. He published articles both in national and international journals and pre-
sented papers in national and international conferences in the areas of philosophy and education.
16  Higher Education Research in the Philippines: Policies and Prospects

Part IV
South/West Asia

299
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in  
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_17
Chapter 17
Education Research and Emergence of Higher 
Education as a Field of Study in India
N.V. Varghese
Abstract  The expansion and massification of the higher education made the sector 
a large and complex organization requiring professional expertise and specialized 
knowledge for managing it. This resulted in many countries in the emergence of 
higher education as a separate field of study producing new knowledge and develop-
ing academic study programmes leading to award of degrees in higher education. 
Although India has the second largest higher education system in the world, research 
and study programmes on higher education are not very common. The education 
departments of universities in India offer a large number of study programmes in 
education which are essentially oriented to prepare students to teach at post-primary 
levels of education. The university departments rarely address issues related to 
higher education in their teaching and research programmes. Research on higher 
education is carried out mostly by social science departments in the universities and 
research institutions. In the absence of study programmes and research on higher 
education, the paper argues that higher education has not yet emerged as a separate 
field of study in India.
Introduction
For centuries higher education remained a small and elite sector peripheral to eco-
nomic and social development of nations. From the mid-twentieth century onwards, 
public interest and public funding to the sector increased. While economic rational-
ity helped continued public support for higher education in the developed countries, 
the thrust on self-reliance defined the rationality to invest in higher education in the 
newly independent developing countries. By the 1980s, it was realized that invest-
ing in knowledge is economically rewarding and higher education emerged as a 
major institution playing a crucial role in promoting economic growth in the 
The views expressed in this paper are of the author, and they should not necessarily be attributed 
to the organization where he is employed.
N.V. Varghese (*) 
Centre for Policy Research in Higher Education (CPRHE/NUEPA), New Delhi, India
e-mail: nv.varghese@nuepa.org

300
knowledge economies. The higher education sector expanded and became massified 
systems in most countries.
The expansion and massification made the higher education sector a huge enter-
prise. Universities and academic systems became complex organizations requiring 
professional expertise and specialized knowledge for managing their administra-
tion, student services, research, finances and governance. Although higher educa-
tion was traditionally a well-developed field of study in some of the countries, 
notably in the USA, the massification of the sector necessitated higher education to 
emerged as a separate field of study in many other countries. However, teaching and 
research on higher education remained limited in volume in some of the large higher 
education systems such as India.
India has the second largest higher education system in the world. This paper 
shows that despite its large size and continued expansion, higher education has not 
yet emerged as a separate field of study in India. It further argues that given limited 
volume of research and study programmes, emergence of the sector as a field of 
study may remain a distant dream in India. The share of research on higher educa-
tion in total research output and relative absence of study programmes leading to a 
degree in higher education in India are reflections of constraints to evolve higher 
education as a separate field of study in India. Indian universities offer a large num-
ber of study programmes in education which are essentially oriented to prepare 
students to teach at post-primary levels of education.
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section discusses the emergence of 
higher education as a field of study in other countries. Section 3 deals with higher 
education as a field of study in India followed by discussions on programmes of 
studies in higher education institutions in section 4 and a discussion on institutional 
framework and research in education in India in section 5. Section 6 discusses some 
trends in research in education and higher education by highlighting some features 
of research carried out by education departments and by social scientists. The final 
section draws some conclusions.
The Origins of Higher Education as a Field of Study
Universities in the early twentieth century were small entities peripheral to social 
life with very little impact on economic growth and social development. They had 
simple organizational structures, small budgets and served mostly the elite sections 
of society. Over the decades, especially after the World War II period, the higher 
education system expanded in developed as well as in developing countries. In the 
recent decades, the emergence of knowledge economy gave a premium for knowl-
edge in production, and hence knowledge production and institutions producing 
knowledge became dear to public policy and for corporate investments.
Given the role of universities in knowledge production, research by higher edu-
cation institutions and demand for higher education graduates increased fuelling 
worldwide expansion of higher education. At present most countries in the world 
N.V. Varghese

301
have a massified system of higher education. In fact, the developed countries have 
universalized higher education, middle income countries are in a stage of massifica-
tion of the system and it is a fast-growing segment in the less-developed countries. 
In other words, over a period of time, higher education sector has become a massive 
enterprise consisting of thousands of institutions, enrolling millions of students, 
employing millions of people and investing billions of dollars.
The higher education sector has become complex organizations engaged in pro-
ducing knowledge, training minds and remaining relevant as public good institu-
tions (Altbach 2014). The massification of higher education and heavy public 
investment in the sector necessitated more evidence-based decision-making in 
higher education. In the context of massification, higher education systems have 
become more complex and higher education policy more difficult. This necessitated 
the study of higher education as a separate field or domain of specialization. Higher 
education emerged as a field of study even in those countries where the size of the 
sector was relatively small.
What are the distinguishing features of any area to claim as a separate field of 
study? Any field of study should have the capacity to produce knowledge in the area 
and develop academic programmes leading to award of degrees. It is expected that 
the research studies produce new knowledge to justify the domain to remain as a 
separate field and study programmes provide the basis for providing academic lead-
ership for the domain.
According to Dressel and Mayhew (1974), the criteria for any specific academic 
discipline are: (a) a general body of knowledge, which has logical taxonomy and 
sequentially ordered knowledge areas; (b) a clearly defined and stable outer limits 
that help define the scholarship of the discipline; and (c) a commonly understood 
methodology of inquiry, a specialized vocabulary, a generally accepted basic litera-
ture and a body of theory and knowledge.
It is doubted whether or not higher education has a set characteristics to meet 
these criteria. The authors (Dressel and Mayhew 1974) argued that higher education 
does not possess sequentially ordered knowledge areas, but it provides, instead, 
knowledge of the opinions of writers. Similarly, higher education as an emerging 
field does not have a clear boundary defining issues to be studied which makes it 
difficult to define the focus of the curriculum and knowledge structure in higher 
education. From this perspective it is difficult to categorize higher education as a 
separate field of study. Therefore, it is not surprising to find academics who believe 
that higher education is not a separate field of study like many other fields of stud-
ies. ‘Clearly, higher education is not a scholarly or scientific discipline; it has no 
central and accepted methodology nor does it have a set of concerns for research 
study. Rather, it is a field that uses the disciplinary insights of other fields, mainly in 
social sciences, to inform research themes that often require inter-disciplinary 
insights’ (Altbach 2014 pp. 1319).
Despite these inherent limitations, higher education as a field of study has a long 
tradition of over a century in the USA when the first graduate course on higher edu-
cation was offered by the Clark University in 1893. However, it flourished as a field 
of study in the USA in the 1950s and 1960s (Fairweather 2000), and it emerged as 
17  Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education as a Field of Study in India

302
a field of study in many other countries in the post-World War II period. In fact, 
higher education emerged as a field of study in Europe in the 1980s (Kehm 2015). 
Even today, one may find a larger number of professors and study programmes 
(Master’s level) on higher education in the USA than in Europe. Further, unlike in 
the USA, the institutional basis of higher education research is fragmented in 
Europe (Kehm and Musselin 2013).
In Canada, the origins of higher education as a field of study emerged in the 
1960s with the appointment of several professors of higher education at the 
University of Toronto (Jones 2012). By the early 1970s, the field of higher educa-
tion and research had acquired all the characteristics associated with an academic 
discipline with broadly defined territorial boundaries. There were academic appoint-
ments, graduate study programmes, research institutions, associations and academic 
journals in the area of higher education. Higher education in the 1970s became 
more than an area of research, and it had assumed the attributes of a recognized 
interdisciplinary field of scholarship.
Several universities in many countries started offering courses in higher educa-
tion (Altbach 2014), and the number has been increasing in the recent decades. A 
recent survey shows that as of 2014, there exists around 274 study programmes in 
higher education spread over 28 countries (Rumbley et al. 2014). The inventory of 
higher education (Rumbley et al. 2014) identified 217 centres/institutes located in 
48 countries focussing on research in higher education. Of this the USA accounts 
for 50 institutes, China 45, the UK 18 and Japan 11. In other words, more than half 
(52%) of the higher education research institutions and centres are located in the 
three countries of the USA, China and the UK. In terms of academic programmes 
offered, the USA has a predominant presence. There exist a total of 277 academic 
programmes on higher education in 29 countries, and 70% of these academic pro-
grammes are in the USA.
Scott (2000) notes that the European model of higher education and research has 
a strong policy focus and the American model has a much stronger focus on prac-
tice – improving institutions and academic practices – leading to large-scale aca-
demic programmes at the Master’s and postgraduate levels. Research on higher 
education in Europe are carried out by different groups of experts with varying 
levels of expertise in theory, methodology, field of knowledge and application. 
Some groups do not identify themselves as higher education researchers but as 
economists, sociologists, political scientists, etc. Their aim is to develop reputation 
within their parent discipline and devote limited time to higher education. They are 
more concerned with conceptual and theoretical developments and less concerned 
about the practical relevance of their work. The second group of people are those 
whose exclusive area of research is higher education. However, they need not neces-
sarily be based in higher education departments. The third group are based in higher 
education research institutions and departments.
Most of the centres of higher education focus on their research on comparative 
or international studies (42.9%), administration and management (41.9%), econom-
ics and financing (33.6%), globalization or internationalization (31.8%) and quality 
assurance, accreditation and assessment (25.8) (Rumbley et al. 2014). Teaching and 
N.V. Varghese

303
learning is also a growing area which is accounted by 20.7% of the centres and 
institutions. Many of the institutions provide technical support for teaching in the 
institutions affiliated to them. However, a smaller number of institutions are also 
engaged in research in teaching and learning with the objective of expanding the 
scholarship of teaching and learning.
The focus of programmes of study in the USA is heavily loaded in favour of 
administration and management (99.5% of the programmes) and student identity, 
diversity and multiculturalism (67.7% of the programmes). While the former is 
common among study programmes in other countries, the focus on student affairs is 
relatively weak in other countries. It seems there are 280 journals and publications 
in higher education in 35 languages. Of this 190 are in English followed by 27 in 
Chinese, 26 in Japanese and 15 in Spanish. Nearly 101 journals are published from 
the USA followed by the UK (34) and 27 each in China and Japan.
Overall, the USA, China, the UK and Japan dominate the scene in terms of host-
ing higher education research centres, offering study programmes and bringing out 
higher education journals and publications. In other words, higher education and 
research remain a domain dominated by the developed countries with limited con-
tribution from developing countries. The unfortunate part is also that higher educa-
tion as a field of study is relatively underdeveloped in developing countries with 
large systems of higher education (Rumbley et al. 2014).
Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education 
as a Field of Study in India
With more than 750 universities, nearly 40,000 colleges, 1.6 million teachers and 34 
million students, India has the second largest higher education system in the world. 
With a gross enrolment ratio of only 23. 6%, it is still at an early stage of massifica-
tion (MHRD 2015), and its potential to grow further is higher than that in many 
other countries. While state funding and expansion through public institutions char-
acterized the strategy of development of higher education in the previous century, 
private institutions and household funding characterize the fast growth and expan-
sion of the sector in the present century (Varghese 2015). The fast expansion of 
higher education accompanied by different forms of diversities and persisting 
inequalities poses challenges to govern the system. In fact, these complexities war-
rant in-depth analysis and deeper understanding of the sector to govern it 
effectively.
India emphasized on the development of higher education and research. The first 
major committee appointed by the newly independent country in 1948 was on 
higher education. The Indian higher education sector at that point of time was very 
small catering to the elites only. The Committees and Commissions on higher edu-
cation in India implicitly wanted to maintain the elite character of higher education. 
Very often than not, their focus was more on quality of research and teaching than 
on expanding access (Mathew 2016). More importantly, the Committees and 
17  Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education as a Field of Study in India

304
Commissions repeatedly expressed their fear of deterioration of quality if the sys-
tem is expanded. In other words, the Committees preferred a high-quality higher 
education sector with limited access to a poor-quality system with expanded access 
to promote equity.
The Commissions were focussing more on research and teaching in higher edu-
cation institutions rather than teaching and research on higher education. They 
made a clear division of labour between research and teaching. The Committees 
considered that a major share of the postgraduate studies (Master’s onwards) and 
research should be carried out in the university departments and research centres 
and that the colleges need to focus more on teaching than research. In fact, the 
Education Commission of 1964–1966 recommended that nearly 80% of the post-
graduate study programmes and research should be the responsibility of university 
departments rather than the colleges (NCERT 1971).
The Committees argued that teaching and research needs autonomy and freedom 
from regimentation of ideas. Higher education is not organized under one regula-
tory body or under one examination board and did not favour any text books, uni-
form syllabus and any one set of text books for all students following similar study 
programmes in different universities. Further, the Committees and Commissions 
found dependence on textbooks in higher education as disturbing since the text-
books prevents the students from developing their own judgements (Mathew 2016). 
The Committees and Commissions were not in favour of an engagement on what to 
teach, how to teach and evaluate what has been taught in higher education the way 
they were measured and evaluated in school education. They talked about the ‘crip-
pling effect’ of external examinations in higher education and argued in favour of 
replacing them with internal and continuous assessment (NCERT 1971).
All these recommendations taken together meant that teaching and learning in 
higher education should be an autonomous process, and therefore, the pedagogy 
and evaluation procedures need to depend upon the teacher. Under such circum-
stances, it was very difficult to develop a common framework for teaching, research 
into teaching-learning processes and evaluation systems which are common in a 
typical school system. In my view this understanding of higher education was not 
very conducive to develop studies on higher education focusing on pedagogical 
aspects and classroom practices.
Higher education as a field of study has yet to emerge in India, although there are 
research studies on higher education. An attempt is made in the following para-
graphs to analyse development or nondevelopment of higher education as a field of 
study in India based on two criteria, namely, study programmes and research on 
higher education.
Study Programmes in Education
The first instance of starting a study programme in education followed the recom-
mendation of the Calcutta University Commission of 1917–1919 for establishing a 
department of education in the University of Calcutta. Later, Bombay University 
N.V. Varghese

305
started a postgraduate course titled as M. Ed (Masters in Education) for a duration 
of 1 year. The first doctoral degree in education was awarded by Bombay University 
in 1943 for a thesis titled ‘Factor Analysis of Arithmetic Ability’ (Rani et al. 2012). 
These were beginnings of emergence of education as a field of study.
Over a period of time, there were proliferation of universities offering courses 
and study programmes leading to degrees in education. At present more than 150 
universities and nearly 1100 colleges in India offer study programmes in education 
(Table 17.1). Nearly 73% of the study programmes are M. Ed which are mostly of 
1-year duration, while 25% are Master’s degree programmes (Master of Arts in 
Education) which are of 2-year duration. The education study programmes enrol 
nearly 1.29 million students accounting for 5.4% of the total enrolment in higher 
education (UGC 2014). In 2013 the universities in India awarded a total of 1570 
research degrees in education.
It can be seen that the study programmes in education proliferated over a period 
of time. The study programmes were essentially for preparation of teachers for the 
school sector and for education departments in the colleges and universities. The 
study programmes leading to undergraduate or graduate degrees in higher education 
are almost absent in India.
Educational Research in India
The educational research takes place in India through universities, specialized 
research institutions, private bodies and governmental and non-governmental orga-
nizations. A good share of educational research, especially higher education 
research, takes place through social science research (SSR) institutions. India is 
strong in terms of institutional framework for SSR and education sector is a benefi-
ciary of SSR efforts in India.
India has a stronger research tradition in education and social sciences than other 
countries in South Asia. While other countries in the region were not only late to 
enter the field of research but also that they relied on external funding or NGO sup-
port for social science and education research, India, on the other hand, relied 
mainly on public institutions and government funding for SSR and education 
research. No wonder, nearly 75–80% of social science research institutions in South 
Asia are located in India (Krishna and Krishna 2010).
Table 17.1  Degree and above level programmes in education in 2015
Degrees
Number of colleges offering
Per cent
MA (Education)
277
25.3
MBA (Education)
11
1.0
M. Ed
773
70.6
M. Ed (Special Education)
24
2.2
M. Sc (Extension Education)
10
0.9
Total
1095
100.0
Source: compiled from the courses from institutions MHRD 2015
17  Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education as a Field of Study in India

306
In the beginnings of the planned development, the Planning Commission of India 
set up a Research Programmes Committee in 1953 to carry out research in social 
sciences to promote national development. This Committee eventually established 
the Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) in 1969 to promote research 
in social sciences. The ICSSR established 27 public-funded regional institutes to 
carry out research in social sciences including education. This laid a strong founda-
tion for social science research including higher education research in India.
From the decade of 1990s, the role of NGOs, private trusts and foreign bodies in 
funding social science and educational research increased in India. The external 
funding favoured studies on poverty, employment, education and health. This period 
also experienced a proliferation of research projects in education. The externally 
funded education programmes such as the district primary education programme 
(DPEP) provided sufficient funding and government support for policy-relevant 
education research in India (Varghese 1996). A good share of these research proj-
ects were carried out by social science research institutions in India.
Institutional Arrangements for Education Research in India
India also developed institutional arrangements for research in education ever since 
educational research in India began in the 1940s. The universities and research insti-
tutions played an important role in promoting research in education in India. As 
noted earlier, an education department was opened in the University of Calcutta in 
the early decades of the twentieth century. Bombay University started courses in 
education in the 1930s and awarded the first research degree in education in 1943. 
Over a period of time, several universities started offering study programmes in 
education. At present 150 universities are offering nearly 1100 study programmes in 
education (Table 17.1) in India.
The research institutions play an important role in facilitating educational 
research. The establishment of Central Institute of Education (CIE) in 1947 was one 
of the first efforts to provide an institutional basis for education research in India. In 
the 1950s another six institutions were established to promote educational research 
and programmes. These include Central Bureau of Textbook Research, Central 
Bureau of Educational and Vocational Guidance, National Fundamental Education 
Centre, National Institute of Basic Education and National Institute of Audio-Visual 
Education.
In 1961 the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
was established as an autonomous premier research institution in education. The 
NCERT gradually established State Councils of Educational Research and Training 
(SCERT) and State Institutes of Education (SIE). Several other national institutions 
such as National Institute of Education, Pune, and Centre of Advanced Studies in 
Education (CASE), Baroda, were created to promote educational research. Most of 
these institutions were actively engaged in research and training activities in 
N.V. Varghese

307
education, and the focus was mainly on issues related to school education. Higher 
education has only a peripheral reference in their research and training activities.
Another development which helped research on higher education was special 
research programmes and funding support extended by different ministries and their 
agencies. The National Policy on Education 1986 and the Programme of Action 
recommended for providing special assistance schemes to departments for promot-
ing research. The education departments in some of the universities were provided 
special assistance under three different categories, namely, Department Research 
Support, Department of Special Assistance and Centre of Advanced Studies. Further, 
the University Grants Commission sets up interdisciplinary research centres for 
Sociology of Education and Economics of Education in Bombay University. The 
institutional expansion was further supported by ICSSR when it sponsored research 
programmes at the Institute of Social and Economic Change, Bangalore; Madras 
Institute of Developmental Studies; the Centre of Social Studies, Surat; Sardar Patel 
Institute of Economic and Social Research, Ahmedabad; and AN Sinha Institute of 
Social Studies, Patna. These interventions helped in expanding research base in 
education and in higher education in India.
A major share of the research in the education departments of universities 
focussed on pedagogical dimensions and that too at the school level. It can be argued 
that education departments of the universities devoted a major share of time and 
effort on issues related to teacher development at the school level – mostly second-
ary level of education. The research carried out in these departments was also peda-
gogical and practice based in nature. These departments seldom focussed on 
research on issues related to higher education. The research in the research institu-
tions, very often, focussed on higher education. Needless to add, the emphasis was 
not on pedagogical issues but on higher education in its relation to social and eco-
nomic development.
Another dimension of educational research in India was the development of 
research capacities – academic competencies and research training. Since education 
researchers were limited in number and education was not an attractive area except 
for teacher training programmes, provisions for higher studies and research degrees 
in education were rather limited. From the 1950s several agencies, notably the 
British Council, provided scholarships and financial support to many Indian schol-
ars to pursue their studies in education in the universities of the UK. On their return, 
many of these scholars joined teaching profession, and they formed the leading 
groups in teaching and research in education in India. This gave a strong research 
basis too education departments and an intellectual basis for educational research 
in India.
The expansion of research facilities and the number of research activities carried 
out by institutions in India are impressive. At present more than 150 universities and 
several research institutions are engaged in educational research, and they together 
produced more than 80,000 theses and project reports (Rani et al. 2012). According 
to the UGC sources (UGC 2014), the universities in India awarded 757 research 
degrees (M. Phil) and 813 advanced research degrees – doctoral degrees (Ph. D) in 
2013. These do not imply that research on higher education was a major focus of the 
17  Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education as a Field of Study in India

308
studies and programmes of research in India. Needless to add research on higher 
education benefitted more from research undertaken in departments and institutions 
other than department of education in the universities.
Trends in Educational Research in India
Most of the research in education continues to be empirical in nature and quantita-
tive in orientation. The empirical character of education research seems to charac-
terize bulk of educational research in India (Mitra 1987). This trend continued even 
in the recent decades. The decade of 1990s saw a large number of studies in educa-
tion in India partly due to external aid flow especially to primary education under 
the district primary education programme (Varghese 1996). Most of the studies 
under these programmes were not only empirical in nature but also were making 
assessments of impacts of interventions to scale up the interventions in bringing 
children to schools or enhancing their levels of learning.
Ever since pedagogy became a full subject of study, teacher training and teaching-­
learning process continue to be the main trust of all research activities in education 
in India (Buch and Govinda 1987). This is also because it was strongly believed that 
educational research aims at obtaining experimental methods, knowledge and edu-
cational practices and processes which could be used for reconstructing educational 
programmes in our country (Buch and Yadav 1974).
An analysis of an educational research in India indicates that most of the research 
has primarily been of academic nature and rarely attempts have been carrying out 
studies having policy implications. Input for the formulation of educational policy 
in India has mainly come from the reports of the Commissions and Committees, 
Five-Year Plans, All India Educational Surveys, etc. (Khaparde 2002). This was 
primarily because a major share of education research was carried out in the educa-
tion departments of universities, and the preoccupation of these departments was on 
issues related to pedagogy, curriculum and teacher training.
The major shift one notices in education research is the increase in research con-
tributions by departments other than education. This increase in research output by 
other departments was reflected in terms of doctoral studies and dissertations, 
research projects, articles in journals and books and other research publications. 
The research orientation and focus of the departments other than education was dif-
ferent from that of the education departments. While educational departments of 
universities mostly focussed on issues related to teacher, curriculum, 
­teaching-­learning and use of technology in education, the social sciences depart-
ments engaged in education research focussed on interface of education with soci-
ety, economy and individuals. In fact, the social scientist from other departments 
relied on tools and methodology borrowed from their parent disciplines and expand-
ing knowledge base of their parent disciplines rather than enriching the domain of 
knowledge generation in education.
N.V. Varghese

309
Three domains of social sciences which made a difference in educational research 
in India are psychology, sociology and economics. The areas such as personality 
development, motivation, tests and measurements, guidance and counselling were 
mostly done by the psychologists in research institutions and psychology depart-
ments of the universities. The psychologists, very often, worked in close collabora-
tion with education departments since their focus on learning theories, personality 
theories, measurements, etc. was closer to the concerns of the education depart-
ments. Psychology has also helped education departments in their research efforts 
with tools for quantitative analysis and inspired education researchers for precision, 
hypothesis formulation and testing and statistical analysis.
Other two social science disciplines which exercised good influence on higher 
education research in India, namely, sociology of education and economics of edu-
cation, were dominant and more visible in project studies than in doctoral studies. 
This is partly because the project studies were less bound by disciplinary boundar-
ies, whereas doctoral theses were more bound by disciplinary orientation (Varghese 
1992). Broadening the concerns of education and research was a contribution made 
by social scientists to education research in India. Their interactions with education 
departments have been less frequent than the interactions psychologists had with 
education departments. In general terms, the sociologists have made contributions 
by broadening the base of educational research on issues related to equity, diversity 
and social change. Economics of education was more concerned with public expen-
diture, investments and rate of returns from investments in education.
The social scientists got into education research following an understanding that 
education is a potent instrument for effecting socio-economic change and develop-
ment. They do not see school as an isolated institution and see them in relation with 
other social institutions and in the social context. The issue of inequalities and the 
effect of education to promote or reduce inequalities was an area which attracted 
social scientists abroad and in India. The sociologists’ interest in education research 
increased with Coleman Report (Coleman et al. 1966) which analysed the educa-
tional provisions and concluded that the variations in student achievement can be 
better explained (or a major share of the explanation) by socio-economic variables 
than school variables.
This meant that learner achievement is influenced by factors outside the class-
rooms and schools and on socio-economic factors. This finding, in a sense, ques-
tioned the reliance entirely on pedagogical explanations for poor student 
performance. The findings implied that improving pedagogical practices alone will 
not help improve student learning. It has to do more with changing the student com-
position in schools. The follow-up study by Jenks et al. (1972) further reconfirmed 
the idea that schools’ success is also related to the socio-economic background of 
students.
The economists’ concern in education grew out of human capital revolution in 
economic thought postulated by Schultz (1961). The main concern for economists 
was to justify public spending on education. The Education Commission report in 
India linked education with national development. In the 1980s, it was realized that 
17  Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education as a Field of Study in India

310
lack of education acts as a constraint to achieve targets of other sectoral programmes. 
Investment in education is seen as a means to achieve targets of other sectors. 
Therefore, education is no longer the monopoly domain of the educationists and 
education departments alone.
In later years the education for all (EFA) programmes brought to light several 
social and economic issues related to education access. The focus of education 
research by social scientists shifted more to equity, student diversity, discrimination, 
governance and management and innovative financing. Similarly, studies leading to 
right to education were done more by social scientists than educationists.
A recent global survey of inventory of research on higher education (Rumbley 
et al. 2014) while identifying 217 centres/institutes included three Indian institu-
tions from India. They are Centre for Higher Education in Tata Institute of Social 
Sciences, Mumbai; Centre for Policy Research Higher Education (CPRHE) in 
National University of Educational Planning and Administration (NUEPA), New 
Delhi; and Zakir Husain Centre for Educational Studies (ZHCES) in Jawaharlal 
Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi. Another institution devoted to education and 
higher education research is the National University of Educational Planning and 
Administration (NUEPA). The research priorities of these institutions confirm the 
belief that higher education research in India is carried out by researchers working 
in departments and discipline other than education.
To sum up, the trends and focus of educational research by education depart-
ments and by social science departments varied. Educational research by education 
departments in India focussed on what is happening in the classrooms. The external 
influences of what is happening in the classroom were not a major concern for edu-
cational research and not a focus of their investigations. The social scientists, on the 
other hand, tried to analyse educational processes from a larger political, social and 
economic context. There has been a substantial difference between the way educa-
tional issues were seen by researchers of education departments and social scientists 
interested in educational research in India. Their mutual interests were marginal and 
interactions were rare. Educational researchers did not step out of classrooms and 
social scientists did not step into the classrooms (Varghese 1992).
Education is one of the powerful instruments in legitimizing the status quo. The 
pedagogy dominated, and classroom-based research did not question the status 
quoist and legitimizing role of education. It can be argued that their focus on peda-
gogical issues indirectly supported the legitimizing role of education. The orienta-
tion of psychologists also supported the legitimizing role of education. However, 
economists and sociologists questioned the potent role of education in legitimizing 
the existing social inequalities. For the social scientists, the questions such as what 
is taught and why it is taught are equally important as how it is taught.
N.V. Varghese

311
Concluding Observations
The study programmes and research in education proliferated over a period of time 
in India. While universities offered study programmes in education, research in edu-
cation was undertaken by education departments, social science departments and 
social science research institutions. At present more than 150 universities offer 
nearly 1100 study programmes. In 2013, the universities in India awarded 813 doc-
toral degrees in education. This looks very impressive.
The focus of research in education departments of universities varied from those 
in the social science departments and research institutions. The research in educa-
tion departments of the universities focusses mostly on pedagogical issues, and their 
major concern has been to improve teaching-learning processes and classroom 
practices. Most of these research focuses on classroom and school level issues with 
limited volume of research on issues related to higher education.
The social science departments of universities became interested in educational 
research. They along with research institutions carry out a good share of research on 
higher education in India. The psychology, sociology and economics departments 
are engaged more in educational research than other social science departments. 
Their research concerns are more related to the social context of education and are 
broader in perspective than classroom-focussed research carried out by education 
departments and are more engaged in research on higher education.
With the expansion of research institutions, the research concerns moved from 
universities to research institutions and the research concerns not only moved to the 
social realm but also to the policy issues. At times a distinction is made between 
academic research and policy-relevant research in education. While universities are 
engaged in academic research, research institutions are engaged in research to pro-
vide policy support. At times policy support is interpreted by governments as sup-
porting the policies of the present day government.
The review of research shows that study programmes and research on higher 
education are limited in India. This is partly because of the approach to develop-
ment of education research and teaching in India and partly due to the response of 
the departments of education of the existing universities. Several committees and 
commissions emphasized on teachers and teaching profession with limited attention 
to pedagogical training to teach in higher education. The education departments in 
the universities rarely addressed issues related to higher education in their teaching 
and research. The almost singular focus of teaching and research in education 
departments is issues related to post-primary levels of school education. They rarely 
addressed issues related to teacher development, teaching-learning process and 
development of study programmes in higher education.
Education is a recognized field of study and research in India, while higher edu-
cation has not yet reached a level of prominence primarily due to the low priority 
accorded to study programmes and research on higher education in education 
departments of universities in India. Research on higher education is increasing, 
thanks to the contributions by social science departments in the universities and 
17  Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education as a Field of Study in India

312
social science research institutions. Although there is better awareness and increased 
emphasis on the need for research on higher education, courses or study programmes 
on higher education are almost absent in India. Therefore, it can be argued that 
higher education has not yet emerged as a separate field of study in India.
There are active proposals to establish strong foundations of teacher develop-
ment and pedagogical training in higher education. The efforts by the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development to establish national resource centre and higher edu-
cation academy under the new scheme of Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National 
Mission focusing on teacher support and orientation on pedagogical aspects and 
efforts to establish schools of education focusing on research in teaching-learning 
and pedagogical aspects of higher education are reflections of the felt need for more 
emphasis in research on teaching and learning in higher education. These are indi-
cations of possibilities of higher education evolving as a separate field of study in 
India in the future.
References
Altbach, P. G. (2014). The emergence of a field : Research and training in higher education. Studies 
in Higher Education, 39(8), 1306–1320.
Buch, M.B., & Govinda, R. (1987). Educational research in India: An overview. In M. B. Buch 
(Ed.) Third survey of research in education (pp.  1–31). New Delhi: National Council for 
Educational Research and Training.
Buch, M. B., & Yadav, M. S. (1974). Educational research in India. In M. B. Buch (Ed.), A survey 
of research in education (pp. 1–24). Centre of Advanced study in Education: Baroda.
Coleman, J. S, Campell, E Hobson, C; Mcpartland, J; Mood, A; Weinfall,f; and York, R 1966. 
Equality of educational opportunity, Washington, US government printing press.
Dressel, P. L., & Mayhew, L. B. (1974). Higher education as a field of study: The Emergence of a 
profession. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.
Fairweather, J. S. 2000. The origins and structures of research in on higher education in the united 
states. In J.  S. Schwarz, & U.  Teichler (Eds.), The institutional basis of higher education 
research: Experiences and perspectives (pp. 77–85). London: Kluwer.
Jenks, C., Smith, M., Aclad, H., Bane, M. J., Cohen, D., Gintis, H., Heyens, B., & Michelson, S. 
(1972). Inequality : Assessment of the effect of family and schooling in America. New York: 
Basic Books.
Jones, G.A 2012. Reflections on the evolution of higher education as a field of study in Canada. 
Higher Education Research & Development, vol. 31, no.5, pp.711–722.
Kehm, B.  M. (2015). Higher education as a field of study and research in Europe. European 
Journal of Education, 50(1), 60–74.
Kehm, B. M., & Musselin, C. (Eds.). (2013). The development of higher edcuaiton research in 
Europe : 25 years of CHER. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Khaparde, M. S. (2002). Educational research in India: Policy and practice. Educational Research 
for Policy and Practice, 1, 23–33.
Krishan, V.V. and Krishna, Usha 2010. ‘ Social sciences in South Asia’, In World Social Science 
Report : Knowledge Divides , Paris, UNESCO.
Mathew, A. (2016). Reforms in higher education in India: A Review of recommendations of 
commissions and committees on education, CPRHE research paper 2. New Delhi: CPRHE, 
NUEPA.
N.V. Varghese

313
MHRD: Ministry of Human Resource Development. (2015). All India survey of higher education. 
MHRD: New Delhi.
Mitra, S.  K. (1987). Priorities in educational research. In M.  B. Buch (Ed.), Third survey of 
research in education (pp. 1023–1028). New Delhi: National Council for Educational Research 
and Training.
NCERT: National Council for Educational Research and Training. (1971). Education and national 
development: Report of education Commission 1964–66. NCERT: New Delhi.
Rani, N., Pachauri, D., & Arya, G.  S. (2012). Evolution of educational research in India. 
International Journal of Educational Research and Technology, 3(1), 11–14.
Rumbley, L. E., Altbach, P. G., Stanfield, D., Shimmi, Y., & de Gayardon, A. (2014). Higher edu-
cation: A world wide inventory of Centres and programmes. Bonn: Lemmens media.
Schultz, T. W. (1961). Investment in human capital. American Economic Review, 51(1), 1–17.
Scott, P. (2000). Higher education research in the light of dialogue between policy makers and 
practitioners. In U. Teichler & J. Sadlak (Eds.), Higher education research and : Its relation-
ship to policy and practice. Oxford: IAU/Elsevier.
UGC: University Grants Commission. (2014). 60th annual report 2013–14. UGC: New Delhi.
Varghese, N.  V. (1992). Interdisciplinarity and educational research in India. Perspectives in 
Education, 8(2), 65–78.
Varghese, N. V. (1996). Decentralization of educational planning in India: The case of the dis-
trict primary education Programme. International Journal of Educational Development, 16(4), 
355–365.
Varghese, N. V. (2015). Challenges of massification of higher education in India (CPRHE research 
papers 1). New Delhi: CPRHE/NUEPA 2015.
N.V. Varghese is currently the Director of the Centre for Policy Research in Higher Education 
(CPRHE), New Delhi. He was Head of Governance and Management in Education at the 
International Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP/UNESCO), Paris, till October 2013 and 
Head of its Training and Education Programmes from 2001 to 2006. He has been responsible for 
managing an Asian regional network – the Asian Network of Training and Research Institutions in 
Educational Planning (ANTRIEP). He was also the Secretary General and responsible for the 
Secretariat of the International Working Group on Education (IWGE). He has directed several 
research projects and published around 25 books and research reports and more than 170 research 
papers and articles in areas related to educational planning, financing and higher education. His 
recent publications include India Higher Education Report 2015 (with Garima Malik), Routledge 
(Francis and Taylor Group; London and New Delhi, 2016), and From Schooling to Learning 
(IWGE Report), Paris, (IIEP/UNESCO, 2014).
17  Education Research and Emergence of Higher Education as a Field of Study in India

315
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in 
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_18
Chapter 18
Higher Education Research in Iran: 
Quantitative Development and Qualitative 
Challenges
Abbas Madandar Arani, Lida Kakia, and Mohammad Jafari Malek
Abstract  Over the last two decades of the twentieth century, Iran, like many societ-
ies, witnessed the expansion of higher education. During this period, governmental, 
nongovernmental, and private universities were established, and the number of fac-
ulty members and students increased drastically. With the start of the new millen-
nium, the government’s policy in higher education was changed from emphasis on 
training to research. As a result, in 2012 Iran gained the world’s 17th rank in science 
production and fixed its top position in the region of Middle East, above Turkey. 
Despite the overall progress, Iran’s higher education research is faced with chal-
lenges. The present paper has five sections. The first section is an overview of higher 
education in Iran. The second part explains the quantitative growth of higher educa-
tion in the past three decades (1984–2014). The third part demonstrates the qualita-
tive development of Iran’s higher education research with more detail. The fourth 
section indicates some of the most important challenges of higher education research 
in contemporary Iran. Article ends with a discussion and conclusions.
A.M. Arani (*) 
Lorestan University, Lorestan, Iran
e-mail: arani.a@lu.ac.ir 
L. Kakia 
Payam Noor University, Tehran, Iran
e-mail: Lida.kakia@gmail.com 
M.J. Malek 
Islamic Azad University (Zanjan Branch), Zanjan, Iran
e-mail: mjafarimalek@gmail.com

316
Introduction
In 1981 because of political problems and turmoil, Iran’s Islamic government closed 
all the universities for 3 years. Then, in 1984 the Cultural Revolution Committee 
reopens them while many former professors and students had been expelled. Fifty-­
three universities, colleges, and other higher education institutions were reformed in 
four groups: engineering and technical sciences, literature and humanities, art, and 
business and administrative sciences (MSRT 2009a). Governance of higher educa-
tion in Iran is dispersed among state-run, private (Azad), and distance-learning uni-
versities. At state-run universities, students must pass a centralized exam and are 
accepted according to their exam rank and special privileges; it is free for all and 
very competitive. At private universities, students must pass a centralized exam and 
also pay tuition for full- or part-time programs (MSRT 2009b). Admission requires 
a secondary school diploma and a passing score on the national university entrance 
exam (Konkoor) (Rasian 2009). Iran’s higher education, based on financial resources 
and administration, are divided into two main categories: public and private (non-
profit) institutions. In public higher education, the two ministries responsible for 
postsecondary education are the Ministry of Science, Research and Technology and 
Ministry of Health and Medical Education (Mehralizadeh et al. 2007). Iran’s univer-
sity population swelled from 180,000 in 1979 to more than 4 million in 2013; 64% 
of its students are women and 40,000 are PhD students (Ameri Ameri 2013). Despite 
the Iran poor political relationship with the USA and some other western countries, 
during the last two decades, Iran’s scientific community remains productive, even 
while economic sanctions make it difficult for universities to buy equipment or to 
send faculty members to the western countries to attend scientific meetings 
(Mohebbi and Mohebbi 2006). The Comprehensive Scientific Plan has been devised 
based on about 51,000 pages of documents and includes 224 scientific projects that 
must be implemented by the year 2025 (Etemad and Sobouti 2008; Shamsipur 
2008). However, Iran has made considerable advances in science and technology 
during the last two decades, and its scientific progress is reported to be the fastest in 
the world (Dehqani 2016). The main objective of this paper is to explain the grow-
ing trend of research in higher education in Iran. Our approach in this paper is his-
torical and comparative. In fact, social policies and educational practices strongly 
depend on history and the development of the societies in which they are embedded. 
To capture this, we follow a historical approach in presenting state policies on 
higher education research in Iran. We first briefly reviewed higher education in Iran. 
In the next two steps, we will explain quantitative development and qualitative 
dimension of higher education. The next section of paper focused on higher educa-
tion research challenges. The paper ends with conclusions.
A.M. Arani et al.

317
A Historical Glance on Higher Education
Higher education in Iran commenced when the Sassanid founded the Gondēshāpūr 
University in 250 AD in southwestern presenting Iran as the center for higher learn-
ing. After the rise of Islam in the seventh century and under the Islamic teaching for 
centuries, Iran was the center of excellence with such prominent figures as Sībawayh 
(733–793), Khwarizmi (780–850), Razi (865–925), Avicenna (980–11,037), and 
Al-Ghazali (1058–1111). Modern higher education in Iran, however, initiated when 
students were awarded scholarships to pursue their studies abroad. In 1851, Amir 
Kabir, the wise minister of Qajarides, founded Dar-al-Fonoon (house of techniques) 
in Tehran. A number of teacher training and medical schools were subsequently 
founded. Eventually, in 1934 the establishment of the University of Tehran marked 
the onset of university education, in the modern sense of the word. Shortly after, 
colleges and universities were added to the educational institutions of the country so 
that by the1979 they added up to 26 universities, 87 colleges, and 226 higher educa-
tion institutions, admitting over 180,000 students. Upon the victory of the Islamic 
revolution in 1979, the need for higher education was felt more than ever in that the 
country had staged a path toward self-sufficiency (IRPHE 2012). From 1980 to 
1988, Iran was preoccupied with eight-year war with Iraq and much of the country’s 
oil revenues were spent on it. By the end of the war, government tried to answer 
social demand for higher education through establishment of new universities and 
institutes. While demand for university entrance was adjusting through a very dif-
ficult national exam, very little attention was given to the research. For nearly two 
decades, various states in Iran tended to maintain quantitative expansion of higher 
education. In fact, since the mid-1990s, the state’s attention was turned to the 
research and promotion of Iran’s position among the Middle East countries.
Quantitative Growth
Since the early years of the Islamic revolution, there has been an attempt to expand 
and propagate higher education in Iran. From 1988, President Hashemi Rafsanjani 
had unveiled plans for establishing a new university called Islamic Azad (free) 
University with branches in all parts of the county, including villages. Islamic Azad 
University, the third-largest university by enrollment in the world and, according to 
its website, with over 400 branches in Iran, was founded with this goal in mind. In 
1988, the Payame Noor University was also founded and offered distant learning 
and half-time education. In its early years, it mostly enrolled government employees 
and professionals. Eventually, it opened its doors to other types of students and also, 
for the first time, enrolled undergraduate students without asking them to take the 
university entrance examination. At present among the total Iran population of 75 
million are 4 million university students taught by about 70,000 faculty members 
(Ameri 2013). However, in the early 2000s, Khatami’s state emphasized that the 
18  Higher Education Research in Iran: Quantitative Development and Qualitative…

318
quality and the quantity of education should be compatible with one another in 
Iranian academia. To achieve this, various policies were considered. In the first step, 
writing articles and publishing books was considered as a basic condition for pro-
moting of faculty members. For the degree of associate professorship and professor-
ship, lecturer prowling fell sharply. In fact, the main reason to research trends among 
universities members was an increase in their salary. The second policy for increas-
ing the Iran’s research position was establishment of postgraduate courses in many 
universities. The third policy was to emphasize on increasing the number of research 
journals, scientific associations, science parks, and research centers. As a result, the 
latest statistics indicated that in 2015–2016 school year, Iran has more than 4.3 mil-
lion students and 68,552 faculty members who are working at about 100 state uni-
versities, 350 nongovernmental universities, and 740 research centers. Madhuoshi 
and Niazi (2010) in their article entitled “Review and Explaining Status of Iran’s 
Higher Education in the World” compared Iran’s situation with 31 countries in vari-
ous indicators such as student-teacher ratio, the number of researchers per million 
people, and the cost of higher education to GDP based on UNESCO information 
(2008–2007) and concluded that the Iran situation in higher education is same as 
developing countries and higher than Middle East countries.
Qualitative Progress
The Islamic Republic’s 20-Year National Vision foresees Iran ascending to the top tier 
“in the areas of economy, science and technology in the western South Asia region 
(which includes Central Asia, Kyrgyz regions, the Middle East and neighboring coun-
tries)” (Pargoo 2016). Supreme leader of Iran, Mr. Khamenei, has called for the 
advancement of a knowledge-based economy and, in this vein, support for higher edu-
cation research. Indeed, in order to strengthen Iran’s position in the field of research, 
the Ministry of Science, Research and Technology has carried out various actions over 
the past decade. This section of the paper refers to some of these measures:
Establishing of Centers, Units, and Research Groups
According to the Institute for Research and Planning in Higher Education (IRPHE) 
in 2011, the council of higher education of the Ministry of Science, Research and 
Technology has issued 613 licenses for establishing new research units. Of these, 
207 permit licenses belong to nongovernmental centers, units, and research and 406 
belong to government. Moreover, the number of scientific associations from 159 in 
2005 has increased to 259 in 2011 and has grown by 2.4%. A very important policy 
developed for higher education that was carried out in 2011 was the establishment 
of centers of excellence in the universities across the nation. IRPHE report showed 
that these centers amounted to 132(IRPHE 2012).
A.M. Arani et al.

319
Technology Parks
As of 2012, Iran had officially 31 science and technology parks nationwide. 
Furthermore, as of 2014, 36 science and technology parks hosting more than 3650 
companies were operating in Iran. These firms have directly employed more than 
24,000 people (Pargoo 2016). According to the Iran Entrepreneurship Association, 
there are totally 99 parks of science and technology, which operate without official 
permits (Coghlan 2011). As of 2014, Iran had also 930 industrial parks and zones, 
of which 731 are ready to be ceded to the private sector.
Scientific Periodicals
According to the statistics, Iran produced 34,155 articles in 2012, which gained the 
country the world’s 17th rank in science production and fixed its top position in the 
region, above Turkey (Akhondzadeh 2013). Scientific progress over the past few 
years was the result of the country’s recent policies and programs to develop knowl-
edge and facilitate researchers’ access to the world’s top academic resources. Iran 
has the world’s fastest-growing scientific output, measured by the number of peer-­
reviewed papers published in international journals. In addition, Iran ranked first in 
scientific growth in the world in 2011 (Ibid: 1). In 2000, the Islamic Republic of Iran 
ranked 53rd in the world in terms of highly cited medical articles but improved to 
the 23rd rank in 2011. According to the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI), 
Iranian researchers and scientists published a total of 60,979 scientific articles in 
major international journals from 1999 to 2008. It is being said that scientific growth 
in Iran has been fastest in the world, even more than China (Mirrazavi 2012). Iran 
with a science and technology yearly growth rate of 25% is doubling its total output 
every 3 years and at this rate will reach the level of Canadian annual output in 2017. 
Because of these progresses, Head of the Islamic World Science Citation Center 
(ISC) Mohammad Javad Dehqani announced that Iran is ascending on the steps of 
scientific growth at a high speed despite being pressured by sanctions. He also said 
that based on the information released in Scopus website (the largest abstract and 
citation database of peer-reviewed literature), Iran has produced 1.5% of the world’s 
science in 2011–2014, adding that the country’s share of science production since 
the start of 2015 has been 1.7% (Dehqani 2015).
Development of Infrastructure
Through a short review on science growth over the past 35 years, Kharabaf and 
Abdollahi (2012) believed that scientific growth of Iran is mainly related to the 
thoughts of policy makers in paying more attention to science and technology and 
18  Higher Education Research in Iran: Quantitative Development and Qualitative…

320
allocating more budgets to developing human resources and infrastructure. In the 
essay published in European Science Editing in 2006 (Habibzadeh 2006 as cited in 
Kharabaf and Abdollahi 2012), the author related the growth of science in Iran to 
several reasons such as larger allocation of budget to scientific research sector, 
increase in the number of graduates and assistant professors over the recent years, 
and the requirement of students to complete their study with publication or patent-
ing or creating a product. In addition Kharabaf and Abdollahi (2012) investigated 
that most of Iranian journals are now managed by expert editors who know the 
procedures of improving the quality of publications such as indexing, online journal 
management systems, peer review, etc., and many of Iranian journals are covered by 
Scopus, MedLine/PubMed, and Web of Science. Meanwhile, the number of Iranian 
editors who have become member of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE), 
World Association of Medical Editors (WAME), and European Association of 
Science Editors (EASE) has increased dramatically. In addition, some of them are 
managing the mentioned committees at higher stages. Iranian researchers have 
gained international reputations since the 1990s, and some of them are listed among 
1% top scientists of the world as reported by ESI. Highly expensive instruments 
especially for high-technology researches have been provided in Iranian universities 
during the past two decades.
International Scientific Cooperation
Iran annually hosts international science festivals. In 1987, the leading Iranian 
Research Organization for Science and Technology (IROST), affiliated to the 
Ministry of Science, Research and Technology, decided to institute an award which 
acknowledges the Iranian outstanding achievements in the field of science and tech-
nology. IROST proposed the creation of the Khwarizmi Award in memory of Abu 
Jafar Mohammad Ibn Mousa Al-Khwarizmi, the great Iranian mathematician and 
astronomer (770–840 C.E) (KIA 2016). In addition, the annual Razi Medical 
Sciences Research Festival promotes original research in science, technology, and 
medicine in Iran (RAZI 2016). There is also an ongoing R&D collaboration between 
large state-owned companies and the universities in Iran. Iranians welcome scien-
tists from all over the world to Iran for a visit and participation in seminars, scien-
tific associations, or collaborations. Many Nobel laureates and influential scientists 
such as Bruce Alberts (American biochemist), F. Sherwood Rowland (American 
professor of chemistry), Kurt Wüthrich (Swiss chemist/biophysicist), Stephen 
Hawking (English theoretical physicist), and Pierre-Gilles de Gennes (French phys-
icist) visited Iran after the Iranian revolution. Some universities also hosted 
American and European scientists as guest lecturers during recent decades. Iran is 
also an active member of COMSTECH (a Ministerial Standing Committee on 
Scientific and Technological Cooperation established by the Third Summit Islamic 
of OIC – Organization of Islamic Cooperation – held at Makkah) and collaborates 
in its international projects (COMSTECH 2016).
A.M. Arani et al.

321
Challenges of Higher Education Research in Iran
Despite improvements in quantity and quality of higher education and research, Iran 
still faces many challenges. At first and with a time interval, both Sayyari (1994) 
and Rasian (2009) emphasized that Iranian professors are not paid high salaries, 
they are not often hired for their talent or knowledge, promotions are often not 
based on talent, and some faculty member are under-qualified with out-of-date 
knowledge and skills. From management dimension, there exists a stifling combina-
tion of overcentralized, bureaucratic administration with few fixed rules and regula-
tions. Managers are reluctant to act and do not effectively plan for the future; yet, 
there exist many stakeholder organizations which do not necessarily coordinate 
their work, such as the Ministry of Science, Research and Technology; the Ministry 
of Health and Medical Education; the Ministry of Education; the Planning and 
Budget Organization; the Religious Education Center; the Cultural Revolution 
Supreme Council; the Expediency Discernment Council; and the Parliament of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran. This proliferation of authority reduces transparency and 
puts managers and faculty members under extra stress and doubt (Arasteh 2001; 
Soltani 2008). In this situation, one of most important challenges of higher educa-
tion research in Iran is university-society gap. In fact, many research projects are 
repetitive, devoid of any practical benefit to society, and stored in the corner of 
universities and research centers. This problem is quite normal. On the one hand, 
university teachers – especially in the field of humanities – are more likely to avoid 
research on real problems of society. Social and political barriers usually do not 
permit to deeply research on problems of society, because many research findings 
suggest change and reform in culture and politics (Farasatkhah et  al. 2008; 
Hamdhaidari et al. 2008; Mehran 2003, 2009). Accordingly, humanities and social 
sciences are in a sorry state in Iran. New elected president Hasan Rouhani believes 
that political “red lines” that prevent both the students and faculties from expressing 
their opinions candidly are the reason behind this problem (Adib 2014). On the 
other hand, about 70 percent of industry is state-run, with the private sector so unde-
veloped and weak to invest on research. The state-run sector fulfills its needs by 
purchasing technical information from developed countries with its oil profits. In 
such a situation, there is no need for R&D as all needs can be met from outside 
sources (Rasian 2009). So as Asefzadeh et al. (2013:33) have pointed out, studies in 
selected oil-producing and non-oil-producing countries show that the relation 
between the average number of scientific articles and HDI is reverse. This inverse 
outcome proves that the rise of human development in these countries might not be 
due to, or associated with, the growth of indexed scientific articles. For example, in 
the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, and Kuwait, despite the high HDI, the number of 
indexed scientific articles is low, while in Brazil, with more number of articles, a 
lower HDI could be witnessed.
Other common challenge is quantity-oriented thinking on academic environ-
ments. Ritzer (2011) in his book with interesting title “The McDonaldization of 
Society-” says “The ‘publish or perish’ pressure on academicians in many colleges 
18  Higher Education Research in Iran: Quantitative Development and Qualitative…

322
and universities leads to greater attention to the quantity of their publications than 
to the quality. In hiring and promotion decisions, a resume with a long list of articles 
and books is generally preferred to one with a short list” (p. 85). In Iran, based on 
the rule and regulations of the Ministry of Sciences, Research and Technology, fac-
ulty members and students are required to produce and publish scientific and 
research articles. Prior to the new regulations, master’s degree students’ disserta-
tions were graded not to 20 (total allotted points on the Iranian grading system) but 
to 18; up to two more possible points were allocated based on the students’ research 
and scientific articles. Also, a notable portion of the credits that each student needs 
to be accepted into a PhD program comes from the student’s science and research 
articles. Therefore, Iranian science and research journals have resorted to charging 
a fee for publishing articles written by students and professors. As the result, stu-
dents and professors publish articles with the aim of receiving credit and not because 
they believe that the society has any need for what they are publishing. Indeed, 
universities’ drifting away from industry and the everyday needs of society indicate 
that the growth in the quantity of the universities has been in exchange for a decrease 
in their quality (Adib 2014). Another problem of higher education research in Iran 
is unity in law for promotion of faculty members in all disciplines. For example, to 
change the status from assistantship to associate position, the main criterion is pub-
lishing papers in ISI journals regardless of the field of study – humanities or pure 
sciences. That’s why most Iran’s research papers are published in pure sciences 
such as chemistry, while there is an intense dissatisfaction among humanities pro-
fessors. It appears that in Iran, higher education and publishing articles have become 
a matter of gaining prestige and earning credits.
Conclusion
Many national and international news agencies and journal papers acknowledged 
that Iran has experienced growth in scientific indexes in recent years. In fact, after 
the revolution in the late 1970s, for a decade, Iran was plagued by political turmoil 
and the war with Iraq. During the next 20 years (beginning of new millennium), all 
efforts of Iranian politicians were focused on establishment and development of 
universities and institutes, expansion of educational facilities, and recruitment of 
teachers. During the past decade, social demand’s pressure for admission to the 
universities has declined sharply. Hence from quantitative dimension, today’s Iran 
higher education system is facing a shortage of students for undergraduate degrees. 
In his recent paper, Habibi (2015:1) describes this problem as an “Iran’s 
Overeducation Crisis.” Indeed, university graduates in many fields are suffering 
from high unemployment rates. The unemployment rate for university graduates, 
which was only 0.44 percent in 1976, had risen to 19.4 percent in 2011. In May 
2014, the Ministry of Labour and Social Affair warned that about 4.5 million uni-
versity graduates would enter the labor market in the next few years (Ibid: 1–4). 
However, by reduction in the number of candidates for undergraduate, universities’ 
A.M. Arani et al.

323
policy turned to the establishment of master’s and PhD courses. It has gone so far 
that the president of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, in a rather critical tone said: “I will be 
very happy to hear that we have 40,000 Ph.D. students in Iran. However, let’s look 
at the famous universities in the world and see how many Ph.D. students each of 
them have” (Adib 2014). The overeducation crisis had created many social prob-
lems, but one of its worst consequences is brain drain. Iran’s former Minister of 
Science, Research and Technology Reza Faraji Dana said, “Every year, about 
150,000 highly talented people emigrate from Iran, equaling an annual loss of $150 
billion to the economy.” Though the monetary value may be inaccurate (the World 
Bank put the economic cost of Iran’s brain drain at $50 billion in 2010), the fact is 
that Iran has experienced one of the highest levels of brain drain over the past 
decades. According to the International Monetary Fund, Iran has the highest brain 
drain rate in the world. An estimated 25% of all Iranians with postsecondary educa-
tion now live in “developed” countries of the OECD (Khajehpour 2014). On the 
other side, it must be admitted that the increase in the number of master’s and doc-
toral students provided a golden opportunity to do more research. At the same time, 
economic incentives (increase of salary) combined with high rate of inflation – due 
to political sanctions against Iran – encourage many faculty members to try their 
best to publish more articles and books. A report by present Ministry of Sciences, 
Research and Technology reveals that Iran ranked fourth in terms of growth rate in 
science in the world. The report also stated that Iran experienced 2% growth in the 
field of production of scientific articles and 6% growth in the field of production of 
world science (IRNA 2016).
Despite these quantitative progresses, we referred to a number of major chal-
lenges of higher education research in Iran. Indeed, one component of the faculty 
member’s quality of work life is interaction, communication, and collaborative 
activities among them (Suchan 2008). This can be manifested in the participation of 
faculty members in academic networks such as scientific communities, board of 
editors, and research group projects. Nourshahi and Samii (2011) reveal that among 
693 faculty members of governmental universities in Iran, the largest number of 
respondents indicated a moderate level of activities. Another finding of the research 
shows that half of the faculty members feel their academic freedom as average. 
Interestingly, faculty members indicated self-censorship as a master of the obstacles 
to their academic freedom. In fact, self-censorship is a system of automatic defense 
against the onslaught of attacks that is more common among faculties of human 
sciences. In a general conclusion, we believe that in Iran the prospects for higher 
education research in the next decade can be positive and represents a growing 
trend. There are several reasons for this optimism. First, there is sufficiency on 
research budget due to improvement of economic conditions of the country  – 
because of recent political agreement between Iran and western countries. Second, 
there is a decreasing trend in the number of students and therefor sufficient time of 
scientific staffs for performing research duties. Third, there are new reforms on aims 
and policies of higher education research, and finally, there are increasing team 
spirit and research group activities among faculty members because of development 
of interdisciplinary subjects.
18  Higher Education Research in Iran: Quantitative Development and Qualitative…

324
References
Adib, M. J. (2014, February 20). The paradox of higher education in Iran. Al-Monitor. Retrieved 
1 May, 2016, from http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2014/02/iran-universities-­
inferior-­doctoral-degrees-shoddyresearch.html#ixzz4CaRdF4xb.
Akhondzadeh, S. (2013). Iranian science shows World’s fastest growth: Ranks 17th in science 
production in 2012. Avicenna Journal of Medical Biotechnology, 5(3), 139–140. [in Persian].
Ameri, R. (2013, September 16). The latest statistics of country students in terms of discipline and 
place, Nama News. http://namanews.com/News/57099/ [in Persian].
Arasteh, H. R. (2001). University Management in Universities Dependent to MSRT: Challenges 
and deficiencies. Quarterly Journal of Research and Planning in Higher Education, 7(3–4), 
41–69. [in Persian].
Asefzadeh, S., Jahandideh, S., & Mousavi, A. (2013). Relationship between human develop-
ment index and the number of scientific articles of countries. Journal of Qazvin University of 
Medical Sciences, 17, 33–40. [in Persian].
Coghlan, A. (2011, March 28). Iran is top of the world in science growth. New 
Scientist. 
Retrieved 
11 
April, 
2016, 
from 
https://www.newscientist.com/article/
dn20291-iran-is-top-of-the-world-in-science-growth/
COMSTECH. (2016). COMSTECH in brief. Retrieved 11 April, 2016, from http://comstech.org/
Dehqani, M. J. (2015, Saturday May 23). ISC President: Iran’s scientific growth increasing at high 
speed despite sanctions. Fars News. Retrieved 9 April, 2016, from http://en.farsnews.com/new-
stext.aspx?nn=13940302000263
Dehqani, J. (2016, Saturday January 2).Iran among top 20 scientific nations. Iran Daily. Retrieved 
1 April, 2016, from http://www.iran-daily.com/News/134146.html
Etemad, E., & Sobouti, Y. (2008). Trends in basic sciences in contemporary Iran: Growth and 
structure of mainstream basic sciences. Committee on the U.S.-Iran Workshop on Science and 
Technology and the Future Development of Societies, Office for Central Europe and Eurasia. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Farasatkhah, M., Ghazi, M., & Bazargan, A. (2008). Quality challenge in Iran’s higher education: 
A historical review. Iranian Studies, 41(2), 115–138.
Habibi, N. (2015). Iran’s overeducation crisis: Causes and ramifications, Massachusetts: Brandeis 
University, Crown Centre for Middle East Studies. Retrieved 19 March, 2016, from http://
www.brandeis.edu/crown/publications/meb/MEB89.pdf
Hamdhaidari, S., Agahi, H., & Papzan, A. (2008). Higher education during the Islamic government 
of Iran (1979–2004). International Journal of Educational Development, 28(3, 231–245.
IRNA. (2016, April 11). Cabinet discusses Iran’s scientific progress. Islamic Republic News 
Agency. http://www.irna.ir/en/News/82029620/
IRPHE. (2012). National report on higher education, research and technology 2011–2012. 
Tehran: Ministry of Sciences, Research & Technology, Institute for research & Planning in 
Higher Education. [in Persian].
Khajehpour, B. (2014, January 12). Can Rouhani reverse Iran’s brain drain. Al-Monitor. Retrieved 
19 March, 2016, from http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/en/originals/2014/01/iran-economy-­
diaspora-reconciliation-sustainable-progress.html
Kharabaf, S., and Abdollahi, M. (2012). Science growth in Iran over the past 35 years, Journal of 
Research in Medical Sciences, 17(3): 275–279, Retrieved 18 March, 2016 from http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3527047/
KIA. (2016). About KIA, Khwarizmi International Award. Retrieved 19 March, 2016, from http://
www2.irost.org/kia/content/about-kia-0
Madhuoshi, M., & Niazi, E. (2010). Review and Explaining Status of Iran’s Higher Education in 
the World. Journal of Iranian Higher Education Association, 2(4), 113–149 (in Persian)
Mehralizadeh, Y., Pakseresht, M. J., Baradaran, M., & Shahi, S. (2007). The dilemma of internal 
evaluation in higher education: A longitudinal case study. Quality Assurance in Education, 
15(3), 352–368 (in Persian)
A.M. Arani et al.

325
Mehran, G. (2003). The paradox of tradition and modernity in female education in the Islamic 
Republic of Iran. Comparative Education Review, 47(3), 269–286.
Mehran, G. (2009). Doing and undoing gender: Female higher education in the Islamic Republic 
of Iran. International Review of Education, 55, 541–559.
Mirrazavi, F. (2012, August 30). New scientific achievements of Iranians. Iran Review. http://
www.iranreview.org/content/Documents/New-Scientific-Achievements-of-Iranians.htm
Mohebbi, M. R., & Mohebbi, M. (2006). Education and Training put Iran Ahead of Richer States. 
Nature, 441(7096), 932.
MSRT. (2009a). Islamic revolution and new organizational structure. Ministry of Science, Research 
and Technology, .Retrieved May 11, 2016, from www.msrt.ir [in Persian].
MSRT. (2009b). An introduction to higher education in Iran, Ministry of Science, Research and 
Technology. Retrieved May 11, 2016, from www.msrt.ir [in Persian].
Nourshahi, N., & Samii, H. (2011). A survey of quality of work life among faculty members of 
governmental universities in Iran and suggesting strategies to improve it. Higher Journal of 
Research and Planning in Education, 59, 91–114. [in Persian].
Pargoo, M. (2016, February 4). How sanctions helped Iranian Tech Industry. Al-Monitor. http://
www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/02/iran-tech-it-sector-post-sanctions-relief-­
development.html#
Rasian, Z. (2009). Higher education governance in developing countries, challenges and recom-
mendations: Iran as a case study. Nonpartisan Education Review/Essays, 5(3):1–18, Retrieved 
2 May, 2016, from http://www.nonpartisaneducation.org/Review/Essays/v5n3.htm
RAZI. (2016). About Razi Festival. Retrieved 20 February, 2016, from http://razi.research.ac.ir/
forms/about.aspx (in Persian).
Ritzer, G. (2011). The McDonaldization of society 6. Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press.
Sayyari, A. A. (1994). An analysis of the higher education problems and straits in Iran. Quarterly 
Journal of Research and Planning in Higher Education, 2(1), 19–46. [in Persian].
Shamsipur, M. (2008). The Role of Chemistry and Biology in the Future Development of Iran. 
Committee on the U.S.-Iran Workshop on Science and Technology and the Future Development 
of Societies, Office for Central Europe and Eurasia. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press.
Soltani, B. (2008). A review on essential challenges of higher education, research, technology 
and future orientation. Tehran: Ministry of Science, Research, and Technology, Institute of 
Research & Planning in Higher Education. [in Persian].
Suchan, J. (2008). How academic organizational systems and culture undermine scholarship and 
quality research: A response to Ron Dulek. Journal of Business Communication, 45(3), 349–
357. Retrieved 20 May, 2016, from http://calhoun.nps.edu/bitstream/handle/10945/40186/
suchan_how_academic_organizational_2008-07-01.pdf?sequence=3.
Abbas Madandar Arani  I am an Associate Professor – at the Department of Education, Lorestan 
University, Iran. My research and teaching interest is in the field of comparative education and 
includes education reform in the context of globalization and internationalization, religion and 
schooling, multiculturalism, Muslim education, education and higher education in Iran and the 
Middle East countries, and educational management and leadership. I am currently working as a 
president of Comparative Education Society of Iran (CESIR). I have been active in the Iranian 
Sociology of Education Association and Iranian Higher Education Association and was awarded a 
PhD scholarship in 2000 through cultural exchange between Iran and India (ICCR). I had some 
presentations and published several articles in the area of comparative education at different 
national and international journals. I have also coauthored five book chapters published in Hong 
Kong, South Africa, the Netherlands, Canada, and Greece. I have participated and presented some 
papers at international conferences on education in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Hong 
Kong, India, Malaysia, Spain, Thailand, South Korea, the UK, the USA, and Turkey.
18  Higher Education Research in Iran: Quantitative Development and Qualitative…

326
Mrs. Lida Kakia  did her PhD work in comparative education at the Sofia University, Bulgaria, 
and at present works as a teacher counselor at different schools in Tehran with more than 25 years 
of experiences. She has written 100 books and papers on different aspects of education. She has 
been selected three times as a merit teacher and was awarded by Iranian presidents. She has also 
presented some articles at international and national conferences and seminars.
Mr. Mohammad Jafari Malek  holds an MA in political relation from Islamic Azad University, 
Zanjan branch. He is currently working as a cultural counselor of Iran in Manila, Philippines. His 
interest lies in higher education and cultural exchange in general and cultural-political roles of 
educational systems in particular. He is also interested in issues related to how culture and educa-
tion can create social power and/or injustice. He has published several articles and presented at 
conferences.
A.M. Arani et al.

327
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in  
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_19
Chapter 19
The Regeneration Aspects for Higher 
Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia
Abdulrahman M. Abouammoh
Abstract  The higher education in Saudi Arabia has been one of the fastest growing 
education systems in the world over the past decade. A rapid expansion on a geo-
graphical and quantitative level has provoked many challenges in Saudi higher edu-
cation. Government and education planners have exerted various efforts to overcome 
the major challenges it faces. Research by postgraduate students and professional 
researchers at specialised institutions has grown rapidly in this area. This chapter 
reviews the main characteristics of the Saudi higher education system. It also pres-
ents the key challenges facing the system, in particular, challenges associated with 
the fast growth in development taking place in the country. The processes required 
to overcome the various hurdles and obstacles in Saudi higher education, in turn, 
made the system very fertile ground for research and investigation. This chapter also 
analyses the foremost issues published in higher education research, and in particu-
lar emphasises the regenerative aspects of this field of research. It also indicates the 
possible wide range of research needed to explore the Saudi higher education sys-
tem in more detail and to discover alternative solutions to the challenges it faces and 
propose possible recommendations. Towards the end of this chapter, some main 
platforms of the Saudi research community in higher education are pointed out, and 
their major activities are briefly reviewed.
Introduction
The government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Saudi Arabia) has realised that 
higher education has an indispensable role to play in social development, economic 
prosperity, knowledge production and sustainable development (Abouammoh et al. 
A.M. Abouammoh (*) 
Department of Statistics and O. R., King Saud University, P. O. Box 2455,  
Dareyya Campus, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia
e-mail: abouammoh@yahoo.com

328
2015). Furthermore, higher education is becoming extremely important throughout 
the world, as a main requirement in the job market, and the public demand for 
higher education is increasing exponentially. For further information, look at 
UNESCO’s World Declaration on Higher Education for the Twenty-First Century, 
for example (1998).
The positive role of higher education includes feasible public investment, better 
public health, improved individual and social prosperity, a higher employment rate, 
the enhancement of national identity, the creation of knowledge and innovation and 
support for regional development and intercultural understanding (UNESCO 1995; 
OECD 2000; 2003; Palvin 2012; Abouammoh et al. 2015).
Saudi Arabia has fully appreciated the important role of universities in regional 
development, through reports and discussion groups, and seminars held at the 
Centre for Higher Education Research and Studies (CHERS) in Riyadh. These 
activities were based on the findings by many researchers (UNESCO 1991; Porter 
2007; Goddard and Kempton 2011; Schmuecker and Cook 2012). In fact, almost all 
new Saudi universities are located in small regions or municipalities.
Prior to the introduction of higher education in Saudi Arabia, the government 
sent 14 students to study for a bachelor’s degree in Egypt in 1926. In 1949, the first 
university college of Islamic law was established in Makkah. Then in 1957, univer-
sity education began with the inauguration of King Saud University, and in the same 
year, a group of Saudi students was sent to study at a university in Texas in the 
United States.
It is apparent that the higher education sector in Saudi Arabia has gone through 
a very rapid development over the past decade. An enormous expansion on a geo-
graphical and quantitative level has occurred over the last 15 years. For instance, 
there were six universities in 1975, and this number increased to 11 in 2005 and to 
38 universities in 2014, including ten smaller, private universities. Furthermore, a 
similar increase in the number of students and staff has occurred. For example, the 
total number of students and staff has increased from 27,964 and 636,445, respec-
tively, in 2005 to 73,817 and 1,496,730 in 2014 (HESC 2015). A slight improve-
ment in the staff student ratio, from 22.8% to 20.3%, can be seen during these years. 
However, the number of female students enrolled in HE institutions between 2005 
and 2014 declined from 57.88% to 48.57%. This change is mainly due to the fewer 
number of female students in the King Abdullah Scholarship Program (KASP) and 
other scholarship programmes, compared to male students, where they form 25% of 
the number of students studying abroad.
At present, higher education institutions enrol about 1.5 million students, and 
university education is available to citizens in about 75 cities and towns in Saudi 
Arabia. In addition, KASP, which started in 2005 with about 2500 students, enrolled 
about 160,000 students towards the end of 2014, studying in more than 28 countries. 
About 80,000 students are studying in US universities (Higher Education Statistics 
Centre 2015). The development of higher education in Saudi Arabia has become a 
priority, and the government has stated in its strategic plan that HE has to be a lead-
ing strategic sector in the movement of the Saudi economy, from being heavily 
dependent on oil revenues to a multi-resourced economy, including industrial and 
A.M. Abouammoh

329
knowledge economies. In fact, the Ninth Five-Year Development Plan (2010–2014) 
states that 50.6 percent of the budget goes to human resource development, includ-
ing education and training.
The financing of higher education is heavily dependent on the government. It 
seems that without the huge support and funding to students through loans and 
scholarships, most private universities and colleges would not be able to pursue 
their mission properly. Public universities are completely funded by annual govern-
ment budgets. In the past few years, some old public universities, such as King Saud 
University, King Abdulaziz University, King Fahd University of Petroleum and 
Minerals and Umm Al-Qura University, have initiated endowment funds and intro-
duced research chairs, which are mainly funded by private donors and endowers. 
Furthermore, the Saudi Council of Ministers has approved initiation of techno-­
valleys associated to these universities in partnership with Saudi and foreign private 
sector. Institutes for studies and consultation have also been established in some 
Saudi universities to provide paid services to the public and private sectors, in order 
to make additional funds available for items that are not listed on the government 
university budget.
There are usually, in average, more, in number, academic units, such as colleges, 
departments, supporting deanships, in Saudi universities than many other similar in 
size European or US universities. For instance, in 2014, there were 23 academic 
colleges at King Saud University and 25 at King Abdulaziz University, as well as 12 
and 9 supporting deanships, respectively. It is worth noting that departments and 
colleges at Saudi universities might have weekly to bimonthly meetings, but with 
little or no terminal decisions taken on their academic and administration affairs 
(HECUL 1994).
The council of any public university is somewhat large, since all vice-rectors, 
academic deans and supporting unit deans are members of the council. For instance, 
each council at King Saud University and King Abdulaziz University has more than 
40 academic administrators.
In the past few years, the Ministry of Higher Education (currently the Ministry 
of Education since January 2015) and Saudi universities have engaged in the issue 
of quality from two important angles. The first one deals with raising the internal 
efficiency of universities, by ensuring the quality of university education. This was 
accomplished with the establishment of the National Center for Assessment in 
Higher Education (NCAHE) in 2001. The second angle looked to improve the 
external efficiency of universities and colleges by regulating the internal processes 
and their outputs. This was achieved by standardising and authenticating the quality 
of academic and institutional accreditations given to universities. The National 
Commission for Assessment and Academic Accreditation (NCAAA), established in 
2004, sets this goal.
From 1975 to January 2015, Saudi higher education was centrally managed by 
the Council of Higher Education, which is chaired by the king. Its members include 
ministers of Higher Education, Education, the National Economy and Planning, 
Labour and the Civil Service and all public university presidents. At present, this 
council has been abolished, and its authority has been given to the Council of 
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

330
Economy and Development, comprising of ministers and headed by the deputy 
crown prince. It seems though that the government has realised that such an arrange-
ment, to have a supreme university governing body, might not be the best way for-
ward, at a time where many decision makers and academics support more autonomy 
for universities.
There are many ideas and proposals for more development, with additional 
autonomy, transparency and fairness regarding various concerns and participation 
of all stakeholders. Academics are enthusiastic about a flexible law that fits all types 
and sizes of Saudi universities and encompasses items and policies that support mis-
sion differentiation and room for competition and excellence in every institution.
At present, there aren’t any foreign university campuses in Saudi Arabia. On the 
other hand, the General Authority for Technical and Vocational Training has made 
agreement with some foreign technical institutions to establish institutes and two-­
year colleges. This has happened in the past 3 years, and one cannot, yet, see how 
successful this joint multinational, technical and vocational institution, even so, 
Saudi Arabia has been considering since long the provision for allowing foreign 
higher education. It has participated through the ministry of higher education in 
three meetings of OECD and the UNESCO that has come up with a document 
entitled “Guidelines for Quality Provision in Cross-border Higher Education”; see 
UNESCO (2005). In February 2016, the Minister of Education has announced, to 
Saudi press, that the government intention is to allow foreign higher education to 
operate in Saudi Arabia. It seems the form and the structure of the intended foreign 
higher education are not yet decided. It is known that foreign higher education can 
be of independent foreign institutions, American University of Cairo, Egypt, and 
American University of Beirut, Lebanon. It can be a site allocated for foreign 
schools as in the education city as in Qatar or campuses or branches of foreign uni-
versities as in the United Arab Emirates model. Also, foreign education can be the 
result of joint or partnerships of national or international programs among institu-
tions; see Abouammoh and Mazi (2010) and Abouamoh (2013). Various models of 
foreign education in Saudi Arabia are expected to face financial, cultural and gover-
nance challenges under the present transition period of higher education system. 
Taking into account the strong funding support of Saudi Arabia to its private, for 
profit and non-profit making higher will lead to an excruciating competition in front 
of foreign higher education in Saudi Arabia. The Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 (2016) 
indicates explicitly to various policies, strategies and in particular in the national 
transformation plan that more liberal trend towards is strongly adopted in privatisa-
tion of many sectors including general and higher education. Also, it was announced 
that the government is looking into building an environment through appropriate 
regulation that make it possible for foreign higher institution to participate in the 
Saudi higher education system.
These and other activities of the vision in the education sector are done through 
meeting, educational activities, research and discussion groups of academicians and 
education decision and policy makers. This direction has motivated many experts 
involved to make various groups of researchers to investigate different aspects of the 
forthcoming 2030 vision and 2020 national transformation plan. These groups of 
A.M. Abouammoh

331
researchers have produced many reports, for example, alternative funding of higher 
education, internationalisation and globalisation of Saudi higher education, review 
and assessment of King Abdullah Scholarship Program (KASP), integration of 
Saudi public universities and enhancing women higher education in Saudi Arabia. 
These groups are considered some of the main Saudi research communities into the 
field of higher education.
Main Features of the System
Some major achievements and the main challenges facing the higher education sys-
tem in Saudi Arabia have been discussed in many written articles. For instance, 
Mazi and Abouammoh (2009) presented the trends and strategies for the develop-
ment of the higher education system prior to the AAFAQ (2011). It was found that 
most of the newly established universities are off-city or off-region campuses of 
older universities. For example, the following is a list of newly established universi-
ties affiliated to an older university and in brackets the year of their establishment: 
Khalid University (1999), the University of Qassim (2004), the University of Aljouf 
(2005), Prince Sattam University (2009), the University of Shagraa (2009) and the 
University of Majmaa (2009) are all affiliates of King Saud University (1957). 
Similarly, King Abdulaziz University (1960) has five regenerations, and Imam 
Mohamed Ben Saud University (1975) has three regenerations. It seems that the 
process of growing the number of universities is expected to be put on hold, possi-
bly for a few years to come, for various economic, political and policy reasons. In 
fact, higher education in Saudi Arabia should not only address the national develop-
ment plan and respond to the growing demands of its students, but it has to stress the 
humanitarian role it has on coexistence, cooperation and integration with the whole 
world. It also has to follow international standards in preparing students with skills 
and be visible on international classifications and rankings of universities 
(Abouammoh 2009).
A synopsis of the development and growth of Saudi HE was given by Alamri 
(2011), where he listed a few strengths and weaknesses of the system. KASP stu-
dents studying abroad are recruited with high gender equity. Furthermore, Saudi 
female students in this and other scholarship programmes are required to be accom-
panied, “mahram”, by an immediate family member, whose living and education 
expenses are covered by a government grant. Saudi Arabia, due to the impact of 
KASP, has become one of the top states regarding the international mobility of its 
students. It is expected that foreign-educated Saudi students will enhance the cul-
tural, educational and socio-political diversity in the country. This will certainly 
motivate society to give more autonomy to HE institutions and additional support to 
the activities of non-government organisations (NGOs) in Saudi Arabia. On the 
other hand, the Saudi HE system is centrally managed, and it has two distinct cate-
gories of staff, Saudi and non-Saudi. The dissimilarities between Saudi and non-­
Saudi staff include the type of contract, allowances, incentives and the holding of 
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

332
administrative and academic positions. This aspect weakens the selection and 
­compensation of achievers and distinguished professors. In a report by Abouammoh 
et al. (2015), it has been noted that almost all Saudi public universities are almost 
comprehensive, i.e. they offer many academic programs in different disciplines, and 
there is no clear mission differentiations between universities in disciplines, level of 
education and in academic or technical programs.
There is no recognised credit transfer system for students and very little coordi-
nation among various disciplines, in order to build common learning or professional 
skills. Sometimes, universities have more than one college teaching the same disci-
pline, such as science, engineering or medical allied sciences at a short distance 
from each other. In fact, the National Qualification Framework for Higher Education 
in Saudi Arabia, published by the NCAAA (2009), mainly formulated the common 
practices implemented in most Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) universities, or 
rather in most Arab university frameworks. This drawback has limited national edu-
cational mobility. Integration among Saudi universities is minimal, in spite of the 
centralised high management. One would expect that integration among universities 
is the only policy motivated and might be supported by an appropriate mobility 
programme, similar to the Erasmus programme in the European Union.
Before the abolition of the Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE) in early 2015, 
there had been a few interesting programmes that had helped improve the Saudi HE 
system (HEDI 2011). There have been many collaboration agreements, memoranda 
of understanding (MoU) and partnership policies, but most MoU are signed for the 
benefit of public relations and have never been implemented. Old Saudi universities, 
namely, King Saud University, King Abdulaziz University and King Fahd University 
of Petroleum and Minerals, have made various arrangements to attract distinguished 
scholars and academic professors, through various programmes such as centres of 
excellence, funded by the MoHE, research chairs and the private sector. King Fahd 
University of Petroleum and Minerals established an international advisory board in 
2007, comprised of very distinguished scholars in higher education and the CEOs 
of the two biggest oil companies in the world, namely, ARAMCO and SABIC. The 
present advisory board consists of 13 international figures and is chaired by Martin 
Jischke, President Emeritus of Purdue University in Indiana in the United States 
(KFUPM 2015). Other regional universities, such as the University of Tabuk, 
formed national advisory boards, consisting of eight Saudi experts, professors of 
higher education and legislators. This has stemmed from a national call for decision 
sharing on university management and the need for external and international 
experts’ participation in university management and planning.
Financing of higher education almost totally comes from public funds, through 
the state’s annual budgets. In 2011, King Saud University, King Fahd University 
and King Abdulaziz University started their own endowments. The establishment of 
endowments in Saudi universities is recent and varies from one institution to another, 
as are the rules for investment and governance of these endowments. The main com-
mon objectives of the endowments are to support the university’s financial capabil-
ity and sustain the funding of university activities. Most of the endowment revenue 
is expected to be directed to research and educational development and to support 
A.M. Abouammoh

333
the interaction between the university and its local community. In addition, it is used 
to attract and provide incentives to high quality researchers and to support them to 
excel in their careers. Some academics feel that endowment revenues can be used 
more efficiently than their current provision in the government budget, to initiate 
and sustain the competitiveness of Saudi universities on an international platform.
The additional finance given to research and technology programmes over the 
past few years has had a very clear impact on the classification of Saudi universities 
on the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) and the Times Higher 
Education World University Rankings (THEWUR). Some universities made 
arrangements with internationally renowned professors to be part-time members or 
be partially affiliated to their institutions. Part of the requirement of these professors 
might also be for them to spend a few weeks at the Saudi university every year. 
These arrangements and other research funds through research chairs have greatly 
increased the status of King Saud University, King Abdulaziz University and King 
Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, pushing them into the top 300 in the 
rankings. In fact, King Saud University was the first Saudi university or even Arab 
university to be included in the top 500 universities in the world by the ARWU. In 
2010, King Saud University was ranked among the world’s top 400 universities, 
while King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals was among the top 500 
universities. King Saud University has advanced in the ARWU from 401-500 to 
301-400 and then to 201–300 and 151–200 in the 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2014 rank-
ings. Similarly, King Abdulaziz University advanced from 301-400 to 151-200 in 
the ARWU in 2010 (MoHE 2013).
These high positions and speedy advancement in the ranking positions in the 
ARWU, the QS World University Ranking, Times Higher Education Index, US 
News and World Report and Webometrics and Scimago Institutional Ranking have 
raised questions. Local and international articles have been written about the trans-
parency and the proper research support that might be utilised to advance the rank-
ing position of the institution, whereas little or no importance is given to other aims 
of research activities. It was even claimed that “Saudi universities offer cash in 
exchange for academic prestige” by (Bhattacharjee 2011). In spite of the bad impact 
of this article and the different reactions from different universities, it has helped all 
stakeholders at Saudi universities to put more efforts into directing research towards 
internal institutions and postgraduate study and to actual local research.
Furthermore, the council of ministers has approved four university companies, 
namely, Riyadh Techno-Valley, Jeddah Techno-Valley and Dhahran Techno-Valley, 
to operate at King Saud University, King Abdulaziz University and King Fahd 
University of Petroleum and Minerals, respectively, and techno-valley at Umm 
Al-Qura University. These initiatives are considered as important tools for the uni-
versities to build partnerships with the public and private sectors in the area of 
knowledge economics, innovation and industry.
The intended strategy of these techno-valleys is to develop industrial partner-
ships and initiate science parks in the three universities. Furthermore, all endow-
ment research chairs are privately funded and last for either 3 or 5 years, to support 
research in disciplines the sponsors feel are important to them. These chairs are 
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

334
evaluated annually, and an extension to their mandate depends solely on their 
­corresponding sponsors, based on their performance and the availability of funds. 
The research outcomes of these chairs contribute significantly to university research. 
For example, at King Saud University, there are 112 research chairs, 17 in engineer-
ing, 26 in humanities, 27 in basic science and 42 in medical and health sciences. 
One other characteristic of Saudi higher education is that almost all universities 
enrol male and female students, but they are taught in segregated classes or cam-
puses. The only all-male universities are King Fahd University of Petroleum and 
Minerals and the Islamic University of Madinah, and the only all-female university 
is Princess Nora bint Abdul Rahman University (PNU). In recent years, King 
Abdullah University for Science and Technology (KAUST), founded in 2006 and 
located near Jeddah, has been developed as a state-of-the-art graduate research 
institution.
Pavan (2013) briefly summarised the impact of the Saudi government and the 
foresight of the planners and decision makers to invest a generous portion of the 
government budget in education and training. She stated that the development of 
higher education in Saudi Arabia through changes in different stages has provoked 
heated debate among Saudi academics. Now, a lot of effort has been directed into 
building a Saudi Arabian knowledge society to diversify state resources and enhance 
the country’s international competitiveness. Academics from other countries have 
been invited to learn about higher education in Saudi Arabia through various pro-
grammes, such as the former annual International Exhibition and Conference on 
Higher Education (IECHE), held in the second quarter of every Gregorian year. 
Many international universities exhibited their programmes and recruited students, 
and Saudi universities likewise exhibited their programmes and their achievements 
to the many local and international visitors. International and Saudi experts at this 
conference delivered many lectures. The last sixth IECHE was held on 13–18 April 
2015. The fate of the next conference is not yet clear, after higher education became 
the responsibility of the Ministry of Education, after 40 years of it being a separate 
department.
Many researchers have investigated KASP; see Pavan (2013), Hilal and Denman 
(2013, 2015) and Abouammoh et al. (2014b). The impact of KASP programme on 
international peace and its impact on the development of the socio-economic and 
socio-structural of Saudi Arabia has been investigated and shown to imply various 
positive aspects.
It is worth noting that the establishment of the Centre for Higher Education 
Research and Studies (CHERS) in 2000 has expressed the Saudi higher education 
awareness of the importance of research in higher education. At CHERS higher 
education, policy and decision makers have placed almost every new policy or aris-
ing challenge to academic investigation, discussion and research. CHERS has 
formed the think-tank and the research main arm for Saudi higher education system. 
The role of CHERS has boosted research and studies and other academic activities 
for higher education as a research discipline.
Also, the Saudi Journal of Higher Education (SJHE) is introducing in its bian-
nual issues very many aspects of academic research in Saudi higher education. The 
A.M. Abouammoh

335
SJHE has recently published its 14th issue which contains papers in both Arabic and 
English languages. One of the growing research bodies in the Saudi higher research 
community is the Academic Leadership Center (ALC). The ALC has started its 
activity in 2008, and it is expanding its activities in discussion of special interest 
group, workshop, training courses, seminars and webinars.
Challenges Facing Women in Saudi Higher Education
This separate section is mainly devoted to the various challenges facing female 
students in Saudi higher education. The growth in Saudi female higher education is 
tremendous compared to the development of male higher education in the kingdom. 
The first group of Saudi female students to enrol in higher education goes back to 
the 1970s. At present, female students comprise almost 42.5% of students in higher 
education and about 58% of university students. Furthermore, despite the modest 
ambitions of local women and the occasional external criticism of the structure and 
the distribution of female students in disciplines in higher education and of the slow 
empowerment process, the number of female graduates and the female voice and 
role in all sectors of life is growing. Female students’ issues in higher education are 
also covered in the previous sections and in the coming sections as well, since they 
are part of other activities in Saudi higher education.
Al-Issa et al. (2013) investigated, in a report, some policies to enhance higher 
education for women in Saudi Arabia. Their proposed policies are intended to over-
come challenges related to the limited available academic programmes for women, 
pathetic infrastructures and educational environments. In another report for CHERS, 
Abouamoh (2013) pointed out that GCC states have similar scholarship programmes 
for female citizens, but they have different policies and management procedures. 
Even so, the GCC programmes are different in their motivation, the obligations they 
place on students and in their assessment compared to scholarship programmes in 
other developed or developing countries.
It is notable that the female staff ratio in Saudi universities has increased from 
33% in 2005/2006 to 40.5% in 2013/2014. In reality, the number of female staff has 
surprisingly increased by about 240% during the same period.
AbdulCader and Anthony (2014) investigated various factors that affect the moti-
vation of universities in Saudi Arabia through surveys, using a sample of different 
nationalities, ranks and institutions. They indicated a lack of motivation to partici-
pate in programme development. In spite of the limitation of the sample, the study 
included useful and alarming results that can be of help to lawmakers in drafting 
new by-laws for Saudi HE.
Profanter (2014) considered the educational challenges facing women and stated 
that the Saudi Arabia of the twenty-first century is almost completely different from 
the Saudi Arabia of a century ago. However, the country is conservative and the 
female role is limited in almost all aspects of life. For instance, the unemployment 
ratio for women is 21.7%, whereas for men it is only 7.6%. Women have tradition-
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

336
ally enjoyed an equal role and a similar share of the market in preuniversity public 
education. Now, a growing number of Saudi women are studying medicine and 
medical allied sciences. Saudi women need an improvement in the transition from 
school education to empower them and qualify them in other fields in the work 
force. In order to implement the concept of gender equity and Saudisation effi-
ciently, the role of schools and university education has to consider this challenge 
(Profanter 2014). Despite the equity for both genders in enrolling for KASP pro-
grammes, women account for about 25% of the scholarship holders studying abroad. 
This is perhaps due to “mahram” requirements, which require the agreement of a 
male relative to accompany female students. It is not easy sometimes to find an 
available “mahram” to accompany the student, and in some countries, there is no 
legal status for the accompanying person to stay in a foreign country for the period 
of study, which might last for 1 year for a master’s programme and up to 7 years for 
a medical residency programme and fellowships. In some cases, women have to 
accept a place at a less prestigious university, in order to live in the mahram’s uni-
versity town, if the mahram chooses to pursue his studies. Other problems are han-
dled by Saudi Cultural attaches abroad to deal with family conflicts between female 
students and her mahram, as well as the separation of couples or in cases where the 
student completes her intended programme before her mahram.
In a recent paper, Elamin and Omair (2010) studied male attitudes towards 
females in the working environment. Jamjoom and Kelly (2013) reviewed different 
aspects of women’s achievements and challenges in higher education in Saudi 
Arabia, whereas Omair (2015) reviewed and discussed the literature related to the 
importance of developing female leadership capacities and effectiveness in Saudi 
higher education. In the same context, Abdallam (2015) reviewed and investigated 
the prospects of GCC women being or becoming leaders. These authors quoted 
many international articles investigating the barrier for the advancement of women 
in leadership roles in higher education. They also critically analysed similar articles 
in the context of Saudi higher education. It has been pointed out that these studies 
deal with the advancement of major external and internal issues created by univer-
sity cultures, gender social practices and attitudes towards female leadership. These 
factors have caused the underrepresentation of women in leadership roles in the 
higher education system. It is worth noting that similar barriers due to social and 
cultural aspects and attitudes towards the empowerment of women in higher educa-
tion systems arise in most of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states and other 
states in the Middle East. It may be surprising to note that job appointments in state 
leadership positions in some GCC states are based on family networks, rather than 
on qualifications and experience (Metcalfe 2007).
For example, job appointments in GCC states might be based on individual and 
family networks rather than on qualifications and competencies (Metcalfe 2007). 
The family idea of the role of men and women is viewed differently in the Middle 
East and is sometimes viewed as an extended form of sex discrimination in educa-
tion and in the labour market. In fact, the University of Kuwait, which is co-­
educational, for example, had its first female president in 1993, whereas the first 
female president of the female-only Princess Nora bint Abdul Rahman University in 
A.M. Abouammoh

337
Saudi Arabia was installed in 2006. Later, King Saud University in Riyadh founded 
the post of vice-president for female students in 2010. This may go in line with 
Hamdan’s (2005) argument that women can excel more in a female-only environ-
ment. In fact, in segregated, co-educational institutions, female under representation 
on management and decision-making levels is notable. It is not socially accepted in 
these institutions that women can be deans of academic colleges or sometimes can-
not be chairs of academic departments. The usual position for females in these insti-
tutions is that of vice-chairman for the female section in a department or vice-dean 
for female students. In an interesting survey, conducted by Al-Ahmadi (2011), it 
was shown that leadership challenges, such as structural, cultural and personal chal-
lenges, a lack of empowerment and a lack of resources are the main barriers towards 
the advancement of women in Saudi Arabia. It has always been argued that women 
are less experienced than their male colleagues, even if they have a higher academic 
rank. This argument can only be proved wrong if women are given equal opportuni-
ties and the same responsibilities and confidence as their male colleagues.
Nursing in Saudi hospitals is mainly a female-dominated sector. Until a decade 
ago, very few Saudi women chose nursing as a profession, whereas, for many years, 
there has been a lot of competition for university places in medicine and dentistry 
among Saudi women. Recently, the Ministry of Health has had to upgrade its former 
nursing qualification, which was equivalent to a two-year post high school diploma 
to a bachelor’s degree. It did so by offering bridging courses to improve its services 
and to comply with the World Health Organization (WHO), which requires people 
to have a bachelor’s degree as the entry requirement for working in most hospital 
professions. Lamadah and Sayed (2014), as well as Gazzaz (2009) among others 
considered the challenges facing nursing education in Saudi Arabia. They presented 
some international experience in preparing nurses to dome health systems. Nurses 
are mainly trained rather than educated, and thus some of their qualification pro-
grammes are hospital based. The nursing profession and training and practices are, 
for the most part, controlled by medicine. Senior Saudi nurses either have little or 
no command of the English language. The transportation from and to the hospital is 
always an issue in a country where women are not allowed to drive. All nursing col-
leges use to be training institutes governed by the Ministry of Health; it has only 
been in the last 5 years that they have been affiliated to the nearest university. The 
academic university set-up is not always appropriate for practical or technical col-
leges that link education strongly with training. Their bridging programmes and 
in-service training are difficult for working mothers, who need childcare almost at 
any time of the day and night, which is not easily available in Saudi Arabia.
To be fair to the political leadership in Saudi Arabia, there are no rules or by-laws 
that limit the development of women in higher education. On the contrary, most firm 
initiatives for women’s participation have come from the government. These initia-
tives included the appointment of a female deputy to the education minister, reserv-
ing one-third of the seats in the Majlis Ash-Shura (appointed Saudi Parliament) for 
women, encouraging the full participation of women in elections and their member-
ship of municipality elections and growing their representation in government high 
committees and in Saudi delegations in the international arena.
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

338
Challenges for Saudi Higher Education
The previous sections have given an overall idea of the size and the main character-
istics of Saudi higher education, which has more recently become a university edu-
cation. The Saudi system of higher education has been facing some challenges due 
to its local features, fast growth and due to new trends and the international competi-
tiveness of institutions. Many stakeholders and decision makers in Saudi higher 
education have acknowledged these challenges.
It has been pointed out that Saudis have a lot to do to improve education mobility 
and institutional integration. On the other hand, there are many voices in the Arab 
states calling for Arab Space in Higher Education (UNESCO 2009).
Issa and Siddiek (2012) studied the labour market challenges to higher educa-
tion. They stressed that university education is used elsewhere for the measure of 
growth of one nation or another. Furthermore, higher education has to lead to 
national development in every country. The most old Arab universities are founded 
in the twentieth century, for example, Syrian, currently University of Damascus, 
founded in 1923; Egyptian Government University, currently University of Cairo 
founded in 1925; and next Farouk the First, currently University of Alexandria, 
founded in 1942. Later on in the second half of the twentieth century, many univer-
sities had been established in almost every Arab state capital and major city. Even 
so, there are common challenges to all Arab universities, including those in Saudi 
Arabia. One of the major challenges is the coordination with the labour market, in 
terms of quantity, quality and specialisations. The main challenges in this area are 
the quality of education, the working skills, funding and the participation of stake-
holders and civil societies in laying down long-term policies.
In a review for health sciences education in Saudi Arabia, Telmesani et al. (2011) 
admitted that it is undergoing a phase of reform and expansion, and they urge that 
health educators implement accreditation and quality assurance. It has been noted 
that one of the potential challenges is the systematic planning of health education 
and the health sector and that it has to have more recognition internationally.
On the other hand, Iqbql and Enchenkov (2014) investigated the problems facing 
university-business collaborations in Saudi Arabia. They pointed to the strong cor-
relation between university-business and industry collaboration and the innovation 
performance of industry and the development of the higher education sector. This 
paper has also explored the differences and agreements on the perceptions of 
employers and academics regarding the skills and competencies needed or acquired 
by university graduates. This interesting study has shown that universities have to 
ensure students gain soft skills and that it is strongly advisable to expose students to 
in service-learning programmes. These processes would give a better chance to 
proper interaction between business and university education. In another context, 
Alfantookh and Bakry (2013) explored the role of creativity and innovation in 
development and their contribution to job creation and the prosperity of society. It 
has been stated that creativity implies knowledge and innovation is the tool to 
employ knowledge, in order to gain economic value. They also stressed that the 38 
A.M. Abouammoh

339
public and private universities can play a crucial role in transforming Saudi Arabia 
into a knowledge-based economy.
E-learning has expanded in many Saudi universities, and it is considered as an 
alternative to the old system of “entisab” or distance learning through mail corre-
spondence that was practised by some Saudi universities. Saudi universities have 
recognised the role and the advantages of e-learning in increasing the capacity of 
university education and improving many aspects of quality measures. Nowadays, 
there are many e-learning and e-education programmes at many Saudi universities. 
Until now, the practised mode has been blended e-learning, where 25% of the learn-
ing load is delivered through instruction on campus and almost all exams are done 
physically. The Saudi higher education authority, the Saudi Electronic University 
(SEU), does not recognise foreign e-learning degrees. Founded in 2012, it is grow-
ing fast and introducing new programmes almost every academic year. Consequently, 
this has discouraged other Saudi higher education authorities to expand significantly 
in e-learning. It has been formally agreed that other higher education programmes 
conducting e-learning have to be limited or left to the SEU only. Aljabre (2012) 
reviewed the challenges facing this type of higher education in Saudi Arabia and 
noted that there is a lot of public demand for e-learning despite various challenges. 
He anticipated that university policy makers needed to address the growing demand 
and expand in this mode of education. The SEU noted that there is a significant 
number of dropouts and withdrawals from some masters’ programmes, which might 
be due to unrealistic expectations by some students that e-learning is a softer option 
than traditional education. In fact, the vast size of Saudi Arabia and the long dis-
tances between towns and cities would make e-learning a good choice to spread 
education in rural areas.
Research funding is one of the major issues in Saudi higher education. Fifteen 
years ago, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) used to be 
the main source of research funding, other than the limited, itemised research fund 
in the university budget. In the past few years, the former Ministry of Higher 
Education has played a role in creating or encouraging other sources of research 
funding in the public and private sectors. In 2011, research funding in Saudi Arabia 
reached around 1% of the state’s GDP, with the government contribution being 
about 70%, while the rest came from various non-government sectors (MoHE 
2013). The spending on research, including research chairs and KASP, has almost 
doubled during the period 2010–2013; even its ratio to the GDP has fallen, since 
government oil revenues have increased dramatically. This spending ratio to GDP 
on research in Saudi Arabia is less than that of the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Japan and the Russian Federation, but it is higher than South Africa or 
Mexico (MoHE 2013).
The main challenges to private higher education are quality, funding and acces-
sibility. The government of Saudi Arabia encouraged non-profit, for-profit higher 
education at a time where there was a shortage of places in Saudi public higher 
education. Two years ago, in 2013, the Ministry of Higher Education admitted that 
there were tens of thousands of available places in many of the newly established 
universities. Even so, private higher education grew rapidly between 2005 and 
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

340
2015, due to the demand for higher education in this period. Students studying in 
private higher education colleges and universities were also financially supported 
through soft loans and generous scholarships. The history of non-profit private 
higher education in Saudi Arabia goes back to 1967, when a second university, 
namely, King Abdulaziz University, was founded as a private university. A few 
years later, it was taken over by the state upon a request from its private founders. In 
her PhD thesis, Jamjoom (2012) gave a full account of most of the factors, which 
motivated the emergence of private higher education in the 15 years up until 2012. 
She explored the perceptions of private higher education among various stakehold-
ers, in comparison to their counterparts in public higher education. There are many 
reasonable private higher education colleges and universities, but the Ministry of 
Higher Education has had to close some weak institutions and transfer their students 
to public universities. Jamjoom also presented other challenges and opportunities 
for private higher education in Saudi Arabia (Jamjoom 2012).
In an earlier PhD thesis, Alqasimi (2005) reviewed private higher education in 
GCC countries. She concluded that private higher education has a greater share of 
the higher education market in these countries. In fact, it is notable that in 2014 
about 5% of Saudi higher education students are in private institutions. Furthermore, 
due to a decrease in oil revenues it is expected that the Saudi government might fol-
low a more stringent policy for funding students and institutions in private higher 
education. Such a move might force many private colleges and universities to 
change the way they operate, especially the for-profit ones.
Most Saudi universities face problems in training and in the professional devel-
opment of teaching staff, as well as in recruiting excellent, expatriate academics and 
researchers. There are different pay scales and incentive packages for Saudi and 
non-Saudi staff. There is fierce competition to recruit excellent academics due to the 
expansion of higher education in Saudi Arabia and other GCC states. It is believed 
that endowments in some universities and private funding through research chairs 
might make things relatively easier for university management.
It was mentioned earlier that, at present, there are more than 160 000 Saudi stu-
dents studying in different parts of the world. These students are living in different 
environments. Some of these students are getting on fine with their cultural and 
academic lives, although it is expected that many, especially female students, might 
experience problems with acculturation. By acculturation, we mean adjusting prop-
erly to a foreign culture with no problems or few troubles that interfere with their 
studies. For instance, Abouammoh (2012) investigated the problems of accultura-
tion facing Saudi KASP students in Britain using quality analysis and indicated that 
because there is a large group of Saudi students studying in Britain there is a need 
for this study model in other parts of the world. It was pointed out that improper 
acculturation might, in some situations, force students to terminate their courses or 
it may have a negative impact on students’ performance (Al-Sheikhly 2012 and 
Abouammoh and Smith 2013).
Heyn (2013) conducted another interesting, qualitative study on male Saudi stu-
dents studying at Western Michigan University. The study looks at the many chal-
lenges facing Saudi students and their experiences in dealing with them.
A.M. Abouammoh

341
In fact, most of the selected applicants for KASP are excellent or very good stu-
dents. Conversely, most Saudi students who gained or were given KASP grants, 
after joining international schools at their own expense, form more than 50% of 
KASP programme holders and are either weak or less than average.
There are many benefits of KASP for Saudi Arabia, such as gaining access to 
leading academics, exposure to state-of-the-art facilities, mastering foreign lan-
guages and reducing the negative perceptions held by some foreigners about Saudi, 
Arab and Muslim cultures. Saudi students studying abroad can enhance some 
important work values and social behaviours, such as discipline, punctuality, 
teamwork, commitment to work and quality and perseverance. Abouammoh et al. 
(2014a, b) indicated that the pros far outweigh the cons in their review of Saudi 
scholarships to North American higher education institutions.
There is some criticism of KASP students in that a large portion of them who 
pursue graduate degrees might be overqualified to take up certain vacancies in the 
job market. Many of them are studying a master’s or a doctorate in business or other 
allied disciplines, which is often a very different discipline to the one they studied 
for their bachelor’s degree (HEO 2014). There is a high requirement to become 
university teaching staff. It is necessary, at the very least, to have very good grade 
on the first university degree, and all qualifications have to be in the same or a very 
closely linked discipline. Furthermore, qualifications have to be gained from well-­
recognised schools. These conditions make it difficult for many KASP graduates to 
join the teaching profession at Saudi universities (HECUL 1994).
On the other hand, students studying abroad, mostly women, might have prob-
lems readapting and readjusting to their own culture after coming back to Saudi 
Arabia (Alandejani 2013). The acculturation problem is an issue for almost all inter-
national students studying abroad (Almotery 2009; Mahmood 2014). This PhD the-
sis was done in a US non-metropolitan university, but the problem of acculturation 
can easily be extended to other education environments and other nationalities.
The internationalisation of Saudi higher education is another issue to be investi-
gated. In fact, international students at Saudi higher education institutions increased 
from 2.2% in 2005/2006 to 4.8% in 2013/2014. This is less than the ratio of inter-
national students in many higher education systems in advanced countries and in 
many world-class universities, which is between 10% and 15% of the student popu-
lation. Conversely, the ratio of expatriate or international staff in Saudi higher edu-
cation institutions has slightly decreased from 42.9% in 2005/2006 to 42.5% in 
2013/2014 (HESC 2015). Actually, the number of non-Saudi teaching and research 
staff has experienced an increase of 161% during the same period. The concept of 
having an all-Saudi university staff is not the objective of almost all higher educa-
tion stakeholders, but the high ratio of non-Saudi staff indicates the need to intro-
duce more effective programmes to address the growing need for Saudi staff at old 
and newly established universities.
One other challenge facing higher education in Saudi Arabia is the teaching and 
learning of English. At present, medicine, dentistry, engineering, most medical and 
basic sciences are taught in English at most Saudi universities. Furthermore, many 
of the KASP students, the majority of whom are studying in English speaking 
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

342
­countries, face problems learning the language. KASP students who are graduates 
from international high schools or some of the few excellent public high schools in 
Saudi Arabia may not need more than a semester of learning English to join univer-
sity. On the other hand, many students may take up to 21 months or more to be able 
to acquire sufficient English to pursue their university education. Few might find 
that the English language is a very big obstacle to overcome, which may even con-
tinue to be a problem after graduation. This problem has been tackled in many 
postgraduate theses and research papers published in international journals. 
Learning English in Saudi Arabia or studying it abroad, for about 2 years in some 
cases, costs students a lot of time and money. Mahib ur Rahman and Alhaisoni 
(2013) pointed out some of the main problems associated with learning English in 
Saudi Arabia, such as the proficiency of teachers and the lack of books, exposures, 
practice skills and assessment methods (Grami 2010). Orth (2015) recently consid-
ered other issues associated with acculturation and the experiences of Saudi stu-
dents at an Australian university in a PhD thesis. In fact, even the change for Saudi 
students from a single gender environment in Saudi Arabia to a mixed gender envi-
ronment abroad, and the issues related to this, can be an interesting field of research 
(Alhazmi and Nyland 2015).
In recent years some Saudi writers, academicians and intellectuals have pub-
lished articles and books about Saudi education in general and higher education in 
particular. All of those books are published in Arabic language. They have given 
critical analysis of the development of Saudi higher education in its competitive-
ness, conservatism and identity. Here, we state four of these titles, namely, “Reform 
of Saudi Education: Absence of Vision and Policy, Suspicious of Religious Culture 
and the Enable Education Administration by Al-Esa (2009)”, Saudi Higher 
Education: Search Journey for Identity” by Al-Esa (2010), “Infiltration of the Ivory 
Tower: Reading of Geopolitical Transformation and Ideological Impact on the 
Structure and Policy of Saudi Higher Education” and “Higher Education in Saudi 
Arabia: Traditionalism with Interest in Technology and Business” by Othman 
(2015). In spite of the harsh criticisms, as reflected as well in their titles, to Saudi 
higher education system, they have proposed, in addition to some controversial 
judgments, many issues of concern that make significant research topics in the 
future development of Saudi higher education. Callous self-criticisms of education 
systems by nationals of education and academic community are noted in many 
countries, including developed ones, in the world. One may note that untraditional 
ideas and proposal are mostly controversial, but they bring interest and motivate 
further discussion and assessment of education policies. On the contrary, various 
characteristics of Saudi higher education have been eulogised by many authors, for 
instance, Pavan (2013, 2015), Pavan and Alfahadi (2014), Hilal and Denman (2013, 
2015) among many others.
A.M. Abouammoh

343
CHERS in Saudi Higher Education
Notwithstanding the fact that half a century has passed since the establishment of 
the first Saudi university and the higher education system has experienced quantita-
tive and geographical expansions along with a reasonable qualitative development, 
the research in higher education has started, somewhat late. The establishment of 
the Centre for Higher Education Research and Studies, known by CHERS goes to 
the year 2000. CHERS has created awareness and emphasises the importance of 
higher education research as a discipline in higher education. CHERS has aimed 
since its beginning to form an academic platform for discussion of various issues, 
challenges and problems facing achieving objectives or development of Saudi 
higher education. The major roles of CHERS are:
	1.	 Building excellent research environment to study higher education issues
	2.	 Provide policy initiatives and analysis for Saudi higher education
	3.	 Enhance the capacity of Ministry of Higher Education, at present Ministry of 
Education, in research
	4.	 Participate in improving and developing the international competitiveness of 
Saudi higher education
	5.	 To be a think-tank in studying higher education challenges
	6.	 To provide reliable source for information on higher education trends and 
developments
	7.	 Building partnership and collaboration with other similar international research 
institutions
CHERS has adopted various activities to perform research activities through the 
following means:
	1.	 Issuing a “Readings in Higher Education” monthly publication of recent interna-
tional research outputs and initiatives in higher education
	2.	 Publishing the “Saudi Journal of Higher Education”
	3.	 Holding an electronic database for all statistics and research work related to 
Saudi higher education
	4.	 Supporting writing books in various aspects of Saudi higher education
	5.	 Translating selected books in higher education in collaboration with UNESCO, 
OECDE and CHEPS in the Netherlands
	6.	 Organizing group discussions, workshops, seminars and conferences
	7.	 Supporting research projects on challenges, possible development or policy 
assessment of Saudi higher education, carried out mostly by Saudi 
academicians
CHERS is fully supported by the Saudi government through the Ministry of 
Higher Education in the past 14 years and the Ministry of Education since about 2 
years ago. CHERS is not a big unit where it employs consultants, all of them acade-
mician on full time who are on leave from Saudi universities. The number of con-
sultants has varied, in the past, from 4 to 12 according to tasks and availability of 
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

344
interested staff, but other researches are done by collaborative researcher on con-
tract or part-time basis from Saudi universities.
Therefore one can state that CHERS has boosted, significantly, research activi-
ties in higher education in Saudi Arabia; see CHERS (2014, 2015).
Due to initiatives of CHERS, the following present indispensable institutions of 
Saudi higher education have been established:
	1.	 The National Commission for Academic Accreditation and Assessment 
(NCAAA) in higher education. It assesses and accredits programs and 
institutions.
	2.	 The Saudi National Centre for Assessment in Higher Education (NCAHE). It 
organises various tests for enrolment in higher education and its graduates.
	3.	 The National Centre for E-Learning in higher education. It develops material and 
provides training for Saudi e-learning staff and technicians.
Recently CHERS has proposed, through its study teams, the need for 
establishing:
	1.	 National Academic Recognition and Information Centre (NARIC) for providing 
information about Saudi higher education institution laws and regulations and 
provides policy and procedures for recognising foreign qualification based on 
reliable information
	2.	 The National Teaching and Learning Centre (NTLC) for building excellent 
teaching and learning environment through training programs
The needs for these and other coordinating bodies in funding, national qualifica-
tion framework, quality assurance and integration among institutions are becoming 
indispensable at present day of the history of Saudi higher education. The recent 
merger of both Ministry of Higher Education and Ministry of Education in one 
administration department has made the new department as the largest central 
administration body in the Saudi government. This huge administration body might 
have motivated two consecutive ministers of education to consider granting all 
Saudi universities much wider autonomy. Saudi research communities in higher 
education are, at present, facing abundance of new challenges and opportunity at 
time to align with the Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 (2016) which is forming the whole 
development process including the structure, policies and the management of Saudi 
higher education.
SJHE in Saudi Higher Education
The Saudi Journal of Higher Education (SJHE) forms a very specialized stage for 
the Saudi higher education researchers; see SJHE (2016). The SJHE has recently 
published its 14th issue of its biannual issues. The SJHE has appeared for the first 
time in 2005 and continued for 2 years, but it was not published for few years later 
until 2012 when it has started to appear regularly in the past 5 years. This journal is 
A.M. Abouammoh

345
peer-reviewed and publishes original research articles in addition to book reviews 
and PhD thesis abstracts related to Saudi higher education.
The journal has discussed many issues related to the challenges and development 
of Saudi higher education. In fact, the academic freedom in the light of the Saudi 
higher education regulations, the perception of students for aptitude tests of 
NCAHE, the women leadership in higher education, the alternative financing ven-
ues for Saudi higher education, the role of community colleges in Saudi higher 
education, the pros and cons of the prep year in Saudi university education and the 
impact of King Abdullah Scholarship Program (KASP) on Saudi higher education 
are some of the area topics that received more attention in research. These and other 
related topics have been discussed in papers published at the SJHE. The Arabic 
language articles published in SJHE complement the article published in a monthly 
four-page issue entitled “Selected Readings in Higher Education”, published by 
CHERS as well, targeting the non-English speaking in the Saudi higher education 
research community.
The ALC in Saudi Higher Education
The Academic Leadership Center (ALC) is considered, at present, the main stage 
for the Saudi higher education research and leadership community in Saudi Arabia; 
see Al-Swailem and Elliott (2013) and ALC (2016). The Ministry of Higher 
Education at that time, now Ministry of Education, has established this centre in 
2009 in recognition for the need of building and enhancing leadership capacity in 
higher education. Also, ALC existence acknowledges the significant role and fea-
sible impact of learned and well-trained leadership on quality and successful man-
agement of higher education institutions. The centre has stated its mission as “To 
provide developmental programs and assistance in leadership for higher education 
institutions, administrators, and leaders enabling them to be more successful and 
effective”. The ALC main goals are to develop leadership culture, enhance effective 
leadership and network leaders and institutions with good practices at locally and 
globally. The ALC is growing slowly but firmly and expanding its activities to 
include more issues of higher education and additional spectrum of various levels of 
leadership in Saudi public universities. The ALC arranged several developmental 
activities to address the need of Saudi higher decision makers and educators. The 
ALC has used various means to achieve its goals including conducting workshops 
for Saudi university presidents, vice-presidents, academic deans, department chairs 
and promising future leaders. The ALC is also conducting training on various levels 
of higher education leadership skills as well as running training-the-trainers pro-
gramme to increase its impact through growing number of its associates and fel-
lows. Moreover, the ALC is involved in other activities such as conferences, 
symposia, mentorship programs, consultation, specialized interest group meetings, 
seminars and webinars.
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

346
In addition, the ALC emphasises that one of its services is running research and 
studies to quantify good practices and investigate new trends in various higher edu-
cation systems and their proper implementation in the Saudi higher education 
­set-­up. The ALC is the only body of its kind in the Arab world, and its services are 
likely to be needed and might be extended to the Cooperation Council for the Arab 
States of the Gulf (GCC). These six states, of the GCC, namely, Bahrain, Kuwait, 
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates, have very similar higher 
education systems and have other joint regional institutions and centres in 
education.
The ALC is expected to be leading higher education community in research in 
the field of higher education in Saudi Arabia. In particular, the Saudi system of 
higher education, at present, is on the verge of major changes in its governance, 
public policies, privatisation, management and funding. These new sets of chal-
lenges and opportunities are attributed to the new Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 and 
the 2020 National Transformation Plan which introduces new growth approaches 
for all development sectors of Saudi Arabia; see Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 (2016).
Conclusion
This chapter is restricted to the main, very significant challenges facing Saudi higher 
education, which make it a very fertile field of research. It is also worth mentioning 
that there are other aspects, related to challenges that have been discussed in differ-
ent master and doctoral research projects in Saudi Arabia and in different universi-
ties around the world.
It is worth noting that the higher education system in Saudi Arabia is in the pro-
cess of changing its mission, vision, structure and governance. The merge of both 
department of pre-university and higher education was one of the recent aspects. 
The introduction of the Saudi Educarion Evaluation Commission (EEC), on 7 May, 
2016, headed by a state minister and reports to the prime minister is another aspect 
of changes and of the priority of higher education role in the state developments. 
The new commission has included the NCAAA, the NCAHE and other evaluation 
and assessment sections of the public education in the Kingdom.
The field of Saudi higher education research is considered relatively young, com-
pared to other higher education systems in developed and many developing coun-
tries. The first university in the kingdom, namely, King Saud University in Riyadh, 
will reach its 60th anniversary in 2017. The fast growth in the number of universi-
ties, students and staff and the emergence of private higher education and the pio-
neering King Abdullah Scholarship Program (KASP) have given rise to many 
challenges and controversial issues. Furthermore, internationalisation and globali-
sation, quality assurance, visibility on research classification podiums and non-­
sustainable funding are putting additional external stress on the higher education 
system. The impact of this programme on Saudi society and the gained knowledge 
A.M. Abouammoh

347
and learning and research skills of Saudi students abroad and their acculturation 
with other societies is a multidimensional field of research.
There are also many issues to be investigated in the field of self-governance of 
universities, integration of the Saudi higher education system and increasing the 
ratio of Saudi teaching staff, as well as international students.
Foreign higher education introduction in the Saudi system of higher education 
was a very controversial issue and might face much social, language, financial and 
religious challenges. Reasonable governance for the provision of foreign higher 
education that take into account most concerns of all stakeholders would need a lot 
of research, discussion and new policies. Saudi Arabia, see Saudi Arabia’s Vision 
2030 (2016), and its National Transformation Plan have dealt with many challenges 
that foreign higher education and private higher education might face.
Stakeholders in the Saudi higher education system and Saudi academics have 
realised the volume of issues that the Saudi higher education system has, requiring 
additional or deeper research and investigation.
To assist researchers and research students, the Centre for Higher Education 
Research and studies (CHERS) was founded in 2001, and King Saud Chair for 
Higher Education Studies, based at the Imam Mohammed bin Saud University in 
Riyadh, was founded in 2015. The purpose of CHERS and the research chair is to 
support researchers and graduate students in their investigations into the various 
features and characteristics of Saudi higher education and the many challenges it 
faces. In fact, there are research centres in colleges of education in almost every 
Saudi university. This might be due to the historical background of some of these 
universities, which started life as colleges of education.
Research appears in the Saudi Journal of Higher Education, which has been pub-
lished biannually since 2004. It has revealed the wide range of topics that have been 
of concern to various stakeholders in Saudi higher education. The last issue of the 
journal was published online only. Example of issues; of concern to the research 
community in Saudi Arabia, mission differentiation of institutions, parallel higher 
education i.e. formal degree programme offered in the evening, alternative funding, 
private for-profit higher education, internationalisation and globalisation of Saudi 
higher education, roles of community colleges and appropriate governance of uni-
versities along wider autonomy.
The Academic Leadership Center (ALC) has also participated considerably in 
building effective ambience for wider higher education research community in 
Saudi Arabia. Bringing leaders, at various levels of university management, and 
enhancing their leadership skills and inspire them to discuss challenges and experi-
ences along with some distinguished international experts are one of the key ALC’s 
programmes and objectives. Thus, different activities of the ALC form an important 
Saudi research and learning community into the field of higher education.
The Saudi Higher Education Observatory at the Ministry of Education provides 
information about the status of international higher education to decision makers. 
The observatory also regularly publishes indicators of the status of Saudi higher 
education and compares it with its international counterparts. Analysis of these indi-
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

348
cators by quantitative and qualitative studies on many variables is very important to 
the Saudi higher education system.
We have researched a few of the many master’s and PhD theses and the very 
many research papers in specialised academic journals that have considered vital 
issues concerning Saudi higher education. There are many challenging issues, such 
as a women’s role in higher education, acculturation of KASP students in more than 
28 countries and the readaptation of students in their native culture. There are also 
issues concerning the financing of higher education, gender equity, quality and new 
governance, which require further investigation and discussion.
The transition and regenerative aspects and research activity in Saudi higher edu-
cation motivated many international institutions to consider it as a field of research 
through either collaborative research papers of Saudi and non-Saudi authors or the 
yearly conference of higher education in Riyadh with participation of all Saudi 
university and many foreign universities. Almost all major activities and projects of 
CHERS and ALC and other university conferences, seminars and workshops in 
higher education issues have some selected experts in higher education from inter-
national leading institutes in the world. In the past few years, many research theses 
have been written in the United Kingdom, the United States and Australian universi-
ties that reflect interest of international research communities as well in the Saudi 
higher education.
Based on previous discussions, it is strongly recommended that research into the 
challenges, potential and future trends of Saudi higher education have to be the 
priority of the Ministry of Education. Higher education or university research cen-
tres on policy studies, in particular, is urgently needed. One may also look into vari-
ous aspects of Saudi university development programmes for the physical, human 
resources, governance and funding and put them to research and critical analysis. 
This approach will provide solutions to existing problems, alternative avenues to 
face challenges and proper management to attain the objectives of higher education, 
as well as enhancing the learning process.
Acknowledgement  The author is grateful to the editors; his colleagues at CHERS, Riyadh; Dr. 
Omar Al-Swailem of ALC at KFUPM, Dhahran; and Bedour Abouammoh of the Saudi Electronic 
University, Riyadh, for their constructive remarks in parts of this chapter.
References
AAFAQ. (2011). The future plan for the university education in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia: 
Executive plan. Riyadh: MoHE.
Abdallam, I. A. (2015). Being and becoming a leader: Arabian Gulf women managers’ perspec-
tive. International Journal of Business and Management, 10(1), S5–39.
AbdulCader, A., & Anthony, P. J. (2014). Motivational issues of Faculty in Saudi Arabia. Higher 
Learning Research Communications, 4(4), 78–8.4.
Abouammoh A. M. (2009) The role of education: Reform trends and EU-GCC cooperation. In 
The EU and the GCC: Challenges and prospects (pp. 72–94). Dubai: Gulf Research Center.
A.M. Abouammoh

349
Abouammoh, B.  A. (2012). The King Abdullah scholarship programme and its impact on 
social behaviour of Saudi young men and women. MSc thesis Sheffield Hallam University, 
Sheffield, UK.
Abouamoh, B. A. (2013). Scholarship program in some GCC and developed countries. Report 2, 
Development of Scholarship Program in Saudi Arabia, CHERS. Riyadh: MoHE.
Abouammoh, A. M., & Mazi, A. A. (2010). International higher education institutions in the Arab 
states: historical developments and trends. In H. K. Haui, & P. Asaias (Eds.), Association for 
Development of the Information Society (IADIS) Proceeding of the interational conference on 
higher education (pp. 108–112).
Abouammoh, B., & Smith, L. (2013). Social issues confronting Saudi students undertaking inter-
national study: An exploratory investigation. International Journal of Innovation, Creativity 
and Change, 1(1). http://www.ijicc.net/index.php/component/content/article/2-aricles-/4-vol-­
1-issue-1-2013.html
Abouammoh, A. M., Smith, L. R., & Duwais, A. M. (2014a). A review of Saudi scholarship pro-
grams to North American higher education institutions. International Journal of Humanities 
and Social Science, 4(1), 41–49.
Abouammoh, A. M., Smith, L., & Duwais, A. (2014b). King Abdullah’s foreign scholarship pro-
gram a global perspective. Saudi Journal of Higher Education, 12, 10–40.
Abouammoh, A. M., Dousary, M. M., Rasheed, A. S., & Al-Khudair, K. M. (2015). Integration 
of higher education system in Saudi Arabia (Report published by CHERS). Riyadh: MoHE.
Al-Ahmadi, H. (2011). Challenges facing women leaders in Saudi Arabia. Human Resource 
Development. International, 14(2), 149–166.
Alamri, M. (2011). Higher education in Saudi Arabia, Journal of Higher Education Theory and 
Practice, 11(4), 88–M91.
Alandejani, J. (2013). Coming home after studying abroad: How Saudi female scholars readapt, 
re-adjust, and transfer their knowledge. Ph.D.  Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, USA.
ALC. (2016), Academic leadership center, Ministry of Education, Saudi Arabi Website, sighted 
Dec 3, 2016 http://www.alc.edu.sa/
Al-Esa, A. M. (2009). Reform of Saudi education: Absence of vision and policy, suspicious of 
religious culture and the enable education administration. In Arabic. Beirut: Alsaqi House.
Al-Esa, A.  M. (2010). Saudi higher education: Search journey for identity. In Arabic. Beirut: 
Alsaqi House.
Alfantookh, A., & Bakry, S. H. (2013). Creativity and innovation in higher education research: 
Problems and solutions. International Journal of Knowledge Society Research, 4(1), 90–107.
Alhazmi, A. H., & Nyland, B. (2015). Contextualization of Saudi international students’ experi-
ence in facing the challenge of moving to mixed gender environments. American International 
Journal of Contemporary Research, 5(2), 87–97.
Al-Isa, E. S., Al-Aqeel, S. A., & Al-sbayye, H. E. (2013). Enhancement of higher education for 
Female in Saud Arabia: Proposed polices. In Arabic, CHERS. Riyadh: MoHE.
Aljabre, A. (2012). An exploration of distance learning in Saudi Arabian universities: Current prac-
tices and future possibilities. International Journal of Business, Humanities and Technology, 
2(2), 132–137.
Almotery M. (2009). Saudi studying expectation, motivation and experience, M.Ed. University of 
Wisconsin. La Crosse, Wisconsin, USA.
Alqasimi, H.  A. (2005). Future vision for the private Higher education in the GCC states. 
Ph.D. Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
Al-Sheikhly N. (2012). Saudi Arabian women pursuing higher education at Oregon State University 
unpublished master of arts (interdisciplinary studies), Oregon State University.
Al-Swailem, O. A. & Elliott, G. (2013). The learning experience of Saudi Arabian higher educa-
tion leadership: Characteristics and global success. In L. Smith, & A. Abouammoh (Eds.), 
Higher education in Saudi Arabia: Achievements, challenges and opportunities (pp. 37–48). 
Dordrecht: Springer.
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

350
Bhattacharjee, Y. (2011). Saudi universities offer cash in exchange for academic prestige. Science, 
334, 1344–1345.
CHERS. (2014). The Centre for Higher Education Research and Studies: Developments, objec-
tives and achievements. Riyadh: Ministry of Higher Education.
CHERS. (2015). Cited November 29, 2013. http://chers.edu.sa/ar/default.aspx
Elamin, A. M., & Omair, K. (2010). Male attitudes towards working females in Saudi Arabia. 
Personnel Review, 39(6), 746–766.
Gazzaz, L. (2009). Saudi nurses’ perceptions of nursing as an occupational choice: A qualitative 
interview study. Ph.D. thesis submitted to the University of Nottingham, Nottingham, England.
Goddard, J., & Kempton, L. (2011). Connecting universities to regional growth: A practical guide. 
Brussels: European Union, Regional Policy.
Grami, M.A. (2010). The effects of integrating peer feedback into university-level ESL writ-
ing curriculum: A comparative study in a Saudi context. PhD thesis Newcastle University, 
Newcastle, UK.
Hamdan, A. (2005). Women and education in Saudi Arabia: Challenges and achievements. 
International Education Journal, 6(1), 42–64.
HECUL. (1994). The higher education Council and university law. Riyadh: MoHE.
HEDI. (2011). Higher education indicators, observatory on higher education. Riyadh: 
MoHE.  Cited Oct 1, 2015. http://he.moe.gov.sa/en/studyinside/universitiesStatistics/Pages/
default.aspx
HEO. (2014). The monthly report of Saudi students studying abroad, July 2014, Higher Education 
Observatory, MoHE, Riyadh Saudi Arabia.
HESC MoE. (2015). Higher education statistics center, Cited November 20, 2015. http://he.moe.
gov.sa/en/studyinside/universitiesStatistics/Pages/default.aspx
Heyn, M. E. (2013) Experiences of male Saudi Arabian international students in the United States 
Western Michigan University. Ph.D. Western Michigan University, Michigan, USA.
Hilal, K. T., & Denman, B. D. (2013). Education as a tool for peace? The King Abdullah scholar-
ship program and perceptions of Saudi Arabia and UAE post 9/11. Higher Education Studies, 
3(2), 24–40.
Hilal, K. T., & Denman, B. D. (2015). The political, socio-economic and sociocultural impacts 
of the King Abdullah scholarship program (KASP) on Saudi Arabia. International Journal of 
Higher Education, 4(1), 254–267.
Iqbql, A., & Enchenkov, M. (2014). Market tested business education: Corporate sector percep-
tions of Saudi graduates competencies. Asia-Pacific Journal of Cooperative Education, 15(2), 
91–106.
Issa, A. T. A., & Siddiek, A. G. (2012). Higher education in the Arab world & challenges of labor 
market. International Journal of Business and Social Science, 3(9), 146–151.
Jamjoom, Y. (2012). Understanding private higher education in Saudi Arabia – Emergence, devel-
opment and perceptions. London: Institute of Education, University of London.
Jamjoom, F. B., & Kelly, P. (2013). Higher education for women in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
In L. Smith, & A. Abouammoh (Eds.), Higher education in Saudi Arabia: Achievement, chal-
lenges and opportunities (pp. 117–125). Dordrecht: Springer.
KFUPM. (2015). Cited October 2, 2015. http://www4.kfupm.edu.sa/iab/docs/IAB_NEWS_17.pdf
Lamadah, S. M., & Sayed, H. Y. (2014). Challenges facing nursing profession in Saudi Arabia. 
Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 4(7), 20–25.
Mahib ur Rahmand, E. M., & Alhaisoni, E. (2013). Teaching English in Saudi Arabia prospects 
and challenges. Academic Research international, 4(1), 112–118.
Mahmood, H. (2014). An analysis of acculturative stress, sociocultural adaptation, and satis-
faction among international students at a non-metropolitan university. Ph.D. thesis, Western 
Kentucky University, Kentucky, USA.
Mazi, A. A., & Abouammoh, A. M. (2009). Development of Higher Education in the Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia: Trends and strategies. For presented at the Global Higher Education Forum 
GHEF09 13–16 December, 2009, Penang, Malaysia. http://faculty.ksu.edu.sa/abouammoh/
A.M. Abouammoh

351
Reports%20and%20papers%20in%20HE/Development%20of%20higher%20education%20
at%20KSA,%20%20GHEF2009%20.pdf
Metcalfe, B.  D. (2007). Gender and human resource management in the Middle East. The 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 18(1), 54–74.
MOHE. (2013). Spending on research and development in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: 
Deputy Ministry for Planning and Information, MoHE.
OECD. (2000). Investing in education: Analysis of the 1999 world education indicators. Paris, 
France.
OECD. (2003). Financing education – Investment and returns: Analysis of the world education 
indicators. Paris, France.
Omair, O. A. (2015). Female leadership capacity and effectiveness: A critical analysis of the lit-
erature on higher education in Saudi Arabia. International Journal of Higher Education, 4(4), 
81–93.
Orth, A.  M. (2015). International students perception of their experience in higher education 
in Australia, a focus on saudi arabian students in their first year of a business in a major 
Australian university. D.Ed. Queensland University of Technology.
Othman, N. (2015). Higher education in Saudi Arabia; typical with interest in technology and 
business. Beirut: Jadawel.
Palvin, S.  E. (2012). Employability of graduates and higher education management systems. 
Conference Proceeding, 22–23 September Final Report of DEHEMS project, Vienna, Austria.
Pavan, A. (2013). A new perspective on the quest for education: The Saudi Arabian way to knowl-
edge society. Higher education. Studies, 3(6), 25–34.
Pavan, A. (2015, August 24–27). Higher education in the GCC: The Saudi Arabia case study, 
at the 6th Gulf research meeting, organised by the Gulf Research Center at the University of 
Cambridge.
Pavan, A., & Alfahadi, A. (2014). Glocal higher education in Saudi Arabia. Developments and 
challenges, at the International Journal of Arts and Sciences (IJAS) conference for academic 
disciplines on Harvard Campus, Boston, pp. 26–30.
Porter, M. E. (2007). Colleges and universities and regional economic development: A strategic 
perspective. Forum for the Future of Higher Education. Excerpted from Forum Futures 2007, 
Forum for the Future of Higher Education Cambridge, MA, pp. 41–44.
Profanter, A. (2014). Achievements and challenges in the educational realm in Saudi Arabia. 
Paper presented online at the AIIC 2014, 2nd annual international interdisciplinary conference, 
Azores Island, Portugal.
Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030. (2016). Thw Saudi Arabia’s and the national Transformation Program 
Website, sited November 25. http://vision2030.gov.sa/en
Schmuecker, K., & Cook, W. (2012). Beyond bricks and mortar boards universities and the future 
of regional economic development. Newcastle Upon Tyne: IPPR North.
SJHE. (2016). The Saudi Journal of Higher Education. Website sighted in November 5, 2016, 
http://chers.moe.gov.sa/ar/Publications/Pages/SaudiJournal.aspx
Telmesani, A., Zaini, R. G., & Ghazi, H. O. (2011). Medical education in Saudi Arabia: A review 
of recent developments and future challenges. East Mediterranean Health Journal 17, 703–707
UNESCO. (1991). World education report 1991. UNESCO, Printed in France.
UNESCO. (1995). Policy paper for change and development in higher education. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO. (1998). World declaration on higher education for the 21st century: Vision and action. 
In Proceedings of the world conference on higher education, UNESCO, Paris, France.
UNESCO. (2005). Guidelines for quality provision in cross-border higher education. Paris: 
UNESCO.
UNESCO. (2009). Towards an Arab higher education space: International challenges and societal 
responsibilities. L. Bechir (Ed.). Beirut: UNESCO Regional Bureau for Education in the Arab 
States.
19  The Regeneration Aspects for Higher Education Research in the Kingdom of Saudi…

352
Abdulrahman M.  Abouammoh  is, at present, a professor at Department of Statistics and 
Operations Research, King Saud University, Riyadh. He obtained his MSc from University of 
Sheffield, England, in 1976 and his PhD from University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, in 
1978. He was chairman for Department of Statistics and Operations Research (1981–1983), vice-
dean for School of Graduate Studies (1983–1987), vice-dean for College of Science (1987–1991) 
and dean for College of Science (1995–1998), at King Saud University. He was member of the 
Shura Council (parliament) of Saudi Arabia (1998–2002), member of the governing board for the 
NCAAA on higher education (2005–2009), member of Supervising Committee of Long-Term 
Planning for University Education in Saudi Arabia (2005–2008) and member of Strategic Planning 
Team for King Saud University (2008–2009). He was a senior consultant at CHERS, Ministry of 
Higher Education, Saudi Arabia (2002–2015). He is an author and co-author of several published 
books and research articles in higher education.
A.M. Abouammoh

Part V
Conclusion

355
Chapter 20
Higher Education Research in Asia: History, 
Development and Challenges
Jisun Jung, Hugo Horta, and Akiyoshi Yonezawa
Abstract  The book demonstrates the rapid evolution of higher education research 
in most Asian countries, particularly in East Asia, in terms of both the number of 
researchers and publications and the diversity of research themes and methodolo-
gies. However, higher education research in some countries in Asia is comparatively 
underdeveloped, underlying an inequality in terms of development of higher educa-
tion research communities. This seems to be related to the stage of development of 
the higher education systems themselves as well as to traditional thinking about the 
organisation of fields of knowledge and science. This chapter summarises main find-
ings of this book and answers to questions regarding identification of higher educa-
tion research in Asian countries in terms of researchers, research institutes, academic 
programmes, national journals and relationship with government. It also summarises 
what topics are being studied and what methodologies have been applied in Asian 
higher education research. The book finally suggests challenges of Asian higher 
education research and emphasizes on international outlook of community.
The field of higher education research is gaining legitimacy in most parts of the 
world, and its importance is increasingly recognised by academics and policy mak-
ers in national, regional and international settings (Altbach et al. 2006). However, 
little is still known about higher education research in Asia. There is no doubt that 
both the scale and the visibility of higher education in Asia are increasing, and 
numerous directions for research have been suggested by this growth. Nevertheless, 
higher education research in Asia has a relatively short history in international 
scholarship (Horta and Jung 2014; Jung and Horta 2013), and the understanding 
that higher education researchers and other practitioners based elsewhere in the 
J. Jung (*) • H. Horta 
Division of Policy, Administration and Social Sciences Education, Faculty of Education,  
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China
e-mail: jisun@hku.hk 
A. Yonezawa 
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Jung et al. (eds.), Researching Higher Education in Asia, Higher Education in  
Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-4989-7_20

356
world have of national higher education research communities in Asia is limited. 
This is not surprising, as even in continents that have developed, stable and thriving 
higher education, research communities with a long history of international partici-
pation and engagement work as ‘silos’ with much less interaction and knowledge 
exchange of ideas than would be anticipated (Tight 2014). If an international higher 
education research community is to grow and develop, it is critical not only that 
researchers from all over the world participate in it (currently, mainly higher educa-
tion researchers from North America, Europe and Oceania participate; see Jung and 
Horta 2015) but also that there is some knowledge of national higher education 
communities, their challenges, their history and development and their prospects for 
the future.
The aim of this book was to explore the evolution of higher education research 
in Asia from a comparative perspective. It is important to compare nations when 
investigating higher education research due to differences between countries in the 
number of active, productive and skilled researchers (among other issues; see 
Teichler 2014) but also to understand the importance placed on international journal 
publications in English and the influence of institutional and governmental priori-
ties on research (Atkinson 2013; Slaughter 2001). The crucial issue is to balance the 
view of the higher education research communities between their national evolu-
tion, the organisation that they have, who constitutes them and how they are provid-
ing new knowledge to local and national universities, students and other stakeholders, 
including policy implications for developing and improving policies and their con-
tribution and visibility to the international community. This balance relates, to a 
large extent, to issues of training, learning and formation that allow higher educa-
tion researchers to have the flexibility and ability (or lack thereof) of the domain of 
language (publishing in English internationally and in the national language(s) 
nationally), of writing styles and research standards – because developing research 
and writing to a national journal is not the same as writing for an international jour-
nal – and of scope and impact, as the topics that are of key relevance for national 
audiences may require an approach, focus and level of depth that may not be appro-
priate for an international audience (which the editors of the international journals 
will be quick on pointing out).
The book demonstrates the rapid evolution of higher education research in most 
Asian countries, particularly in East Asia, in terms of both the number of research-
ers and publications and the diversity of research themes and methodologies. 
However, higher education research in some countries in Asia is comparatively 
underdeveloped, underlying an inequality in terms of development of higher educa-
tion research communities. This seems to be related to the stage of development of 
the higher education systems themselves as well as to traditional thinking about the 
organisation of fields of knowledge and science. Indeed, higher education research 
has no fixed identity or conceptualisation in some Asian countries; and even when 
the importance of the field is acknowledged, sufficient resources and support may 
not be available. (This relates to the irony identified by Dennison in 1992, that 
J. Jung et al.

357
higher education research is considered increasingly important but not important 
enough apparently to be funded as it deserves to be.) The major question likely 
relates to the very existence of a higher education research community in Asia, as it 
was identified in the literature that studies in the Asian context – and published 
internationally – have been produced by only a few individual scholars on a very 
small number of institutions (Jung and Horta 2013). Through theoretical, historical 
and empirical exploration, this book has uncovered the development as well as the 
challenges faced by higher education research in Asia. In light of these findings, 
some strategies are suggested for broadening Asia’s higher education research 
community.
Is Higher Education an Independent Academic Field 
in National Contexts Across Asia?
The book commenced with a simple question regarding the recognition of higher 
education as an independent academic field in Asia. Based on the contributions of 
this book, it was concluded that higher education has received insufficient attention 
to make it an independent field of research in most Asian countries. This is unsur-
prising given the multidisciplinary nature of higher education research (Teichler 
1996) and its consequent openness to researchers from different fields (Macfarlane 
and Grant 2012). In many Asian countries, higher education research is a relatively 
young and emerging field. As amply illustrated by the Mongolian case study in this 
book, higher education research is often regarded as a means of planning future 
policy directions, evaluating policy outcomes and outlining policy implications, 
rather than as an independent intellectual discipline. In addition, as indicated by the 
Thailand case study, the main research areas targeted in Asian contexts are science- 
and technology-based rather than related to higher education, due to governments’ 
policy priorities. In operational terms, higher education research in Asia is still 
associated with only a limited number of specialised academic programmes, aca-
demic appointments, national scholarly associations and core journals, as evidenced 
by most of the country case studies detailed in this book. The Chinese context is 
somewhat different: higher education has received more recognition as a legitimate 
independent academic field, as it has been officially approved by China’s Ministry 
of Education and the Academic Degrees Committee of the State Council. 
Nevertheless, the author of the Chinese case study in this book noted that higher 
education research in China still lacks the status enjoyed by other social science 
disciplines.
20  Higher Education Research in Asia: History, Development and Challenges

358
Is There a Community of Higher Education Researchers 
in Asian Countries?
Rather than defining higher education research as a field, Tight (2004) described 
higher education ‘communities of practice’ comprising ‘groups or networks which 
help guide, regulate and make meaning of our lives, both in work and outside’ 
(p. 398). The growth of these communities is reflected by an increase in specialised 
academic programmes and academic appointments and the emergence of national 
scholarly societies and core journals (Altbach et al. 2006; Blackwell and Blackmore 
2003; Jones 2012). Some countries in Asia, such as Japan and China, have long 
boasted national communities of higher education researchers. However, Asia’s 
higher education community of practice is still vulnerable. Further academic spe-
cialisation and differentiation are needed to build up a community of Asian higher 
education scholars.
Researchers
To identify an academic community, it is important to determine the key national 
and international groups of researchers. In China and Japan, for example, the higher 
education research community has become more visible (since the 1990s in Japan 
and the 2000s in China) due to an increase in the number of professional higher 
education researchers and the volume of higher education policy research. This, in 
turn, arose from the establishment of specialised postgraduate programmes on 
higher education and the return of Chinese students enrolled on higher education 
courses overseas. In Korea, some major research universities have very recently 
recruited academics who specialise in higher education, and their research visibility 
is increasing. However, in many countries, the ‘critical mass’ of specialists (Jones 
2012) required for the development of higher education research is lacking, as 
researchers are from very diverse academic backgrounds. In some places, special-
ists in higher education are almost non-existent. In Macau, for example, there are 
very few local higher education researchers; most of the research in this field is 
conducted by scholars from universities in mainland China and some from Hong 
Kong. They tend to write short introductory papers on the history and development 
of Macau’s higher education or to conduct comparative studies of Macau, Hong 
Kong and/or other places. In Mongolia, higher education research is carried out 
almost exclusively by students and faculty members at state-owned higher educa-
tion institutions and members of the National Institute for Educational Research 
under the Ministry of Education.
J. Jung et al.

359
Research Institutes
In many Asian countries, numerous institutes, centres and academic units have been 
established to facilitate higher education research, which is often initiated by 
government-­driven institutes. For example, the National Higher Education Research 
Institute in Malaysia conducts policy research commissioned by the Department of 
Higher Education. However, higher education research units are lacking in Asian 
universities. Even in Korea, which has the highest university enrolment of all of the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, only three 
university research institutes focus on higher education research (Rumbley et al. 
2014). Elsewhere in Korea, research in this field is carried out as part of education 
research in general. China and Japan have some higher education research institu-
tions with a long history, such as those at Xiamen University and Hiroshima 
University, but these institutes are also responsible for providing consultancy and 
supporting governments and university authorities, as demonstrated by the Chinese 
case studies in this book. There are some benefits that can arise from combining 
research and practice in these institutes, and the resulting synergies can bring find-
ings of great interest to the research field and also to policymaking, but only if 
resources – human, financial and time – are not overly concentrated in mostly one 
of these activities. On the other hand, the recent launch of higher education research 
institutes in some Asian countries is quite promising. For example, the Centre for 
Higher Education Research and Studies was founded in Saudi Arabia in 2001, and 
the King Saud Chair for Higher Education Studies was founded in 2015 by the 
Imam Mohammad ibn Saud University in Riyadh to train higher education research-
ers and conduct higher education research. The establishment of these research 
institutes focusing on higher education research can illuminate issues concerning 
the characterisation and development of higher education in Middle Eastern coun-
tries that still remain largely unknown to other Asian, but also to worldwide 
audiences.
Academic Programmes
The number of higher education academic programmes varies significantly between 
countries. For example, 18 institutions in China are authorised to grant Ph.D. 
degrees in higher education, and students enrolled on 15 EdD programmes receive 
professional doctoral degrees. In addition, 91 higher education programmes and 96 
education economics and management programmes that address economic and 
administrative aspects of higher education have been established at the master’s 
level. Japan also has a few such programmes. However, very few higher education 
academic programmes are available in other countries in Asia. As illustrated in the 
case study of Korea, most Korean universities do not offer higher education 
20  Higher Education Research in Asia: History, Development and Challenges

360
programmes at the postgraduate level, although some colleges of education provide 
a few higher education-related curricula.
The situation is similar in many Southeast Asian countries. There are few mas-
ter’s programmes focusing on higher education in Malaysia and only one special-
ised doctoral programme (an EdD in higher education) offered by one of the 
country’s public universities. In Thailand, as revealed in the case study in this book, 
higher education is not yet offered as an independent course. Leading public univer-
sities offer courses covering higher education issues, but these belong to other gen-
eral education subjects, such as course and curriculum instruction, education 
management, education technology and subject-based education. The authors of the 
Taiwanese case study identified the reasons for the lack of academic programmes in 
higher education in Taiwan. Several attempts have been made to establish master’s-­
level programmes at various universities, but most have failed due to the limited job 
prospects for graduates. Although graduates of higher education programmes gen-
erally have expertise in university management, they find it difficult to acquire jobs 
in Asia’s higher education sector because university employees in many Asian pub-
lic universities have civil-servant status and are thus required to take a national 
exam rather than majoring in higher education at the postgraduate level. In Japan, 
higher education postgraduate scholars tend to work full time in the higher educa-
tion sector or even for the government and thus find it difficult to secure enough 
time and energy to pursue research leading to high-quality publications.
National Journals
Few national journals in Asia focus exclusively on higher education. To ensure its 
recognition as an independent area of enquiry, higher education requires an estab-
lished core of journals (Bayer 1983). In China and Japan, there are a few domestic 
academic associations specialising in higher education that issue journals on higher 
education research in Chinese and Japanese, respectively. Approximately 400 jour-
nals devoted to higher education are published in China, but only half a dozen are 
published nationally, while all the others are bounded by individual universities and 
seldom circulated outside their sponsoring institutions (Altbach et  al. 2006). 
However, higher education issues in Asia are usually dealt with in other general 
educational journals. As evident from the Korean and Taiwanese case studies, higher 
education issues are often published in journals in the fields of educational admin-
istration and policy, curriculum and instruction and educational technology and 
learning. In some cases, a specific field of knowledge leads higher education 
research. For example, Mongolia’s Journal of Medical Education publishes many 
innovative teaching issues. However, there are reasons to expect some change 
regarding the emergence of national publications focused on higher education 
research: the Saudi Journal of Higher Education has been published biannually 
since 2004, and the Saudi Higher Education Observatory at the Ministry of 
J. Jung et al.

361
Education provides decision makers with information on the status of international 
higher education.
Strong Link with Government
One of the distinctive features of higher education research in Asia is its strong link 
with government policymaking. In Singapore, for example, as evident from the case 
study, the development of higher education is largely determined by the govern-
ment, as well as by factors relating to globalisation, because the government is 
responsible not only for setting major policy directions but also for providing finan-
cial resources. In Malaysia, higher education has become a key policy concern, 
leading to the establishment of the Ministry of Higher Education in 2004. Research 
agendas in this field have since tended to follow the main directions for reform (Kim 
et al., 2015). The situation is similar in Thailand and Mongolia, as demonstrated in 
their respective case studies in this book. The Chinese case analysis revealed that 
since 2011, more than half of the articles on major publication databases in China 
have been supported by the state as part of various research funding projects. The 
fact that the higher education research communities in these Asian countries engage 
in research topics that result from responding to government needs for the assess-
ment of policies and challenges can be very positive, in the sense that governments 
are using the national communities – and their expertise – to inform policies and 
impact national higher education stakeholders. The drawback, however, relates to a 
possible over-reliance on these projects – including the resources that they pro-
vide – that can undermine academic freedom, autonomy and critical thinking of past 
and current government policies (see Rostan 2010; Savelsberg et al. 2002).
What Topics Are Being Studied and What Methodologies 
Have Been Applied in Asian Higher Education Research?
The policy-driven nature of higher education research in Asia is reflected in the 
main themes under study and methodologies applied. In many countries, the main 
research themes are government-level policy issues. In China, the majority of arti-
cles published on higher education investigate practical issues, and articles on sys-
tem policy are the most frequently published in educational journals in Korea. In 
Taiwan, policy directions, institutional activities and higher education reform are 
mainstream themes, with a current focus on higher education evaluation and rank-
ings, internationalisation/globalisation, marketisation and world-class universities. 
In Singapore, the major research themes are related to decentralisation, massifica-
tion, quality and excellence, globalisation, marketisation, internationalisation and 
entrepreneurialisation. As illustrated in the related case study, the major themes of 
20  Higher Education Research in Asia: History, Development and Challenges

362
higher education research in Singapore are directly related to policy guidance in line 
with national development priorities. This follows the trend in the international 
higher education literature, where many of the publications are country cases – iso-
lated or in comparison – that in a way are expected to be used as benchmarks that 
other countries can assess and use (Kuzhabekova et al. 2015).
However, in many other countries, the themes of higher education research are 
wide-ranging and dispersed. A range of areas of higher education are addressed, 
such as management, history, philosophy, sociology, curriculum and faculty devel-
opment and teaching and curriculum development, as demonstrated in the case 
studies of Mongolia and Thailand. Such research is only intermittently conducted 
and published, which tends to point to the strong participation of ‘part-time’ 
researchers (Harland 2012) who contribute to the knowledge in higher education 
but are not effectively part of the higher education research community. They do not 
frequently publish on higher education topics; sometimes they do not even publish 
in higher education research journals, and most of the time, they publish a single 
article due to having data or came across a case in their main field of teaching or 
professional experience that led to a publication in the higher education research 
literature (Horta and Jung 2014).
In terms of methodology, the Korean case study illustrated the tendency to base 
higher education research on policy documents produced by the government or sec-
ondary data obtained in other countries. Promisingly, however, the volume of quan-
titative, qualitative and mixed-methods empirical research is increasing, particularly 
in the East Asian and Southeast Asian research communities. This use of a variety 
of methods allows for a more inclusive set of perspectives on the challenges and 
issues, which will add value in terms of offering a richer and more nuanced under-
standing of the reasons such challenges exist in the first place and then for devising 
possible solutions for them to be tackled. This multitude of methodological designs 
can drive Asian indigenous higher education research to develop new conceptual 
models that can better explain higher education systems in Asia but also avoid the 
trend in higher education (particularly in North America) to overly rely upon quan-
titative methodologies (Wells et al. 2015).
What Are the Challenges to and Future Directions of Higher 
Education Research in Asia?
Identity of ‘Asian’ Higher Education Research 
and International Outlook
It is difficult to identify clear trends in the aims, theories and practices of higher 
education research across Asia. The research contexts of Asian countries have 
extremely heterogeneous origins due to differences in colonial influence, geo-
graphic boundaries, language, developmental stage and policy priorities. Similarly, 
J. Jung et al.

363
the ‘Asian identity’ of higher education research is difficult to define. In Chap. 3 of 
this book, Rui Yang pointed out that Western higher education research has long 
been regarded as standard practice, whereas Asian approaches to conducting 
higher education research differ (often based on national values rather than regional 
values, particularly in China and Japan). There are differences not only in the con-
ceptualisation of higher education development across Asia, but in the ways in 
which scholarly communities produce knowledge. It is also difficult for higher 
education scholars in Asia to integrate Asian values and traditions with Western 
scholarly norms. In Chap. 4, Jae Park argued that higher education research in 
Asian contexts ‘should be able to portray, explain, and ease the numerous and 
manifold problems’ afflicting higher education in Asia. The issue seems to relate 
somewhat to the fact that many Asian countries continue to be developing higher 
education research communities at the national level (which, in itself, is positive), 
but this development may be done in a way in which such communities become 
too locally rooted and lack the resources required to attract substantial regional and 
international attention and to provide an input to the international higher education 
literature.
Regional collaboration between Asian higher education researchers, as Hugo 
Horta pointed out in his Chap. 2, needs to be fostered as a way for the research and 
visibility of Asian-based higher education researchers to gain further visibility and 
legitimacy. Until recently, the higher education research communities neither col-
laborated much nor shared their findings, and country case studies in comparative 
projects were led by non-Asian-based academics or international organisations. 
This presents a concern that others non-native to Asia may provide a vision and 
understanding of Asia higher education biased by their own cultural, social and 
economic views and understandings of the world. Indigenous eyes and minds are 
needed to identify, understand and explain critical but subtle characteristics and 
nuances of Asian higher education systems to the world. To do this, the national 
higher education communities have to bring these views to researchers based else-
where, and doing so requires much greater engagement with the global higher edu-
cation research communities, publishing in the English language and in international 
and specialised peer-reviewed higher education journals, because it is through them 
that research gains visibility and global understanding. If Asian-based researchers 
do not do this – and do not do this in the international literature – others will do it 
for them, with the risk of conveying distorted or ‘colonial’ views when doing so. In 
engaging in these activities, balancing between publishing nationally and interna-
tionally becomes the crux of the problem, but in the mix, there are also challenges 
related to the changing socialisation, training and sets of incentives that the current 
and future generations of higher education researchers need to undergo.
Echoing Roger Chao’s Chap. 5, this conclusion of the book argues for the need to 
raise awareness, establish an identity for the Asian higher education community and 
increase efforts to target an international audience. It also argues that the creation of 
20  Higher Education Research in Asia: History, Development and Challenges

364
this identity requires more regional collaboration that has the potential to influence 
regional policymaking on higher education in Asia. Recently, there has been an 
increase in international exchange and collaboration between practitioners of higher 
education in areas such as quality assurance and capacity development. Regional 
student exchange and quality assurance initiatives are now particularly prominent in 
Asia, with subregional programmes established between the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations and Middle Eastern countries (Yonezawa et al. 2014). However, very 
few of these interactions have yet led to high-quality research publications, with the 
exception of initiatives conducted in Hong Kong and Singapore. Hong Kong holds a 
particularly strong position in the global higher education research community in 
terms of its international publication record, as noted by Jung and Horta (2013), 
while working as a bridge between East Asia – especially China – and the rest of the 
world (Postiglione 2015). Both Singapore and Hong Kong have strong university 
education and research sectors with diversified and cosmopolitan academic insti-
tutes, host numerous academic conferences on (higher) education and boast rich 
resources and a strong tradition of academic freedom (also part of these two cities’ 
drive to be recognised as regional knowledge hubs: see Lee 2014). However, these 
two cities are more of an exception than the rule, and more needs to be done.
The creation of a regional higher education association, in the likes of the 
Consortium for Higher Education Researchers (CHER) in Europe, with a strong 
geographical foundation associated with an inclusive community that debates 
higher education issues from around the world and interacts with higher education 
communities based elsewhere in the world (Kehm and Musselin 2013), is one 
potential way to lay the foundation for the development of a higher education 
research community in Asia. The creation of the Higher Education Research 
Association in Asia (HERA), which has held a conference in South Korea, Japan, 
Taiwan, Hong Kong and Mainland China and it will hold its next conference in 
Malaysia, seems to be following the path towards the creation of such a community 
with a strong regional identity linked to a global outlook. This conclusion also 
argues that the engagement and participation needs to be done in the international 
context, such as publishing in international higher education journals (to further 
gain global legitimacy and visibility), and participating in international conferences 
voicing the research, analyses, views and contributions that the Asian higher educa-
tion research can bring to the global pool of knowledge.
References
Altbach, P. G., Bozeman, L. A., Janashia, N., & Rumbley, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Higher education: 
A worldwide inventory of centers and programs. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Atkinson, R. (2013). Journals with borders, journals without borders: Underrepresentation of Asian 
countries in educational research journals. Higher Education Research and Development, 
32(3), 507–510.
Bayer, A. E. (1983). Multi-method strategies for defining ‘Core’ Higher Education Journals. The 
Review of Higher Education, 6(2), 103–113.
J. Jung et al.

365
Blackwell, R., & Blackmore, P. (Eds.). (2003). Towards strategic staff development in higher edu-
cation. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Harland, T. (2012). Higher education as an open-access discipline. Higher Education Research & 
Development, 31(5), 703–710.
Horta, H., & Jung, J. (2014). Higher education research in Asia: An archipelago, two continents or 
merely atomization? Higher Education, 68(1), 117–134.
Jones, G. A. (2012). Reflections on the evolution of higher education as a field of study in Canada. 
Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 711–722.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: A publication and co-publication 
analysis. Higher Education Quarterly, 67(4), 398–419.
Jung, J., & Horta, H. (2015). The contribution of East Asian countries to internationally published 
Asian higher education research: The role of system development and internationalization. 
Higher Education Policy, 28(4), 419–439.
Kehm, B., & Musselin, C. (Eds.). (2013). The development of higher education research in Europe: 
25 years of CHER. Rotterdam: Sense.
Kuzhabekova, A., Hendel, D., & Chapman, D. (2015). Mapping global research on international 
higher education. Research in Higher Education, 56(8), 861–882.
Lee, J. T. (2014). Education hubs and talent development: Policymaking and implementation chal-
lenges. Higher Education, 68(6), 807–823.
Macfarlane, B., & Grant, B. (2012). The growth of higher education studies: From forerunners to 
pathtakers. Higher Education Research and Development, 31(5), 621–624.
Postiglione, G. A. (2015). Research universities for national rejuvenation and global influence: 
China’s search for a balanced model. Higher Education, 70(2), 235–250.
Rostan, M. (2010). Challenges to academic freedom: some empirical evidence. Economic Review, 
18(1), 71–88.
Rumbley, L. E., Altbach, P. G., Staneld, D. A., Shimmi, Y., Gayardon, A., & Chan, R. Y. (2014). 
Higher education: A worldwide inventory of research centers, academic programs, and jour-
nals and publications. Boston: Center for International Higher Education, Boston College.
Savelsberg, J. J., King, R., & Cleveland, L. (2002). Politized scholarship? Science on crime and the 
state. Social Problems, 37, 327–348.
Slaughter, S. (2001). Problems in comparative higher education: Political economy, political soci-
ology and postmodernism. Higher Education, 41(4), 389–412.
Teichler, U. (1996). Comparative higher education: Potentials and limits. Higher Education, 32(4), 
431–465.
Teichler, U. (2014). Opportunities and problems of comparative higher education research: The 
daily life of research. Higher Education, 67(4), 393–408.
Tight, M. (2004). Research into higher education: An a-theoretical community of practice? Higher 
Education Research and Development, 23(4), 395–411.
Tight, M. (2014). Working in separate silos? What citation patterns reveal about higher education 
research internationally. Higher Education, 68(3), 379–395.
Wells, R. S., Kolek, E. A., Williams, E. A., & Saunders, D. B. (2015). How we know what we 
know: A systematic comparison of research methods employed in higher education journals, 
1996–2000 v. 2006–2010. Journal of Higher Education, 86(2), 171–198.
Yonezawa, A., Kitamura, Y., Meerman, A., & Kuroda, K. (Eds.). (2014). Emerging international 
dimensions in East Asian higher education. Dordrecht: Springer.
20  Higher Education Research in Asia: History, Development and Challenges

366
Jisun Jung  is an Assistant Professor in the Faculty of Education at the University of Hong 
Kong since September, 2015. She received a Ph.D. from Seoul National University, Korea, in 
2011, and she was a postdoctoral fellow and lecturer at the University of Hong Kong. She has been 
involved in the international comparative project ‘The Changing Academic Profession’ since 2009. 
Her current research focuses on academic profession, doctoral education, employment and post-
graduate studies and higher education research in Asia. She is the co-editor of two special issues, 
‘Higher Education Research in East Asia: Regional and National Evolution and Path-Dependencies’ 
in Higher Education Policy and ‘Graduate Employment and Higher Education in East Asia’ in 
International Journal of Chinese Education, and also a co-editor of the book ‘The Changing 
Academic Profession in Hong Kong’ published by Springer in 2017. She has many publications 
in internationally refereed journals such as Higher Education, Studies in Higher Education, 
Minerva, Tertiary Education and Management and Higher Education Quarterly and several 
book chapters in Springer books. She is currently the principal investigator of the project, 
‘Students’ Motivation and Expectation for Career Advancement in Self-financed Master’s 
Program: Hong Kong Case’.
Hugo Horta  is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Education of the University of Hong Kong 
since September 2014. After completing his Ph.D. at the Technical University of Lisbon, in 2007 
(part of it performed in the Netherlands and in the United States), and a postdoctoral spell in 
Tohoku University, Japan, he worked as Advisor to the Portuguese Secretary of State of the 
Ministry of Science, Technology and Higher Education, from 2010 to 2011. He also served as the 
Portuguese National delegate to the ERA Steering Committee on Human Resources and Mobility 
from 2010 to 2014. Throughout this period, he published articles focused on various topics in 
international peer-reviewed journals in the field of Higher Education and Science and Technology 
Studies. He is currently Coordinating Editor at Higher Education and sits in the advisory editorial 
boards of Higher Education Policy, Asian Pacific Education Review, Journal of Higher Education 
and Science and the International Journal of Institutional Research and Management (IJIRM). He 
recently co-edited a book on Trends and Challenges in Science and Higher Education: Building 
Capacity in Latin America with Manuel Heitor and Jamil Salmi.
Akiyoshi Yonezawa  is a Professor and Director at Office of Institutional Research, Tohoku 
University. He also serves as a Special Advisor to the President for Institutional Research and 
Effectiveness. He received Ph.D. in Education from Tohoku University. With a background in 
sociology, he mainly conducts research on comparative higher education policy – especially focus-
ing on world-class universities, internationalization of higher education, and public–private rela-
tionships in higher education. He established his expertise in higher education policy and 
management through working experience at universities and public organizations: Nagoya 
University, National Institution for Academic Degrees and University Evaluation, Hiroshima 
University, OECD, and the University of Tokyo. He is currently serving as a Board Member at 
Japan Society of Educational Sociology and at Japan Association for Higher Education Research. 
He is a coeditor of the book series Higher Education in Asia: Quality, Excellence and Governance 
series (Springer Book Series).
J. Jung et al.

