Research Handbook on 
Entrepreneurial Teams
Theory and Practice
Edited by
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh
IÉSEG School of Management (LEM-CNRS), France
Thomas M. Cooney
Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland
Cheltenham, UK • Northampton, MA, USA
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

© Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney 2017
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
­mechanical or photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior 
­permission of the publisher.
Published by
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited
The Lypiatts
15 Lansdown Road
Cheltenham
Glos GL50 2JA
UK
Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
William Pratt House
9 Dewey Court
Northampton
Massachusetts 01060
USA
A catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016949964
This book is available electronically in the 
Business subject collection
DOI 10.4337/9781784713263
ISBN 978 1 78471 319 5 (cased)
ISBN 978 1 78471 326 3 (eBook)
Typeset by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Stockport, Cheshire
01
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

v
Contents
List of contributors
vii
Foreword  Mike Wright
xv
  1	 Introduction
1
	
Cyrine Ben-­Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney
PART I  LEARNING FROM THEORY AND PRACTICE
  2	 Entrepreneurial teams research in movement
11
	
Cyrine Ben-­Hafaïedh
  3	 Urban legends or sage guidance: a review of common advice  
about entrepreneurial teams
45
	
Phillip H. Kim and Howard E. Aldrich
PART II  DEVELOPING ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS
  4	 Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family
73
	
Giovanna Campopiano, Tommaso Minola and Lucio Cassia
  5	 Entrepreneurs’ perspectives on the structuring phase of the  
entrepreneurial team
96
	
L. Martin Cloutier, Sandrine Cueille and Gilles Recasens
  6	 Which deep-­level diversity compositions of new venture teams  
lead to success or failure?
121
	
Stephanie Schoss, René Mauer and Malte Brettel
  7	 How owner-­manager team size influences the potential  
economic contribution of owner-­managed businesses
144
	
Jonathan Levie and Johan P. de Borst
  8	 Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership emergent states  
on entrepreneurial teams
164
	
Wencang Zhou and Donald Vredenburgh
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

vi    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
PART III  CONTEXTUALIZING ENTREPRENEURIAL  
TEAMS
  9	 Family entrepreneurial teams
187
	
Allan Discua Cruz, Elias Hadjielias and Carole Howorth
10	 Te Ohu Umanga Māori: temporality and intent in the Māori  
entrepreneurial team
208
	
Mānuka Hēnare, Billie Lythberg, Amber Nicholson and  
Christine Woods
11	 Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams and the role of  
culture shock on performance
231
	
Jean-­François Lalonde
12	 Women empowerment through Government Loaned 
Entrepreneurship Teams (GLETs) in Kenya
252
	
Mary Wanjiru Kinoti, Moses Kibe Kihiko and  
Thomas M. Cooney
13	 Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship: when team  
heterogeneity facilitates organizational hybridity
273
	
Frédéric Dufays and Benjamin Huybrechts
Index
289
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

vii
Contributors
Howard E. Aldrich is Kenan Professor of Sociology, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA. Howard’s main research inter-
ests are ­entrepreneurship, entrepreneurial team formation, gender and 
­entre­preneur­ship, and evolutionary theory. His book Organizations 
Evolving (Sage, 1999) was co-­winner of the Max Weber Award from 
the Organizations, Occupation and Work section of the American 
Sociological Association. His latest book An Evolutionary Approach 
to Entrepreneurship: Selected Essays was published by Edward Elgar 
Publishing in 2011.
Cyrine Ben-­Hafaïedh is Assistant Professor of Entrepreneurship and 
Strategy, IÉSEG School of Management (LEM-­CNRS), Paris, France. 
Cyrine’s doctoral thesis focused on the topic of entrepreneurial team 
formation and won two Best Dissertation Awards. Her research now 
centres on entrepreneurial teams and collective entrepreneurship, and she 
explores these topics through various contexts (e.g., ambition, academic, 
social, etc.). Her work has been published in peer-­reviewed journals and 
books, and she has received several Best Conference Paper Awards. She 
serves as a reviewer for several international journals in the field, and 
she has won a number of Best Reviewer Awards (including two from the 
Academy of Management Entrepreneurship Division). Cyrine is currently 
the Country Vice-­President for France in the European Council for Small 
Business and Entrepreneurship.
Malte Brettel is Professor of Business Administration and Entrepreneur­
ship at RWTH Aachen University, Germany, where he is also running the 
entrepreneurship centre. Malte is also Adjunct Professor for Entrepreneur­
ship at WHU – the Otto-­Beisheim School of Management in Germany 
and is co-­founder of several successful businesses.
Giovanna Campopiano is Assistant Professor at the Chair of Business 
Administration and Family Entrepreneurship, Witten Institute for Family 
Business (WIFU), University of Witten/Herdecke, Germany. Giovanna 
mainly focuses her research on management issues in family business, 
looking in particular at the involvement of the family in the business and 
its effect on firm performance, corporate social responsibility, sustain-
ability issues and entrepreneurial activities. She has published her research 
in academic journals such as Family Business Review, Journal of Business 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

viii    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Ethics, Journal of Small Business Management and Journal of Family 
Business Strategy. She organizes a track in the Family Business Strategic 
Interest Group of the European Academy of Management (EURAM) 
conference and serves as reviewer for several journals in the field.
Lucio Cassia is Professor of Strategic and Global Management and Chair­
man of the Research Center for Young and Family Enterprise (CYFE) 
at the University of Bergamo, Italy. Lucio teaches strategic management, 
corporate strategy, competition and growth and entrepreneurial strategy 
in graduate, postgraduate and PhD programmes. He is currently leading 
research, education and consulting on entrepreneurship, business strategy 
and family business. His main interests are on technology-­based start-­ups, 
high-­tech companies, innovation tools and patterns of growth of small 
and medium enterprises. With particular focus on the topics of youth 
entre­preneur­ship, growth of family businesses, managerial succession and 
generational change, Lucio promoted and founded the CYFE. Lucio has 
published ten books and over 150 papers in academic and professional 
journals.
L. Martin Cloutier, PhD, is a full-professor in the Department of 
Management and Technology, School of Management (École des sciences 
de la gestion, ESG), at the University of Quebec at Montreal. His research 
programme centres on investigating, in various contexts, problems and 
issues of concern to groups or collectives, using systems-based decision-
making approaches and methods to modelling such as system dynamics 
(SD) and group concept mapping (GCM). With the co-authors of his 
chapter in this volume, he has examined the collective representations of 
entrepreneurial development and support actors and stakeholders for very 
small ventures in entrepreneurial support infrastructures and incubators 
in Canada and in France. He has published 30 referred articles on mana-
gerial economic related problems using system-based approaches (R&D 
Management, International Journal of Technology Management, Drug 
Discovery Today, Journal of Economic Issues, International Journal of 
Wine Business Research, Industrial Management & Data Systems, Journal 
of Decision Systems and Revue Internationale PME).
Thomas M. Cooney is Professor of Entrepreneurship, at the College of 
Business, Dublin Institute of Technology (DIT), Ireland and Academic 
Director of the Institute for Minority Entrepreneurship at DIT. Tom 
is also Visiting Professor at the University of Turku, Finland, editor of 
the journal Small Enterprise Research and policy advisor to the Irish 
government, European Commission, OECD and other international 
organizations. His primary research interests are in entrepreneurial teams 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Contributors    ­ix
and entrepreneurship for disadvantaged/minority communities. Further 
details of his work can be found at www.thomascooney.com.
Sandrine Cueille is a ‘Maître de Conférences’ in Management Sciences, 
Université de Pau et des Pays de l’Adour, France. Sandrine’s research 
programme focuses on the strategic practices of organizations ­evolving 
in complex environments, in particular on health care organizations 
and also on young entrepreneurial ventures benefiting from incubators 
and other types of business support. Her current research interests are 
mainly centred on entrepreneurial ecosystems, entrepreneurial teams,  and 
growth patterns of recently created firms – notably high-tech companies. 
Along with the co-authors of her chapter in this volume, she conducted 
studies on these topics using bottom-up mixed methods to capture the 
collective representations of entrepreneurial actors in order to encompass 
the systemic interactions and the complexity of the examined phenomena.
Johan P. de Borst is a doctoral researcher at the Hunter Centre for Entre­
preneur­ship, Strathclyde Business School, University of Strathclyde, UK. 
Johan is a fully funded doctoral researcher at Strathclyde where he is 
investigating the intersection of income, well-­being and personality of the 
microentrepreneur. He holds an MBA from Babson College, USA and 
was the Babson European Scholarship Award winner in 2012. He also 
has extensive experience working with and in start-­ups including at Mass 
Challenge in Boston, and as a graduate of the Babson College Summer 
Venture Program, and is the author of The Stingy Startup, a book taught 
at undergraduate level.
Allan Discua Cruz is a Lecturer in Entrepreneurship in the Department 
of Entrepreneurship, Strategy and Innovation, Lancaster University 
Management School, UK. Allan is a founding member of the Centre 
for Family Business at Lancaster University and a member of a business 
family. He has published on the topics of family entrepreneurial teams 
and entrepreneurship in family business. His current research focuses on 
entrepreneurial teams and social contexts of entrepreneurship.
Frédéric Dufays is a postdoctoral researcher at KU Leuven, Belgium. He 
coordinates the Centre of Expertise for Cooperative Entrepreneurship. 
Frédéric holds a PhD in Management from HEC Liège Management 
School of the University of Liège, Belgium, for which he received the 
support of the FRS-FNRS through a FRESH grant. His research interests 
include social entrepreneurship as well as the emergence of hybrid organi-
zations, among which cooperatives, as well as collective dynamics (teams 
and networks) in entrepreneurship.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

x    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Elias Hadjielias is a Lecturer in Entrepreneurship, MBA Program Leader, 
and Director of CEDAR (Centre for Entrepreneurial Development, 
Alliance and Research) at UCLan Cyprus. His research interests include 
collective entrepreneurship in family businesses, cooperation within and 
between family businesses, and entrepreneurial learning between family 
members in business. Elias has also consulting experience in start-­ups and 
new venture development.
Mānuka Hēnare is an Associate Professor of Māori Business Development, 
Department of Management and International Business, University of 
Auckland Business School, New Zealand. Mānuka is a consultant and 
researcher in the private sector with a speciality in Māori business enter-
prise and development economics. He joined the University of Auckland 
Business School in 1996 where he is responsible for Māori business devel-
opment. Mānuka is also the Foundation Director of the Mira Szászy 
Research Centre for Māori and Pacific Economic Development and leads 
a number of multidisciplinary research project teams.
Carole Howorth is Professor of Entrepreneurship and Family Business, 
University of Bradford Management School, UK. Carole is Associate 
Dean for Research at the University of Bradford. She is Chair of the Global 
STEP Program for family enterprising and of the Academic Advisory 
Panel for the Institute for Family Businesses Research Foundation. She 
was Founding Director of the Centre for Family Business at Lancaster 
University and currently serves on its Advisory Board.
Benjamin Huybrechts is Associate Professor, HEC Liège Management 
School, University of Liège, Belgium. Benjamin holds the SRIW-­
Sowecsom Chair in Entrepreneurship and Social Innovation. His research 
topics include novel hybrid organizational forms in the area of social 
enterprise, the emergence and diffusion of social innovation, and cross-­
sector partnerships and networks.
Moses Kibe Kihiko is a PhD candidate, School of Business, Mount 
Kenya University, Kenya. Moses is a scholar, writer, book reviewer and 
book chapter contributor, holds a Master’s in Leadership Studies and 
is pursuing a PhD in Business Administration & Management. He was 
the 2009 best overseas entrant of Ashridge Business School & Guardian 
Public annual writing competition and is a published author of Public 
Leadership: The Ten Defining Moments How Leaders Acquire and Handle 
Fame, Power and Glory (Miraclaire Publishing, 2010) and is currently 
working on a book entitled Engaging Corporate Social Responsibility. 
Moses is a monthly columnist known as ‘The Scholar’ in Small Medium 
Enterprises Today (SMET) magazine and is the founder/CEO of Practicum 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Contributors    ­xi
Leadership Consultancy (PLC) and accepts training, consultancy, research 
and writing opportunities in various corporate, public and private firms in 
the areas of business and entrepreneurship, organizational development, 
management, leadership and strategy.
Phillip H. Kim is Associate Professor of Entrepreneurship, Babson College, 
USA. Phil studies, teaches, and advises on different aspects of how entre-
preneurial ideas become reality. His research has been published in 
leading entrepreneurship, management, and sociology journals. His views 
on entrepreneurship and innovation have appeared in The Wall Street 
Journal, The New York Times, Forbes, and other prominent media outlets.
Mary Wanjiru Kinoti is a Senior Lecturer and Associate Dean of Graduate 
Business Studies at the School of Business, University of Nairobi, Kenya. 
She holds a PhD in Business Administration and is a seasoned university 
lecturer with her experience spanning almost two decades. She has taught 
at the Kenya Institute of Management (KIM), Egerton University, Kenya 
and currently is based at the University of Nairobi where she lectures in 
marketing. She is passionate about the marketing of small and medium 
enterprises, as well as green marketing and sustainable development 
courses. Mary has authored several articles published in refereed journals 
and is also working on a number of books contextualized for Africa.
Jean-­François Lalonde is Professor of Entrepreneurship, University of 
Sherbrooke, Canada, where he teaches entrepreneurship. He is the author 
or co-­author of articles, book chapters, lectures and case studies in entre-
preneurship. His research focuses on the links between culture and entre-
preneurship. He is involved in the development of entrepreneurship in his 
community by helping young entrepreneurs and non-profit enterprises.
Jonathan Levie is Professor of Entrepreneurship and Director of Teaching 
and Knowledge Exchange at the Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, 
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. He is also the Ambition and 
Growth Research Theme Leader in the UK’s Enterprise Research Centre, 
co-­directs Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) UK, and is a member 
of the Research and Innovation Committee of GEM. He has published in 
the Journal of Management Studies, Research Policy, Entrepreneurship 
Theory & Practice, Small Business Economics, Family Business Review, 
and Journal of Technology Transfer, among others. His main current 
research areas are entrepreneurship ecosystems, venture growth, technol-
ogy commercialization, and entrepreneurship policy.
Billie Lythberg is a Senior Research Fellow at the University of Auckland 
Business School, New Zealand. Billie works at the junction of ­economics, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

xii    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
anthropology and art history, specializing in ethnographic studies and 
object-­centric research. Her core research interests are Indigenous 
­economies and aesthetics, with particular foci on Polynesian arts, entre-
preneurship and ‘gift exchange’. She is especially interested in possi-
bilities for reframing historical interactions and collaborations between 
Europeans and Polynesians, and their material, artefactual and philo-
sophical legacies for contemporary communities. She is an Affiliated 
Researcher at Cambridge University Museum of Archaeology and 
Anthropology (UK), and Contributing Editor to the Art of Oceania for 
Khan Academy, USA.
René Mauer is Chair of Entrepreneurship and Innovation, ESCP Europe 
Berlin, Germany. René joined ESCP Europe’s Berlin campus for the 
Chair of Entrepreneurship and Innovation in 2015. He received a doctoral 
degree in the area of entrepreneurship from RWTH Aachen and has been 
involved in a variety of entrepreneurial projects. His area of expertise is 
entrepreneurial decision-­making in venture and corporate contexts.
Tommaso Minola is Director of the Research Center for Young and Family 
Enterprise (CYFE) and Lecturer in the field of Technology Management, 
Entrepreneurship and Strategy within the Department of Management, 
Information and Production Engineering at the University of Bergamo, 
Italy. Tommaso’s research interests focus on the embeddedness of entre-
preneurship, embracing different aspects of the entrepreneurial process 
from intention and cognition, to behaviour and performances. In par-
ticular Tommaso focuses on two distinctive domains of ­embeddedness – 
university and family. He is TOFT Visiting Professor at Jönköping 
International Business School (Sweden) and National Representative 
for Italy in the GUESSS research consortium. His work is published or 
forthcoming in several academic journals, including Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, Small Business 
Economics, Journal of Small Business Management, R&D Management, 
and The Journal of Technology Transfer. He is member of several aca-
demic and professional associations, and reviewer for major international 
journals in the field.
Amber Nicholson is a PhD student at the University of Auckland Business 
School, New Zealand. Amber, of Māori kinship group Ngāruahine, is 
a researcher at the Mira Szászy Research Centre for Māori and Pacific 
Economic Development. Her current doctoral research, ‘Arohia ngā 
tapuwae o ngā tūpuna: Heed the footprints of the ancestors’, looks at the 
how the energy of ancestral landscapes shape business. She completed 
a Bachelor of Commerce with First Class Honours in 2012 titled ‘A 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Contributors    ­xiii
Takarangi of Well-­being: An Ambicultural Approach to Business and 
Economics’.
Gilles Recasens is a ‘Maître de Conférences’ in Management Sciences, 
Université de Pau et des Pays de l’Adour, France. Gilles’s research 
programme investigates, on the one hand, enterprise-­related financial 
stress, using game theory to model relationships between stakeholders 
in an imperfect information framework, and case studies to understand 
how bankruptcy law impacts entrepreneurial actors’ actions in avoiding 
financial stress. On the other hand, his research focuses on entrepreneurial 
issues such as the structuring of the entrepreneurial team within young and 
small firms, the exploration-exploitation dilemma faced by young technol-
ogy start-ups, the growth of very small enterprises as part of an accom-
panied business-support relationship and, in particular, by taking into 
account the role of entrepreneurial ecosystems in sustaining these transi-
tions. These works use case study research approaches and group concept 
mapping methods to identify and analyse the collective representations of 
entrepreneurs and business support providers on such matters, in various 
entrepreneurial support contexts in Canada and France.
Stephanie Schoss is a PhD candidate, RWTH Aachen University, Germany 
and Institute Director, University of St. Gallen in Switzerland. Stephanie 
is a serial entrepreneur and a doctoral student at the RWTH Aachen 
University where she studies the deep-­level diversity dimensions of entre-
preneurial teams. She is also a Director of the Competence Center for Top 
Teams at the Institute of International Management at the University of 
St. Gallen.
Donald Vredenburgh is a Professor of Organizational Behavior in the 
Department of Management at Baruch College, The City University 
of New York, USA. His research has focused on leadership, organiza-
tional design, the exercise of power in organizations, and organizational 
politics. Administrative positions in academe have included Associate 
Provost, Director of a doctoral programme in business, and Director of an 
Institutional Review Board. He has consulted for various organizations.
Christine Woods is Associate Professor in Entrepreneurship and 
Innovation, Faculty of Business & Economics, University of Auckland, 
New Zealand. Kiwi born and bred, Christine’s interest in entrepreneurship 
was sparked after working in Malawi as a small-­business advisor. There 
she ‘caught’ the entrepreneurship bug, becoming ‘hooked’ on the passion 
and energy that entrepreneurs bring to what they do. Chris currently 
teaches entrepreneurship at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels, 
as well as Māori Entrepreneurship, a component of the Postgraduate 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

xiv    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Diploma in Māori Business. Her research interests are in the area of family 
business, SME growth, social entrepreneurship and Māori entrepreneur-
ship and entrepreneurial behaviour.
Wencang Zhou is Assistant Professor of Management in the School 
of Business at Montclair State University, New Jersey, USA. His 
research focuses on the psychology of entrepreneurship, particularly on 
­entrepreneurial teams, team diversity and shared leadership.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

xv
Foreword
In the popular imagination, entrepreneurship is still often times viewed as 
being the domain of heroic (or villainous!) individuals. Yet, in the modern 
enterprise environment, entrepreneurial teams have a greater tendency 
to be the norm. Unfortunately, research on entrepreneurial teams has 
tended to lag behind this recognition of reality on the ground and so 
practitioners have had relatively little guidance from systematic research 
findings. Actually, much of the early research on entrepreneurial teams 
drew heavily on research on top management teams in larger corpora-
tions without fully taking account of the differences between these two 
organizational contexts. Moreover, a particular feature of entrepreneurial 
teams is the need to make changes in composition and functions that will 
enable a venture to develop beyond the start-­up phase, activities that are 
associated with team member exit as well as entry (as my own research 
subsequently explored).
To be effective, entrepreneurial teams need to have some diversity of 
expertise but our knowledge of the appropriate nature of diversity is frag-
mentary at best. In particular, while we know that contexts are important 
for understanding the variety of entrepreneurial activity, we have had little 
insight into the appropriate nature of entrepreneurial team diversity in 
different contexts. This volume brings together a wealth of empirical find-
ings that take the body of research knowledge on entrepreneurial teams 
in different contexts a significant step forward. The findings address not 
only the role of differences in team size and the characteristics of team 
members, but also the influence of different cultural, ethnic and institu-
tional environments. The volume also highlights the importance of dif-
ferences in the organizational forms of entrepreneurial ventures, notably 
family firms and social enterprises, on the nature of entrepreneurial teams.
Entrepreneurial ventures involve more than high-­tech start-­ups aimed 
at maximizing financial returns. They also involve a variety of ventures 
with different ownership forms and goals that are likely to have implica-
tions for team configurations that as yet are little understood. By adopting 
a variety of valid methodological approaches, the studies in this volume 
emphasize the complexity of the research agenda and the challenges in 
obtaining access to relevant data. The studies therefore provide an excel-
lent starting point in mapping out the gaps in our knowledge base on 
entrepreneurial teams. They point the way to exploring the rich agenda for 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

xvi    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
further studies regarding the drivers of the variety of diversity in entrepre-
neurial teams and this will have profound implications for both research 
and practice.
Mike Wright
Centre for Management Buy-­out Research
Imperial College Business School, London
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

1
1.  Introduction
Cyrine Ben-­Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney
‘It is difficult to clap with one hand’ is arguably a very appropriate Chinese 
saying with which to introduce a book entitled Research Handbook on 
Entrepreneurial Teams: Theory and Practice. In recent years, there has 
been an increasing body of evidence suggesting that firms founded by 
entrepreneurial teams are more likely to achieve fast growth than firms 
founded by lone actors, and for this reason entrepreneurial teams have 
become of escalating interest to scholars and practitioners alike. The 
research has also identified that firms founded by multiple individuals 
are fluid and team based, they give authority to those employees with 
the greatest knowledge of a specific area, and their growth strategies can 
emerge from anyone within the organization. They also have an innate 
sense of networking since good communication is a crucial component of 
successful teams. Yet, it has also been noted that there has been a dearth 
of literature regarding our understanding of entrepreneurial teams and 
even the expression ‘entrepreneurial team’ has frequently been used inter-
changeably with the term ‘management team’ when writers have been 
discussing small firms. However, in more recent times there has been a 
marked increase in the number of journal articles, books and popular 
press stories addressing the topic of entrepreneurial teams but our com-
prehension of them and their relationship with growth remains very weak.
The book begins in Part I with a detailed review of the literature by 
­Ben-­Hafaïedh in Chapter 2, which will help the reader to understand the 
development of research and theories on entrepreneurial teams over time, 
and it offers clarification of the different terminology used by research 
scholars. The chapter will also contextualize the movements that have 
occurred in developing an understanding of entrepreneurial teams and 
how they have led to our current perceptions of this form of enterprise. 
Kim and Aldrich in Chapter 3 superbly counterbalance this chapter as 
they review the development of entrepreneurial teams from a practitioner 
perspective. They analyse articles and stories from the popular press and 
Internet channels to examine the most common forms of advice that is 
offered regarding constructing and growing entrepreneurial teams. As 
one might imagine, their findings both agree and disagree with the work 
of academic researchers who are seeking scientific evidence to support 
their theories rather than anecdotal stories of experiences and actions. 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

2    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
The two chapters combine very effectively to offer the reader an excellent 
understanding of the history and current positioning of entrepreneurial 
teams amongst both the academic and practitioner communities.
Team entrepreneurship appears to be much more prevalent in some 
countries and industries than in others due to influencing factors such as 
culture, society and the nature of specific industries. Indeed, the combina-
tion of culture and individual characteristics will shape the likelihood of 
potential entrepreneurs starting a business on their own or in conjunc-
tion with like-­minded colleagues. For example, entrepreneurs who will 
seek to maintain 100 per cent ownership of their enterprise rather than 
share equity amongst other stakeholders will find that that this mindset 
adversely affects the prospect of entrepreneurial teams being formed 
and the sharing of any subsequent rewards. It also encourages singular 
decision-­making and hierarchical structures because ‘the entrepreneur is 
the boss’! Given that research has suggested that entrepreneurial teams 
impact positively on firm growth, then a greater sense of inclusiveness 
needs to happen in team formation and this can be challenging for many 
people whose background or characteristics might promote a more indi-
vidualistic approach to life. Furthermore, while early research on entre-
preneurship identified that attitude and mindset are key characteristics 
of successful entrepreneurs, more recent research has identified that team 
entrepreneurs require a mindset that is inclusive, shares responsibilities 
and divides rewards equitably. Communication is also highly important to 
successful entrepreneurial teams as they need to share information, ideas 
and authority. Communication is not just given to employees on a need-­
to-­know basis but as a method of getting all stakeholders to better under-
stand their roles regarding the potential prosperity of the enterprise. This 
communication occurs via networks and is not passed down through a 
multilayered hierarchical structure. Additionally, research has shown that 
the entrepreneurs of fast-­growth firms believe that attention to customer 
needs and quality products/services are important to the growth of their 
business, and that ultimately the success of a firm is everyone’s respon-
sibility, not just that of management. All of these characteristics lead to 
varying explanations regarding why entrepreneurial teams are increas-
ingly responsible for fast-­growth firms rather than enterprises founded 
by lone actors and they reinforce the critical importance of the formation 
stage of entrepreneurial teams as a ‘good start’ that can have a major influ-
ence on the future growth patterns of an enterprise.
Part II of the book explores many of the different issues involved in the 
formation of entrepreneurial teams and through new research studies it 
offers greater understanding and insight relating to this aspect of entre-
preneurial team activity. In Chapter 4, Campopiano, Minola and Cassia 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Introduction    ­3
explore the role of family within the formation of entrepreneurial teams 
and they find that there is a positive effect when family provide both 
human and social capital. The chapter focuses on the antecedents that 
drive potential entrepreneurs to include family members in entrepreneurial 
teams and reconcile the inconclusive results present in existing literature 
on the role of family cohesion and family capital as factors that may foster 
or hinder the propensity of potential entrepreneurs to form an entrepre-
neurial team with their relatives. It should be noted that the positive influ-
ence of family can also be seen in Chapters 9 and 11, even though the main 
focus of those chapters is contextualization rather than family members.
Chapter 5 from Cloutier, Cueille and Recasens highlights the use of 
group concept mapping (GCM) as a relatively new research methodol-
ogy to explore the structuring phase of entrepreneurial teams from the 
perspective of entrepreneurs. The GCM process provides some shared 
indications regarding scope, breadth and depth of action areas underlying 
entrepreneurial team development and discusses how the shared concep-
tual framework obtained from these analyses can be translated to suggest 
a set of best-­practice propositions. The chapter additionally stresses the 
balancing act that entrepreneurial teams face at the structuring phase 
of development between managing the venture and building it from the 
resource pool.
Another aspect of entrepreneurial team formation that is examined 
in the book is the dispositional personality–related characteristics of 
founding team members as leading indicators of new venture success. 
In Chapter  6, Schoss, Mauer and Brettel highlight that the difference 
between a successful and an unsuccessful team relates to the combina-
tion of sufficiently distinctive personality types that form a team. Their 
analysis reveals that balanced individuals who simultaneously show high 
levels of multiple traits appear more often in unsuccessful teams, while 
individuals with fewer but more strongly developed traits are to be found 
in successful teams. The research method of cluster analysis serves to 
develop a better understanding of which personality characteristics are 
most important to team success and how the traits cluster together to form 
specific team types.
Moving on from this understanding of personality types, Chapter 7 
by Levie and De Borst examines the relationship between team size and 
the potential economic contribution of early-­stage and established busi-
nesses. Their chapter presents evidence that, in addition to having a strong 
direct effect on the economic potential of early-­stage and established 
firms, larger teams are associated with greater economic potential in more 
complex, knowledge-­intensive businesses and with higher growth expecta-
tion where owner-­managers have higher education levels.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

4    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
The final chapter of Part II focusing on entrepreneurial team formation 
is Chapter 8 from Zhou and Vredenburgh whose research investigates the 
dispositional antecedents that facilitate the development of shared lead-
ership and the performance consequence of this leadership model. The 
chapter suggests that entrepreneurial team founders, to benefit from the 
informational diversity that team members desirably bring, should share 
leadership, and the authors emphasize that each team member should be 
willing and able to assume leadership roles when tasks require.
Part II of the book offers a number of interesting perspectives regarding 
the formation of an entrepreneurial team and cumulatively they propose 
a broadening of one’s understanding of this aspect of entrepreneurial 
activity. The influence of family, team size, personality types and shared 
leadership all contribute positively to the potential success and growth of 
a new venture but how they are utilized and developed is at the mercy of 
individual entrepreneurs.
As highlighted earlier, there is a body of evidence that suggests that 
fast-­growth firms are more likely to be founded by entrepreneurial teams 
than by lone actors, and the research also suggests that the strategy 
utilized by fast-­growth firms led by entrepreneurial teams is emergent 
at the start-­up phase but moves to being deliberate as the firm matures. 
This means that their strategies were continuously emerging at the 
beginning, but later were more planned. To use Mintzberg’s analogy, 
at the beginning they were like clay on a potter’s wheel, where one had 
a broad idea of what was to be moulded but it only took definite shape 
as the process evolved. However, with time and experience the potter 
would know exactly what they were going to produce over the coming 
weeks and months, although new forms might continue to be moulded 
in order to introduce new product lines. With an emergent strategy these 
new forms can be suggested by anyone in the organization, as frequently 
those closest to the product or customer will have the clearest ideas of 
where improvements can be made. Strategies are deliberate when they 
are planned and disseminated throughout the organization in a managed 
process so that everyone understands them. Strategies should not be 
written in stone, but a clear sense of where the company wants to be in 
three years is critical to achieving success. Fast-­growth firms led by entre-
preneurial teams frequently identified growth markets as a starting point, 
and after they built a base in those markets they then moved towards the 
quality end of the market. Therefore, the lesson for entrepreneurial teams 
regarding strategy is to begin by moulding a strategy and then as time 
progresses to develop that mould. However, this nuancing of strategy is 
heavily influenced by the context in which an entrepreneurial team oper-
ates and such a context might involve family, gender, culture, ethnicity or 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Introduction    ­5
goal orientation of the firm. These contexts greatly affect the ambitions 
and philosophy of an enterprise and so Part III of the book discusses a 
variety of contextual situations in which an entrepreneurial team might 
operate and how strategies are shaped by context, as well as by entrepre-
neurial teams.
Part III begins with a review by Discua Cruz, Hadjielias and Howorth 
in Chapter 9 of the literature on family entrepreneurial teams. Families 
have tended to be overlooked in studies of entrepreneurial teams but this 
chapter draws on knowledge of entrepreneurial teams and family busi-
nesses in order to explain family entrepreneurial teams’ functions and 
outcomes. It highlights that family entrepreneurial teams represent a 
distinctive context for entrepreneurship, where stewardship drives team 
efforts, kinship ties determine team membership, and informal social 
cooperation, communal thinking and intergenerational learning practices 
prevail in the modus operandi.
It is arguable that indigenous communities represent a larger notion of 
family and Chapter 10 by Hēnare, Lythberg, Nicholson and Woods on 
Māori entrepreneurial teams is a wonderful extension of this concept. The 
authors argue that Māori entrepreneurial teams harmonize the collective 
intent and complementary attributes of individual members, and balance 
heritage with innovation. This chapter focuses on two clusters of values – 
temporality and intent – to demonstrate that the relationship between 
entrepreneurship and cultural values determines the composition of, and 
guides toward success, the Māori entrepreneurial team.
Part of this chapter taps into the importance of ethnicity and Lalonde 
addresses this more fully in Chapter 11. This chapter presents and dis-
cusses the issues relating to one kind of diversity in entrepreneurial teams 
that is more common as the world becomes more global – that is, ethnic 
diversity. It focuses on the dynamics of these groups and examines why 
and how this form of diversity influences a firm’s performance.
Moving from heterogeneous teams to homogeneous teams, Chapter 12 
by Kinoti, Kibe Kihiko and Cooney examines entrepreneurial teams 
formed by women. The chapter analyses the impact of the Women 
Enterprise Fund (WEF), which was established by the Kenyan govern-
ment to address the issue of poverty and unemployment amongst the 
country’s female population. The research found that delays in funding 
from WEF, illiteracy and loan diversion by women were among the key 
challenges that needed to be addressed if the women-­owned entrepre-
neurial teams were to be successful. While in much of the book success is 
spoken about in terms of high growth, in this study success is measured 
by the ability of an entrepreneur to generate enough income to sustain her 
family.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

6    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
The final context in which entrepreneurial teams are explored is through 
social enterprise. In Chapter 13, Dufays and Huybrechts examine the 
composition of teams involved in social entrepreneurship, and more 
particularly their heterogeneity in terms of ‘institutional logics’, which 
has received little attention in entrepreneurship literature. The chapter 
highlights the potential added value and pitfalls of entrepreneurial teams 
in institutionally complex settings such as social entrepreneurship and a 
model is proposed that examines the implications of entrepreneurial team 
heterogeneity in social entrepreneurship. It makes clear that complexity 
and dynamism, in particular with regard to individuals’ social network 
structure, as well as interactions between team members, are necessary 
to understand the impact of team composition on the entrepreneurial 
process.
Collectively the five chapters in Part III offer the reader varying contexts 
from which entrepreneurial teams can emerge and highlight the additional 
and distinctive challenges that entrepreneurial teams must address in such 
circumstances. Just as in Part II when exploring the formation of entrepre-
neurial teams, in this part of the book the development of entrepreneurial 
teams cannot be considered in a simplistic linear fashion but must be 
understood through the complexities and nuances of its given context.
There are a number of lessons for scholars, practitioners and policy-­
makers from the findings of this book. While the literature suggests that 
firms founded by entrepreneurial teams are more likely to achieve fast 
growth than firms founded by an individual, the chapters in this book 
do not question this view because that was not the key objective of the 
book. However, the findings of the various research studies undertaken 
for the book do accentuate the characteristics of sharing and inclusiveness 
in entrepreneurial teams, which arguably contribute significantly to the 
greater likelihood that fast-­growth firms are founded by entrepreneurial 
teams rather than by lone actors. Therefore, the entrepreneurial ecosystem 
should encourage firms to be founded by teams but these teams should not 
be unnaturally generated, as was noted in Part II. Entrepreneurs can be 
encouraged to build teams and find co-­founders without forcing them into 
that situation since engendering team entrepreneurship is about nurturing 
rather than coercion.
While the practice of ‘picking winners’ has had a great deal of support 
in recent years amongst many enterprise agencies across the globe, there 
are a number of problems with this concept. The first is the question of 
what measures are used to pick ‘winners’. If a set criterion is employed 
then there is the definite possibility of losing potential successes because 
the relevant agency has already labelled those outside the criterion as 
‘no-­hopers’. Therefore, it is potentially more fruitful to encourage a 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Introduction    ­7
broader range of entrepreneurs to start an enterprise, knowing that some 
(or many) will fail, but that the more likely winners will potentially come 
from those who have failed and then tried again. Entrepreneurs who have 
been separated from their initial teams should be encouraged to start 
again. However, enterprise agents are commonly assessed on their short-­
term records and therefore a radical change in policy is required if the 
potential winners are to be given the freedom to fail and then to start again 
as a member of another team. It also requires a change in attitude in many 
cultures that failure is acceptable, and that it is a learning process towards 
long-­term achievement. Both of these requirements necessitate significant 
alteration in existing mindsets, and unfortunately are therefore unlikely to 
occur in the near future. This book suggests new ideas on how such change 
might happen!
This book offers a wide range of research methodologies, perspectives 
and insights that will enlighten any reader, whether they are a scholar, 
practitioner or enterprise support agent. The book is structured to enable 
the reader to ‘dip in and out’ of the work and not be required to read it 
in its entirety in one sitting. However, it would be advisable to read some 
chapters at one sitting so that the comparative viewpoints and findings 
on a specific topic can be contrasted and this will enable the reader to 
achieve enhanced learning from their comprehension of the book. The 
discussions in the various chapters will challenge current perspectives and 
offer ­interesting new approaches to various aspects of entrepreneurial 
teams. The book is an important contribution to the growing significance 
of entrepreneurial teams as the preferred future structure of new ventures.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

PART I
LEARNING FROM 
THEORY AND PRACTICE
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

11
2.  Entrepreneurial teams research in 
movement
Cyrine Ben-­Hafaïedh
While it has been 40 years since Jeffry A. Timmons wrote about entre-
preneurial teams (ETs) and wondered whether they were ‘an American 
dream or nightmare?’ (Timmons, 1975), research into this topic remains 
relatively recent. Indeed, it was the early 1990s before Kamm and her 
colleagues published their seminal research agenda on ETs (Kamm et al., 
1990) but it has only been over the past 15 years that there has been an 
exponential increase in research on ETs with no less than three academic 
journal special issues devoted to this topic (International Small Business 
Journal, June 2005; Management Research News, 2009; Entrepreneurship 
Theory & Practice, January 2013). This pattern is consistent with the 
history of entrepreneurship research that has been long marked by the 
reification of the phenomenon in a deus ex machina entrepreneur (Ogbor, 
2000). However, the collective reality of entrepreneurship (Johannisson, 
2003) and, more specifically the importance of team entrepreneurship, 
could not be overlooked much longer. It has become increasingly dif-
ficult to keep neglecting the quantitative and qualitative importance of 
ETs as most new ventures are now team based (at least one-­half and up 
to 79.1 per cent in a recent survey of European start-­ups) (Watson et al., 
1995; Lechler, 2001; Kollmann et al., 2015), and some research has shown 
that they tend to register superior performance (e.g., growth) to their solo 
counterparts (Birley and Stockley, 2000; OECD, 2003).
Even though ETs are now getting the scholarly recognition that they 
deserve, the overall number of research articles addressing this topic 
remains reasonably low. There are a number of recent articles that review 
existing literature on ETs, with each of them focusing on a specific 
issue. For example, Zhou and Rosini (2015) examine the link between 
ET diversity and performance, Klotz et al. (2014) focus their attention 
on the intermediary mechanisms that explain how team inputs lead to 
team effectiveness, while De Mol et al. (2015) are concerned with ET 
cognition. This chapter complements these review articles by examin-
ing ETs research in movement. Movement is first considered from a 
developmental stages’ perspective as this chapter critically reviews ETs 
literature following the three main phases of an ET: forming, functioning 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

12    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
and evolving. Then, taking a more holistic approach, the chapter seeks to 
capture the signals of the current evolution of ETs research. In identify-
ing the key lessons that are being learned, this chapter also outlines how 
future research efforts could be reinforced and developed in the most 
impactful ways.
DEFINING THE TERM ‘ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAM’
In order to identify articles and research relating to ETs, this chapter 
relies on the numerous denominations used for ETs (Schjoedt et al., 
2013). The initial list was completed through a broad search with 
the terms ‘entrepreneur’ and ‘team’ as keywords in an academic web 
search engine (Google Scholar) and by checking the articles citing those 
retrieved. Having completed this process, the following terminologies are 
considered appropriate terms for further investigation: ET, entrepreneur-
ial top management team, new venture team, new venture top manage-
ment team, venture team, founding team, founder team, start-­up team, 
team venture. They were used as keywords for a query in titles, abstracts, 
subjects and keywords, restricted to academic journals, on EBSCO’s 
Business Source Complete database (scholarly business database) and 
on the Social Sciences Citation Index (the most comprehensive database 
of peer-­reviewed journals in the social sciences, accessed via Thomson 
Reuters Web of Science, formerly ISI Web of Knowledge). The plural 
forms were also considered. The results span 40 years. The earliest iden-
tified paper was published in 1975 (Timmons, 1975) and the query was 
last updated in January 2016. The two databases combined cover all of 
the quality entrepreneurship and small business academic journals (ABS 
2010 Ranking; Journal Quality List 2012). An analysis of the hundreds 
of research hits led to a final unified sample of 121 articles. Articles that 
did not have ETs as a primary focus were excluded as well as any articles 
on corporate ETs. The articles that were identified as being appropriate 
to the literature review were thoroughly analysed utilizing the focus of 
‘movement’ in this chapter.
In trying to find the ‘entrepreneur’ in entrepreneurship, Gartner et al. 
(1994, p. 6) argue that ‘the locus of entrepreneurial activity often resides not 
in one person but in many’. They are referring to the individuals who might 
have some direct strategic influence on the development of a venture and so 
the members of an ET should be searched for amongst them. There are two 
main approaches that could be taken to identify such characters: by inclu-
sion or by exclusion. For the first approach, three main identification crite-
ria emerge from the literature: founder, owner and top manager (Table 2.1).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­13
It has been suggested that the definition of an ET by Kamm et al. (1990) is 
the most used in the literature (Cooney, 2005); they state that:
[. . .]we define an ET as two or more individuals who jointly establish a business 
in which they have an equity (financial) interest. These individuals are present 
during the pre-­start-­up phase of the firm, before it actually begins making its 
goods or services available to the market. (Kamm et al., 1990, p. 7)
Watson et al. (1995) add the condition that the founders-­owners also 
‘actively participate’ in the business, while Ensley et al. (2002) specify 
the ‘active involvement’ as being involved in ‘strategic decision-­making’, 
indicating that the ET members should not only be managers but ‘top’ 
managers. Many authors researching ETs simply do not define their 
research object (Schjoedt and Kraus, 2009) and those who do generally 
combine two or three of the main criteria (see Table 2.1). The major exist-
ing differences in definitions therefore lie both in the combinations and in 
the ways that the terms are captured. Cooper and Daily (1997) argue that 
Table 2.1  Defining entrepreneurial teams: three main identification 
criteria
Authors of the 
Definitions, in 
Chronological Order
Founder
Owner
(Top) 
Manager
Reason for Inclusion
Kamm et al. (1990);  
  Kamm and Nurick 
(1993)
X
X
Seminal definition.
Watson et al. (1995)
X
X
X
Addition of the management 
condition.
Ensley et al. (2002,  
  2003)
X
X
X
Specification of top 
management and relaxation 
of one (undesignated) 
condition.
Ucbasaran et al.  
  (2003)
X
X
X
Reunion of the three updated 
conditions.
Cooney (2005)
X
X
Special issue on ETs’ editorial.
Schjoedt and Kraus  
  (2009)
X
X
Special issue on ETs’ editorial.
Klotz et al. (2014)
X
Recent literature review. 
Neither founder status nor 
ownership criterion are 
specifically mentioned. An ET 
here is akin to a new venture 
top management team.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

14    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
while ‘founders’ is what usually comes to mind when thinking about ETs, 
someone joining the entrepreneur(s) after founding should also be con-
sidered as part of the ET. While Cooney’s (2005) definition would con-
sider prospective team members joining at any stage of the maturation 
of the firm, other definitions such as Schjoedt and Kraus’s (2009) would 
only consider the early phases of the venture. Ensley et al. (2002) argue 
that two out of the three conditions should suffice, while Ucbasaran et al. 
(2003) consider that the three should be met. More recently, Klotz et al. 
(2014, p. 227) define an ET as ‘the group of individuals that is chiefly 
responsible for the strategic decision making and ongoing operations 
of a new venture’. Ownership is not discussed and the founder status 
is apparently not a requirement. This definition thus appears to focus 
on a sole criterion and the authors do indeed state that in reality it is a 
new venture top management team (but that they preferred to avoid this 
terminology).
Beyond the different combinations of these three main criteria, a com-
plementary approach to ET member identification enables one to exclude 
actors that are not considered by the entrepreneurs as part of their teams 
but who could comply with the conditions above. These are notably early 
employees and investors. An important condition, highlighted in Schjoedt 
and Kraus’s (2009) definition, is in the social unit concept: members of 
an ET are seen as a social entity by themselves and by others, which sug-
gests that there is a mutual recognition between ET members. Cardon 
et al. (2016, p. 4) also argue that members of the ET are ‘distinct from 
other groups such as outside funders of the venture or external boards of 
investors’.
This chapter suggests that it would be beneficial to combine the two 
approaches to ET identification. An ET member should meet at least two 
out of the three inclusion criteria that the literature has highlighted (see 
Table 2.1). Moreover, strategic actors (Gartner et al., 1994) who comply 
with the conditions above but who are not recognized by the others as part 
of the ET should be excluded. The combination of these two approaches to 
ET identification should enable a more precise and operational definition.
TEAM DEVELOPMENTAL STAGES
In seeking to understand the stages through which ETs develop and grow, 
this section of the chapter explores three key areas: (1) forming, (2) func-
tioning and (3) evolving. Under the topic of ‘forming’, the chapter will 
address issues such as coming into existence, initial structuring and initial 
strategic choices. Under ‘functioning’, the chapter will address issues such 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­15
as moving from composition to outcomes and external processes, while 
‘evolving’ will address issues such as turnover, managerial transition and 
other types of outcomes. Collectively, these areas will enable the reader to 
understand more thoroughly the stages through which a team develops 
and how performance can be influenced by these occurrences.
Forming
The literature identifies two main mechanisms of ET formation (Forbes 
et al., 2006). The first pictures a strategic behaviour where entrepreneurs 
undertake an extensive search for prospective team members that would 
fulfil their resource needs. Kamm and Nurick’s (1993) conceptual model 
of team-­venture formation exemplifies this approach. The second perspec-
tive presents ET formation as a manifestation of interpersonal attraction 
following the homophily mechanism (‘birds of a feather flock together’). 
Friendship is, for example, seen as an important driver of ET formation 
(Francis and Sandberg, 2000). Discua Cruz et al. (2013) examine the spe-
cific case of family ETs based on seven Honduran case studies. They find 
that trust and shared values are important for membership. Quantitative 
studies, using structural event analysis, have demonstrated that the pre-
dominant characteristic of ETs is homophily (tendency of individuals to 
associate and bond with similar others). For example, based on 745 ETs’ 
composition reports, Ruef (2002) concludes that homophily, with regard 
to gender in particular, is the most consistent principle guiding team 
formation. Ruef et al. (2003) confirm this result on a sample of 816 ETs 
from the first Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics (PSED) and also 
add the characteristic of ethnicity. The strategic perspective presented as 
‘normative’ is thus challenged (Forbes et al., 2006; Aldrich and Kim, 2007) 
and its upholders attempt to explain the homophily of ETs by suggesting 
that the entrepreneurs are behaving irrationally. Parker (2009) argues 
that heterophilous ETs tend to be more successful (in terms of venture 
­performance) but entrepreneurs build homophilous teams because they 
are prone to certain cognitive biases, over-­optimism and self-­serving attri-
butions in particular. He suggests that informed outsiders (e.g., practition-
ers or hands-­on investors) would improve ET formation compared to the 
private choices that entrepreneurs make (ibid.). Based on a qualitative 
longitudinal study of ET formation in an academic spin-­off, Clarysse and 
Moray (2004) conclude otherwise. They suggest it to be more efficient to 
‘coach’ the existing ET instead and have it develop the skills and capacities 
to run the operations, which can be achieved in a relatively short period. 
The two approaches to ET formation are contrasted in the literature. 
Rather than discussing their relative merits in absolute terms, Aldrich 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

16    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
and Kim (2007) attempt to alleviate the tension by contextualizing these 
approaches as ETs do not form in a vacuum. Aldrich and Kim (2007) dis-
tinguish between small-­world networks that are dense and emerge based 
on homophily and proximity from scale-­free networks that are clustered 
in hubs and where new nodes prefer to attach to those already highly con-
nected nodes. They argue that the instrumental approach to ET formation 
fits best well-­institutionalized sectors characterized by scale-­free networks, 
whereas the social psychological approach fits best small-­world networks. 
According to Aldrich and Kim (2007), the typical ET would be a mundane 
ET forming in a small-­world, local and dense type of network, hence the 
superiority of the social psychological approach in explaining the phe-
nomenon of ET formation.
Wasserman (2012) argues that the decision to venture in a team intro-
duces further critical decisions about whom to attract, what role each 
team member should play, and how to split the equity among the team 
members. These are three core dilemmas that he calls the ‘Three Rs – 
Relationships, Roles, and Rewards’. The first was broached earlier in 
the chapter and the two others are now addressed. In the forming phase, 
a team begins to structure itself but how does it define the initial norms, 
roles, and interaction patterns? Zhao et al. (2013) argue that deploying 
the correct ET member to the correct task is essential and should be done 
on the basis of capability. The research of Sine et al. (2006) on work roles 
in ETs has a focus on role formalization and functional specialization 
and they find that new ventures with higher ET formalization and spe-
cialization outperform those with more organic organizational structures. 
Zolin et al. (2011) investigate role flexibility and find, in a sample of 921 
German incubator-­based firms, that strong ties (defined as previously 
known people in their study) in the ET increase such flexibility. However, 
the effect of strong ties on role modifiability is statistically significant only 
with novice entrepreneurs.
One team role that has been deeply investigated is the leadership role, 
with Ensley et al.’s (2000) results first confirming the existence of lead 
entrepreneurs in ETs. They suggest that lead entrepreneurs are set apart 
from other ET members by the strength of their strategic or entrepreneur-
ial vision (the ability to see what is not there) and their self-­confidence. 
Foo et al. (2006), from a sample of 51 ETs, highlight that the presence 
of a distinct leader is positively related to team satisfaction. Beyond the 
existence of a leader, an entrepreneurial type of leadership (characteristics 
of risk-­taking, innovativeness and proactiveness) can also stimulate ET 
members to be more creative (Chen, 2007). Furthermore, it is interesting 
to note that it is not the resources that a leader brings to the table that are 
critical, but rather it is the trust that his or her fellow teammates have in 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­17
the leader that enhances people’s commitment to cooperation (Wu et al., 
2009). It should also be noted that the initial trust and commitment gener-
ated are very beneficial to the subsequent growth stage of the enterprise 
(Wang and Wu, 2012). In seeking to understand why this happened, 
Darling et al. (2006) identify certain personal skills that enable a lead 
entrepreneur to bring together and develop that commitment within a 
team and these skills included paradoxical thinking, controlled responding 
and inclusive behaving.
Another dilemma within team formation concerns the equity split 
(Wasserman, 2012). Balkin and Swift (2006) remind us that at the creation 
of a new venture, the situation is often that of cash scarcity, and therefore 
equity and its relative distribution to the members of the ET is a critical 
issue. It represents more than potential future wealth since it is also about 
control and symbols such as the value of the contribution of each team 
member. This is likely to be an emotionally charged decision for any 
team and perception of fairness is essential (ibid.). This is confirmed by 
Breugst et al.’s (2015, p. 66) qualitative longitudinal study of eight ETs 
that highlights that the ‘perceived justice of equity distribution emerged as 
a key variable influencing ET interactions and important entrepreneurial 
outcomes’. Team attraction (the belief that the team is a strong entity) 
and team repulsion (a team drifting apart) are, respectively, positively and 
negatively related to high perceived justice. However, external threats can 
make a team go from a positive spiral to a negative spiral despite high per-
ceived justice. Therefore, the distribution of power is essential to under-
standing strategic decision-­making and organizational performance. In 
a sample of 129 newly chartered US banks, DeVaughn and Leary (2010) 
find that the incidence of organizational distress (defined as a specific 
state or condition that is just short of failure) decreases with an increase 
in the number of large blockholders on the ET (ownership superior to 
5 per cent).
Determining the strategy for an enterprise is another critical element of 
the ‘forming’ stage as an ET initiates the new venture and sets the found-
ing strategies that might lock the organization into a certain pattern (Zhao 
et al., 2013). Fern et al. (2012) suggest that differences between firms may 
emerge due to the ETs’ heterogeneous knowledge stock and the result-
ant decision-­making regarding strategic choices. They find that a team 
member’s past experience strongly constrains choices, and that diversity 
of experience, at the level of the ET member and the ET, lessens these 
constraints. This supports Beckman’s (2006) argument that ET composi-
tion shapes new firm behaviours as an important antecedent of exploita-
tive and explorative behaviour and firm ambidexterity. Exploitation is 
more common for heterogeneous ETs in their members’ prior company 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

18    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
affiliations while exploration is more common for the more diverse teams. 
Gruber et al. (2013) find in a sample of 496 technology ventures that ETs 
with more diverse industry experience and more diverse external knowl-
edge sourcing relationships identify not only a larger number of market 
opportunities but also more varied and distant ones. Ding (2011) empiri-
cally tests the effect of ET members’ professional-­education background 
on early-­stage organizational strategy in a sample of 512 young biotech-
nology firms. She finds that firms with proportionally more entrepreneurs 
with PhDs on the team have a higher probability of adopting open science. 
Furthermore, this link is stronger in a less favourable institutional envi-
ronment for open science. Chaganti et al. (2008) find that new ventures 
with an ethnic-­immigrant presence in the ETs show a stronger propensity 
to seek and pursue entrepreneurial opportunities, and thus a more aggres-
sive prospector strategy than those without that presence. This effect 
is dependent on the team size (weaker when teams are larger) and the 
average team members’ age (stronger for teams with younger members). 
Henneke and Lüthje (2007) find that a heterogeneous composition in 
terms of ET members’ educational background fosters strategic planning 
openness, that is, the consideration of a wider range of strategic options 
for the new venture. However, they find weak support for the relationship 
between the ET’s educational heterogeneity and environmental scanning. 
They attribute the weakness of this link to contextual effects specific 
to fast-­paced environments such as those they studied. Saemundsson 
and Candi (2014) research how environmental conditions influence new 
technology-­based firms to select an exploration strategy versus an exploi-
tation strategy in their innovation activities, arguing that due to resource 
constraints they are unlikely to opt for both. Based on 145 Danish firms, 
they find that heterogeneous ETs (in their backgrounds) are more likely 
to adapt their strategy to the environment whereas homogeneous ETs are 
more likely to continue with their preferred strategy (unless the pressure 
from the environment increases).
This section has examined the ‘forming’ stage of ETs. The literature 
distinguishes two main routes to team formation, one strategic and the 
other interpersonal. This dichotomy is also present in the practitioners’ 
discourses. In this book, Kim and Aldrich (Chapter 3) examine these two 
main strategies for constructing ETs, contrasting academic and popular 
advice. The initial structuring of the ET is also part of the ‘forming’ 
stage. Role formalization, specialization and flexibility are starting to be 
addressed in the literature. The leadership role is singled out and more spe-
cifically investigated. Rewards are another team dilemma in this stage. The 
rare research on this topic points at the significance of perceived justice of 
equity distribution. Finally, the importance of the initial ­strategic choices 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­19
is examined from a path dependency perspective. Research finds that ET 
composition shapes these initial choices contingent on the environment 
the new organization evolves in.
Functioning
In order to perform effectively, an ET will draw on its resources and 
interactions, which means that team composition and processes need to 
be addressed. Team composition is one of the earliest topics ETs research-
ers tackled by examining the impact of team diversity on performance. 
Arguing that it did not have to start from scratch, research on ETs ini-
tially drew heavily from research on top management teams (Birley and 
Stockley, 2000; Davidsson and Wiklund, 2001). Following upper echelons 
theory (Hambrick and Mason, 1984), the question commonly investigated 
has been: ‘Two competing views of team diversity: heterogeneity or homo-
geneity, which is better?’ (Horwitz and Horwitz, 2007). The argument 
for the former is generally that it brings different expertise, experiences 
and perspectives, and thus fosters creativity, innovation and problem 
resolution. This vision is countered by a social approach that argues that 
diversity in aspects such as age, race and expertise has a negative impact 
on team outcomes (ibid). Similarity between members of a team is sup-
posed to reduce dissonance (Festinger, 1957) and thus enhance cohesion 
and work processes (and ultimately performance) but no clear answer has 
been found to date. According to Horwitz and Horwitz (2007), findings 
are so conflicting that some authors contend there are no consistent main 
effects of team diversity on organizational performance. ET research fol-
lowed the same path and appears to have reached the same conclusions. 
Klotz et al. (2014) argue that research has failed in identifying the essen-
tial ingredients for building effective ETs, while Zhou and Rosini (2015) 
argue that the results are inconsistent and that the association between 
team diversity and performance remains inconclusive. As for classical 
upper echelons theory studies, results are thus mitigated. For example, 
the impact of functional diversity or experience in entrepreneurship is not 
clear (Hmieleski and Ensley, 2007; Parker, 2012). However, a recent meta-
analysis finds significant effects of ET characteristics on new ventures. Jin 
et al. (2016) first examine aggregated team composition characteristics 
such as collective industry experience, start-up experience, and work expe-
rience, and their effects on new venture performance are significantly posi-
tive. This is consistent with earlier studies which found a positive effect of 
individual human capital on entrepreneurial success (Unger et al., 2011). 
Second, they examine heterogeneity in the ET in terms of gender, age, and 
functional experience combined into a global heterogeneity measure and 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

20    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
conclude that heterogeneity is important for new ventures. Third, they test 
for the impact of ET size on new venture performance and find a positive 
and significant effect. Taken together, these results suggest that ET com-
position has overall an effect on new ventures but strong inconsistencies 
remain when the studies are not bundled and, more specifically, when dif-
ferent diversity dimensions are examined separately (for example, Zhou 
and Rosini, 2015).
This issue of the inconsistencies in team composition studies can be 
tackled from at least three angles. Generally, ETs research seems to follow 
Joshi et al.’s (2011) suggestions in their review on workplace demography 
research that they break into three approaches: (1) reconceptualization 
of diversity variables; (2) incorporation of mediating mechanisms; and 
(3) greater emphasis on contextual moderators.
Concerning conceptualization of diversity, there is first a discussion 
between surface-­level and deep-­level diversity. The two main ideas in 
upper echelons theory are (a) the close link between the top management 
team’s composition and the firm’s outcomes, and (b) the possibility to 
approximate cognitive diversity by demographic diversity (Hambrick, 
2007). Schjoedt and Kraus (2009) argue that surface-­level characteristics 
are often used to assess ET heterogeneity whereas most of them do not 
have an established link with performance, whereas heterogeneity in deep-­
level characteristics possesses such a link, which suggests that the latter 
needs to be examined. Personality is one example of the inputs that have 
not been examined deeply in the literature (Klotz et al., 2014) although 
Schoss et al. (Chapter 6) undertake such a review later in this book. They 
find that personality factors are significantly related to venture success 
and that the relevant traits are much more effective when they are present 
in different team members rather than in only one team member. Khan 
et al. (2015) find diversity in need of achievement to have negative effects 
on the outcomes in general but it can become positive if, at the same time, 
the team’s mean need for achievement is low overall. The same authors 
focus on internal locus of control in another article and find that it pro-
motes team performance (effectiveness and efficiency). However, team 
efficiency is increased when ETs possess at the same time a high internal 
locus of control at team level and a low diversity on this well-­established 
entrepreneurial personality trait (Khan et al., 2014). Moreover, these two 
papers contribute in showing that measurement is also important since the 
mean level in a characteristic and the diversity on that same characteristic 
can have different impacts. Klotz and Neubaum (2016) call for person-
ality studies in an ET setting. Focusing on the dark side of personality 
traits, they suggest that some team members may possess positive traits 
that offset the negative traits of others. Also, they argue that research-
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­21
ers should move beyond simply examining the mean level of personality 
traits in teams and examine how the minimum and maximum levels affect 
functioning and performance and how the intra-­group variance does too.
Furthermore, similar to the fact that most studies up to now focus on 
surface-­level diversity, it is noticeable that most studies simply construe 
diversity as variety. Harrison and Klein (2007) argue that the construct 
of diversity actually requires closer examination. They propose that it can 
be construed from three main perspectives: separation, variety or dispar-
ity. Variety is the perspective that is usually adopted in ET research as it 
is the basis of upper echelons theory. It considers differences among team 
members in terms of relevant knowledge or experience and is viewed as 
positive (ibid.). On the other hand, separation predicts a negative outcome 
to diversity. Separation indicates that there are differences in position or 
opinion among team members, primarily of value, belief or attitude (ibid.). 
Finally, disparity (inequality) reflects possession that is the distribution of 
how much of a socially valued commodity each unit member possesses. 
This second discussion about the conceptualization of diversity echoes 
some studies in the literature concerning certain types of teams where 
the variety perspective may not be perceived as the most relevant. One 
example is the case of academic spin-­off ETs that the literature presents 
as being possibly composed of two identity-­based subgroups: academics 
and practitioners. With their different mindsets and cultures (Rasmussen, 
2011), academics and practitioners on a same team can create a faultline 
(i.e., a divide between these two subgroups that negatively impacts team 
processes and consequently team outcomes) (Thatcher and Patel, 2012). 
Visintin and Pittino (2014) argue that team integration can be promoted 
by a number of ET attributes such as common background and past 
membership in the same research team. They find the latter to be true 
in a sample of 103 university spin-­offs based in Italy. As for common 
background, similar experience does positively moderate the relationship 
between profile differentiation (i.e., the presence of academics and non-­
academics on the team) and performance but not similarity in education 
background (ibid.).
Joshi et al.’s (2011) second suggestion for team composition research 
concerns ‘mediating mechanisms’. The latter might also be an explana-
tion for the lack of consistent results on the relationship between ET 
composition and new venture performance. As a limitation to their meta-
analysis on this relationship and as a future research opportunity, Jin et 
al. (2016) highlight the importance of exploring the possible mediating 
effects. Mediators are classically considered to be processes following the 
input–process–output (IPO) framework. The most conventional media-
tor variables that ET research examined are conflict and communication 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

22    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
(Schjoedt and Kraus, 2009). Ensley and colleagues (Ensley and Pearce, 
2001; Ensley et al., 2002) find that cognitive conflict, task related, is posi-
tively linked to new venture performance and is propounded as a source 
of creativity, innovation and avoidance of groupthink (Janis, 1982). 
Affective (relational) conflict has, on the other hand, a negative impact 
on performance. They also find a positive link between these two types 
of conflict (Jehn, 1997) that could be explained by the fact that attempts 
to stimulate cognitive conflict can, in turn, augment the affective type of 
conflict. This relationship might contribute to explain Foo’s (2011) finding 
that task conflict relates negatively to member-­rated ET effectiveness in a 
sample of 73 teams developing their business idea. Foo et al. (2006) inves-
tigate the effects of team inputs and processes on team members’ percep-
tions of team viability and satisfaction in nascent ventures on a sample of 
51 new venture teams. They suggest that it is not as much the frequency 
of communication that must be taken into account as its openness. They 
find that teams with problems communicate more (in order to resolve their 
issues). An open communication is positively linked to their performance 
measures and it enhances personal ­interactions. Some studies attempt 
to integrate different variables in a multidimensional model such as that 
by Watson et al. (1995), which comprises four ­dimensions: leadership, 
interpersonal flexibility, team commitment and helpfulness. They find a 
positive relationship between this aggregate measure and perceived firm 
performance in a sample of 191 ETs. Similarly, Lechler (2001) emphasizes 
the importance of going beyond the classical conflict and communication 
variables to measure social interaction in its complexity as a whole. He 
suggests six components: communication, cohesion, work norms, mutual 
support, coordination and conflict resolution. Using a sample of 159 new 
technology-based firms’ ETs, Lechler (2001) obtains conclusive results 
linking his measure and venture success.
Marks et al. (2001) argue that certain mediating variables generally 
viewed as processes are not processes per se but rather emergent states. 
This notably led to the use of the input–mediator–output–input (IMOI) 
framework where the ‘M’ encompasses the different processes as well as the 
emergent states (Ilgen et al., 2005). The latter are ‘constructs that charac-
terize properties of the team that are typically dynamic in nature and vary 
as a function of team context, inputs, processes and outcomes. Emergent 
states describe cognitive, motivational, and affective states of teams, as 
opposed to the nature of their member interaction’ (Marks et al., 2001, 
p. 357). Shared leadership is a mediator of this type that has received some 
attention. Carland and Carland (2012) propose a model in which there are 
two interacting aspects of shared leadership: shared entrepreneurial vision 
and shared command and control. While definitions of shared leadership 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­23
are numerous, generally it is described as a state where leading behaviour is 
manifested by the team as a whole and not just a single individual (Ensley et 
al., 2003). Ensley et al. (2006) compare this concept to that of vertical lead-
ership and examine their relative influence on new venture performance. 
They are both found to be significant predictors but the shared leadership 
variables account for a significant amount of variance in new venture per-
formance beyond the vertical leadership variables. Hmieleski et al. (2012) 
further confirm the important effect of shared authentic leadership on 
new venture performance based on a sample of 179 US new ventures. In 
Chapter 8 of this book, Zhou and Vredenburgh also find empirical support 
that shared leadership improves ET performance and they find, moreover, 
that personality composition is a dispositional antecedent of shared leader-
ship. Zhou (2013) focuses on interaction and shows in a sample of 144 ETs 
that task-­related informational diversity benefits ET performance more 
when leadership is shared among team members.
Some authors attempt to introduce contingency to explain the inconclu-
sive results of the effects of team diversity. They notably examine the fit 
with the firm’s life-­cycle stage, its degree of innovativeness or the venture’s 
strategy and business environment. Steffens et al. (2012) find that higher 
homogeneity in the ET is detrimental in the long term but did not find 
a relationship between team homogeneity and short-­term performance. 
Amason et al. (2006) find that a negative relationship exists between team 
heterogeneity and venture performance in highly innovative firms, but not 
in the less innovative firms. Ganotakis and Love (2012) find that the set 
of ET human capital needed for entering export markets is different from 
that required for succeeding in those markets. Eesley et al. (2014) find 
that diverse ETs are likely to achieve high performance in a competitive 
commercialization environment while technically focused teams present 
a better fit with a cooperative commercialization environment and when 
the enterprise pursues an innovation strategy. In their meta-analysis of ET 
composition and new venture performance, Jin et al. (2016) distinguish 
high-tech industries from low-tech industries and find that in the latter 
‘aggregated team characteristics are significantly more beneficial to new 
venture performance than heterogeneous ET characteristics’ (p. 18). This 
means that in low-tech industries, increasing ET diversity is less beneficial 
than increasing human capital embedded in the team. The environment is 
thus an important contingency variable.
The remainder of this section focuses on the external processes as, 
beyond the internal processes they experience, ETs also interact with 
their environment. Witt (2004) examines the network success hypothesis 
that assumes a positive relationship between the networking activities of 
­founders and their new ventures’ success. His review of empirical studies 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

24    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
reveals a lack of significant results, which he notably explains as being 
caused by a focus on the individual rather than the ET. Also, there are 
important stakeholders such as venture capitalists that have attracted 
much research. In both of these cases, external processes have often been 
linked to internal ones. Neergaard (2005) identifies, in a qualitative study, 
six central networking activities and showed that not all ET members were 
equally active networkers, with one member in particular often doing 
most of it. Arenius and Laitinen (2011) confirm the latter and further 
argue that if the networking is shared then it diminishes the associated 
stress and the team will be better able to detect its network reconfiguration 
needs (following the changes in their resource needs). Vissa and Chacar 
(2009) endeavour to show, in a sample of 84 Indian software team-­based 
ventures, how the use of external networks was contingent on ET internal 
processes (strategic consensus and cohesion) and how they jointly shape 
performance outcomes. In Grandi and Grimaldi’s (2003) examination 
of 40 Italian academic spin-­offs, they find that the ETs’ intention to set 
up relations with external actors and their frequency of interaction with 
the latter was an antecedent of new venture success. They notably dem-
onstrate that the networking intention is positively influenced by the 
degree of articulation of the roles in the ET (a clear ‘division of labour’) 
and negatively by the degree of completeness of the ET. Brinckmann and 
Hoegl (2011) examine how teamwork capability (quality of internal col-
laboration) and relational capability (collaboration with partners external 
to the focal firm) of the ET affects the development of new firms. Their 
findings show that these internal and external processes will have diverg-
ing effects on the development of a new venture. Teamwork capabilities 
lead to a reduced likelihood of ET members being added and they do not 
affect sales and employment growth, while relational capabilities lead to 
ET member additions as well as sales and employment growth.
The most commonly investigated external processes are venture capi-
talist related, with scholars focusing on two main processes: conflict and 
learning. Higashide and Birley (2002) examine conflict between the ET 
and the venture capitalist as perceived by the latter. They find that cogni-
tive conflict related positively to firm performance while affective conflict 
associated negatively to firm performance. These impacts are in general 
stronger in any conflict related to organizational goals than to policy deci-
sions. Zacharakis et al. (2010) examine both the ET’s internal conflict and 
external conflict with a venture capitalist. They find that ETs do not view 
cognitive conflict with the venture capitalist as favourable and that the 
intra-­team conflict increases the conflict between the ET and the venture 
capitalist. Berggren and Fili (2008) focus on business angels and how they 
abstract from different cues that their relationship with the ET is experi-
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­25
encing problems. From interviews with business angels, six different cues 
have emerged that are ranked according to how detrimental they could 
be to the relationship with the ET. Busenitz et al. (1997) consider that an 
ET’s perception of whether its treatment by the venture capitalist is fair 
will affect its receptivity to venture capitalist advice. In a sample of 116 
venture capitalist–funded firms, they mainly identified the indiscriminate 
use of contractual covenants as an adverse trigger. The background of the 
ET also frames the perceived sense of fairness in the studied relationship. 
The number of years of ET industry experience and the average ET firm 
tenure negatively frame perceptions of procedural justice. On the other 
hand, overall team tenure positively (and significantly) frames ET percep-
tions of fairness. Barney et al. (1996) consider that venture capitalist learn-
ing assistance can be of two types (business management and operational) 
and argue that ETs would evaluate them differently depending on some 
of their characteristics. Their results indicate that ETs with more industry 
experience and longer team tenure in the current venture are negatively 
related to both business management advice and operational assistance 
offered by their venture capitalists. The ETs that tend to welcome busi-
ness management advice are those that had previously worked together 
and whose primary experience was from another industry. Busenitz et al. 
(2004) adds to these studies by adopting a learning perspective to consider 
the venture capitalists’ value-­added proposition and finds no statistically 
significant support for strategic information, a negative association for 
dismissals, and positive support for procedurally just interventions.
In summary, team composition and processes are the most addressed 
topics in ETs research. In investigating the passage from composition to 
outcomes, ET scholars draw heavily on upper echelons theory and do 
not find consistent results. Nevertheless, the composition characteristics 
are still believed to be important for new venture performance. Different 
strategies are deployed in order to clarify this relationship. Some scholars 
started to look at deeper-­level composition characteristics such as per-
sonality. Others focused on the mediators and considered emergent states 
rather than traditional processes. Finally, a contingency approach has also 
been taken with a better consideration of context. The ‘functioning’ stage 
also involves external processes. The latter are more and more examined 
together with internal processes and the most commonly investigated 
external processes are those in relation to venture capitalists.
Evolving
The evolution of the ET is studied from two perspectives: first that of the 
turnover and second that of the managerial transition (or when the ET 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

26    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
becomes and/or is replaced by a top management team). What both of 
these perspectives have in common is the acknowledgement of how initial 
conditions appear to constrain them as well as other outcomes. Bryant 
(2014) argues that the adaptive capacity of entrepreneurial ventures is 
often limited by the legacies of imprinted founding characteristics. He 
develops a model of the microfoundations of imprinting based on collec-
tive memory and shows how a venture’s long-­term capacity to adapt might 
be improved. Based on an empirical research study, Beckman and Burton 
(2008) find that the ET’s prior functional experiences and initial organiza-
tional functional structures predict subsequent top manager backgrounds 
and later functional structures. Furthermore, following the IMOI frame-
work, certain outcomes have a cyclical causal feedback, which the extra ‘I’ 
represents. These outcomes will be discussed later in the chapter.
Ucbasaran et al. (2003) emphasize the importance of human capital in 
new ventures and portray ET turnover as a way to manage this human 
capital in order to adapt it to the project and its future development. 
They argue that it is important to distinguish team entries from team 
exits as they are likely to have different antecedents. Vanaelst et al. (2006) 
qualitatively examine the evolution of ten ETs and find that departures 
are linked to intrapersonal conflict (e.g., the personal ambition of an 
ET member cannot be conciliated with that of the venture) and/or inter-
personal conflict (cognitive and/or affective). New entries, on the other 
hand, are all linked to supplementary resource needs. Loane et al. (2014) 
examine motives of ET exits in 12 firms and find that the drivers of ET 
exits are notably linked to conflicts regarding business strategies, per-
sonal circumstances or lifestyle changes. The authors underline the fact 
that not all exits signal conflict as one might deduce from the literature 
and that the influence of outside equity may similarly force departures 
from an ET.
In their analysis of ETs turnover, Ucbasaran et al. (2003) also consider 
the value of human capital, both in terms of quantity and quality. The 
former is operationalized by the ET’s size and average age, and the latter 
by the degree of functional diversity. Globally, they consider that an ET 
poor in terms of human capital will be associated with new entries whereas 
a heterogeneous team (in which member coordination and integration 
costs are higher) will be associated with team exits. They test these hypoth-
eses in a sample of 92 firms surveyed at three points in time over more 
than a ten-­year span. They find that team size is negatively linked to team 
entries and find no significant relationship for team exits. Chandler et al.’s 
(2005) results on emerging ventures (six to 24 months old) corroborate 
Ucbasaran et al.’s (2003) perception of turnover in ETs as an adaptation 
mechanism but also mitigate against their results. For example, Chandler 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­27
et al. (2005) find that the larger the ET, the greater the tendency to add 
members. Furthermore, Li’s (2008) research of 90 biotechnology firms 
leads to different results on the impact of ET functional heterogeneity, 
saying that it is negatively associated with turnover, while Ucbasaran et al. 
(2003) find a weakly significant positive relationship and Chandler et al. 
(2005) find a stronger positive one.
In examining ET turnover, some studies focus more specifically on 
founders’ departure in the context of managerial transition (Flamholtz 
and Randle, 2000). In a sample of 78 firms over a 16-­year life span, Boeker 
and Karichalil (2002) find that founders’ departure increases with firm 
size, decreases with founder ownership and board membership, and has 
a U-­shaped relationship with firm growth. Founders who worked in 
research and development or who were chief executives are also less likely 
to leave. Other researchers focus on venture capitalists and/or context to 
gain a better understanding of ET members’ departure. Fiet et al. (1997) 
find that dismissals happen more when firms perform poorly, and that 
procedural justice (perception of fairness) in the venture capitalist–ET 
relationship is important as there is a negative relationship between it 
and ET dismissal. Erikson and Berg-­Utby (2009) argue that the dismissal 
of ET members is critical in knowledge-­intensive firms because key tacit 
knowledge is often embedded in the ETs and their networks. Busenitz et 
al. (2004) do not find support for a negative effect on performance that 
a single dismissal from the ET might suggest but they do find support 
for a negative relationship between two-­plus dismissals and a favourable 
venture exit. Bains (2007) advises against early removal of the ET as he 
found that it correlated with poorer performance than retaining the ET’s 
skills. The best time to remove the ET is after an initial public offering 
(IPO). Jain and Tabak (2008) find that the probability of founder CEO at 
IPO is positively related to the size of the ET. They argue that this result is 
consistent with the notion that larger ETs increase their bargaining power 
and provide more choice for the CEO position. Erikson and Berg-­Utby 
(2009, p. 50) do not find such a relationship with ET size but do find one 
with the investors’ initial negotiating style: ‘using a positional negotiating 
style in the pre-investment phase can have a strong significant effect on 
dismissal when things get tough post-investment.’
The IMOI model considers that causal linkages do not have to be linear 
or additive, but can be non-­linear or conditional. It is an acknowledg-
ment of the possible interactions of inter-­ and intra-­variable categories. 
Outcomes have an impact on the ET’s evolution and the latter (in terms 
of turnover or managerial transition but also role redistribution, for 
example) impacts the outcomes. De Mol et al. (2015, p. 247) suggest that 
there are:
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

28    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
[. . .]three specific types of outcomes that have proved valuable in examining 
team effectiveness: (a) the team’s production of a high-­quality product, be it a 
physical product, a decision, a plan or other output; (b) the team’s contribu-
tion to the well-­being and growth of the team; and (c) the continuing capability 
of members to work together in the future (Hackman, 1987; Hackman and 
Wageman, 2005).
The first category encompasses outcomes such as products and services, 
strategy formulation, creativity, new venture performance and legitimacy, 
while team learning and opportunity recognition would pertain to the 
second category (De Mol et al., 2015). Team turnover and managerial 
transition fall into the last category (Cooper and Daily, 1997). The major-
ity of the outcomes that are investigated in ET research are firm-­level 
performance outcomes and most studies follow upper echelons research 
that proxies top management team performance with venture performance 
(Rau, 2005) and thus use one measure or another of new venture per-
formance (e.g., sales growth, profitability, net cash flows). Nevertheless, 
research on other organizational teams indicates that this type of measure 
is too restrictive (Cohen and Bailey, 1997). Lechler (2001) offers a first 
step toward a more complete measure of ET performance as he considers 
personal success (defined by the development of the ET member’s personal 
income, personal satisfaction with the business results and the satisfaction 
with entrepreneurial teamwork) alongside ­organizational-­level economic 
success. Chowdhury (2005) develops a complete new measure, composed 
of seven items accounting for team outcomes and team behaviours, and 
each ET member rates their team on each of these items. These pioneer 
studies combined with research on team effectiveness measurement 
prompt an assessment at three levels: organizational, team and individual. 
At the organizational level, performance would be measured by the new 
venture’s performance. Financial measures, in particular sales growth, are 
the most used indicators (Drnovsek and Glas, 2004) but this raises at least 
two problems: the need to wait in order to have sufficient ‘history’ and the 
fact that not all firms have the same performance ambitions (Davidsson, 
1989; Schjoedt and Kraus, 2009). Besides classical objective firm perfor-
mance measures, the ET’s appreciation with regard to its personal objec-
tives should thus be factored in, plus external assessments (e.g., advisors, 
venture capitalists) can also be considered. Turning to the team level, 
Cohen and Bailey (1997) suggest assessing decision quality as a group-­level 
indicator of performance. Another measure can be the collective entre-
preneurial competency that is created: did the team succeed in building a 
‘collective entrepreneurship’ (Reich, 1987)? Finally, at the individual level, 
it would be interesting to assess satisfaction based on the perceived profes-
sional and/or personal development, for example (Hackman, 1990).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­29
In summary, the ‘evolving’ stage of ETs raises three main discus-
sion points: ET turnover, managerial transition and the other outcomes 
resulting from or affecting these evolutions. Research on ET turnover 
has mainly found that team entries and team exits were not explained by 
the same factors. In their understanding of the passage from an ET to a 
top management team, scholars focused on the ET’s composition, on the 
team’s relationship with venture capitalists and on contextual elements 
such as the firm’s performance. These evolutions lead to new inputs, team 
reconfigurations and interact with other important outcomes at the firm, 
team or individual level.
TRANSVERSAL MOVEMENTS
As has been mentioned earlier in the chapter, research relating to ETs 
is picking up momentum, with journal special issues, literature reviews 
and conference tracks on the topic increasingly visible. In this movement 
at least three main trends can be identified through signals of varying 
­intensity and value.
Lesson 1: Formation is Key
ETs distinguish themselves from other organizational teams in various 
aspects, leading researchers to argue that ‘findings from organizational 
team research must be extrapolated with caution when applied to new 
venture teams’ (Foo, 2011, p. 43). First, the context is quite different. 
Klotz et al. (2014, p. 228) discuss ‘the unique nature of the new venture 
context’ and the importance of imprinting effects that last well beyond the 
tenure of the ET. However, by beginning with teams already in existence 
and focusing on factors that affect their functioning (Kim and Aldrich, 
Chapter 3), many reviews appear to neglect a fundamental aspect of the 
ETs’ uniqueness put forward by other researchers such as Ruef (2010) 
that proposes that ETs are naturally occurring rather than constructed or 
imposed by others. The formation phase is widely neglected even though 
it has long-­lasting effects and is very specific to ETs, while some research-
ers have begun to understand the criticality and uniqueness to ETs of this 
stage and the need to explore it. Nevertheless the level of research is still 
quite low and many opportunities are still available and awaiting research.
According to Ruef (2010), many entrepreneurs who wish to form an 
ET end up venturing in solo. He argues that ‘the reasons for this outcome 
can be complex’ and that ‘it is important not to equate this outcome 
with the intentions or preferences of the entrepreneur’ (ibid., p. 10). The 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

30    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
question of why entrepreneurs decide to venture in teams is also impor-
tant to consider. Based on a qualitative study of ten ETs, Ben-­Hafaïedh 
(2013) mainly finds resource-­based motivations (such as diversification of 
resources and skills) and interpersonal motivations (such as support need 
and belief in the superiority of teamwork). The expectations of certain 
stakeholders have also been singled out as motives for ET formation 
(Moreau, 2005; Ben-­Hafaïedh, 2013). These studies find that the entrepre-
neurs express resource-­based motivations and interpersonal motivations 
jointly. Do these two types of reasons always co-­exist? Are some settings 
more conducive to one type than the other (e.g., family entrepreneurship, 
high-­tech sectors)? Furthermore, do these reasons predict the team for-
mation mechanisms that will be used? Also, what is the effect of intrinsic 
compared to extrinsic motivation (Ryan and Deci, 2000)? In other words, 
when does an entrepreneur decide by his or her own volition to start a 
team or when are they pushed (directly or not) toward it either to help 
get it funded (signalling theory) or to comply with institutional norms 
(e.g., mimetic isomorphism in high-­tech sectors)?
The duality of the perspectives on the reasons for ET formation echoes 
in the mechanisms. The literature appears to have taken for granted 
the superiority of the social psychological approach in describing the 
­phenomenon of ET formation and of the strategic approach in producing 
more effective teams. Two main critiques may be addressed regarding such 
a position. First, the evidence is not so clear-­cut. The studies that high-
lighted the prevalence of the homophily principle had restricted homoph-
ily to its ascriptive dimensions (such as age, gender and race) in order to 
attribute the achieved dimensions (such as educational and functional 
backgrounds) to the strategic approach (e.g., Ruef, 2002), whereas both 
dimensions actually form the (status) homophily concept (Lazarsfeld and 
Merton, 1954). Moreover, while the literature focused on status homoph-
ily, value homophily (i.e., similarity in values, attitudes and/or beliefs) 
is more likely to characterize an interpersonal fit, considering shared 
personal aspirations and business visions (Leung et al., 2006). A different 
operationalization may thus yield different results. Second, the two per-
spectives on ET formation develop separately whereas some authors argue 
for the existence of interaction effects (Forbes et al., 2006; Grossman et al., 
2012). This calls for investigation and digging into the tension in order to 
avoid creating isolated silos of knowledge (Poole and Van de Ven, 1989). 
Ben-­Hafaïedh (2010) suggests, for example, that ET formation occurs 
through different stages following a phased decision process combining 
the social psychological approach (search and screening) and the strategic 
approach (selection). Furthermore, it would be interesting to examine the 
relationship between the process of ET formation and performance: what 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­31
are the most effective ways of forming an ET and on what elements (if any) 
are they contingent?
It has been recognized that the process of ET formation is entwined 
with the identification and refinement of the business opportunity. But 
is a collective identification possible? Harper (2008) argues positively 
but this issue awaits empirical investigation. Furthermore, the relation-
ship between the opportunity development and the team formation is 
also not very clear. Kamm et al. (1990) argue there are two possibilities: 
either an initial entrepreneur identifies an opportunity and then decides 
to form a team (lead entrepreneur approach) or two individuals or more 
decide to work together regardless of whether or not they have identi-
fied an opportunity (group approach). These two possibilities are also 
represented in Cooney’s (2005) process model of enterprise formation. 
The literature appears to focus on the first approach while it seems 
marginal in reality (Henneke and Lüthje, 2007). What are the repercus-
sions in both cases (for example, in the use of causation/effectuation – 
Sarasvathy, 2001)? How do the ‘opportunities being pursued’ and the 
‘way an ET is formed’ influence each other (Kamm et al., 1990; Discua 
Cruz et al., 2013)? And how does this relationship relate to performance 
issues?
Roles and rewards are also under-­researched in this formation stage. 
How does the initial structuring of the team occur in terms of role dis-
tribution, flexibility, and so on? How do the formal roles (such as those 
that exist in top management teams following certain titles) interact 
with the informal ones such as those discussed in this book by Schoss 
et al. (Chapter 6): shaper, team worker, and so forth? How does this 
initial structuring impact future outcomes such as performance and later 
­organization? Regarding rewards, what are the types of decision criteria 
used to divide ownership of the enterprise and with what results? How do 
they interact with other variables that may influence the distribution of 
equity to the ET (Balkin and Swift, 2006)? What about the other possible 
rewards such as salaries, and so on?
Lesson 2: Resources Need to be Leveraged
ET composition and its relationship with performance have been, follow-
ing the upper echelons research stream, investigated quite frequently. The 
main research question that has been explored has related to the benefits 
of diversity, with the results being mostly inconclusive (Zhou and Rosini, 
2015). Nevertheless, a global effect of ET composition on new venture 
performance is found (Jin et al., 2016) and team composition is important 
to investors. Research has demonstrated the key role that an ET plays in 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

32    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
a venture capitalist’s evaluation of venture proposals (Ge et al., 2005). 
Franke et al. (2008) find in a sample of 51 professionals in venture capital-
ists’ firms that venture capitalists expect some team members to possess 
industry experience and leadership experience, and strongly prefer teams 
with heterogeneous educational backgrounds. Research also finds biases 
in this selection process and related downsides to the strong reliance by 
VCs on a team’s composition. Franke et al. (2006) show the existence of 
similarity biases as the venture capitalists in their sample tend to prefer 
teams that were similar to them in terms of training and professional 
experience. In a sample of 68 European early-­stage high-­tech focused 
venture capitalists, Knockaert and Vanacker (2013) find that the venture 
capitalists who focus on ET characteristics criteria during selection are 
less involved in value-­adding activities compared to those who focus on 
technology criteria. But team composition remains a prominent variable 
nonetheless, even for non-­institutional investors, with Vogel et al. (2014) 
finding that individuals (not professional investors but people recruited 
via business media websites) are more inclined to fund ETs with task-­
oriented diversity (e.g., education, experience) as well as relations-­oriented 
diversity (e.g., gender, nationality). Their conclusion is that ‘social capital 
of an ET matters to a greater extent to funding decisions of external inves-
tors than the behavioural integration of the team’s human capital. ETs 
must therefore ­carefully balance the social costs of non-­task-­related diver-
sity and the access to financial resources’ (Vogel et al., p. 595). This finding 
echoes Franke et al. (2008) who find a notable difference between novice 
and experienced venture capitalists. The latter give much importance to 
the mutual acquaintance among ET members while the former do not.
The results of a study on 174 individual entrepreneurs representing 79 
high-­tech ETs suggest that demographic diversity (in terms of age, gender 
and functional background) is not important per se for ET effectiveness, 
whereas team processes are important (Chowdhury, 2005). More spe-
cifically, demographic diversity does not significantly contribute to either 
cognitive comprehensiveness or team commitment, nor is it significantly 
related to team performance. By contrast, the team ‘processes’ are both 
positively and significantly related to ET effectiveness. However, these 
results may also come from the fact that diversity can be conceptual-
ized and measured in various ways (as presented above in this chapter; 
see also Zhou and Rosini, 2015). Scholars also argue that demographics 
should not be the only inputs considered. Deeper-­level diversity such 
as personality traits (Klotz and Neubaum, 2016) and affective inputs 
such as entrepreneurial passion (Cardon et al., 2016) should be consid-
ered in ETs research. Moreover, the mediators are not all processes. In 
Chowdhury’s (2005) study, the two team processes qualify as emergent 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­33
states (Marks et al., 2001). ‘ET cognition [for example] can be described 
as (a) an emergent state, (b) embedded in team processes and (c) involving 
sharing content-­related knowledge’ (De Mol et al., 2015, p. 239). Processes 
(task work processes such as decision-­making, information processing, 
coordination and problem solving, as well as teamwork processes such as 
conflict) will thus interact with these emergent states. In terms of cognitive 
emergent states, De Mol et al. (2015) notably discuss transactive memory 
systems and shared mental models, with mental models playing a critical 
role in enabling entrepreneurs to structure their behaviour in organiza-
tions (Forbes, 1999 in Grégoire et al., 2015). Considering mediators is thus 
essential, as well as differentiating between processes and emergent states. 
However, achieving accurate measurement, in particular the emergent 
team properties, is still quite challenging (see Carter et al., 2015).
It is thus important not to dismiss ET composition as a key factor for 
team and new venture performance but to be attentive to the conceptual-
ization and measurement of diversity, and to consider the different media-
tor categories and their possible interactions. Concerning, for example, 
personality traits in ETs, Klotz and Neubaum (2016) argue that it is essen-
tial to study them in mediated models that link personality to new ventures 
outcomes via other mechanisms. Studies have shown that resources were 
not self-­explanatory but that the way in which they are leveraged is essen-
tial (Blatt, 2009; Wang and Wu, 2012). Moreover, it is arguable that this 
could be taken a step further, with different compositions viewed as differ-
ent resource configurations needing different types of leverage. A configu-
rational approach to team composition highlights the need to reflect upon 
the most efficient ways to leverage different configurations. Team roles are 
here of essence, their allocation as well as their reallocation. Furthermore, 
certain configurations might need some specific efficient leverage enablers. 
For example, in this book, Lalonde (Chapter 11) introduces the concept of 
culture shock within a multi-­ethnic ET configuration.
Finally, learning is an important factor scarcely accounted for within 
vast swathes of the literature. Clarysse and Moray (2004) show how an ET 
learns by demonstrating that after a year of operations, a team composed 
of academics developed the skills and capacities to run the new venture’s 
operation. They lament that ‘the necessity of experiential team learning 
is seldom included in business plans’ (Clarysse and Moray, 2004, p. 56). 
But ET learning does not happen automatically and Clarysse and Moray 
(ibid.) note that ‘the provision of a minimum amount of coaching seems to 
be necessary’. While learning at the individual level and at the small-­firm 
level has received some attention, there is generally a dearth of research 
about ET learning (Karataş-­Özkan, 2011). One study nonetheless finds 
that ‘prior experience’, the ‘division of (decision-­making) labour’ and 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

34    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
the ‘knowledge’ characteristic of the ET shape learning (Sardana and 
­Scott-­Kemmis, 2010). However, learning can also be construed as a way 
to enhance and to adapt the necessary leverage to make the most out of an 
ET’s current and evolving compositional elements.
Lesson 3: Context Really Matters
Zahra et al. (2014, p. 2) argue that context is ‘believed to pervade and 
influence the micro processes that give entrepreneurial actions their sub-
stance and potency’. For ETs research, contextualization can be viewed 
from at least three perspectives. First, in her call for a need for context 
lens in entrepreneurship research, Welter (2011) puts forward many types 
of contexts: business (industry, market), social (networks, household and 
family), spatial (geographical environments, industry districts and clus-
ters) and institutional (culture and society, political and economic system). 
These types of contexts are most notably taken into consideration by some 
researchers for their impacts on ETs functioning and outcomes (Bruton 
and Rubanik, 2002; Bouncken, 2004; Arrighetti et al., 2014). Furthermore, 
Packalen’s (2015) results on how demographic features of ETs differ 
between regions and over time tend to ­demonstrate the ­importance of 
treating context variables such as region and industry as moderators 
rather than controls. In the spatial dimension of context, Zahra et al. 
(2014) also include the physical distance in the digital economy. For ETs 
research, this raises the topic of virtual teams (Matlay and Martin, 2009; 
Aguinis and Lawal, 2012).
Second, the temporal dimension is an important aspect of context as 
well. In ETs research, this underscores the different developmental phases 
of the teams as well as temporal topics such as learning and turnover. 
Indeed, in this chapter certain issues, topics and concepts are more rel-
evant in one stage than another. It also restates the importance of longitu-
dinal studies in order to observe a team’s evolution over time.
Finally, contexts can also be embedded so as to typify the ET. This is 
notably the case for family entrepreneurship, social entrepreneurship, 
academic entrepreneurship, women entrepreneurship, business groups, 
franchises, and so on. Zahra et al. (2014) discuss these types of factors as 
the ownership dimension of context. In ETs research, high-­tech settings 
are very frequent. When ETs researchers consider new technology-­based 
firms, the academic spin-­off is often singled out (Ensley and Hmieleski, 
2005). Their ETs are quite specific, generally characterized by an aca-
demic core (Wright et al., 2007) and more homogeneous than (e.g.) inde-
pendent new technology–based firms (Ensley et al., 2005). Functional 
heterogeneity in a team is a positive signal for investors. ETs in research-­
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­35
based spin-­offs often lack managerial expertise. Hence, incubators and 
other advising services try to attract experienced managers to complete 
the ET but the graft is difficult. In this chapter the relevance of specific 
theories for this context (such as faultline theory – Ben-­Hafaïedh et al., 
2014) has been highlighted. The specificity of these teams impacts their 
formation (Lundqvist, 2014) and thus the other phases as well. These 
ETs are often an example of hybrids, teams where there are (at least) two 
competing logics (Almandoz, 2014). This is also a specificity that can 
be found in a social entrepreneurship context (Dufays and Huybrechts, 
Chapter 13), characterized by its inherent tension between social and 
economic dimensions or logics (Battilana and Lee, 2014; Doherty et al., 
2014). This duality of objectives of social entrepreneurship may translate 
into tensions within the whole entrepreneurial process as well as within 
the team (Smith et al., 2013). Such a distinguishing feature of the context 
causes a singularity of social ETs and of their issues (Ben-­Hafaïedh and 
Dufays, 2015).
In ETs research, gender is a compositional factor still under-­investigated. 
Men are more likely to venture in teams than women (Kelley et al., 2013; 
Kollmann et al., 2015). While Godwin et al. (2006) argue that women 
would benefit from forming or integrating a mixed-­sex ET in certain 
­situations, the question remains as to how the team and the new venture 
will be impacted. Moreover, what are the women’s contributions in such 
a configuration and how can they be enhanced? Another more recent 
study tries to understand how gender inequality in leadership emerges 
in ETs. The authors find that ‘merit’s effect becomes much larger when 
multiple merit-­based criteria provide consistent predictions for which 
team member is superior to others, and when entrepreneurial founders 
adopt bureaucratic templates to construct new ventures. However, gender 
stereotypes of leaders pervasively constrain women’s access to power posi-
tions’ (Yang and Aldrich, 2014, p. 303). While informative, these existing 
studies do not really delve into the process by which gender might impact 
the team and the new venture through strategic decision-­making notably.
Family is another context dimension for which ETs research is more 
advanced. In this book, Discua Cruz et al. (Chapter 9) describe the specifi-
cities of family ETs and their impact on various dimensions. Brannon et al. 
(2013) empirically show how family relationships in ETs matter. Colombo 
et al. (2014) draw on the concept of socio-­emotional wealth to show how 
the family aspect affects sales and employment changes. They also act as 
a reminder that there is still heterogeneity in family ETs (e.g., non-­family 
members in the team, number of generations present) and that their com-
position moderates the previous relationships. Co-­preneurship (or spousal 
teams entrepreneurship) is also an important nuance in family ETs 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

36    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
(Hedberg and Danes, 2012). Family ventures ­sometimes grow through 
business groups. This is also a specific context where portfolio entre-
preneurs form and expand business groups by creating ETs, often with 
former employees (Iacobucci and Rosa, 2010).
In summary, the context must be taken into consideration in ETs 
research. Certain variables are too often considered as simple controls and 
not further investigated. Moreover, the temporal dimension is of essence 
as can be seen in this chapter where different developmental phases of ETs 
raise different issues and call for different types of research. Finally, the 
different types of ETs are also representative of the importance of context 
(social ETs, family ETs, etc.) but these different types also comprise 
­elements of heterogeneity that should not be overlooked.
CONCLUSION
The ambition of this chapter was to examine ETs research in movement. 
First, it critically reviewed and organized existing ETs research in three 
main team developmental stages, and second, it captured the signals of 
the current paths that ETs research is taking. This chapter also sought to 
highlight certain movements and to offer some guiding lights that would 
contribute effectively to furthering understanding of ETs and the enhance-
ment of their performance.
The chapter has clearly shown that there is more and more research 
on ETs even though the overall level is still quite low. As for other 
entrepreneurship topics, researchers often come from various disciplines 
and sometimes with certain templates. This can be seen through the influ-
ence that research on top management teams (strategic management) 
and on organizational groups in general (organizational behaviour) has 
on ETs (Klotz et al., 2014). Research on ETs need not start from scratch 
(Davidsson and Wiklund, 2001) but as the topic is transitioning from 
infancy to adolescence (on certain topics in particular), its distinctive 
features need to be acknowledged. The formation phase is one stage in 
particular where ETs research should be less transposing and more pio-
neering. Why and how do ETs come into existence are the first questions 
in this phase. And then, how does the team structure itself at start-­up and 
make its early strategic choices, choices that will condition much of the 
future of the venture?
Borrowing or getting inspiration from research on other organizational 
teams must not be put aside, but researchers must ensure that the specifi-
cities of ETs are acknowledged and appropriately investigated. Concepts 
from other organizational teams are not always relevant for ETs or if 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­37
used, they must be transposed with much care. For example, with ET 
formation, the main theories now in use were not developed with ETs 
in mind (and sometimes not even organizational teams) (Forbes et al., 
2006). Also, the methodologies do not always fit as, for example, research 
on ETs is sometimes less advanced on certain topics (Edmondson and 
McManus, 2007). ET researchers should also be more diligent about how 
their research could contribute to other fields. Klotz et al. (2014) discuss 
how ETs research could contribute to the strategic management literature 
and to organizational behaviour/human resource management literature. 
In terms of topics more specifically, the contribution from research on ETs 
should be of value to corporate ETs or intrapreneurial teams and, more 
generally, teams in a context of collective entrepreneurship (Shepherd 
and Krueger, 2002; Ribeiro-­Soriano and Urbano, 2010; Andries and 
Czarnitzki, 2014).
REFERENCES
Aguinis, H. and S.O. Lawal (2012), ‘Conducting field experiments using eLancing’s natural 
environment’, Journal of Business Venturing, 27 (4), 493–505.
Aldrich, H.E. and P.H. Kim (2007), ‘Small worlds, infinite possibilities? How social networks 
affect entrepreneurial team formation and search’, Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 
1 (1–2), 147–65.
Almandoz, J. (2014), ‘Founding teams as carriers of competing logics: When institutional 
forces predict banks’ risk exposure’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 59 (3), 442–73.
Amason, A.C., R.C. Shrader and G.H. Tompson (2006), ‘Newness and novelty: Relating 
top management team composition to new venture performance’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 21 (1), 125–48.
Andries, P. and D. Czarnitzki (2014), ‘Small firm innovation performance and employee 
involvement’, Small Business Economics, 43 (1), 21–38.
Arenius, P. and K. Laitinen (2011), ‘Entrepreneurial teams and the evolution of networks: A 
longitudinal study’, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 12 (4), 
239–47.
Arrighetti, A., D. Bolzani and A. Lasagni (2014), ‘Beyond the enclave? Break-­outs into main-
stream markets and multicultural hybridism in ethnic firms’, Entrepreneurship & Regional 
Development, 26 (7–8), 753–77.
Bains, W. (2007), ‘When should you fire the founder?’ Journal of Commercial Biotechnology, 
13 (3), 139–49.
Balkin, D. and M. Swift (2006), ‘Top management team compensation in high-­growth tech-
nology ventures’, Human Resource Management Review, 16 (1), 1–11.
Barney, J.B., L.W. Busenitz and J.O. Fiet et al. (1996), ‘New venture teams’ assessment 
of learning assistance from venture capital firms’, Journal of Business Venturing, 11 (4), 
257–72.
Battilana, J. and M. Lee (2014), ‘Advancing research on hybrid organizing – Insights from 
the study of social enterprises’, The Academy of Management Annals, 8, 397–441.
Beckman, C.M. (2006), ‘The influence of founding team company affiliations on firm behav-
ior’, Academy of Management Journal, 49 (4), 741–58.
Beckman, C.M. and M.D. Burton (2008), ‘Founding the future: Path dependence in the 
evolution of top management teams from founding to IPO’, Organization Science, 19 (1), 
3–24.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

38    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C. (2010), ‘Entrepreneurial team formation: Any rationality?’ in A. Zacharakis, 
S. Carter and A. Corbett et al. (eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2010, Babson 
Park, MA: The Arthur M. Blank Center for Entrepreneurship, Babson College, pp. 415–29.
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C. (2013), ‘Essai de modélisation de la constitution des équipes entrepreneuri-
ales’ [Modelling entrepreneurial team formation], Vie & Sciences de l’Entreprise, 193 (1), 
11–36.
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C. and F. Dufays (2015), ‘Entrepreneurial teams in social new venture 
creation: A research agenda’, paper at the International Council for Small Business 
50th Anniversary Conference, 6–9 June, Dubai.
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C., A. Micozzi and P. Pattitoni (2014), ‘Academic spinoffs new venture 
teams and performance: Insights from faultline theory’, paper at the ICSB 2014 World 
Conference on Entrepreneurship, Dublin.
Berggren, B. and A. Fili (2008), ‘When things go wrong: Business angels’ use of cues in 
judging their investment relations’, International Journal of Business Strategy, 8 (2), 48–58.
Birley, S. and S. Stockley (2000), ‘Entrepreneurial teams and venture growth’, in D.L. Sexton 
and H. Landström (eds), The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship, Oxford: Blackwell, 
pp. 287–307.
Blatt, R. (2009), ‘Tough love: How communal schemas and contracting practices build rela-
tional capital in entrepreneurial teams’, Academy of Management Review, 34 (3), 533–51.
Boeker, W. and R. Karichalil (2002), ‘Entrepreneurial transitions: Factors affecting founder 
departure’, Academy of Management Journal, 45 (3), 818–26.
Bouncken, R.B. (2004), ‘Cultural diversity in entrepreneurial teams: Findings of new ven-
tures in Germany’, Creativity & Innovation Management, 13 (4), 240–53.
Brannon, D.L., J. Wiklund and J.M. Haynie (2013), ‘The varying effects of family relation-
ships in entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 107–32.
Breugst, N., H. Patzelt and P. Rathgeber (2015), ‘How should we divide the pie? Equity dis-
tribution and its impact on entrepreneurial teams’, Journal of Business Venturing, 30 (1), 
66–94.
Brinckmann, J. and M. Hoegl (2011), ‘Effects of initial teamwork capability and initial 
relational capability on the development of new technology-­based firms’, Strategic 
Entrepreneurship Journal, 5 (1), 37–57.
Bruton, G.D. and Y. Rubanik (2002), ‘Resources of the firm, Russian high-­technology start-
ups, and firm growth,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 17 (6), 553–76.
Bryant, P.T. (2014), ‘Imprinting by design: The microfoundations of entrepreneurial adapta-
tion’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 38 (5), 1081–102.
Busenitz, L.W., J.O. Fiet and D.D. Moesel (2004), ‘Reconsidering the venture capitalists’ 
“value added” proposition: An interorganizational learning perspective’, Journal of 
Business Venturing, 19 (6), 787–807.
Busenitz, L.W., D.D. Moesel and J.O. Fiet et al. (1997), ‘The framing of perceptions 
of fairness in the relationship between venture capitalists and new venture teams’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 21 (3), 5–22.
Cardon, M., C. Post and W. Forster (2016), ‘Team entrepreneurial passion (TEP): Its emer-
gence and influence in new venture teams’, Academy of Management Review, doi: 10.5465/
amr.2014.0356.
Carland, J.C. and J.W. Carland (2012), ‘A model of shared entrepreneurial leadership’, 
Academy of Entrepreneurship Journal, 18 (2), 71–81.
Carter, N.T., D.R. Carter and L.A. DeChurch (2015), ‘Implications of observability for the 
theory and measurement of emergent team phenomena’, Journal of Management, doi: 
10.1177/0149206315609402.
Chaganti, R.S., A.D. Watts and R. Chaganti et al. (2008), ‘Ethnic-­immigrants in founding 
teams: Effects on prospector strategy and performance in new Internet ventures’, Journal 
of Business Venturing, 23 (1), 113–39.
Chandler, G.N., B. Honig and J. Wiklund (2005), ‘Antecedents, moderators, and perfor-
mance consequences of membership change in new venture teams’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 20 (5), 705–25.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­39
Chen, M.-­H. (2007), ‘Entrepreneurial leadership and new ventures: Creativity in entrepre-
neurial teams’, Creativity and Innovation Management, 16 (3), 239–49.
Chowdhury, S. (2005), ‘Demographic diversity for building an effective entrepreneurial 
team: Is it important?’ Journal of Business Venturing, 20 (6), 727–46.
Clarysse, B. and N. Moray (2004), ‘A process study of entrepreneurial team formation: The 
case of a research-­based spin-­off’, Journal of Business Venturing, 19 (1), 55–79.
Cohen, S.G. and D.E. Bailey (1997), ‘What makes teams work: Group effectiveness research 
from the shop floor to the executive suite’, Journal of Management, 23 (3), 239–90.
Colombo, M.G., A. De Massis and E. Piva et al. (2014), ‘Sales and employment changes in 
entrepreneurial ventures with family ownership: Empirical evidence from high-­tech indus-
tries’, Journal of Small Business Management, 52 (2), 226–45.
Cooney, T.M. (2005), ‘Editorial: What is an entrepreneurial team?’ International Small 
Business Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Cooper, A.C. and C.M. Daily (1997), ‘Entrepreneurial teams’, in D.L. Sexton and 
R.W. Smilor (eds), Entrepreneurship 2000, Chicago, IL: Upstart Publishing, pp. 127–50.
Darling, J.R., M.J. Keefe and K.E. Nicols (2006), ‘Successful entrepreneurial ­team-­building: 
A new paradigm of development skills’, Journal of Business & Society, 19 (1/2), 143–59.
Davidsson, P. (1989), ‘Entrepreneurship – And after? A study of growth willingness in small 
firms’, Journal of Business Venturing, 4 (3), 211–26.
Davidsson, P. and J. Wiklund (2001), ‘Levels of analysis in entrepreneurship research: 
Current research practice and suggestions for the future’, Entrepreneurship Theory & 
Practice, 25 (4), 81–99.
De Mol, E., S.N. Khapova and T. Elfring (2015), ‘Entrepreneurial team cognition: A review’, 
International Journal of Management Reviews, 17 (2), 232–55.
DeVaughn, M.L. and M.M. Leary (2010), ‘Antecedents of failure for newly chartered banks 
in the U.S. banking industry’, Group & Organization Management, 35 (5), 666–95.
Ding, W.W. (2011), ‘The impact of founders’ professional-­education background on the 
adoption of open science by for-­profit biotechnology firms’, Management Science, 57 (2), 
257–73.
Discua Cruz, A., C. Howorth and E. Hamilton (2013), ‘Intrafamily entrepreneurship: The 
formation and membership of family entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 37 (1), 17–46.
Doherty, B., H. Haugh and F. Lyon (2014), ‘Social enterprises as hybrid organizations: A 
review and research agenda’, International Journal of Management Reviews, 16 (4), 417–36.
Drnovsek, M. and M. Glas (2004), ‘Exploring the personal and business dimensions of a 
new venture’s performance and their impact on its growth propensity’, in M. Dowling, 
J. Schmude and D. Knyphausen (eds), Advances in Interdisciplinary European Research, 
Münster: Lit Verlag, pp. 121–39.
Edmondson, A.C. and S.E. McManus (2007), ‘Methodological fit in management field 
research’, Academy of Management Review, 32 (4), 1155–79.
Eesley, C.E., D.H. Hsu and E.B. Roberts (2014), ‘The contingent effects of top management 
teams on venture performance: Aligning founding team composition with innovation 
strategy and commercialization environment’, Strategic Management Journal, 35 (12), 
1798–817.
Ensley, M.D. and K.M. Hmieleski (2005), ‘A comparative study of new venture top man-
agement team composition, dynamics and performance between university-­based and 
independent start-­ups’, Research Policy, 34 (7), 1091–105.
Ensley, M.D. and C.L. Pearce (2001), ‘Shared cognition in top management teams: 
Implications for new venture performance’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22 (2), 
145–60.
Ensley, M.D., J.W. Carland and J.C. Carland (2000), ‘Investigating the existence of the lead 
entrepreneur’, Journal of Small Business Management, 38 (4), 59–77.
Ensley, M.D., K.M. Hmieleski and C.L. Pearce (2006), ‘The importance of vertical and 
shared leadership within new venture top management teams: Implications for the perfor-
mance of startups’, Leadership Quarterly, 17, 217–31.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

40    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Ensley, M.D., A.W. Pearson and A.C. Amason (2002), ‘Understanding the dynamics of 
new venture top management teams: Cohesion, conflict, and new venture performance’, 
Journal of Business Venturing, 17 (4), 365–86.
Ensley, M.D., A. Pearson and C.L. Pearce (2003), ‘Top management team process, shared 
leadership, and new venture performance: A theoretical model and research agenda’, 
Human Resource Management Review, 13 (2), 329–46.
Erikson, T. and T. Berg-­Utby (2009), ‘Preinvestment negotiation characteristics and dis-
missal in venture capital-­backed firms’, Negotiation Journal, 25, 41–57.
Fern, M.J., L.B. Cardinal and H.M. O’Neill (2012), ‘The genesis of strategy in new ventures: 
Escaping the constraints of founder and team knowledge’, Strategic Management Journal, 
33 (4), 427–47.
Festinger, L. (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.
Fiet, J.O., L.W. Busenitz, D.D. Moesel and J.B. Barney (1997), ‘Complementary theoretical 
perspectives on the dismissal of new venture team members’, Journal of Business Venturing, 
12 (5), 347–66.
Flamholtz, E.G. and Y. Randle (2000), Growing Pains: Transitioning from an Entrepreneurship 
to a Professionally Managed Firm, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-­Bass.
Foo, M.-­D. (2011), ‘Teams developing business ideas: How member characteristics and 
­conflict affect member-­rated team effectiveness’, Small Business Economics, 36 (1), 33–46.
Foo, M.-­D., H.-­P. Sin and L.-­P. Yiong (2006), ‘Effects of team inputs and intrateam pro-
cesses on perceptions of team viability and member satisfaction in nascent ventures’, 
Strategic Management Journal, 27 (4), 389–99.
Forbes, D. (1999), ‘Cognitive approaches to new venture creation’, International Journal of 
Management Reviews, 1 (4), 415–39.
Forbes, D.P., P.S. Borchert and M.E. Zellmer-­Bruhn et al. (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial team 
formation: An exploration of new member addition’, Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 
30 (2), 225–48.
Francis, D.H. and W.H. Sandberg (2000), ‘Friendship within entrepreneurial teams and its 
association with team and venture performance’, Entrepreneurship, Theory and Practice, 
25 (2), 5–25.
Franke, N., M. Gruber and D. Harhoff et al. (2006), ‘What you are is what you like – 
similarity biases in venture capitalists’ evaluations of start-­up teams’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 21 (6), 802–26.
Franke, N., M. Gruber and D. Harhoff et al. (2008), ‘Venture capitalists’ evaluations 
of start-­up teams: Trade-­offs, knock-­out criteria, and the impact of VC experience’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 32 (3), 459–83.
Ganotakis, P. and J.H. Love (2012), ‘Export propensity, export intensity and firm 
­performance: The role of the entrepreneurial founding team’, Journal of International 
Business Studies, 43 (8), 693–718.
Gartner, W.B., K.G. Shaver and E. Gatewood et al. (1994), ‘Finding the entrepreneur in 
entrepreneurship’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 18 (2), 5–9.
Ge, D., J.M. Mahoney and J.T. Mahoney (2005), ‘New venture valuation by venture 
­capitalists: An integrative approach’, University of Illinois at Urban Champaign Working 
Paper No. 124: 05–0124.
Godwin, L.N., C.E. Stevens and N.L. Brenner (2006), ‘Forced to play by the rules? Theorizing 
how mixed-­sex founding teams benefit women entrepreneurs in male-­dominated contexts’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 30 (5), 623–42.
Grandi, A. and R. Grimaldi (2003), ‘Exploring the networking characteristics of new venture 
founding teams’, Small Business Economics, 21 (4), 329–41.
Grégoire, D.A., J. Cornelissen and D. Dimov et al. (2015), ‘The mind in the middle: Taking 
stock of affect and cognition research in entrepreneurship’, International Journal of 
Management Reviews, 17 (2), 125–42.
Grossman, E.B., H. Yli-­Renko and R. Janakiraman (2012), ‘Resource search, interper-
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­41
sonal similarity, and network tie valuation in nascent entrepreneurs’ emerging networks’, 
Journal of Management, 38 (6), 1760–87.
Gruber, M., I.C. MacMillan and J.D. Thompson (2013), ‘Escaping the prior knowledge 
corridor: What shapes the number and variety of market opportunities ­identified before 
market entry of technology start-­ups?’ Organization Science, 24 (1), 280–300.
Hackman, J.R. (1987), ‘The design of work teams’, in J.W. Lorsch (ed.), Handbook of 
Organizational Behavior, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-­Hall, pp. 315–42.
Hackman, R. (1990), Groups That Work (And Those That Don’t): Creating Conditions for 
Effective Teamwork, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-­Bass.
Hackman, J.R. and R. Wageman (2005), ‘A theory of team coaching’, Academy of 
Management Review, 30 (2), 269–87.
Hambrick, D.C. (2007), ‘Upper echelons theory: An update’, Academy of Management 
Review, 32 (2), 334–43.
Hambrick, D.C. and C. Mason (1984), ‘Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of 
its top managers’, Academy of Management Review, 9 (2), 193–206.
Harper, D.A. (2008), ‘Towards a theory of entrepreneurial teams’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 23 (6), 613–26.
Harrison, D.A. and K.J. Klein (2007), ‘What’s the difference? Diversity constructs as 
separation, variety, or disparity in organizations’, Academy of Management Review, 32 (4), 
1199–228.
Hedberg, P.R. and S.M. Danes (2012), ‘Explorations of dynamic power processes within 
copreneurial couples’, Journal of Family Business Strategy, 3 (4), 228–38.
Henneke, D. and C. Lüthje (2007), ‘Interdisciplinary heterogeneity as a catalyst for product 
innovativeness of entrepreneurial teams’, Creativity & Innovation Management, 16 (2), 
121–32.
Higashide, H. and S. Birley (2002), ‘The consequences of conflict between the venture 
capitalist and the entrepreneurial team in the United Kingdom from the perspective of the 
venture capitalist’, Journal of Business Venturing, 17 (1), 59–81.
Hmieleski, K.M. and M.D. Ensley (2007), ‘A contextual examination of new venture per-
formance: Entrepreneur leadership behavior, top management team heterogeneity, and 
environmental dynamism’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 28 (7), 865–89.
Hmieleski, K.M., M.S. Cole and R.A. Baron (2012), ‘Shared authentic leadership and new 
venture performance’, Journal of Management, 38 (5), 1476–99.
Horwitz, S.K. and I.B. Horwitz (2007), ‘The effects of team diversity on team outcomes: 
A meta-­analytic review of team demography’, Journal of Management, 33 (6), 987–1015.
Iacobucci, D. and P. Rosa (2010), ‘The growth of business groups by habitual entrepreneurs: 
The role of entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34 (2), 351–77.
Ilgen, D.R., J.R. Hollenbeck and M. Johnson et al. (2005), ‘Teams in organizations: From 
input–process–output models to IMOI models’, Annual Review of Psychology, 56 (1), 
517–43.
Jain, B.A. and F. Tabak (2008), ‘Factors influencing the choice between founder versus non-­
founder CEOs for IPO firms’, Journal of Business Venturing, 23 (1), 21–45.
Janis, I.L. (1982), Groupthink, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Jehn, K.A. (1997), ‘A qualitative analysis of conflict types and dimensions in organizational 
groups’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 42 (3), 530–57.
Jin, L., K. Madison and N.D.  Kraiczy et al. (2016), ‘Entrepreneurial team composition 
characteristics and new venture rerformance: A meta-analysis’, Entrepreneurship Theory 
and Practice, Early view.
Johannisson, B. (2003), ‘Entrepreneurship as a collective phenomenon’, in E. Genescà, 
E.  Urbano and J. Capelleras et al. (eds), Creacion de Empresas – Entrepreneurship, 
Barcelona: Servei de Publicacions de la Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, pp. 87–109.
Joshi, A., H. Liao and H. Roh (2011), ‘Bridging domains in workplace demography research: 
A review and reconceptualization’, Journal of Management, 37 (2), 521–52.
Kamm, J.B. and A.J. Nurick (1993), ‘The stages of team venture formation: A decision-­
making model’, Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 17 (2), 17–27.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

42    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Kamm, J.B., J.C. Shuman and J.A. Seeger et al. (1990), ‘Entrepreneurial teams in new 
venture creation: A research agenda’, Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 14 (1), 7–17.
Karataş-­Özkan, M. (2011), ‘Understanding relational qualities of entrepreneurial learning: 
Towards a multi-­layered approach’, Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 23 (9–10), 
877–906.
Kelley, D.J., C.G. Brush and P.G. Greene et al. (2013), Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2012 
Women’s Report, Wellesley: MA: The Center for Women’s Leadership, Babson College.
Khan, M.S., R.J. Breitenecker and E.J. Schwarz (2014), ‘Entrepreneurial team locus of 
control: Diversity and trust’, Management Decision, 52 (6), 1057–81.
Khan, M.S., R.J. Breitenecker and E.J. Schwarz (2015), ‘Adding fuel to the fire’, Management 
Decision, 53 (1), 75–99.
Klotz, A.C. and D.O. Neubaum (2016), ‘Research on the dark side of personality 
traits in entrepreneurship: Observations from an organizational behavior perspective’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 40 (1), 7–17.
Klotz, A.C., K.M. Hmieleski and B.H. Bradley et al. (2014), ‘New venture teams: A review 
of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 40 (1), 226–55.
Knockaert, M. and T. Vanacker (2013), ‘The association between venture capitalists’ selec-
tion and value adding behavior: Evidence from early stage high tech venture capitalists’, 
Small Business Economics, 40 (3), 493–509.
Kollmann, T., C. Stöckmann and J. Linstaedt et al. (2015), European Startup Monitor 
2015, accessed 9 August 2016 at http://europeanstartupmonitor.com/fileadmin/presse/­
download/esm_2015.pdf.
Lazarsfeld, P.F. and R.K. Merton (1954), ‘Friendship as a social process: A substantive and 
methodological analysis’, in R.M. MacIver, T.F. Abel and M. Berger et al. (eds), Freedom 
and Control in Modern Society, New York: D. Van Nostrand Co., pp. 18–66.
Lechler, T. (2001), ‘Social interaction: A determinant of entrepreneurial team venture 
success’, Small Business Economics, 16 (4), 263–78.
Leung, A., J. Zhang and P.K. Wong et al. (2006), ‘The use of networks in human resource 
acquisition for entrepreneurial firms: Multiple “fit” considerations’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 21 (5), 664–86.
Li, J. (2008), ‘Top management team restructuring in pre-­IPO high technology startups: 
The influence of TMT characteristics and firm growth’, The Journal of High Technology 
Management Research, 19 (1), 59–69.
Loane, S., J. Bell and I. Cunningham (2014), ‘Entrepreneurial founding team exits in rapidly 
internationalising SMEs: A double edged sword’, International Business Review, 23 (2), 
468–77.
Lundqvist, M.A. (2014), ‘The importance of surrogate entrepreneurship for incubated 
Swedish technology ventures’, Technovation, 34 (2), 93–100.
Marks, M.A., J.E. Mathieu and S.J. Zaccaro (2001), ‘A temporally based framework and 
taxonomy of team processes’, Academy of Management Review, 26 (3), 356–76.
Matlay, H. and L.M. Martin (2009), ‘Collaborative and competitive strategies in virtual teams 
of e-­entrepreneurs: A pan-­European perspective’, Australasian Journal of Information 
Systems, 16 (1).
Moreau, R. (2005), ‘Les raisons de l’entrepreneuriat collectif: Le cas des équipes créatrices 
d’Entreprises de nouvelles technologie’ [The reasons for collective entrepreneurship: The 
case of new technology firms’ venture teams], Gestion 2000, 22 (3), 123–42.
Neergaard, H. (2005), ‘Networking activities in technology-­based entrepreneurial teams’, 
International Small Business Journal, 23 (3), 257–78.
OECD (2003), Entrepreneurship and Local Economic Development: Programme and Policy 
Recommendations, Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and Development.
Ogbor, J.O. (2000), ‘Mythicizing and reification in entrepreneurial discourse: Ideology-­
critique of entrepreneurial studies’, Journal of Management Studies, 37 (5), 605–35.
Packalen, K. (2015), ‘Multiple successful models: How demographic features of founding 
teams differ between regions and over time’, Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 
27 (5–6), 357–85.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams research in movement    ­43
Parker, S.C. (2009), ‘Can cognitive biases explain venture team homophily?’ Strategic 
Entrepreneurship Journal, 3 (1), 67–83.
Parker, S.C. (2012), ‘Do serial entrepreneurs run successively better-­performing businesses?’ 
Journal of Business Venturing, 28 (5), 652–66.
Poole, M.S. and A.H. Van de Ven (1989), ‘Using paradox to build management and organi-
zation theories’, Academy of Management Review, 14 (4), 562–78.
Rasmussen, E. (2011), ‘Understanding academic entrepreneurship: Exploring the ­emergence 
of university spin-­off ventures using process theories’, International Small Business 
Journal, 29 (5), 448–71.
Rau, D. (2005), ‘The influence of relationship conflict and trust on the transactive memory 
performance relation in top management teams’, Small Group Research, 36 (6), 746–71.
Reich, R.B. (1987), ‘Entrepreneurship reconsidered: The team as hero’, Harvard Business 
Review, May–June, 77–83.
Ribeiro-Soriano, D. and D. Urbano (2010), ‘Employee–organization relationship in col-
lective entrepreneurship: An overview’, Journal of Organizational Change Management, 
23 (4), 349–59.
Ruef, M. (2002), ‘A structural event approach to the analysis of group composition’, Social 
Networks, 24 (2), 135–60.
Ruef, M. (2010), The Entrepreneurial Group: Social Identities, Relations, and Collective 
Action, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ruef, M., H.E. Aldrich and N.M. Carter (2003), ‘The structure of founding teams: 
Homophily, strong ties and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs’, American Sociological 
Review, 68 (2), 195–222.
Ryan, R.M. and E.L. Deci (2000), ‘Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions 
and new direction’, Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25 (1), 54–67.
Saemundsson, R.J. and M. Candi (2014), ‘Antecedents of innovation strategies in new 
technology-­based firms: Interactions between the environment and founder team composi-
tion’, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31 (5), 939–55.
Sarasvathy, S.D. (2001), ‘Causation and effectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from eco-
nomic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency’, Academy of Management Review, 
26 (2), 243–63.
Sardana, D. and D. Scott-­Kemmis (2010), ‘Who learns what? A study based on entrepre-
neurs from biotechnology new ventures’, Journal of Small Business Management, 48 (3), 
441–68.
Schjoedt, L. and S. Kraus (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial teams: Definition and performance 
factors’, Management Research News, 32 (6), 513–24.
Schjoedt, L., E. Monsen and A. Pearson et al. (2013), ‘New venture and family busi-
ness teams: Understanding team formation, composition, behaviors, and performance’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 1–15.
Shepherd, D.A. and N.F. Krueger (2002), An intentions-­based model of entrepreneurial 
teams’ social cognition’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27 (2), 167–85.
Sine, W.D., H. Mitsuhashi and D.A. Kirsch (2006), ‘Revisiting Burns and Stalker: Formal 
structure and new venture performance in emerging economic sectors’, Academy of 
Management Journal, 49 (1), 121–32.
Smith, W.K., M. Gonin and M.L. Besharov (2013), ‘Managing social–business tensions: A 
review and research agenda for social enterprise’, Business Ethics Quarterly, 23 (3), 407–42.
Steffens, P., S. Terjesen and P. Davidsson (2012), ‘Birds of a feather get lost together: New 
venture team composition and performance’, Small Business Economics, 39 (3), 727–43.
Thatcher, S.M.B. and P.C. Patel (2012), ‘Group faultlines: A review, integration, and guide 
to future research’, Journal of Management, 38 (4), 969–1009.
Timmons J.A. (1975), ‘The entrepreneurial team: An American dream or nightmare?’ 
Journal of Small Business Management, 13 (4), 33–8.
Ucbasaran, D., A. Lockett and M. Wright et al. (2003), ‘Entrepreneurial founder teams: 
Factors associated with member entry and exit’, Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 
28 (2), 107–27.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

44    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Unger, J.M., A. Rauch and M. Frese et al. (2011), ‘Human capital and entrepreneurial 
success: A meta-analytical review’, Journal of Business Venturing, 26 (3), 341–58.
Vanaelst, I., B. Clarysse and M. Wright et al. (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial team development in 
academic spinouts: An examination of team heterogeneity’, Entrepreneurship Theory & 
Practice, 30 (2), 249–71.
Visintin, F. and D. Pittino (2014), ‘Founding team composition and early performance of 
university-­based spin-­off companies’, Technovation, 34 (1), 31–43.
Vissa, B. and A.S. Chacar (2009), ‘Leveraging ties: The contingent value of entrepreneurial 
teams’ external advice networks on Indian software venture performance’, Strategic 
Management Journal, 30 (11), 1179–91.
Vogel, R., T.X. Puhan and E. Shehu et al. (2014), ‘Funding decisions and entrepreneurial 
team diversity: A field study’, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 107 (Part B), 
595–613.
Wang, C.-­J. and L.-­Y. Wu (2012), ‘Team member commitments and start-­up competitive-
ness’, Journal of Business Research, 65 (5), 708–15.
Wasserman, N.T. (2012), The Founder’s Dilemmas: Anticipating and Avoiding the Pitfalls that 
Can Sink a Startup, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Watson, W.E., L.D. Ponthieu and J.W. Critelli (1995), ‘Team interpersonal process effective-
ness in venture partnerships and its connection to perceived success’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 10 (5), 393–411.
Welter, F. (2011), ‘Contextualizing entrepreneurship – conceptual challenges and ways 
forward’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 35 (1), 165–84.
Witt, P. (2004), ‘Entrepreneurs’ networks and the success of start-­ups’, Entrepreneurship & 
Regional Development, 16 (5), 391–412.
Wright, M, B. Clarysse and P. Mustar et al. (2007), ‘Entrepreneurial teams in spin-­offs’, in 
Academic Entrepreneurship in Europe, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: 
Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 133–49.
Wu, L.Y., C.J. Wang and C.Y. Tseng et al. (2009), ‘Founding team and start-up competitive 
advantage’, Management Decision, 47 (2), 345–58.
Yang, T. and H.E. Aldrich (2014), ‘Who’s the boss? Explaining gender inequality in 
­entrepreneurial teams’, American Sociological Review, 79 (2), 303–27.
Zacharakis, A., T. Erikson and B. George (2010), ‘Conflict between the VC and ­entrepreneur: 
The entrepreneur’s perspective’, Venture Capital, 12 (2), 109–26.
Zahra, S.A., M. Wright and S.G. Abdelgawad (2014), ‘Contextualization and the advance-
ment of entrepreneurship research’, International Small Business Journal, 32 (5), 479–500.
Zhao, Y.L., M. Song and G.L. Storm (2013), ‘Founding team capabilities and new venture 
performance: The mediating role of strategic positional advantages’, Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 37 (4), 789–814.
Zhou, W. (2013), ‘Is informational diversity really informational? An investigation of 
what and when in entrepreneurial teams’, Journal of Marketing Development and 
Competitiveness, 7 (3), 29–42.
Zhou, W. and E. Rosini (2015), ‘Entrepreneurial team diversity and performance: Toward an 
integrated model’, Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 5 (1), 31–60.
Zolin, R., A. Kuckertz and T. Kautonen (2011), ‘Human resource flexibility and strong ties 
in entrepreneurial teams’, Journal of Business Research, 64 (10), 1097–103.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

45
3.  Urban legends or sage guidance: a review 
of common advice about entrepreneurial 
teams*
Phillip H. Kim and Howard E. Aldrich
INTRODUCTION
This chapter evaluates two commonly held stereotypes about strategies for 
constructing founding teams promoted by practitioners and experienced 
entrepreneurs. Consider the following two scenarios:
Scenario 1  Alex has caught the entrepreneurship bug. He’s the ‘idea 
person’ with a wearable tech concept he believes is worth millions. He 
anticipates his technology will offer users data that will substantially 
change how they interact with their surroundings. However, he realizes he 
lacks certain skills – he has no experience with programming, marketing, 
or running the numbers. So he rounds up a few colleagues to discuss his 
idea and his predicament one evening, and they urge him to expand his 
network and recruit trusted allies to join him in his venture. They tell him, 
‘Make sure you find others with complementary skills and experiences to 
your own’. Emboldened by their advice and armed with the names of some 
potential partners, Alex returns home and immediately starts drafting the 
emails he hopes will lead him to the perfect team.
Scenario 2  Sophia has begun to contact her family and friends to gauge 
their interest in taking on a leadership role in her new venture: an ambi-
tious social network and online rental platform for young parents. This 
collaborative move seems natural to her: these people have always sup-
ported her in past endeavors and she trusts they will help take her idea 
to the next level. She brushes away the adage that familiarity breeds 
contempt, concluding that creating a team of people she knows well will 
unquestionably help grow her business. She anticipates establishing a 
strong relational foundation for her venture by working with close confi-
dants. Before long, Sophia finds herself in the midst of serious conversa-
tions with a cousin and an old coworker who both expressed interest in 
making the leap toward entrepreneurship.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

46    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
As exemplified in these vignettes, taken-­for-­granted principles about 
creating founding teams abound in the popular discourse. They appear 
widely in the media, where they are passed on from experts to novices 
as received wisdom (Radu and Redien-­Collot, 2008). It is easy to see 
why such commonly accepted principles are attractive – they conform to 
conventional thinking about how people form relationships, interact in 
teams, and are rewarded for their efforts. Nonetheless, there is a need to 
assess whether these popular strategies are based on any systematic evi-
dence or are simply the urban myths of entrepreneurship. Some might rest 
on solid research and thus be good guides for practice. Others, however, 
such as the commonly accepted advice about following a ‘gut instinct’ 
may actually do more harm than good. The published academic research 
on entrepreneurship represents a variety of disciplinary perspectives on 
entrepreneurial practice that may allow for a critical sifting of the evidence 
and a more cautious perspective on founding teams. This contrast between 
popular and academic advice also highlights some areas where practition-
ers are leading the way with insights worthy of deeper consideration by 
academic researchers.
This chapter addresses the following questions about founding teams 
and assesses the extent to which their commonly accepted answers are 
based on misconceptions and failure to consider social science findings 
regarding teams. (1) What is the ‘ideal’ founding team? The wisdom of the 
media touts ideals such as complementary skills, diverse backgrounds, and 
shared operating visions. Why do so many entrepreneurs have difficulty 
achieving this subtle balance of founding team talents? (2) What is the 
‘ideal’ mix of relations for a founding team? The popular literature empha-
sizes the importance of ensuring trust and harmony among all members, 
which may lead entrepreneurs to turn to family, friends, and other prior 
relationships. Most teams follow these principles. But, does this result in 
the best outcomes?
To accomplish these objectives, this chapter uses the following ­structure: 
examples of ideal founding team varieties are described as they are 
mythologized in the popular discourse. These idealized forms are con-
trasted with insights from academic research to identify any fallacies 
inherent in the popular wisdom. Doing so underscores important insights 
confirmed by research and issues worth additional investigation. The dis-
cussion concludes with practical insights for each stereotype for forming 
and maintaining healthy founding teams, derived from both the popular 
discourse and academic research.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­47
PRELIMINARIES
Why Conduct this Due Diligence?
Before embarking on this review, this section outlines the reasons for 
writing this chapter and frames the arguments at hand. Consider the 
increasingly do-­it-­yourself nature of entrepreneurship, aided significantly 
by easy access to information and anecdotes concerning venture crea-
tion (Aldrich and Yang, 2012a). The sheer amount of information today 
regarding any aspect of starting a business can easily confuse and over-
whelm, such as the many online options available to potential entrepre-
neurs. First, they can visit websites such as Quora and FounderDating 
to seek the wisdom of some entrepreneurship oracles. Second, they can 
crowdsource answers to their questions and judge the value of the received 
advice based on votes and other reputation-­based indicators, such as 
through Entrepreneurship & Innovation Exchange (EIX).
Inexperienced entrepreneurs face the arduous task of actually making 
sense of the advice they gather, without having first-­hand experience 
running a start-­up. For example, a simple Google search returns over 
11 million hits for ‘founding team advice’, with no guidance on how to 
sort the worthwhile from the worthless. Paying a business consultant or 
taking business education classes is out of the question for many people. 
This leaves many founders with no choice but to rely on ‘gut instincts’ 
or word-­of-­mouth from family, friends, and associates. In the midst of 
this wealth of advice and myriad of opinions, getting the right answers 
to questions of founding team dynamics has become increasingly impor-
tant to the success of nascent ventures and for achieving critical start-­up 
milestones.
From a practical standpoint, having a functioning founding team has 
become an entry requirement for other objectives. Entrepreneurs seeking 
admittance into an accelerator program, for instance, will be expected to 
have worked out the ‘founding team’ issue prior to applying. The success-
ful composition of a founding team also matters for formal financing: 
‘When I see a stack of business plans, I throw the pile in the air’, quipped 
Angelo Santinelli, investor and venture advisor. ‘I grab one that’s floating 
(because it’s short) and rip out the page with the founding team. That’s all 
I read’.1 Getting the team composition right is essential for writing a ‘great 
business plan’ (Sahlman, 1997) and is a key item to check off in the ‘new 
business road test’ (Mullins, 2013). If entrepreneurs expect to make an 
impact with their venture – or even get it up and running at all – they must 
make good decisions from the very earliest stages of the team ­formation 
process.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

48    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Definitions
Given the variety of ways entrepreneurship terminology is used in the 
popular discourse, this discussion begins by defining key concepts. For 
these purposes, ‘founding team’ is defined as the individuals actively 
involved in launching a new venture who have some ownership inter-
est in the emerging entity (Aldrich and Ruef, 2006; Xu and Ruef, 2007; 
Klotz et al., 2014). About one-­third of all start-­up attempts in the United 
States involve two or more people with an ownership stake; within that 
group, the majority involves spousal couples. In knowledge-­intensive 
sectors, such as biotechnology and computer software, and among high-­
capitalization start-­ups, teams are the rule, not the exception (Beckman 
et  al., 2007). Almost all the people involved on a team will have been 
previously acquainted with each other, either as family members or busi-
ness associates, with almost no strangers on the team. Somewhat surpris-
ingly, even among teams started by business school graduates, most have 
­previously known one another (Ruef, 2010).
Because other parties can be involved in the overall founding effort – 
even those who do not intend to be owners – this review also considers 
‘founding collaborators’. Employing the definition adopted in prior work, 
founding collaborators are defined here as ‘a group of people who assist 
the founder with distinctive contributions to business creation efforts’ 
(Kim and Longest, 2014). Such collaboration may involve tangible 
support, key responsibilities or even deep integration in the creation of 
the new business (Jack et al., 2008; Ruef, 2010; Kotha and George, 2012). 
The discovery of such founding collaborators has been one of the key 
contributions of sociological research on entrepreneurship in the past few 
decades (Reynolds and Miller, 1992), reminding scholars of the impor-
tance of investigating the social context within which entrepreneurial 
teams emerge.
Additionally, the founding team concept is anchored by a focal leader. 
Although it is possible for multiple individuals to launch a new venture by 
working jointly, a more realistic assumption is that a single founder has 
begun the effort and, after a period of time, has sought out collaborators 
to join them in their venture (Kim et al., 2013). This chapter also adopts 
an egocentric perspective for the illustrations.
Scope Conditions
The following examples focus predominantly on how individuals and 
those whom they recruit to join them operate during the early stages of 
venture formation. As the opening vignettes illustrated, this chapter shines 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­49
a light on how entrepreneurs go about the messy work of assembling their 
initial pool of human resources, a critical phase originally anticipated by 
Stinchcombe (1965) as one of several liabilities in creating new organiza-
tions (Aldrich and Yang, 2012b; Senyard et al., 2014). These initial steps 
are an important focus, because entrepreneurs face considerable uncer-
tainty regarding the viability of their concepts and the prospects of their 
fledgling ventures. Whether these concerns are referred to as ‘liabilities of 
newness’ or ‘key risk factors’ (or similar phrases more common among 
practitioners), the message remains the same: the likelihood of entrepre-
neurs establishing successful businesses often depends on their ability to 
build effective founding teams early on and effectively collaborate with 
others in their social networks.
Most research on entrepreneurship has been conducted on organiza-
tions that have survived the firm formation process, with researchers 
taking the entrepreneurial team’s composition as given (Martinez et al., 
2011). At that point, however, many of the uncertainties facing the origi-
nal founding team will have been resolved, particularly with regard to 
roles and responsibilities within the team. Decisions about hiring, target 
markets, sources of financing and other critical issues may have caused so 
much internal conflict that a founding team has succumbed to the ­liability 
of newness even before making much of a mark on its environment. Their 
disappearance goes unremarked in many entrepreneurship studies, given 
typical research designs (Yang and Aldrich, 2012). For example, in their 
extremely comprehensive review of the literature on new venture teams, 
Klotz et al. (2014) began with teams already in existence, focusing on 
factors that affect their functioning. Their work gave no hint that the 
entrepreneurial teams they focus on are the survivors of a much larger 
cohort that began with them, months or years ago. Thus, in this assess-
ment of the common stereotypes surrounding founding teams, there is an 
emphasis on the difficulties of decision-­making under uncertainty as a key 
factor affecting the extent to which typical founders are actually able to 
follow the proffered advice.
This analysis takes a holistic approach to the processes related to found-
ing teams, regardless of the industries in which the new ventures compete 
or the products and services they offer to their customers. A few basic 
principles apply to the formation and maintenance of almost all healthy 
founding teams. Of course, ventures in any given industry will have their 
own specific issues: ventures based on technology discovered in an aca-
demic laboratory (Shane and Stuart, 2002), for instance, may experience 
unique dynamics among their founders, as this setting calls for a par-
ticularly careful determination of the appropriate roles and identities of 
entrepreneurs and research scientists (George and Bock, 2009). However, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

50    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
there is value in connecting such industry-­specific circumstances back to 
more general principles that can apply broadly across multiple contexts 
and founding conditions. In short, this chapter makes the bold claim that 
many aspects of the founding process with regard to teams are generic and 
cut across all industrial sectors.
The final scope condition concerns averages and extremes. In any dis-
tribution of entrepreneurs, some individuals will fall on the extreme ends 
of the range: in ability, skills, experiences, and other characteristics. These 
outliers and their accomplishments often attract the attention of audiences 
and become enshrined as the exemplars for how others in the middle of 
the distribution should aspire to act. The critique and practical advice pre-
sented here are intended not for those on the fringe, or for even those who 
aspire to be an extreme case, as the advice found in the popular discourse 
will already be oriented to such types. Instead, this study calls attention to 
the middle range of the distribution – the vast majority of founders who 
are ‘ordinary’ (or slightly above or below the mean). This alternate per-
spective is primarily motivated by the opportunity to exploit the contrast 
between how ordinary individuals form and maintain successful found-
ing teams, as opposed to the few extreme cases who have extraordinary 
backgrounds or abilities enabling them to actually achieve the extremely 
ambitious founding ideals promoted in the media.
ASSESSING THE STEREOTYPES
The following sections describe two common stereotypes concerning the 
process of constructing founding teams and the ideal-­typical strategies 
that they promote. These stereotypes are evaluated from the perspective 
of academic research on entrepreneurship, looking for the core principles 
underlying them. Each section concludes with practical advice on how 
founders could apply these principles and offers researchers suggestions 
for future inquiries.
Ideal Type #1: The Perfectly Complementary Founding Team
Given the high stakes associated with launching a successful venture, 
founders often go to great lengths to put together the right team. 
About half of all new ventures start as multi-­person efforts, and even 
solo ventures often draw on assistance from other non-­owners, such as 
advisers, service providers, and other supporters (Ruef, 2010; Kim and 
Longest, 2014). The collaborative spirit undergirding many entrepre-
neurial ­initiatives has led experienced entrepreneurs, investors, and other 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­51
experts to ­emphasize the need to form high-­caliber teams. Sam Altman, 
President of Y-­Combinator, put it bluntly: ‘This is one of the most impor-
tant decisions you make in the life of your start-­up and you need to treat it 
as such’.2 Arguably, the goal of forming a perfect founding team is impor-
tant and aspirational, but given the uncertainties they face, entrepreneurs 
will often fall short. This section reviews the narrative behind the ideal, 
discusses the research associated with this aspect of founding teams and 
offers practical advice for founders.
The narrative for forming a ‘perfect founding team’ ideal, as explained 
to prospective entrepreneurs, goes something like this: first, entrepre-
neurs should identify their own strengths and weakness. Armed with this 
self-­knowledge, they then search for others with complementary skills 
and invite them to join the team. These individuals should have work 
experience related to the venture being started, but the team as a whole 
should have diverse backgrounds and experiences to ensure that multiple 
perspectives thrive. Diversity can be defined in terms of social categories, 
information and knowledge, and personality characteristics (Zhou and 
Rosini, 2015).
Assessing the evidence for the consequences of entrepreneurial team 
diversity is difficult because most of the research on teamwork has been 
conducted within the context of teams formed inside existing organiza-
tions. Top management teams (Eesley et al., 2014), upper echelon teams 
(Klotz et al., 2014), cross-­functional teams (West and Meyer, 1998), 
working groups (Smith, 2002), task forces (Li and Hambrick, 2005) and 
other kinds of teams created within an existing organizational frame-
work (such as in large corporations) are created by managers who can 
explicitly take account of the kinds of team members they believe would 
lead to better outcomes. In contrast, most entrepreneurial teams emerge 
naturally, from pre-­existing relationships among individuals (Arrow et al., 
2000). Thus, studies of entrepreneurial team composition and perfor-
mance, based on such studies, must take into account the very strong 
selection forces generating the observed teams. Otherwise, researchers 
may attribute performance outcomes to team dynamics whereas, in fact, 
prior relationships imprinted the team with a mix of advantages and dis-
advantages that strongly influenced the outcomes. The assumption under-
lying the arguments made in this chapter is that many teams fail to cope 
with the uncertainties stemming from diversity they encounter during the 
founding process because of how they were formed.
Some claims concerning diversity are better supported than others. For 
example, diversity appears particularly important when a team is working 
on a complex task that cannot be solved by individuals working sepa-
rately (Page, 2007). A five-­year panel study of new ventures found that 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

52    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
more homogeneous teams suffered reduced economic performance com-
pared to less homogeneous teams (Steffens et al., 2012). Strong research 
evidence, based on both field studies and laboratory studies, suggests 
that it is important for entrepreneurial teams to surface disagreements 
as a way of bringing important issues to the table for discussion, poten-
tially enhancing organizational performance through the consideration of 
diverse points of view (Nemeth, 1997; West and Meyer, 1998). The diverse 
others are not necessarily important because of the content of their ideas, 
but rather because they raise arguments and objections that an otherwise 
homogeneous group would not take seriously. By injecting alternatives 
into the discussion, those with a minority viewpoint enhance the overall 
quality of the decision.
The core issue: how much control do entrepreneurs have over assembling a 
team?
Entrepreneurs are told to look for people who possess qualities that cannot 
be taught, such as chemistry with other team members, a shared vision for 
the venture’s future, and a passion for solving the problem the business 
idea addresses. To assemble a diverse team, entrepreneurs are urged to 
network strategically, positioning themselves so that they will find and 
be found by the people with whom they seek to collaborate (Dubini and 
Aldrich, 1991). Table 3.1 presents several illustrative quotes related to this 
narrative from the popular press online.
Two assumptions underpin this oft-­given wisdom on the process of 
assembling dream teams. The first assumption is that these interactions are 
seamless and easy to conduct; co-­founders can form relationships quickly 
and easily when the need arises. The second assumption is that founders 
have boundless social leverage: where they live, their education and work 
histories, and their own personal preferences all help them overcome per-
sonal and social distance between them and their perfect partners. Many 
founders, however, face serious obstacles to achieving this ideal, at least 
in their initial attempts to start a business. The following critique of the 
proffered ideal founding team process points to three limitations: first, 
most people inhabit small-­world networks based on similarities; second, 
most people have limited reach in their networks; third, all people lack 
clairvoyance and thus may be unable to perceive what complementary 
backgrounds actually look like in a team.
Limitation 1: living in a small-­world network  One definition of the term 
‘small-­world networks’ is that they are clusters of relationships formed 
primarily on the basis of similarity, such that the people are more intercon-
nected to others within these clusters than to those outside them (Aldrich 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­53
and Kim, 2007). In network terminology, small-­world networks form on 
the basis of homophily, exhibit high density, require their members to 
traverse longer distances to access those outside their local clusters, and 
depend on bridging ties to make such external connections. According 
to this theoretical perspective, people are bound by a variety of social 
and cultural characteristics that shape the kinds of relationships they 
form with others. Because of people’s strong affinity to others based on 
memberships in common social-­demographic categories, shared informa-
tion and perceived personality similarities, most of the relationships they 
develop are nurtured through common backgrounds, experiences, and 
achievements (McPherson et al., 2001).
Although people’s inclination toward homophily leads them toward 
stronger interpersonal bonds, it also hinders their ability to affiliate with 
those with complementary attributes. Yet, these are precisely the kinds 
Table 3.1  Illustrative quotes for building a perfectly complementary team 
narrative
Illustrative Quote
‘With founders, the goal is to find the right amount of similarity. You’re
  looking for complementarity of skills, but similarity of styles’ (Andreas 
Stavropoulos, Draper Fisher Jurvetson)a
‘In web/mobile startups, the canonical view is the founding team consists of a
  hacker, a hustler, and a designer. In other domains, the skill sets differ, but 
the key idea is that you want a team with complementary skills’ (Steve Blank, 
serial entrepreneur, blogger and author)b
‘A creative guru, a numbers-­cruncher, a people-­person with loads of natural
  charm. . .all of these personalities add strength and dimension to your team, 
and enhance your chances for success. And working with people who are 
different from you, in terms of gender, race, ethnicity, background and 
personal traits, will broaden your scope and help your team prepare for the 
real world’c
Sources:
a.	 Forrest, C. (2014), ‘How to choose a great co-­founder for your startup’, TechRepublic, 
18 February, accessed 11 August 2016 at http://www.techrepublic.com/article/
how-­to-­choose-­a-­great-­co-­founder-­for-­your-­startup/.
b.	 Blank, S. (2013), ‘How to build the perfect founding team’, VB, 29 July, accessed 11 
August 2016 at http://venturebeat.com/2013/07/29/how-­to-­build-­the-­perfect-­founding-­ 
team/.
c.	 ‘Getting started as an entrepreneur/team/teams make it happen’, accessed 25 August 
2016 at https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Getting_Started_as_an_Entrepreneur/Team/
Teams_Make_It_Happen.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

54    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
of people entrepreneurs are advised to seek out as team members. To the 
extent that entrepreneurs search among potential team members who are 
embedded in the same or similar networks, they will have difficulty locat-
ing diverse others. In Burt’s evocative metaphor, they will hear their own 
echo, instead of a distinctive voice (Burt, 2005). Such constraints will limit 
the extent to which entrepreneurs spontaneously engage in innovative and 
creative actions.
In a series of studies examining patterns of founding team composition, 
researchers have found that homophily strongly affects how entrepreneurs 
collaborate with others. The key findings of these research projects show 
that founding teams are homogeneous in terms of common demographic 
characteristics such as race, gender, and age (Ruef et al., 2003); that occu-
pational backgrounds help determine the ways entrepreneurs collaborate 
with each other (Kim and Longest, 2014); and that high-­technology 
ventures are as affected by ethnic homophily as much as other industries 
(Hart, 2014). These findings are consistent with other findings on homo-
phily in other contexts, suggesting that despite the resounding advice to 
the contrary, creating a team with diverse backgrounds and experiences is 
not a straightforward step for most founders to take.
Limitation 2: restricted reach in people’s networks  Not having regular 
interactions with diverse others is just one of the issues associated with 
living in a small-­world network. Another consequence is the extra effort 
required to build relationships with those outside someone’s immediate 
social circles. In network terminology, because most of their relationships 
are concentrated in local clusters, people in small-­world networks must 
navigate a longer path to reach those who do not share similar charac-
teristics (Aldrich and Kim, 2007). Shortening these paths requires bridg-
ing ties – network shortcuts – that connect one cluster to another (Burt, 
1992). Without knowing connectors who broker social exchanges between 
clusters, most people are limited in their ability to reach those who have 
backgrounds and experiences substantially different from their own (Uzzi, 
1996). However, based on the diversity argument, it is these very collabo-
rators that founders most need to enroll.
Several studies have revealed severe restrictions on founders’ network 
reach, especially in the size of their collaborative network and degree 
of role diversity among those to whom they are connected. On average, 
founders have less than one co-­owner with whom they share equity and 
just over one additional person who offered support as a non-­owner 
(Kim and Longest, 2014). Moreover, founders are heavily dependent 
on spousal and kinship support in the early stages of business formation 
(Renzulli et al., 2000; Renzulli and Aldrich, 2005; Kim et al., 2013). Given 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­55
the limited network reach of most entrepreneurs, finding ideal teammates 
with complementary attributes and skills within a small-­world network is 
a high hurdle to clear.
Limitation 3: entrepreneurs lack clairvoyance  An entrepreneur’s 
mandate for assembling the ideal founding team is clear: they must 
find those with complementary skills and experiences to their own so 
that their weaknesses are compensated by someone else’s strengths. 
Entrepreneurs are encouraged to do this while at the same time cul-
tivating chemistry and a unified vision among all members. Table 3.1 
showed some illustrative principles offered by practitioners. Although 
these principles do offer a roadmap and seem helpful, they also place 
an excruciating burden on the original founders to adequately discern 
what skills and experiences are necessary for the businesses they wish 
to create. The core tenet of the ‘lean start-­up’, ‘customer discovery’ and 
‘disciplined entrepreneurship’ approaches to business creation is the 
discovery of a sustainable business model after a process of experimen-
tation (Ries, 2011; Blank and Dorf, 2012; Aulet, 2013). Given the many 
uncertainties internal to the nascent business and external within the 
operating environment, most founders will not fully appreciate the true 
range of skills that their team needs.
What is the evidence regarding entrepreneurial clairvoyance? 
Entrepreneurship scholars have conducted research on many personal-
ity characteristics, especially the so-­called ‘Big Five’ that are recognized 
globally as core elements of someone’s personality (Caliendo et al., 2011; 
Patel and Thatcher, 2014). Cognitive neuroscience is just beginning to 
spread into management science with some very promising results (Becker 
et al., 2011). However, neither of these rigorous scholarly lines of inquiry 
has provided any evidence that humans, even entrepreneurs, possess the 
ability or competence to see into the future (Wayman et al., 2014). Facing 
extreme uncertainty, the best that entrepreneurs can do is conduct as 
many trials as possible, structuring them so that they can learn from the 
feedback they receive (Sarasvathy et al., 2013). Inevitably, they will make 
many mistakes.
Practical advice for entrepreneurs
Although there are questions about entrepreneurs’ abilities to assemble a 
diverse founding team, aspiring entrepreneurs should take note of some 
practical advice derived from research. As they seek to form their teams, 
founders ought to consider joining organizations with a stated objec-
tive of assembling people, both formally and informally, with common 
interests but diverse backgrounds (Davis et al., 2006; Zuckerman and 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

56    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Sgourev, 2006; Almeida et al., 2014). Events organized by Meetup and 
other networking groups enable participants to interact with people 
who share similar interests in at least one key area. Promisingly, a 
quick search of Meetup in the regions where the authors currently work 
(within two miles of Boston, MA and 25 miles of Raleigh-­Durham, 
NC) produced about 50 networking groups related to ‘start-­ups’ in each 
region. Alumni networks – especially those sponsored by university alma 
maters and former employers – are another key source of potential con-
nections. For entrepreneurs who go beyond watching sporting events or 
catching up on the latest office gossip, these networks provide a basis 
on which to establish deeper relationships, discuss their ventures and 
gain introductions to people who may be in a position to collaborate. 
Moreover, these organizations often sponsor meetings based on affinity 
interests as a way to keep people engaged. To emphasize the ripeness of 
such networks, studies show that both educational and employer alumni 
affiliations predict a high likelihood of future network collaborations 
(Rider, 2012).
At times, even these types of voluntary gatherings are insufficient for 
overcoming the structural barriers entrepreneurs face. Online networks 
are a feasible alternative for entrepreneurs seeking to broaden their social 
reach. Although the pervasive reach of social media should facilitate the 
kinds of productive networking recommended for founding teams, online 
networking has its limitations, including the ability to make meaning-
ful connections. Some entrepreneurs who recognized this problem have 
responded by forming dinner and social clubs, such as the Spring Street 
Social Society in New York City. These clubs create social gatherings that 
bring together individuals with unique life experiences and allow guests 
opportunities to strike up meaningful personal conversations. Rather 
than depending on algorithms embedded in social media platforms, the 
event organizers intentionally curate the connections people make in these 
gatherings by acting as information brokers among the participants. Other 
entrepreneurs have attempted to build more effective online networking 
platforms (such as FounderDating, CoFoundersLab, and Founder2be) 
with the specific objective of producing strong and effective venture teams.
Of course networking alone, whether online or off, is insufficient for 
achieving the objective of forming the ideal founding team. Simply having 
the necessary diversity in skills and experiences does not guarantee that 
the working relationship will prosper as a founding collaboration. After 
making initial connections, entrepreneurs should undergo a trial period, 
where they explore the depth of their common interests, commitment 
levels, and the compatibility of their working styles. Given the difficul-
ties of launching a new venture and the toll it can exert on relationships, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­57
founders are strongly advised to subject their relationships to minor ‘stress 
tests’ to avoid future relational breakdowns and more catastrophic out-
comes down the road.
Although there is no simple formula to predict a perfect match, under-
going a trial period involving regular interactions based on small projects 
can help determine if a more deeply committed ‘marriage’ will yield a pro-
ductive relationship. These tests could include work-­related interactions, 
accomplished by assigning small projects to each other, such as gathering 
market information. Tests could also take place collaboratively, such as 
by working together to write a piece of code. Tests can also coincide with 
informal social interactions, like meeting for coffee or playing ultimate 
Frisbee, to ensure the partnership will remain healthy in the face of future 
unexpected difficulties.
Avenues for future research
For academics, there are several research avenues worthy of further inves-
tigation. The theoretical tension exposed in this first ideal type is to what 
extent founders can escape the structural constraints of their relational 
networks. Scholars can take steps to further understand the conditions in 
which such constraints can be altered by entrepreneurial action, and offer 
founders more insight into how to form effective collaborations beyond 
their core small-­world networks. Given the prevalence of networking 
events devoted to start-­ups, one approach to better understand these 
issues is to track the evolution of new relationships formed as a result of 
entrepreneurial meetups, building on earlier work by Vissa (2012) who 
studied the formation of new ties by Indian entrepreneurs, and Almeida 
et al. (2014) who studied Indian immigrant entrepreneurs in the US 
semiconductor industry. Implementing an experimental design or new 
forms of data collection may deepen scholarly understanding of how new 
relationships form within the context of networking events. For example, 
Ingram and Morris’s (2007) use of electronic name badges to track interac-
tions among participants at a social function could be upgraded to more 
modern near-­field communications technology, so that researchers can 
glean additional information from these events and better understand 
their implications for future collaborations.
Ideal Type #2: O Sole Mio! The Joys and Perils of Trusting Family and 
Friends
Once the excitement of envisioning their breakthrough ideas wears off, 
nascent entrepreneurs are soon confronted with the reality of actually 
running a business. While the media romanticizes the ‘start-­up lifestyle’, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

58    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
many new entrepreneurs are likely to struggle to simply get their businesses 
up and running; moreover, a weak customer response, production delays, 
or unanticipated competition can easily frustrate founders’ initial ambi-
tions. These struggles, along with the stresses of uncertainty, deadlines, 
and a lack of resources can take their toll on founders’ well-­being and 
overwhelm even the most optimistic. In some cases, founders encounter 
significant psychological challenges associated with the failures and other 
trials inherent to launching businesses (Shepherd, 2003; Louie, 2016). For 
example, noted venture capitalist Brad Feld has written about his bouts 
with depression on his blog, giving a public face to this normally private 
issue. Acknowledging that this is not an isolated issue, Dana Severson and 
Nick Ciske launched Start-­upsAnonymous.com, which features regular 
posts by stressed-­out entrepreneurs describing the struggles they face on 
a daily basis.
To cope with the personal and business struggles that crop up during 
the start-­up phase, founders are regularly urged to remember that 
‘entrepreneurship is a team sport’, not something to be undertaken solo. 
Founders are likely to heed this common advice by seeking support from 
their family and friends as they work through business-­related challenges. 
This reliance on social support can be critical in a business’s early stages: 
supporters can offer personal assurances, financial resources, business 
advice or good old-­fashioned sweat equity, believing that the business 
will prosper from bringing trusted allies into the effort. In network terms, 
this is referred to as entrepreneurs’ strong ties: people to whom entrepre-
neurs feel particularly close, with an expectation of obligatory reciprocity 
and mutually beneficial cooperation (Staber and Aldrich, 1995). Within 
immigrant ethnic communities, for example, a lack of support from the 
outside often means that strong ties with co-­ethnics are the only resources 
available for many nascent entrepreneurs (Aldrich and Waldinger, 1990; 
Sequeira and Rasheed, 2006).
The challenge, unfortunately, is that founders often overestimate the 
benefits of tapping into their network of trusted family members and 
friends for achieving the outcomes they seek: effective operating results. 
This section addresses a second founding team stereotype: founders who 
form teams based on trustworthy relationships but do so without reach-
ing out to family and friends in the early stages of forming their business. 
The narrative for this second ideal resembles the following: founding 
teams succeed when they are based on trustworthy relationships, which 
help founders weather the storms associated with starting a venture. But 
they should be wary of mixing existing personal and business relationships 
because of the potential complications arising from such collaborations. 
An ideal founding team avoids these difficulties, with its founder tapping 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­59
into relationships best suited for growing the venture, while at the same 
time, preserving relational harmony on the team. This may even mean 
forming collaborations with people whom you do not know very well, but 
have a ‘good feeling’ about how the partnership will work out because of 
their apparent talents. Quotes representing this narrative are displayed in 
Table 3.2.
This section of the chapter points out the conditions under which the 
perceived benefits derived from trustworthy relationships lead entrepre-
neurs to ignore their hidden costs. While conventional wisdom cautions 
against recruiting family and friends to work together in ventures, the 
myth at hand is whether founders can actually find trustworthy relation-
ships beyond their immediate relational circle to fulfill their practical 
needs. In fact, founders often disregard this advice. Family and friends 
are the first line of defense when founders need support, because they are 
most likely to respond to calls for assistance. In their eagerness to seek 
assistance with their venture, founders can readily overlook the question 
of whether their supporters are actually qualified to assist in the founding 
process. In relying on family and friends and involving them in a business 
setting, founders may also obscure the role expectations typically associ-
ated with family and friends. Finally, many founders also fall into the 
trap of believing their relationships can withstand the additional stresses 
Table 3.2  Illustrative quotes for finding trustworthy team members 
narrative
Illustrative Quote
‘Co-­founders are the foundation block that rocks most failed companies and
  strengthens winning ones. You MUST have a lengthy relationship with a 
co-­founder PRIOR to founding. The ideal is a being part of another fox hole 
work environment where you can learn about each other through trials. As 
counterintuitive as it sounds, friends are your second best bet. In both cases 
you want to have common ground at the moral ideology level with a serious 
dosage of respect’a
‘A great idea can be the spark that brings people together, but mutual trust and
  respect keep them together’b
Sources:
a.	 Forrest, C. (2014), ‘How to choose a great co-­founder for your startup’, TechRepublic, 
18 February, accessed 11 August 2016 at http://www.techrepublic.com/article/
how-­to-­choose-­a-­great-­co-­founder-­for-­your-­startup/.
b.	 Stark, K. and B. Stewart (n.d), ‘4 characteristics of successful entrepreneurs’, Inc.com, 
accessed 11 August 2016 at http://www.inc.com/karl-­and-­bill/4-­characteristics-­of-­successful-­
entrepreneurs.html.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

60    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
of the business venture. The following sections address each of these 
issues.
Limitation 1: benefitting from familiarity but skimping on quality  Given 
the vast range of uncertainties associated with any new venture, it is quite 
reasonable for founders to want to reduce uncertainty by relying on those 
most familiar to them, without critically evaluating whether these people 
have the qualifications to actually deliver what is most needed. Building on 
earlier remarks about small-­world networks, a reality is that people tend 
to associate with others based on the extent to which they are embedded in 
social contexts fostering opportunities for frequent and positive contacts 
(Granovetter, 1985). As such, founders can easily turn to their family and 
friends for assistance; they interact with these people frequently, bond 
over common interests, and share information freely (the frequency with 
which founders start businesses with their spouses, for instance, has even 
spawned the new label ‘couplepreneurs’). Social theorist Peter Blau (1977) 
referred to this as the concept of ‘propinquity’ and demonstrated how it 
influences both small-­scale, one-­on-­one interactions and large-­scale social 
structures. Propinquity channels most founders’ initial efforts to those 
whom they know well, such as family and friends.
Academic studies have consistently shown that social groups emerge 
from relationships fostered by familiarity and frequent opportunities for 
social contact (McPherson et al., 2001). These same principles apply to 
the formation of entrepreneurial teams. Ruef (2010) reported that entre-
preneurial teams, on average, are homogeneous on a variety of common 
social and demographic characteristics: gender, race, education, and age. 
Moreover, founders and their collaborators have typically known each 
other for a substantial period of time prior to working on their ventures: 
founders have known people in their collaborative network for a median 
number of 12 years (Yang and Aldrich, 2014). Although it is possible 
that some of these long-­term relationships involve people qualified to 
contribute to a founding effort, the great majority were entered into long 
before nascent entrepreneurs were contemplating starting new businesses. 
Founders are unlikely to form teams with strangers.
Given the strong inertia that comes with embedded social relationships, 
it is not surprising that founders often prioritize familiarity over a serious 
evaluation of their family and friends’ qualifications (Granovetter, 1985; 
Burton et al., 2009). Some scholars have even argued that friendships 
constitute a good basis on which to build entrepreneurial teams (Francis 
and Sandberg, 2000). People in familiar relationships are easy to recruit: 
they are typically less costly to involve (in the short-­run) in terms of time 
and compensation. Facing uncertainties on many fronts, often the most 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­61
­efficient strategy for entrepreneurs to follow is to minimize search costs 
and take the first available satisfactory option (Gigerenzer and Selten, 
2001). Given that people do not usually choose their strong ties with an 
eye to their possible utility many years into the future, there should be 
little association between how long entrepreneurs have known people 
and the extent to which those people are helpful in starting new ventures. 
For example, research on a nationally representative sample of nascent 
entrepreneurs trying to start businesses found that experience was not a 
statistically significant predictor of support among founding teams (Kim 
et al., 2013).
Limitation 2: role expectations and their complications: do people know 
what to expect?  Over half a century ago, Stinchcombe (1965) presciently 
wrote that one of the liabilities of new organizations is their lack of formal 
role structures and reporting relationships, as compared to more estab-
lished entities. All new ventures must cope with potential disarray and the 
frenetic assignment of responsibilities, and the problem is compounded for 
new ventures formed with the assistance of family and friends: confusing 
role expectations for everyone involved (Kim et al., 2013). Every kind of 
social relationship is based on implicit expectations of inherent relational 
roles (Merton, 1949). Some roles are based on high levels of giving, open-
ness, and intimacy, such as relations between friends. Others are based 
on hierarchy, such as relations between teachers and students, or call 
for arms’-­length interactions, such as relations between shopkeepers and 
customers. The challenge for founders arises when role expectations for 
family and friends are neither aligned nor appropriate for the tasks they 
are requested to fulfill.
A helpful conceptual framework for understanding role conflicts is to 
examine the task–role alignment for each dyadic relationship in a found-
ing collaboration. Tasks can be organized into the forms of support 
they provide to a requesting founder:  emotional (comfort or showing 
concern), instrumental (practical forms of help), or informational (advice 
or ­mentoring assistance). When these role expectations are misaligned, 
either or both parties in the dyadic relationship will experience discom-
fort, usually raising questions such as, ‘Why am I being asked to do X?’ 
or ‘Why can’t you provide what I need?’ Family and close friends do well 
when they are asked to fulfill role expectations related to offering emo-
tional support based on shared intimacy and trust. They can also be posi-
tioned to provide instrumental and informational support, but the benefits 
of these forms of support can only be realized with appropriate task–role 
­alignment (Kim et al., 2013). Specifically, family relations enable ­founders 
to receive helpful instrumental support toward their ventures, while friends 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

62    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
offer useful informational support that benefits the emergence of the ven-
tures. When these tasks and roles are misaligned, founders may be unable 
to fully maximize their support network, resulting in potentially detrimen-
tal consequences to the viability of their ventures.
Limitation 3: the stresses of working with close relations in business ven-
tures  Research confirms entrepreneurs’ high dependence on close rela-
tions in the early stages of business start-­ups (Powell and Greenhaus, 
2010; Grossman et al., 2012; Dyer et al., 2014; Martinez and Aldrich, 
2014). Approximately 50 percent of founders in team-­based start-­ups 
involve spousal pairs, and another 15 percent involve other members 
of their family (Ruef et al., 2003). Moreover, about 20 percent tap 
into their network or friends for some form of assistance (Ruef, 2010). 
This means nearly 85 percent of new businesses in the United States 
(throughout all sectors) start with considerable involvement from family 
and friends. Even in high-­growth technology ventures, the presence of 
family and friends is substantial: according to a study of private technol-
ogy and life sciences ventures reported by Wasserman (2012), approxi-
mately 40 percent involved friends, and another 17 percent involved 
family. The frequency with which founders involve close-­knit relation-
ships in their ventures suggests the same drive and optimism that fuels 
founders’ anticipation for a successful business has convinced them that 
they can maintain the integrity of the relationships they bring into their 
businesses.
The frequency with which founders bring on friends and family to their 
teams shows the pervasiveness of the stereotype that these relationships 
require little or no prior planning. But just as the pressures of raising 
­children or enduring a chronic illness can strain even the strongest mar-
riage, so too will the burdens associated with business formation affect how 
people treat each other. Although many familial and close friendships do 
have ample resilience to withstand these intense periods, the reality is that 
it is difficult to successfully mix familiar and business roles (Eddleston and 
Powell, 2012). The following observation by Paul McManus, a venture 
capitalist, sums up quite effectively the consequences of adopting this 
myth: ‘Those who found companies with friends will (a) lose the company, 
(b) lose their friends, or (c) lose both. . . Blood [family relationships] is 
almost always a show-­stopper’ (quoted from Wasserman, 2012, p. 100). 
Evidence supports McManus’s commentary: ventures based on family 
and friends are also prone to breaking up. Wasserman (2012) reported 
that for each additional cofounder with an existing social relationship, the 
likelihood of the person leaving the venture increased by almost 30 percent. 
Optimistic founders who believe their relationships can weather the storms 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­63
of business formation may underestimate the toll the collaborations can 
have on the relationships they cherish the most.
Role conflicts are undoubtedly magnified under the highly uncertain 
conditions facing new ventures. The same uncertainty that leads entre-
preneurs to avoid strangers and favor friends and family in building their 
teams undermines the stable expectations that had sustained strong ties in 
the past. The logic governing relations between friends and family is based 
on tradition, positive emotionality, and trust, whereas the logic governing 
market relations is more meritocratic and instrumental. Decisions that 
make good business sense for a new firm’s reward and compensation plan 
may undermine the sense of equity and fair play that friends have come to 
expect from the lead founder. Moreover, if founders resist creating gov-
ernance structures with adequate surveillance and monitoring procedures, 
they may leave themselves open to being exploited by other members of 
the team who take advantage of the founder’s ill-­advised trust in them 
(Möllering, 2014).
Practical advice for entrepreneurs
If family and close friends are brought into founding efforts, the follow-
ing advice can help minimize the risk of the negative outcomes outlined 
above. Generally speaking, it is important to acknowledge that mixing 
work with close relationships will transform these relationships into some-
thing different than what they were prior to collaborations (Gudmunson 
et al., 2009). Books such as Start-­up Life: Surviving and Thriving in a 
Relationship with an Entrepreneur by venture capitalist Brad Feld and his 
wife Amy Batchelor (2013), and For Better or For Work by Meg Hirshberg 
(2011), whose husband Gary started the dairy company Stonyfield Farm, 
are helpful resources for seeing first-­hand accounts of how family rela-
tionships are affected when they become entangled in the pursuit of an 
entrepreneurial venture.
Prior to reaching out to family members or other close relations, found-
ers are urged to conduct the ‘Thanksgiving Holiday Business Meeting’ 
test, asking whether it would be comfortable to mix business and pleasure 
during important family gatherings. If not, they should think twice about 
engaging in a serious collaboration, and save these relationships from the 
hardships associated with starting a business. Another practical step to 
take is to develop clear lines of communication to handle and resolve the 
conflicts that will inevitably arise while collaborating (Wasserman, 2012). 
For some people, this could be to erect a firewall to separate business and 
personal matters in the working relationships. For others, this could mean 
effectively involving outside advisers or confidantes to arbitrate disputes 
(Cornwell and Cornwell, 2008). While there are no simple answers for how 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

64    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
to construct the communication plans, founders would be wise to think 
through the process by which difficult situations will be ironed out before 
they actually happen. Otherwise, they are simply ‘playing with fire’ and 
will likely get burned when a conflict arises (Wasserman, 2012).
If entrepreneurs develop strong connections with significantly different 
others, those diverse connections can offset the effects of having a high 
proportion of ties composed of close connections. For example, a survey 
of small and medium enterprises in the transportation sector found that 
any diverse tie, either weak or strong, resulted in higher levels of innova-
tion (Julien et al., 2004). Strong cohesive networks in a team, combined 
with diverse connections to outsiders in what is called a ‘small world con-
figuration’, may represent an ideal environment for both creativity and 
innovation (Uzzi and Spiro, 2005). While the ties to diverse others provide 
channels for information flow, cohesiveness within a team creates the right 
levels of trust and goodwill necessary to make those ideas become reality 
(Aldrich and Kim, 2007).
Avenues for future research
For entrepreneurship researchers, the theoretical tension involving the 
trust–relational tradeoffs discussed offers an array of future research possi-
bilities. First, the family business literature focuses primarily on established 
firms and the dynamics associated with these entities, and thus there are 
ample opportunities to explore how family businesses form initially, and 
how family dynamics affect their emergence, growth, and persistence (Bird 
and Wennberg, 2014; Martinez and Aldrich, 2014). Second, throughout 
the world, family businesses dominate many industries; some span multiple 
generations, with ownership and management control passed down from 
founders to later generations. However, the field of research still lacks com-
prehensive knowledge about the intersection of family and entrepreneur-
ship concepts and their applications to business ventures. A helpful starting 
point is to apply concepts central to the sociology of the family and life 
course to better understand their implications to family-­based new ventures 
(Aldrich and Cliff, 2003; Salvato and Aldrich, 2012). Third, researchers 
could examine more closely the negative psychological impacts the business 
formation process has on entrepreneurs. As has already been discussed, 
family and close friends serve as a first line of defense for many people 
when they encounter personal trials and hardships. Future research may 
better gauge to what extent these close relations can assist entrepreneurs 
during this stressful life event. Fourth, studies may examine whether entre-
preneurs can sufficiently benefit from their close relations when they need 
them the most – in their businesses’ nascent stages – given the complica-
tions naturally arising from business collaborations among close relations.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­65
CONCLUSION
This chapter explored two common stereotypes of entrepreneurial team 
formation: that anyone can form a perfect founding team, complete with 
diverse members boasting varied backgrounds and experiences; and that 
friends and family constitute an entrepreneur’s best source of support in 
the founding process. However, these stereotypes fail to take into account 
the high level of uncertainty and several harsh realities inherent in the act 
of business formation. The first such reality is that most people (aside from 
the outliers with exceptional circumstances) live in small-­world networks 
of people that look and act very much like themselves. While there is no 
disputing the importance of having a team replete with complementary 
skills and experience, there are questions about the typical entrepreneur’s 
ability to carry out the task of recruiting such team members. However, 
founders can take practical steps to overcome such limitations. The second 
reality facing most aspiring business owners concerns whether they can 
count on the unquestioning comfort and support of trusted loved ones in 
the midst of the stressful process of founding a business. Entrepreneurial 
lore reminds founders of the pitfalls of trying to undertake a venture 
alone, and the vast majority of businesses are started between people who 
already know, like, and deeply trust each other – even if these people do 
not have the requisite qualifications for the business. Given this reality, 
entrepreneurs who may be inclined to mix business and personal relation-
ships must find ways to respect their valued relationships.
The incredible amount of information and advice available to the 
aspiring entrepreneur today may create the illusion of an easy-­to-­follow 
roadmap to success, or even an easy road to the landmarks on the way 
to success, such as finding a co-­founder or founding team. The reality, 
however, is actually far more difficult for the ordinary person to achieve. 
Illuminated by an understanding of sociology and human interaction, this 
chapter has pointed out the difficulties in abiding by some of the com-
monly dispensed wisdom regarding the business formation process. In 
place of such popular advice, this review offers entrepreneurs practical 
ways to overcome some of the natural restrictions and inherent boundaries 
to forming a successful founding team. In addition, academic researchers 
are urged to further investigate these entrepreneurial dilemmas.
NOTES
*	
We appreciate the guidance from our editors Cyrine Ben-­Hafaïedh and Thomas Cooney. 
We also thank Nikki Bown and Yuling Lin for their excellent research support.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

66    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
1.	 This quote is taken from a personal conversation with Angelo Santinelli on 10 November 
2014.
2.	 Y-­Combinator is a well-­known venture accelerator based in Mountain View, CA. Quote 
taken from Saltman, S. (n.d.), ‘How to start a startup’, accessed 1 August 2016 at http://
startupclass.samaltman.com/courses/lec02/.
REFERENCES
Aldrich, H.E. and J.E. Cliff (2003), ‘The pervasive effects of family on entrepreneurship: 
Toward a family embeddedness perspective’, Journal of Business Venturing, 18 (5), 
573–96.
Aldrich, H.E. and P.H. Kim (2007), ‘Small worlds, infinite possibilities? How social networks 
affect entrepreneurial team formation and search’, Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 
1 (1–2), 147–65.
Aldrich, H.E. and M. Ruef (2006), Organizations Evolving, London: Sage.
Aldrich, H.E. and R. Waldinger (1990), ‘Ethnicity and entrepreneurship’, Annual Review of 
Sociology, 16 (1), 111–35.
Aldrich, H.E. and T. Yang (2012a), ‘Lost in translation: Cultural codes are not blueprints’, 
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 6 (1), 1–17.
Aldrich, H.E. and T. Yang (2012b), ‘What did Stinchcombe really mean? Designing research 
to test the liability of newness among new ventures’, Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 
1 (3), 1–5.
Almeida, P., A. Phene and S. Li (2014), ‘The influence of ethnic community knowledge on 
Indian inventor innovativeness’, Organization Science, 26 (1), 198–217.
Arrow, H., J.E. McGrath and J.L. Berdahl (2000), Small Groups as Complex Systems: 
Formation, Coordination, Development, and Adaptation, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Aulet, B. (2013), Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 Steps to a Successful Start-­up, Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley.
Becker, W.J., R. Cropanzano and A.G. Sanfey (2011), ‘Organizational neuroscience: 
Taking organizational theory inside the neural black box’, Journal of Management, 37 (4), 
933–61.
Beckman, C.M., M.D. Burton and C. O’Reilly (2007), ‘Early teams: The impact of team 
demography on VC financing and going public’, Journal of Business Venturing, 22 (2), 
147–73.
Bird, M. and K. Wennberg (2014), ‘Regional influences on the prevalence of family versus 
non-­family start-­ups’, Journal of Business Venturing, 29 (3), 421–36.
Blank, S. and B. Dorf (2012), The Start-­up Owner’s Manual: The Step-­by-­Step Guide for 
Building a Great Company, Pescadero, CA: K&S Ranch.
Blau, P.M. (1977), ‘A macrosociological theory of social structure’, American Journal of 
Sociology, 83 (1), 26–54.
Burt, R.S. (1992), Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Burt, R.S. (2005), Brokerage and Closure: An Introduction to Social Capital, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Burton, M.D., P.C. Anderson and H.E. Aldrich (2009), ‘Owner founders, nonowner found-
ers, and helpers’, in P.D. Reynolds and R.T. Curtin (eds), New Firm Creation in the 
United States, Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 115–33.
Caliendo, M., F.M. Fossen and A.S. Kritikos (2011), ‘Personality characteristics and the 
decision to become and stay self-­employed’, SOEP Papers on Multidisciplinary Panel Data 
Research, Berlin: Berlin Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung.
Cornwell, E.Y. and B. Cornwell (2008), ‘Access to expertise as a form of social capital: An 
examination of race and class-­based disparities in network ties to experts’, Sociological 
Perspectives, 51 (4), 853–76.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­67
Davis, A.E., L.A. Renzulli and H.E. Aldrich (2006), ‘Mixing or matching? The influence of 
voluntary associations on the occupational diversity and density of small business owners’ 
networks’, Work and Occupations, 33 (1), 42–72.
Dubini, P. and H. Aldrich (1991), ‘Personal and extended networks are central to the 
­entrepreneurial process’, Journal of Business Venturing, 6 (5), 305–13.
Dyer, W.G., E. Nenque and E.J. Hill (2014), ‘Toward a theory of family capital and entre-
preneurship: Antecedents and outcomes’, Journal of Small Business Management, 52 (2), 
266–85.
Eddleston, K.A. and G.N. Powell (2012), ‘Nurturing entrepreneurs’ work–family balance: A 
gendered perspective’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 36 (3), 513–41.
Eesley, C.E., D.H. Hsu and E.B. Roberts (2014), ‘The contingent effects of top management 
teams on venture performance: Aligning founding team composition with innovation strat-
egy and commercialization environment’, Strategic Management Journal, 35 (12), 1798–817.
Feld, B. and A. Batchelor (2013), Start-­up Life: Surviving and Thriving in a Relationship with 
an Entrepreneur, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Francis, D.H. and W.R. Sandberg (2000), ‘Friendship within entrepreneurial teams and its 
association with team and venture performance’, Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 
25 (2), 5–25.
George, G. and A.J. Bock (2009), Inventing Entrepreneurs: Technology Innovators and Their 
Entrepreneurial Journey, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Gigerenzer, G. and R. Selten (2001), ‘Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox’, Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Granovetter, M. (1985), ‘Economic action and social structure: The problem of embedded-
ness’, American Journal of Sociology, 91 (3), 481–510.
Grossman, E.B., H. Yli-­Renko and R. Janakiraman (2012), ‘Resource search, interper-
sonal similarity, and network tie valuation in nascent entrepreneurs’ emerging networks’, 
Journal of Management, 38 (6), 1760–87.
Gudmunson, C.G., S.M. Danes and J.D. Werbel et al. (2009), ‘Spousal support and work–
family balance in launching a family business’, Journal of Family Issues, 30 (8), 1098–121.
Hart, D.M. (2014), ‘Founder nativity, founding team formation, and firm performance in 
the US high-­tech sector’, International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 10 (1), 
1–22.
Hirshberg, M.C. (2011), For Better or For Work: A Survival Guide for Entrepreneurs and 
Their Families, New York: An Inc. Original.
Ingram, P. and M.W. Morris (2007), ‘Do people mix at mixers? Structure, homophily, and 
the “life of the party”’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 52 (4), 558–85.
Jack, S., S.D. Dodd and A.R. Anderson (2008), ‘Change and the development of entre-
preneurial networks over time: A processual perspective’, Entrepreneurship and Regional 
Development, 20 (2), 125–59.
Julien, P.-­A., E. Andriambeloson and C. Ramangalahy (2004), ‘Networks, weak signals 
and technological innovations among SMES in the land-­based transportation equipment 
sector’, Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 16 (4), 251–69.
Kim, P.H. and K.C. Longest (2014), ‘You can’t leave your work behind: Employment 
­experience and founding collaborations’, Journal of Business Venturing, 29 (6), 785–806.
Kim, P.H., K.C. Longest and H.E. Aldrich (2013), ‘Can you lend me a hand? Task–role 
alignment of social support for aspiring business owners’, Work and Occupations, 40 (3), 
211–47.
Klotz, A.C., K.M. Hmieleski and B.H. Bradley et al. (2014), ‘New venture teams: A review 
of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 40 (1), 226–55.
Kotha, R. and G. George (2012), ‘Friends, family, or fools: Entrepreneur experience and 
its implications for equity distribution and resource mobilization’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 27 (5), 525–43.
Li, J. and D.C. Hambrick (2005), ‘Factional groups: A new vantage on demographic 
­faultlines, conflict, and disintegration in work teams’, Academy of Management Journal, 
48 (5), 794–813.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

68    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Louie, R.K. (2016), ‘The psychiatry of entrepreneurship’, Academic Psychiatry, 40 (2), 
386–8.
Martinez, M.A. and H.E. Aldrich (2014), ‘Sociological theories applied to family businesses’, 
in L. Melin, M. Nordqvist and P. Sharma (eds), The SAGE Handbook of Family Business, 
London: Sage Publications, pp. 83–99.
Martinez, M.A., T. Yang and H. Aldrich (2011), ‘Entrepreneurship as an evolutionary 
process: Research progress and challenges’, Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 1 (1), 
Article 4.
McPherson, M., L. Smith-­Lovin and J.M. Cook (2001), ‘Birds of a feather: Homophily in 
social networks’, Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 415–44.
Merton, R.K. (1949), Social Theory and Social Structure, Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Möllering, G. (2014), ‘Trust, calculativeness, and relationships: A special issue 20 years after 
Williamson’s warning’, Journal of Trust Research, 4 (1), 1–21.
Mullins, J. (2013), The New Business Road Test: What Entrepreneurs and Executives Should 
Do Before Launching a Lean Start-­Up, Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Limited.
Nemeth, C.J. (1997), ‘Managing innovation: When less is more’, California Management 
Review, 40 (1), 59–74.
Page, S.E. (2007), The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Better Groups, Firms, 
Schools, and Societies, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Patel, P.C. and S.M.B. Thatcher (2014), ‘Sticking it out: Individual attributes and persistence 
in self-­employment’, Journal of Management, 40 (7), 1932–79.
Powell, G.N. and J.H. Greenhaus (2010), ‘Sex, gender, and decisions at the family S work 
interface’, Journal of Management, 36 (4), 1011–39.
Radu, M. and R. Redien-­Collot (2008), ‘The social representation of entrepreneurs in the 
French press: Desirable and feasible models?’, International Small Business Journal, 26 (3), 
259–98.
Renzulli, L.A. and H.E. Aldrich (2005), ‘Who can you turn to? Tie activation within core 
business discussion networks’, Social Forces, 84 (1), 323–42.
Renzulli, L.A., H. Aldrich and J. Moody (2000), ‘Family matters: Gender, networks, and 
entrepreneurial outcomes’, Social Forces, 79 (2), 523–46.
Reynolds, P.D. and B. Miller (1992), ‘New firm gestation: Conception, birth, and implica-
tions for research’, Journal of Business Venturing, 7 (5), 405–18.
Rider, C.I. (2012), ‘How employees’ prior affiliations constrain organizational network 
change: A study of US venture capital and private equity’, Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 57 (3), 453–83.
Ries, E. (2011), The Lean Start-­up: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to 
Create Radically Successful Businesses, New York: Crown Business.
Ruef, M. (2010), The Entrepreneurial Group: Social Identities, Relations, and Collective 
Action, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ruef, M., H.E. Aldrich and N.M. Carter (2003), ‘The structure of founding teams: 
Homophily, strong ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs’, American Sociological 
Review, 68 (2), 195–222.
Sahlman, W.A. (1997), ‘How to write a great business plan’, Harvard Business Review (July/
August), 98–108.
Salvato, C. and H.E. Aldrich (2012), ‘“That’s interesting!” in family business research’, 
Family Business Review, 25 (2), 125–35.
Sarasvathy, S.D., A.R. Menon and G. Kuechle (2013), ‘Failing firms and successful 
­entrepreneurs: Serial entrepreneurship as a temporal portfolio’, Small Business Economics, 
40 (2), 417–34.
Senyard, J., T. Baker and P. Steffens et al. (2014), ‘Bricolage as a path to innovativeness 
for resource-­constrained new firms’, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31 (2), 
211–30.
Sequeira, J.M. and A.A. Rasheed (2006), ‘Start-­up and growth of immigrant small businesses: 
The impact of social and human capital’, Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, 
11 (4), 357–75.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

A review of common advice    ­69
Shane, S. and T.E. Stuart (2002), ‘Organizational endowments and the performance of 
­university start-­ups’, Management Science, 48 (1), 154–70.
Shepherd, D.A. (2003), ‘Learning from business failure: Propositions of grief recovery for the 
self-­employed’, Academy of Management Review, 28 (2), 318–28.
Smith, R.A. (2002), ‘Race, gender, and authority in the workplace: Theory and research’, 
Annual Review of Sociology, 28, 509–42.
Staber, U. and H.E. Aldrich (1995), ‘Cross-­national similarities in the personal networks of 
small business owners: A comparison of two regions in North America’, Canadian Journal 
of Sociology, 20 (4), 441–67.
Steffens, P., S. Terjesen and P. Davidsson (2012), ‘Birds of a feather get lost together: New 
venture team composition and performance’, Small Business Economics, 39 (3), 727–43.
Stinchcombe, A.L. (1965), ‘Social structure and organizations’, in J.G. March (ed.), 
Handbook of Organizations, Chicago, IL: Rand McNally, pp. 142–93.
Uzzi, B. (1996), ‘The sources and consequences of embeddedness for the economic 
­performance of organizations: The network effect’, American Sociological Review, 674–98.
Uzzi, B. and J. Spiro (2005), ‘Collaboration and creativity: The small world problem’, 
American Journal of Sociology, 111 (2), 447–504.
Vissa, B. (2012), ‘Agency in action: Entrepreneurs’ networking style and initiation of 
­economic exchange’, Organization Science, 23 (2), 492–510.
Wasserman, N. (2012), The Founder’s Dilemmas: Anticipating and Avoiding the Pitfalls That 
Can Sink a Start-­up, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wayman, F.W., P.R. Williamson and B. Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2014), Predicting the 
Future in Science, Economics, and Politics, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, 
USA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
West, G.P. and G.D. Meyer (1998), ‘To agree or not to agree? Consensus and performance 
in new ventures’, Journal of Business Venturing, 13 (5), 395–422.
Xu, H. and M. Ruef (2007), ‘Boundary formation in emergent organization’, in M. Ruef and 
M. Lounsbury (eds), Research in the Sociology of Organizations, Greenwich, CT: Elsevier.
Yang, T. and H.E. Aldrich (2012), ‘Out of sight but not out of mind: Why failure to account 
for left truncation biases research on failure rates’, Journal of Business Venturing, 27 (4), 
477–92.
Yang, T. and H.E. Aldrich (2014), ‘Who’s the boss? Explaining gender inequality in 
­entrepreneurial teams’, American Sociological Review, 79 (2), 303–27.
Zhou, W. and E. Rosini (2015), ‘Entrepreneurial team diversity and performance: Toward an 
integrated model’, Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 5 (1), 31–60.
Zuckerman, E.W. and S.V. Sgourev (2006), ‘Peer capitalism: Parallel relationships in the 
U.S. economy’, American Journal of Sociology, 111 (5), 1327–66.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

PART II
DEVELOPING 
ENTREPRENEURIAL 
TEAMS
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

73
4.  Entrepreneurial team formation: the role 
of the family
Giovanna Campopiano, Tommaso Minola and 
Lucio Cassia
INTRODUCTION
This chapter contributes to the stream of literature on entrepreneurial 
team formation, unveiling the role of family that affects the type of pros-
pect team members that potential entrepreneurs are prone to include in 
their venture. Using empirical quantitative analyses, the chapter studies 
the antecedents of the propensity to include only family members in the 
entrepreneurial team (thereby forming a so-­called family entrepreneurial 
team), instead of picking prospect team members from non-­family 
pools, either exclusively or jointly with family members. We refer to 
family entrepreneurial team (FET) as an entrepreneurial team made up 
of:
[. . .]two or more family members, related by kinship or marriage, who engage 
in the identification and pursuit of business opportunities to establish or pur-
chase a firm, have an equity stake in the firm, and have a direct influence on the 
strategic choice of the firm at the time of founding. (Discua Cruz et al., 2013, 
p. 20)
The concept of entrepreneurial teams and their formation is a relatively 
new field of inquiry within entrepreneurship literature (Ben-­Hafaïedh, 
2010, 2013; Klotz et al., 2014). While some efforts have been made to 
investigate the challenges related to team composition, for example in 
terms of characteristics of its members (Schjoedt and Kraus, 2009), 
scarce attention has been devoted to the understanding of entrepre-
neurial team formation (Cooney, 2005). That is, much of the research on 
entrepreneurial teams has focused on framing the problems associated 
with developing a team once the new venture has already been set up 
(e.g., Kamm and Nurick, 1993), investigating founding teams turnover 
(Ucbasaran et al., 2003), or identifying the different rationales (relational 
on the one side and instrumental on the other) to expanding an existing 
team (Forbes et al., 2006). These rationales induce scholars to consider 
either a resource-­seeking or an interpersonal attraction approach when 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

74    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
discussing the ways in which an entrepreneurial team might be formed, 
and when looking at the different stages in identifying prospective team 
members and consideration sets (Ben-­Hafaïedh, 2010). Team forma-
tion processes, instead, have not received much attention by scholarly 
research. Identification, selection and recruitment are the three stages of 
team formation, with the first particularly considered critical to filtering 
out the potential team member and thus identifying the considerations 
set (Gensch and Soofi, 1995), thus showing the importance of identify-
ing the antecedents of this stage of aiming to start a new entrepreneurial 
venture.
Family has frequently been indicated as one possible pool from which 
a potential entrepreneur might identify prospective team members (Ruef 
et al., 2003), although extant research has not investigated yet the extent to 
which these two approaches (resource seeking or interpersonal attraction) 
are relevant when considering family context within entrepreneurial team 
formation. Some related prior research does exist and this includes studies 
on founding partnerships (Forster and Jansen, 2010), the creation of FETs 
within business families’ entrepreneurial portfolios driven by interper-
sonal linkages among family members (Discua Cruz et al., 2013), and the 
effects of FETs on new venture success (Brannon et al., 2013). However, 
little is known about how an entrepreneurial team is formed from the 
beginning and in particular, what are the antecedents of entrepreneurial 
team formation regarding how a potential entrepreneur may consider 
involving prospective team members in a new venture.
This study focuses on whether factors belonging to both the rela-
tional and instrumental spheres (Ben-­Hafaïedh, 2013) are conducive 
to the formation of an FET rather than other types of entrepreneurial 
teams. The research may illustrate the differences and complementari-
ties between the underlying interpersonal and instrumental motives, 
since ‘clarifying whether the choice of a new member is driven by 
instrumental factors, interpersonal ones, or some combination of the 
two is quite challenging’ (Forbes et al., 2006, p. 232), thus addressing 
the call for further understanding of the crucial and untapped issues 
concerning the origins of entrepreneurial teams (Forster and Jansen, 
2010; Brannon et al., 2013). In addition, this study discusses the factors 
driving a potential entrepreneur towards the decision to include family 
members or not in an entrepreneurial team (Discua Cruz et al., 2013). 
Resource seeking and interpersonal attraction logics may be found 
to coexist, with ­theoretical and practical implications regarding the 
decision-­making process of entrepreneurial team formation in its early 
stages ­(Ben-­Hafaïedh, 2010).
To address these issues, this chapter aims to contribute to the debate 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­75
about the role of family as an antecedent when forming an entrepre-
neurial team with only family members (FET) in comparison to select-
ing non-­family members or members from both pools (mixed). For this 
purpose, we blend a family-­embeddedness perspective on one side and 
a resource-­based view of the firm on the other. Within this context, 
the family is respectively acknowledged both as resilient to economic 
and psychological hindrances and as a provider of resources that may 
be crucially helpful to the start-­up of the enterprise (Schjoedt et al., 
2013). Relying on these two theoretical perspectives, the study aims to 
build new knowledge on the combination of relational and instrumental 
motives when opting for an FET; family cohesion on the one hand and 
family capital (in terms of social, human and financial capital) on the 
other are introduced to operationalize the two rationales (Discua Cruz 
et al., 2013).
Regression analyses test the theorized relationships, based on a sample 
of 21 407 university students who intend to pursue a career as entrepre-
neurs, have never been self-­employed before, and are willing to start in 
a team. The sample was gathered from the 2011 edition of the Global 
University Entrepreneurial Spirit Students Survey (GUESSS). Through 
this sample, which includes all the potential new ventures, the ones that 
will actually be started up as well as those that will not (or that will rapidly 
fail), it is possible to overcome the main problem of success bias as it is 
usually difficult to identify a team until after it has been created (Aldrich, 
1999).
The results suggest that both relational and instrumental motivations 
significantly affect the formation of entrepreneurial teams with family 
members and that they exert this effect quite similarly for FETs and 
mixed teams. However, family social capital and family human capital 
are positively related to a marginally higher propensity to form an FET 
rather than a mixed entrepreneurial team. Overall, a hierarchy seems to 
emerge in the way that family-­related antecedents affect the choice of 
the type of teams that potential entrepreneurs want to form. The chapter 
therefore offers a contribution to existing entrepreneurship literature 
by showing that FETs might be created not only with the purpose of 
valorizing the existing family’s assets within a family business context 
(Discua Cruz et al., 2013), but also with the aim of leveraging a cohesive 
family environment and family capital, considering in particular the 
advantages or disadvantages of an FET with regard to an entrepre-
neurial team that also includes non-­family members. The next section 
of the chapter includes theoretical analyses that leverage on family-­
embeddedness and the resource-­based view to explain the role of family 
in the formation of an FET and to design a conceptual framework for 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

76    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
the study. Then the methodology and the main results are presented 
in depth, and a discussion section relates the main findings to extant 
literature and highlights the main contributions. Finally, implications 
for theory and practice, limitations and concluding remarks are offered 
in the closing section.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The study of entrepreneurial team formation cannot overlook the fact 
that entrepreneurs are embedded in social relationships (Aldrich and 
Zimmer, 1986), a notion that ‘has become almost axiomatic in the entre-
preneurship literature’ (Aldrich and Cliff, 2003, p. 589). Given this under-
standing, the family unit is a significant trigger for new entrepreneurial 
initiatives as it is considered the social institution where every individual 
is embedded (Aldrich and Cliff, 2003). Shared identity and frequent inter-
actions characterize relationships among family members, so that nascent 
ideas can arise and come to fruition as there are many opportunities to 
discuss and pursue them (Ruef et al., 2003; Steier, 2007). Furthermore, 
the family plays an important role in the resource mobilization process 
during the start-­up phase (in terms of social, human and financial capital 
provision) (Chua et al., 2011; Campopiano et al., 2016; Sieger and 
Minola, 2016). Arguably, therefore, the family can be considered one of 
the most important institutions within which to incubate entrepreneurial 
activity.
The Relational Motive: Effect of Family Cohesion on Entrepreneurial 
Team Formation
Family members are widely recognized as people who share their vision, 
trust each other, stick to common norms and obligations, and clearly have 
a common identity that makes them focus on the collective so that they 
are more committed to each other (Eddleston et al., 2012). Considering 
the level of closeness and emotional linkages experienced by members 
of a family, loyalty, trust and commitment also emerge as key elements 
of family cohesion (Olson, 1989), so that collectively these may be con-
sidered a significant aspect in the decision of a group of people with 
whom a potential entrepreneur would like to start a new business. Social 
embeddedness provides the theoretical perspective from which to study 
the relational aspect of the influence of family on the decision to form an 
FET in comparison to an entrepreneurial team with members from other 
networks. In particular, this perspective suggests that individuals do not 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­77
make decisions alone, but rather are influenced by their network of social 
relations (Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986). Accordingly, this chapter adopts a 
family-­embeddedness perspective that considers the family system as sig-
nificantly affecting an entrepreneur’s venture creation (Aldrich and Cliff, 
2003), including the choice of pools from which prospective team members 
may be identified. In particular, the family includes people who ­identify 
with the group, and who especially commit themselves to the group 
because of common affiliation needs, and the fulfilment of these needs 
drive the decisions of the team (Uhlaner et al., 2007). Nevertheless, family 
varies in cohesion (Sieger and Minola, 2016), thus affecting the extent to 
which cohesion is reflected in closer social relationships, a high degree of 
trust and affinity, and subsequently a high level of awareness of each other 
(Ensley et al., 2002), which in turn facilitates the team-­building process 
(Ucbasaran et al., 2003). Cohesion also makes individuals more sensitive 
to supporting other team members, thereby fostering communication and 
better interpersonal relations (Pieper, 2010). Over time, family members 
have the opportunities to assess the trustworthiness and reliability of each 
other, thus further committing themselves to creating a context to develop 
ideas and to discussing the possibility of starting a business together 
(Aldrich and Kim, 2007).
However, some drawbacks also exist. A cohesive family that has a 
common experiential background is more likely to experience possible 
affective conflicts and reciprocity obligations after the business activity 
gets started (Arregle et al., 2015). Indeed, given that family affiliations 
are enduring, there may be different expectations among people who 
simultaneously play the role of entrepreneurs and the long-­lasting role 
of family members (Brannon et al., 2013). Additionally, high cohesion 
within the family may actually hinder essential debate for fostering 
entrepreneurial ideas as family members might be afraid to offer per-
sonal opinion (Sundaramurthy and Kreiner, 2008). Therefore, a high 
level of family cohesion may cause potential entrepreneurs to consider 
this aspect in the decision to form an FET (or not); hence, a person may 
decide to opt for various pools from which to identify entrepreneurial 
team members. Through this approach, potential entrepreneurs seek to 
counterbalance the drawbacks of including only family members and 
counter the downsides of the relational approach in the entrepreneurial 
team formation. In light of the foregoing, the following hypothesis may 
be derived:
Hypothesis 1  All else being equal, students in families with a high degree of 
cohesion are likely to prefer mixed entrepreneurial teams to FETs, and FETs 
to an entrepreneurial team with no family members at all.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

78    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
The Instrumental Motive: Effect of Family Capital on FET Formation
The availability of resources is also important in affecting the decision to 
involve family members or not in a new venture’s entrepreneurial team 
(Discua Cruz et al., 2013). As potential entrepreneurs deal with the deci-
sion on which resources – and from which sources – they need to acquire 
(Larson and Starr, 1993), the founders’ social ties are considered relevant 
in building a venture’s set of financial, human and other resources (Brush 
et al., 2001). Therefore, the family, acknowledged as a network of strong 
social ties, plays a relevant role in the resource mobilization process of 
potential entrepreneurs in terms of human, social and financial capital 
(Aldrich and Cliff, 2003). This proactive engagement may affect the deci-
sion of potential entrepreneurs to involve family members in the new 
venture team (Chrisman et al., 2003). Family can indeed support offspring 
by providing them with an extended specialized network and useful 
contacts (social capital), by transmitting to them knowledge and values 
(human capital), and by being a convenient source of funding for the start-
­up (financial capital).
Social capital is strictly dependent on social relations (Adler and Kwon, 
2002), and family social capital is thus represented by the familial network 
of contacts that may facilitate access to investors, suppliers and new 
customers. Family members may act as brokers and put their offspring 
in touch with people who are able to provide valuable resources to run 
a business (Granovetter, 1993; Elfring and Hulsink, 2007), thus assuring 
long-­lasting and trustworthy relationships with existing family networks. 
These arguments lead to a positive effect of family social capital on FET 
formation. However, these network ties are usually longer-­term and 
intense relationships with similar people (Elfring and Hulsink, 2003); 
indeed, the network provided by the family may be redundant as many 
family members may have the same contacts, thus providing a limited set 
of information and isolating the potential entrepreneurs from contact-
ing people in pools external to the family environment (Arregle et al., 
2015). Potential entrepreneurs risk becoming blind to new opportunities 
and thus becoming ‘locked’ in family ties (Elfring and Hulsink, 2003). 
Therefore, the positive effect of family social capital is decreasing, and this 
corresponds to the idea that, in order to ensure that the founding team 
relates well with external stakeholders, the presence of key individuals in 
the organizational network is paramount (Grandi and Grimaldi, 2003). 
Hence potential entrepreneurs may opt for entrepreneurial teams not only 
formed by family members, but also including prospective team members 
from different pools in order to leverage the network of key individu-
als from both familial and external networks. Reliance on family social 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­79
capital therefore suggests that a mixed entrepreneurial team is likely pre-
ferred to an FET, which in turn is preferred to a team that does not include 
any family members.
As regards human capital, the accumulation of knowledge and infor-
mation affects the cognitive ability to perceive opportunities and operate 
more efficiently and effectively through entrepreneurial initiatives (Hindle 
et al., 2009); moreover, the human capital provided by spouses or relatives 
in general may offer stability in the early stages of the start-­up (Brüderl 
and Preisendörfer, 1998). Knowledge support is in particular deeply 
related to the need of a potential entrepreneur to include team members 
from a specific pool (Forster and Jansen, 2010). Considering, in addition, 
that family members, provided with family human capital, are found to 
be more creative than non-­family members (Habbershon and Williams, 
1999), and whether the indispensable knowledge to start a new business is 
owned by the family, the potential entrepreneur may consequently decide 
to form an FET. Therefore, a high availability of family human capital 
may lead to a high proclivity to form an FET. While the family is con-
sidered a homogeneous group, this condition may not enable a potential 
entrepreneur to have enough experience and skills available to leverage for 
the new start-­up (Ucbasaran et al., 2003), which suggests a negative rela-
tionship between family human capital and FET formation. In particular, 
the acknowledgement of a lack of knowledge and competencies (Webb 
et al., 2010) may lead a founding team to open their network to exter-
nals in order to increase the ‘team’s degree of completeness’ (Grandi and 
Grimaldi, 2003, p. 332). In light of this, given a high level of family human 
capital, potential entrepreneurs may decide to combine the knowledge 
and experience of both family members and externals by including them 
both as prospective team members for their start-­up. Thus, the degree of 
family human capital available to potential entrepreneurs may lead them 
to prefer a mixed entrepreneurial team to an FET, and FET to an entre-
preneurial team with no family members.
Finally, the family is frequently considered the first source of financing 
for an offspring’s new venture, thanks to trust and support ensured among 
family members (Chua et al., 2011). According to the resource-­based view, 
family members may be required to form the entrepreneurial team and 
thus fill a resource deficiency (Forbes et al., 2006), relying on financial 
capital with better terms from family members than from other entities 
such as banks (Hundley, 2006). Contrary to this positive effect of family 
financial capital on FET formation, an offspring may consider themselves 
obliged to their family that has lent money to them, feel an obligation 
of reciprocity due to securing an easier loan, and so avoid relying on the 
family financial capital in order not to be indebted (Sieger and Minola, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

80    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
2016). Therefore, potential entrepreneurs may decide to have as prospec-
tive team members both family members (who may also contribute to 
warrant financial capital at low cost) and external members so as to diver-
sify the source of financial capital necessary to start a new business.
In sum, a mixed entrepreneurial team is preferred to an FET, and FET 
to an entrepreneurial team with no family members at all, in that the 
potential entrepreneur can leverage on the availability of social, human 
and financial capital (family capital), as stated in the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2  All else being equal, students leveraging on family capital are 
likely to prefer mixed entrepreneurial teams to FET, and FET to an entre-
preneurial team with no family members at all.
METHODOLOGY
This study examines the antecedents of FET formation from the point of 
view of university students. The data used were gathered from the 2011 
edition of the Global University Entrepreneurial Spirit Students Survey 
(GUESSS), which was conducted in 26 countries around the globe. The 
aims of GUESSS are to: (1) systematically record the entrepreneurial 
intentions and activities of students on a long-­term basis across time 
and countries; (2) provide participating universities and countries with 
an assessment of the entrepreneurial spirit of their students and identify 
individual and social factors that could help enhance this spirit; and 
(3) observe the performance of the start-­ups created by university students 
(Laspita et al., 2012). The sample of respondents considered in this analy-
sis has been restricted from the initial 93 265 respondents to the GUESSS 
survey to 21 407 individuals by constraining the data to those students 
who are considering a career as an entrepreneur (by positively answering 
the following: ‘Please indicate if and how seriously you have been thinking 
about founding an own company’), plus they have not already started to 
work in their new venture and they have never been self-­employed before. 
Moreover, only potential entrepreneurs who would like to start with a 
team are included, by selecting individuals who positively replied to the 
question ‘Do you plan to found your company with partners?’
The dependent variable has been built through the answers to one spe-
cific question of the GUESSS survey: ‘Where do you recruit your partners 
from?’ This question could have been answered with multiple choices, that 
is, (1) university; (2) circle of friends outside university; (3) relatives/family 
circle (parents, siblings); or (4) spouse. The FET variable has been calcu-
lated as a categorical variable, equal to 0 when the respondent is willing to 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­81
create an entrepreneurial team with no family members at all; equal to 1 
when the team consists of prospective team members from the family only; 
and equal to 2 when prospective team members can be identified either 
within the family or among networks of people with no kin relationships 
with the respondent. Within this categorization, an FET is as defined by 
Discua Cruz et al. (2013), while it is also possible to distinguish an FET 
from entrepreneurial teams with both family and non-­family members 
in order to capture any differences between these groups as regards the 
effects of family cohesion and family capital.
The independent variables are family cohesion and family capital 
(social, human, financial capital), which are obtained through dedi-
cated questions (measured via Likert scales, ranging from ‘strongly 
disagree’  =  1, to ‘strongly agree’ = 7) included in the questionnaire 
and grounded in extant research. Family cohesion encompasses items 
regarding to what extent family relationships are close, mutual support 
is intensive, and family members’ togetherness is important (e.g., Salvato 
and Melin, 2008). In particular, four items are used, based on the 
FACES III scale (Olson et al., 1985): ‘Family togetherness is important’, 
‘Family members feel very close’, ‘When family gets together, everyone 
is present’, ‘Family members ask each other for help’. Family capital (in 
terms of social, human and financial capital) is measured through items 
that capture to what extent university students perceive that their family 
would provide help for their potential venture (Davidsson and Honig, 
2003; Wiklund and Shepherd, 2008). As regards social capital, respond-
ents express to what extent their parents/family provide them with con-
tacts to people that might help in pursuing an entrepreneurial career, 
introduce them to business networks through the contacts to potential 
business partners and/or customers, and provide access to a distribution 
network for their intended company. Human capital is operational-
ized with a three-­item Likert scale: ‘My parents/family offer me general 
knowledge about how to run a business’, ‘My parents/family offer me 
industry-­related knowledge how to produce services and products’, and 
‘My parents/family coach/mentor me in my entrepreneurial activities’. 
Financial capital is obtained via the respondents’ perception of being pro-
vided with debt capital by the parents/family (capital that bears regular 
interest payments and that has to be repaid), being provided with equity 
capital (capital without regular interest payment that may be lost if the 
business fails), and being provided with capital benefiting favourable 
and flexible conditions (e.g., low interest rates or long payback periods). 
Cronbach’s alphas for the four independent variables are respectively 
0.84, 0.88, 0.90 and 0.81, which are above the 0.7 threshold commonly 
used in social science studies (Hair et al., 2006).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

82    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Control variables are also included in the analyses. University students’ 
age and gender are considered (Schröder et al., 2011), with gender coded as 
a dummy variable (0 = male, 1 = female). Students’ geographical origin is 
taken into account through a dummy variable: 1 if the respondent studies 
in Europe and 0 otherwise. Then, as the proximity of a career choice deci-
sion might affect the engagement in the entrepreneurial process (Lee et al., 
2011), two dummy variables are introduced for graduate (Master) level 
and PhD level of studies (1 if the corresponding level applies, 0 if not; 
undergraduate – Bachelor – was the holdout category). To account for the 
field of study, there are three dummy variables for ­business/­economics, 
natural sciences and social sciences (1 if the corresponding field applies, 
0 if not; ‘other’ as the holdout category). In addition, a dummy vari-
able is also included in order to indicate if the student has attended any 
entrepreneurship course or seminar (1 if yes, 0 otherwise), so that it is 
possible to test any effect of entrepreneurship education as part of the 
studies (Souitaris et al., 2007). High-­tech is a dummy variable, equal 
to 0 when the would-­be entrepreneur wants to enter low-­tech industry 
(e.g., manufacture of household appliances, the foundry industry, the food 
industry, etc.) and equal to 1 when he or she is willing to enter a high-­tech 
industry (e.g., pharmaceuticals, the electronic industry, the aerospace 
construction, mechanical engineering, etc.). Finally, a dummy variable 
accounts for parents’ entrepreneurial involvement (1 if the status applies, 
0 if not), in order to take into account the presence of a family business 
background (Laspita et al., 2012). Parents may indeed serve as positive 
role models, thus motivating offspring from business families to engage 
in new entrepreneurial activities (Carr and Sequeira, 2007). In particular, 
extant research has stated that individuals with at least one self-­employed 
parent are more likely to be self-­employed (e.g., Dunn and Holtz-­Eakin, 
2000), thanks to the ‘entrepreneurial capital’ (skills, experience and values 
conducive to success in self-­employment) acquired through exposure to a 
parental business (Hundley, 2006).
Table 4.1 presents the descriptive statistics and correlations of the vari-
ables of the study. Family capital components (social, human, financial) 
show a strong correlation among themselves; this may relate to the fact 
that it can be difficult to clearly perceive separately the three kinds of 
support for offspring, as the source of the three components is always the 
family, and it may be hard for a family to provide offspring with social 
capital but not human or financial capital.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

83
Table 4.1  Descriptive statistics and correlation matrixa
Mean
SD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
  1 Age
25.14
6.29  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2 Gender
0.55
0.50
−0.06
  3 Bachelor
0.79
0.41
−0.21
0.01
  4 Master
0.17
0.37
0.11
−0.01
−0.86
  5 PhD
0.02
0.15
0.12
−0.01
−0.30
−0.07
  6 Entrepreneurial 
education
0.97
0.18
0.01
0.04
−0.01
0.02
0.01
  7 Business economics
0.25
0.44
−0.01
0.01
−0.02
0.03
−0.03
−0.03
  8 Natural science
0.26
0.44
0.01
−0.23
0.02
−0.01
−0.02
−0.01
−0.35
  9 Social science
0.21
0.40
−0.03
0.07
−0.04
0.03
0.05
0.03
−0.30
−0.30
10 Hi-­tech
0.39
0.49
−0.02
−0.06
0.01
−0.00
0.02
0.02
−0.21
0.16
−0.13
11 Family business 
background 
0.26
0.44
−0.10
−0.01
0.03
−0.02
−0.01
−0.02
0.05
−0.01
−0.03 −0.02
12 Family social capital
3.05
1.83
−0.20
0.01
0.10
−0.08
−0.05
−0.11
0.04
−0.02
−0,01 −0.06 0.26
13 Family human 
capital
3.17
1.88
−0.20
0.02
0.10
−0.08
−0.04
−0.11
0.04
−0.03
−0,01 −0.06 0.32 0.81
14 Family financial 
capital
2.82
1.75
−0.16
−0.03
0.04
−0.02
−0.01
−0.10
0.03
−0.02
−0.01 −0.02 0.16 0.64 0.58
15 Family cohesion
0.26
0.44
−0.02
0.10
0.04
−0.04
−0.02
−0.05
0.01
−0.01
−0.01 −0.03 0.03 0.23 0.24 0.15
16 FET
0.60
0.81
−0.01
0.10
0.06
−0.06
−0.03
−0.00
0.00
−0.01
−0.01 −0.06 0.04 0.11 0.13 0.05 0.12
Note:  a.  Values higher than 0.0134 are significant at a = 0.05%.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

84    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
RESULTS
Since the decision whether to form an entrepreneurial team with family 
members, no family members or both is operationalized through a cat-
egorical variable, the theorized relationships are tested via multinomial 
logistic regression analyses (for an instance of multinomial logistic regres-
sion analyses in entrepreneurship research, see Zellweger et al., 2011). 
Tables 4.2a and 4.2b show all of the tested statistical models. The effect of 
the control and independent variables on the proclivity to form an FET 
is shown with respect to an entrepreneurial team with no family members 
at all in Model A (Table 4.2a); an entrepreneurial team with ­prospective 
team members from both family and non-­family pools is tested with 
respect to an entrepreneurial team with no family members at all in Model 
B (Table 4.2a); finally, the effect on the propensity to form an FET with 
respect to an entrepreneurial team with both family and non-­family 
members is shown in Model C (Table 4.2b). Model 1 (A, B and C) tests 
the relationship between the control variables and entrepreneurial team 
formation. The second model (2A, 2B and 2C) tests the effect of family 
cohesion, while Models 3 (A, B and C), 4 (A, B and C) and 5 (A, B and C), 
respectively, introduce family social, human and financial capital.
There is a positive and statistically significant relationship between family 
cohesion and FET formation (b = 0.275, p-­value < 0.001 in Model 2A) as 
well as an entrepreneurial team with both family and non-­family members 
(b = 0.263, p-­value < 0.001 in Model 2B), suggesting that a cohesive family 
leads the potential entrepreneur to form an entrepreneurial team involv-
ing family members, while Model 2C suggests that family cohesion is not 
significantly affecting the propensity of potential entrepreneurs to include 
only family members rather than members from both family and ­non-­family 
pools in their entrepreneurial team. Hypothesis 1 is therefore only partially 
supported. As regards the tests of Hypothesis 2, Models 3A, 3B, 4A, 4B, 
5A and 5B show a positive direct relationship between, respectively, family 
social, human and financial capital and the decision to involve family 
members in a new venture team. Human capital has the strongest impact 
on FET formation (respectively, b = 0.358 and b = 0.263, p-­value < 0.001), 
then social capital also has a highly relevant effect (respectively, b = 0.281 
and b = 0.226, p-­value < 0.001), and, finally, financial capital significantly 
affects the formation of an FET (respectively, b = 0.109 and b = 0.110, 
p-­value < 0.001). Models 3C and 4C suggest that family social and human 
capital are significantly related to the propensity of potential entrepreneurs 
to opt for FETs rather than forming an entrepreneurial team with both 
family and non-­family members (respectively, b = 0.055, p-­value < 0.05, and 
b = 0.095, p-­value < 0.001), suggesting the opposite sign for the ­hypothesized 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­85
­relationships. Finally, Model 5C suggests that financial capital does not sig-
nificantly affect the propensity of having exclusively family members rather 
than an entrepreneurial team with both family and non-­family members. 
Therefore, also Hypothesis 2 is partially supported by our results.
Some robustness tests with more detailed measures of family entrepre-
neurial team were also performed. In one case, these considered having 
only the spouse as a prospective team member, and in another case, the 
tests considered only members of the family of the respondent. In the first 
case the results were not significant, probably because of the small sample 
size of university students who have a spouse and also considered him or 
her as a prospective member of the entrepreneurial team. However, the 
latter case supports previous findings, thus showing that both relational 
and resource-­seeking motivations positively affect the propensity of poten-
tial entrepreneurs to include prospective team members from their family.
DISCUSSION
The results of this study suggest that both relational and resource-­
seeking motivations lead potential entrepreneurs to include prospective 
team members in their start-­up. This research offers interesting insights 
about the relevant role of the family when considering different pools 
from which to pick prospective team members to start-­up a new business 
(Ben-­Hafaïedh, 2013). Interpersonal aspects, operationalized via family 
cohesion, and instrumental ones, in terms of social, human and financial 
capital that the family makes available (Discua Cruz et al., 2013), are all 
relevant in the identification of the consideration set when forming an 
entrepreneurial team, thus contributing to the key issues raised in the 
literature as recalled in the introduction to this chapter (Forbes et al., 
2006, p. 232). Therefore, the family plays a crucial role in leading potential 
entrepreneurs, driven by both relational and instrumental motivations, 
to strongly consider the family as the first pool from which to find pro-
spective team members. Family cohesion and capital reveal significant 
antecedents of entrepreneurial team formation, suggesting that both 
relational and resource-­seeking approaches coexist when considering the 
family context of potential entrepreneurs. The family provides support 
that makes the decision to form a family entrepreneurial team more allur-
ing for potential entrepreneurs, notwithstanding the potential negative 
aspects that come with it, as some research has highlighted. This supports 
and extends the existing stream of research showing the important role of 
family with regard to entrepreneurial team formation (e.g., Schjoedt et al., 
2013).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

86    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Furthermore, family human capital and family social capital signifi-
cantly affect potential entrepreneurs in favouring only a family pool for 
entrepreneurial team formation, instead of considering both family and 
non-­family prospective team members. The results support a hierarchy 
Table 4.2a  Results of multinomial logistic regression analyses (Models 
A and B)a
Variables
Model 1A: FET
Model 1B: 
Family and 
Non-­family
Model 2A:  
FET
Model 2B: 
Family and 
Non-­family
Model 3A:  
FET
Age
0.281***
0.020
−0.076**
0.023
0.285***
0.020
−0.064**
0.023
0.321***
0.021
Gender
0.539***
0.019
0.119***
0.181
0.514***
0.020
0.095***
0.183
0.542***
0.020
Bachelor
0.035
0.046
−0.085†
0.046
0.051
0.047
−0.077†
0.046
0.032
0.048
Master
−0.210***
0.045
−0.176***
0.044
−0.186***
0.046
−0.163***
0.044
−0.200***
0.046
PhD
−0.062*
0.027
−0.099***
0.027
−0.049†
0.027
−0.091**
0.027
−0.061*
0.028
Business  
  economics
0.005
0.023
−0.040†
0.022
0.004
0.023
−0.036
0.022
−0.001
0.023
Natural science
−0.025
0.024
−0.002
0.022
−0.024
0.024
−0.004
0.022
−0.019
0.024
Social science
−0.038
0.024
−0.053*
0.023
−0.045†
0.024
−0.060*
0.024
−0.034
0.024
Entrepreneurial  
  education
0.017
0.017
−0.018
0.015
0.026
0.017
−0.007
0.015
0.042*
0.017
High-­tech  
  industry
−0.278***
0.020
−0.088***
0.018
−0.278***
0.021
−0.085***
0.018
−0.264***
0.020
Family business  
  background
0.127***
0.017
0.073***
0.016
0.121***
0.018
0.068***
0.017
0.067***
0.018
Family  
  cohesion
0.275***
0.021
0.263***
0.020
Family social  
  capital
0.281***
0.201
Family human  
  capital 
Family financial  
  capital 
Constant
−1.180***
0.020
−1.068***
0.019
−1.217***
0.020
−1.102***
0.020
−1.190***
0.020
Log likelihood
−19 510.75
−19 510.75
−19 173.25
−19 173.25
−18 670.88
Notes:
a.	 The comparison baseline is ‘Non-­family entrepreneurial team’.
Robust standard errors in italics.
†	
p < 0.1; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­87
of preferences (at a given level of social capital and human capital avail-
able to the potential entrepreneur) in which the FET comes before other 
types of entrepreneurial teams, in particular the option of building an 
entrepreneurial team with both family and non-­family members, different 
from what was hypothesized. Conversely, the effect of financial capital 
and cohesion just differentiate teams with only or some family members 
from those with none. It could be argued that what differentiates social 
capital and human capital from financial capital and cohesion is the 
 
Model 3B: Family 
and Non-­family
Model 4A:  
FET
Model 4B: Family 
and Non-­family
Model 5A:  
FET
Model 5B Family 
and Non-­family
−0.031
0.023
0.335***
0.021
−0.029
0.024
0.294***
0.020
−0.056*
0.023
0.125***
0.184
0.540***
0.020
0.117***
0.184
0.546***
0.020
0.127***
0.183
−0.095*
0.047
0.048
0.048
−0.088†
0.047
0.044
0.047
−0.082†
0.046
−0.178***
0.045
−0.182***
0.047
−0.168***
0.045
−0.200***
0.046
−0.176***
0.044
−0.096**
0.028
−0.053†
0.028
−0.101***
0.028
−0.063*
0.027
−0.095**
0.028
−0.043†
0.022
0.006
0.023
−0.043†
0.022
0.004
0.023
−0.039†
0.022
0.001
0.022
−0.011
0.024
0.003
0.022
−0.018
0.024
0.005
0.022
−0.056*
0.023
−0.038
0.025
−0.053*
0.024
−0.034
0.024
−0.050*
0.024
0.006
0.015
0.051**
0.017
0.078
0.015
0.025
0.017
−0.007
0.015
−0.084***
0.019
−0.265***
0.021
−0.083***
0.019
−0.278***
0.021
−0.088***
0.018
0.020***
0.017
0.030
0.019
0.005
0.018
0.113***
0.018
0.053**
0.017
0.226***
0.019
0.358***
0.020
0.263***
0.019
0.109***
0.019
0.110***
0.181
−1.059***
0.019
−1.198***
0.020
−1.061***
0.019
−1.186***
0.020
−1.061***
0.019
−18 670.88
−18 702.50
−18 702.50
−18986.71
−18986.71
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

88
Table 4.2b  Results of multinomial logistic regression analyses  
(Model C)a
Variables
Model 1C: FET
Model 2C: FET
Model 3C: FET
Model 4C: FET
Model 5C: FET
Age
0.357***
0.026
0.349***
0.026
0.352***
0.027
0.364***
0.027
0.350***
0.026
Gender
0.420***
0.023
0.419***
0.023
0.416***
0.023
0.423***
0.023
0.419***
0.023
Bachelor
0.120*
0.054
0.128*
0.055
0.127*
0.055
0.136*
0.056
0.125*
0.056
Master
−0.034
0.054
−0.026
0.054
−0.023
0.055
−0.014
0.055
−0.024
0.055
PhD
0.037
0.034
0.042
0.034
0.034
0.034
0.048
0.035
0.033
0.034
Business economics
0.045†
0.027
0.041
0.027
0.041
0.028
0.049†
0.028
0.044
0.027
Natural science
−0.022
0.028
−0.020
0.028
−0.020
0.028
−0.015
0.028
−0.024
0.028
Social science
0.015
0.029
0.015
0.029
0.022
0.029
0.015
0.029
0.016
0.029
Entrepreneurial education
0.035†
0.019
0.033†
0.019
0.035†
0.020
0.044*
0.020
0.033†
0.020
High-­tech industry
−0.190***
0.024
−0.190***
0.024
−0.180***
0.024
−0.182***
0.024
−0.190***
0.024
Family business background
0.054**
0.020
0.053**
0.021
0.047*
0.022
0.025
0.022
0.060**
0.021
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

89
Family cohesion
0.012
0.025
Family social capital
0.055*
0.235
Family human capital 
0.095***
0.024
Family financial capital 
−0.001
0.023
Constant
−0.112***
0.024
−0.115***
0.025
−1.131***
0.024
−1.137***
0.024
−1.125***
0.023
Log likelihood
−19 510.75
−19 173.25
−18 670.88
−18 702.50
−18 986.71
Notes:
a.	 The comparison baseline is ‘Family entrepreneurial team with family and non-­family members’.
Robust standard errors in italics.
†	
p < 0.1; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

90    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
degree of threat that the former is exposed to during the entrepreneurial 
process with respect to the latter. Social capital and human capital are 
path-­dependent resources, which grow over time and are sticky and addi-
tive in nature (Barney, 1991); hence, venturing, growing a business, and 
even failing, all represent experiences and learning processes that likely 
increase social capital (in terms of structural relationship) and human 
capital (in terms of knowledge) (Sharma, 2008; Campopiano et al., 2016). 
This happens without an increase in the opportunity cost for potential 
reallocation, or the cost related to losses from negative and unsuccess-
ful events (Davidsson and Honig, 2003). Instead, financial capital and 
cohesion are elements that are more likely to be jeopardized or even lost 
(Zahra, 2012) due to unforeseen or negative events (e.g., due to bank-
ruptcy, dispute or non-­fulfilment of obligations). These problems might 
be perceived as more pronounced when the entrepreneurial team includes 
only family members. This difference might resonate with the findings 
as regards the antecedents of entrepreneurial team formation, as social 
capital and human capital might be less associated to the downsides of 
venturing within a family, so that they may lead to more confidence in 
preferring an FET, without involving any external prospective team 
member. Conversely, relying on family financial capital and cohesion 
might be perceived as more problematic and, although their overall effect 
is perceived as positive, they might generate heavy concerns that could 
result in a less marked preference (or simply equivalence) for FETs over 
mixed entrepreneurial teams.
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH ON FETS
This study shows that, in developing a consideration set of prospec-
tive team members, a combination of both relational and instrumental 
motives may be relevant (e.g., Forbes et al., 2006). The empirical strategy 
and the theoretical perspective used enable an advancement of the debate 
regarding the antecedents of entrepreneurial team formation. Focusing 
on the role of family in affecting the propensity of potential entrepreneurs 
to include family members in the entrepreneurial team allows a further 
understanding of the antecedents, particularly upstream of the identifica-
tion stage in the entrepreneurial team formation process (Ben-­Hafaïedh, 
2010).
In addition, the adoption of a measure for the relational motive rooted 
in the family-­embeddedness perspective (that is, family cohesion) con-
tributes to ‘mov[ing] beyond the resource-­based view (RBV) that pre-
dominates entrepreneurial teams research and consider[ing] also theories 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­91
that capture the relationships that underscore FETs’ (Discua Cruz et al., 
2013, p. 19). The integration of the two theoretical perspectives allows the 
conceptualization and operationalization of the antecedents relating to 
entrepreneurial team formation and therefore contributes to this stream 
of literature by positioning this study upstream of the decision-­making 
process when a potential entrepreneur is seeking to create a team when 
starting up a new business. The family bears a common vision, norms 
and identity that lead potential entrepreneurs to consider the family itself 
as a pool from which it is possible to pick prospective team members. 
Furthermore, the family provides social, human and financial capital, 
which have a comparable effect, although the findings of this study also 
suggest that social and human capital in particular can lead to considering 
only family members to start-­up a new business in team. This may have 
strong implications for future research on entrepreneurial team forma-
tion and composition, as teams consisting of family members only may 
face issues and challenges that are different from teams with no family 
members or mixed entrepreneurial teams.
This study suffers from a few limitations that future research may 
address. First, it assumes that potential entrepreneurs will consider 
prospective team members only from acquaintances and from people 
in ‘small worlds’ (Aldrich and Kim, 2007), while different pools might 
be also considered to access alternative resources and capabilities, such 
as in a competency-­driven search for team members (e.g., Kamm and 
Nurick, 1993). Second, it does not consider the family effect in the case 
of potential entrepreneurs who are willing to start alone, as the chapter 
focuses on the antecedents of entrepreneurial team formation so the 
team option is already chosen (Harper, 2008). Third, in this study it is 
not known whether the business idea comes from the individual or from 
the team (e.g., Cooney, 2005). Finally, the setting of this study does not 
allow distinguishing between exogenously and endogenously determined 
entrepreneurial teams (e.g., Harper, 2008). All these issues may be further 
explored to contribute to the overall understanding of the antecedents of 
entrepreneurial team formation.
CONCLUSION
This research contributes to the ongoing debate on entrepreneurial team 
formation, in line with recent efforts to advance knowledge in this domain 
(e.g., Klotz et al., 2014). Drawing on this stream of literature, this study 
avoids the success bias that usually represents the main issue in investi-
gating entrepreneurial teams, as new venture creation is a left-­censored 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

92    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
phenomenon (Aldrich, 1999). The study focuses on the antecedents that 
drive potential entrepreneurs to include family members in entrepreneurial 
teams, thus showing that family cohesion and family capital are factors 
that may foster the propensity of potential entrepreneurs to form an entre-
preneurial team with family members, and advancing the debate on the 
antecedents of the identification stage of entrepreneurial team formation 
(Forbes et al., 2006; Ben-­Hafaïedh 2010).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are indebted to the editors for their valuable feedback and the IFERA 
participants for their comments that have helped us improve the contribu-
tion of our research. Moreover, we would like to acknowledge that this 
research has been supported by the Italian Ministry of Education, University 
and Research ‘PRIN’ 2010–11 Research Grant ‘Scientific Research 
and Competitiveness. Variety of Organizations, Support Systems and 
Performance Levels’ Strategic Project (Grant No. 2010744K3S_007), which 
funded research regarding corporate venturing and innovation phenomena 
on enterprises operating in maturity and emerging industries, with particu-
lar focus on the analysis of entrepreneurs/entrepreneurial teams as well as 
organizational structures in the context of family and non-­family firms.
REFERENCES
Adler, P. and S.-­W. Kwon (2002), ‘Social capital: Prospects for a new concept’, Academy of 
Management Review, 27 (1), 17–40.
Aldrich, H. (ed.) (1999), Organizations Evolving, London: Sage.
Aldrich, H. and J. Cliff (2003), ‘The pervasive effects of family on entrepreneurship: Toward 
a family embeddedness perspective’, Journal of Business Venturing, 18 (5), 573–96.
Aldrich, H. and P. Kim (2007), ‘Small worlds, infinite possibilities? How social networks 
affect entrepreneurial team formation and search’, Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 
1 (1–2), 147–65.
Aldrich, H. and C. Zimmer (1986), ‘Entrepreneurship through social networks’, in D. Sexton 
and R. Smilor (eds), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship, New York: Ballinger, 
pp. 3–23.
Arregle, J.-­L., B. Batjargal and M.A. Hitt et al. (2015), ‘Family ties in entrepreneurs’ 
social networks and new venture growth’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 39 (2), 
313–44.
Barney, J. (1991), ‘Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage’, Journal of 
Management, 17 (1), 99–120.
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C. (2010), ‘Entrepreneurial team formation: Any rationality?’, Frontiers of 
Entrepreneurship Research, 30 (10), 1–15.
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C. (2013), ‘Essai de modélisation de la constitution des équipes entrepre-
neuriales’ [Modelling test of the constitution of entrepreneurial teams], Vie & Sciences de 
l’Entreprise, 193 (1), 11–36.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­93
Brannon, D., J. Wiklund and M. Haynie (2013), ‘The varying effects of family relationships 
in entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 107–32.
Brüderl, J. and P. Preisendörfer (1998), ‘Network support and the success of newly founded 
business’, Small Business Economics, 10 (3), 213–25.
Brush, C., P. Greene and M. Hart (2001), ‘From initial idea to unique advantage: The entre-
preneurial challenge of constructing a resource base’, Academy of Management Executive, 
15 (1), 64–78.
Campopiano, G., T. Minola and R. Sainaghi (2016), ‘Students climbing the entrepreneurial 
ladder: Family social capital and environment-­related motives in hospitality and tourism’, 
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 28 (3), 1115–36.
Carr, J. and J. Sequeira (2007), ‘Prior family business exposure as intergenerational influence 
and entrepreneurial intent: A theory of planned behavior approach’, Journal of Business 
Research, 60 (10), 1090–98.
Chrisman, J., J. Chua and R. Litz (2003), ‘A unified systems perspective of family 
firm ­performance: An extension and integration’, Journal of Business Venturing, 18 (4), 
467–72.
Chua, J., J. Chrisman, F. Kellermanns and Z. Wu (2011), ‘Family involvement and new 
venture debt financing’, Journal of Business Venturing, 26 (4), 472–88.
Cooney, T. (2005), ‘Editorial: What is an entrepreneurial team?’, International Small Business 
Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Davidsson, P. and B. Honig (2003), ‘The role of social and human capital among nascent 
entrepreneurs’, Journal of Business Venturing, 18 (3), 301–31.
Discua Cruz, A., C. Howorth and E. Hamilton (2013), ‘Intrafamily entrepreneurship: The 
formation and membership of family entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 37 (1), 17–46.
Dunn, T. and D. Holtz-­Eakin (2000), ‘Financial capital, human capital, and the transition 
to self-­employment: Evidence from intergenerational links’, Journal of Labor Economics, 
18 (2), 282–305.
Eddleston, K., F. Kellermanns and T. Zellweger (2012), ‘Exploring the entrepreneur-
ial behavior of family firms: Does the stewardship perspective explain differences?’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 36 (2), 347–67.
Elfring, T. and W. Hulsink (2003), ‘Networks in entrepreneurship: The case of high-­
technology firms’, Small Business Economics, 21 (4), 409–22.
Elfring, T. and W. Hulsink (2007), ‘Networking by entrepreneurs: Patterns of tie-­formation 
in emerging organizations’, Organization Studies, 28 (12), 1849–72.
Ensley, M., A. Pearson and A. Amason (2002), ‘Understanding the dynamics of new venture 
top management teams: Cohesion, conflict, and new venture performance’, Journal of 
Business Venturing, 17 (4), 365–86.
Forbes, D., P. Borchert, M. Zellmer-­Bruhn and H. Sapienza (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial 
team formation: An exploration of new member addition’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 30 (2), 225–48.
Forster, W. and K. Jansen (2010), ‘Co-­creating new ventures: Attraction, search, and uncer-
tainty in founding partnership formation’, Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 30 (10), 
16–31.
Gensch, D.H. and E.S. Soofi (1995), ‘Information-­theoretic estimation of individual consid-
eration set’, International Journal of Research in Marketing, 12 (1), 25–38.
Grandi, A. and R. Grimaldi (2003), ‘Exploring the networking characteristics of new venture 
founding teams: A study of Italian academic spin-­off’, Small Business Economics, 21 (4), 
329–41.
Granovetter, M. (1993), ‘The nature of economic relationships’, in R. Swedberg (ed.), 
Explorations in Economic Sociology, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 3–41.
Habbershon, T. and M. Williams (1999), ‘A resource-­based framework for assessing the 
strategic advantages of family firms’, Family Business Review, 12 (1), 1–25.
Hair, J., W. Black and B. Babin et al. (eds) (2006), Multivariate Data Analysis, 6th edition, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

94    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Harper, D. (2008), ‘Towards a theory of entrepreneurial teams’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 23 (6), 613–26.
Hindle, K., K. Klyver and D.F. Jennings (2009), ‘An “informed” intent model: Incorporating 
human capital, social capital, and gender variables into the theoretical model of entre-
preneurial intentions’, in A.L. Carsrud and M. Brännback (eds), Understanding the 
Entrepreneurial Mind: Opening the Black Box, Berlin: Springer, pp. 35–50.
Hundley, G. (2006), ‘Family background and the propensity for self-­employment’, Industrial 
Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 45 (3), 377–92.
Kamm, J. and A. Nurick (1993), ‘The stages of team venture formation: A decision-­making 
model’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 17 (2), 17–27.
Klotz, A., K. Hmieleski, B. Bradley and L. Busenitz (2014), ‘New venture teams: A review 
of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 40 (1), 
226–55.
Larson, A. and J. Starr (1993), ‘A network model of organization formation’, Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 17 (2), 5–15.
Laspita, S., N. Breugst, S. Heblich and H. Patzelt (2012), ‘Intergenerational transmission of 
entrepreneurial intentions’, Journal of Business Venturing, 27 (4), 414–35.
Lee, L., P.K. Wong, M.D. Foo and A. Leung (2011), ‘Entrepreneurial intentions: The 
influence of organizational and individual factors’, Journal of Business Venturing, 26 (1), 
124–36.
Olson, D. (1989), ‘Circumplex model of family systems VIII: Family assessment and inter-
vention’, in D. Olson, C.S. Russell and D.H. Sprenkle (eds), Circumplex Model: Systemic 
Assessment and Treatment of Families, New York: Haworth Press, pp. 7–49.
Olson, D.H., J. Portner and Y. Lavee (eds) (1985), FACES III, St. Paul, MN: Family Social 
Science, University of Minnesota.
Pieper, T. (2010), ‘Non solus: Toward a psychology of family business’, Journal of Family 
Business Strategy, 1 (1), 26–39.
Ruef, M., H. Aldrich and N. Carter (2003), ‘The structure of founding teams: Homophily, 
strong ties, and isolation among US entrepreneurs’, American Sociological Review, 68 (2), 
195–222.
Salvato, C. and L. Melin (2008), ‘Creating value across generations in family-­controlled busi-
nesses: The role of family social capital’, Family Business Review, 21 (3), 259–76.
Schjoedt, L. and S. Kraus (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial teams: Definition and performance 
factors’, Management Research News, 32 (6), 513–24.
Schjoedt, L., E. Monsen and A. Pearson et al. (2013), ‘New venture and family busi-
ness teams: Understanding team formation, composition, behaviors, and performance’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 1–15.
Schröder, E., E. Schmitt-­Rodermund and N. Arnaud (2011), ‘Career choice intentions 
of  adolescents with a family business background’, Family Business Review, 24 (4), 
305–21.
Sharma, P. (2008), ‘Commentary: Familiness: capital stocks and flows between family and 
business’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32 (6), 971–7.
Sieger, P. and T. Minola (2016), ‘Family’s financial support as poisoned gift – A family 
embeddedness view on entrepreneurial intentions’, Journal of Small Business Management, 
forthcoming.
Souitaris, V., S. Zerbinati and A. Al-­Laham (2007), ‘Do entrepreneurship programmes raise 
entrepreneurial intention of science and engineering students? The effect of learning, inspi-
ration and resources’, Journal of Business Venturing, 22 (4), 566–91.
Steier, L. (2007), ‘New venture creation and organization: A familial sub-­narrative’, Journal 
of Business Research, 60 (10), 1099–107.
Sundaramurthy, C. and G. Kreiner (2008), ‘Governing by managing identity boundaries: 
The case of family businesses’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32 (3), 415–36.
Ucbasaran, D., A. Lockett, M. Wright and P. Westhead (2003), ‘Entrepreneurial founder 
teams: Factors associated with member entry and exit’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 28 (2), 107–28.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial team formation: the role of the family    ­95
Uhlaner, L., R. Floren and J. Geerlings (2007), ‘Owner commitment and relational govern-
ance in the privately-­held firm: An empirical study’, Small Business Economics, 29 (3), 
275–93.
Webb, J.W, D.J. Ketchen and R.D. Ireland (2010), ‘Strategic entrepreneurship within family-­
controlled firms: Opportunities and challenges’, Journal of Family Business Strategy, 1 (2), 
67–77.
Wiklund, J. and D. Shepherd (2008), ‘Portfolio entrepreneurship: Habitual and novice 
founders, new entry, and mode of organizing’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 
32 (4), 701–25.
Zahra, S. (2012), ‘Organizational learning and entrepreneurship in family firms: Exploring 
the moderating effect of ownership and cohesion’, Small Business Economics, 38 (1), 51–65.
Zellweger, T., P. Sieger and F. Halter (2011), ‘Should I stay or should I go? Career choice 
intentions of students with family business background’, Journal of Business Venturing, 
26 (5), 521–36.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

96
5.  Entrepreneurs’ perspectives on the 
structuring phase of the entrepreneurial 
team
L. Martin Cloutier, Sandrine Cueille and 
Gilles Recasens
INTRODUCTION
This chapter examines the problem of structuring entrepreneurial team 
development in small enterprises taken from the perspectives offered by 
a group of young entrepreneurs who have each faced such a challenge. 
In particular, the chapter will report on a shared representation (or col-
lective) conceptual framework created from a list of action statements 
generated by these young entrepreneurs who formed a venture and were 
in the process of structuring an entrepreneurial team. At this structuring 
phase of the venture, the establishment of an extended support network 
has already been initiated to bring in various kinds of inputs to the venture 
(including the confidence and relationship characteristics needed for pur-
suing more formalized actions), and so this phase would correspond to 
a sort of ‘in between’ within the team ‘establishment’ and ‘structuring’ 
phases identified by Vyakarnam et al. (1999). This phase is part of a series 
of team development phases and efforts, and its central focus is on vision 
and leadership development while human and financial resources are 
being sought to build capabilities (Naffakhi and Bayad, 2008).
As an entrepreneurial team becomes increasingly structured, entre-
preneurs must anticipate and foresee the set of actions required to 
formalize operations and business processes, decide whether to invite 
additional investors, determine new needs, select skills and competences, 
and challenge their own assumptions about how to redefine their role 
and get things accomplished. While some work has been undertaken 
toward identifying entrepreneurial team-­oriented factors to consider 
while moving forward with its development (ibid.), much less research has 
been conducted on the interrelated complexity of various actions required 
on the part of entrepreneurs for meeting the challenges of the team struc-
turing (Klotz et al., 2014). More specifically, little is known regarding 
the complexity of the entrepreneurial team structuring process at this 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­97
juncture, and the challenge regarding how these action-­oriented factors 
interact with one another and how they are prioritized by entrepreneurs. 
Therefore, a first contribution that this chapter makes is to observe the 
structure and scope of the set of actions identified by entrepreneurs when 
managing and developing the organization with resources available from 
the environment. When this is established, another key issue explored 
concerns how the entrepreneurial team development action priorities 
meet the associated feasibility challenge. Hence, a second contribution 
this chapter offers is the list of action priorities and (given their feasi-
bility) the possible implications of these on the capability to succeed in 
meeting the challenges of the entrepreneurial team structuring as a step-
ping stone to the growth phase.
Various applied research-­oriented methods and techniques to enhance 
group-­level sensemaking have recently emerged in the strategic manage-
ment literature (Stigliani and Ravasi, 2012; Tarakci et al., 2014). Research 
in the general entrepreneurship or in the small business management fields 
has reported very few of these types of formalized group participative 
research methods making use of primary data like the one introduced 
in this chapter, although some are beginning to appear (Cloutier et al., 
2013, 2014). Nevertheless, in entrepreneurship research, cognitive repre-
sentations (and their associated methods and tools) have been considered 
fundamental for quite some time to assist entrepreneurs in better defining 
their activity system and to improve business practice with relevant actions 
(Filion, 2008). The research framework proposed in this chapter consists 
of the group concept mapping (GCM) approach (Trochim and Cabrera, 
2005; Kane and Trochim, 2007). The GCM approach examines knowl-
edge representations and perceptions distributed amongst a group of indi-
viduals (Rosas, 2016). Hence, in this study, it brings a formal bottom-­up 
mixed method-­based perspective to the examination of the systemic and 
complex phenomenon of the entrepreneurial team development at the 
structuring phase.
The objective of this chapter is to explore both qualitatively and quan-
titatively the systemic interactions and complexity of actions leading to 
team development at the structuring phase in very small entrepreneurial 
ventures. This objective is important as it forms the basis for the questions 
raised in this chapter. First, how do entrepreneurs represent the complexity 
of the set of actions required at the structuring phase of the entrepreneurial 
team-­building process? Second, what are entrepreneurs’ perceptions of the 
importance and feasibility of the set of actions to be initiated? The answers 
to these questions, using GCM, offer a much needed practical perspective 
to help derive useful implications and to fully consider the entrepreneurial 
team development as a process (Ben-­Hafaïedh, 2012).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

98    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
LITERATURE REVIEW
The literature in entrepreneurship highlights multiple issues related to the 
development of an entrepreneurial team. To analyse these issues, it is first 
important to understand what entrepreneurial team structuring means. To 
do so, the notions of ‘entrepreneurial team’ and of ‘team structuring’ are 
first defined. Then, key challenges related to entrepreneurial team struc-
turing are highlighted and the main gaps in this literature are identified.
Entrepreneurial Team Structuring: A Definition
The definition of an entrepreneurial team has evolved significantly over 
the years. Built on earlier work, Kamm et al. (1990, p. 7) have operational-
ized the definition of the entrepreneurial team as ‘two or more individuals 
present at the pre-­start-­up phase of the venture who jointly establish a 
business in which they have an equity (financial) interest’. Cooney (2005, 
p. 229) has refocused that definition by altering the financial consideration 
from it and by underscoring the importance of members’ contribution to 
the development of the venture as ‘two or more individuals who have a 
significant financial interest and participate actively in the development 
of the enterprise’. However, for Klotz et al. (2014, p. 227), the team is 
conceived as ‘the group of individuals that is chiefly responsible for the 
strategic decision-­making and ongoing operations of a new venture’. This 
latter definition emphasizes responsibilities concerning decision-­making 
at both the operational and strategic levels. Evolving definitions about 
the concept of the entrepreneurial team also reflects on the changing 
scope or boundaries of the team; at the organizational level (openness 
toward employees performing and taking on managerial responsibilities) 
and at the environmental level (participation from industrial, commercial 
or financial partners to the development and strategic decision-­making 
process). The broader definitions of the entrepreneurial team, such as 
the ones that have emerged in the recent literature, are of interest for the 
work presented in this chapter. The notion of the entrepreneurial team is 
also of interest to the extent that Kamm et al. (1990) have identified that 
a significant number of businesses are created by teams (regardless of the 
type of industry, geographic location or gender of founders) and that there 
is arguably a connection between ventures created by teams (or not) and 
their impact on performance (as measured by sales, market capitalization 
or the success of the business, although this latter notion is not always 
precisely defined).
The concept of entrepreneurial team structuring refers to the notions 
of team formation and development, which can be described as a process 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­99
consisting of many phases (Naffakhi and Bayad, 2008): formation, struc-
turing, development and maturity. At the formation phase, team members 
learn how to work together (develop a shared experience, adapt the 
communication, and develop a supportive social network). At the struc-
turing phase, team members focus more on the development of the busi-
ness project (construction of a shared vision, development of resources, 
market positioning, initiation of strategic thinking, and establishment of 
an organizational structure). During the development phase, the team 
sharpens the project’s vision and defines the business goals (hence, the 
strategy and the organization of the venture). At the maturity phase, team 
members can take a step back with respect to their initial role. They can 
allocate time resources to enhance their social network, which may be 
conducive to the generation of new ideas and opportunity development. 
This view on the entrepreneurial team development suggests a process 
that is likely to evolve pervasively throughout the entrepreneurial project. 
This may imply the integration of new members, but also the emergence 
of conflicts amongst members, all susceptible to prompt the departure of 
some of them.
Although the literature does not formally establish strict correspond-
ences between the different phases of the development of the entrepre-
neurial team and those observed over the course of an enterprise’s business 
life cycle, it is possible to draw a parallel between them. Indeed, the team 
is likely to evolve throughout the development phases of the enterprise 
life cycle (Greiner, 1972; Hoy, 2006). The path through these phases can 
be explained by the arrival or departure of team members in an effort 
to adapt to emerging management issues and functioning modes as the 
venture enters new development phases (Fayolle, 2012). Therefore, it may 
be particularly interesting to examine the team structuring phase when 
the business is at the outset of its growth phase, as is suggested within this 
chapter, given that many questions will remain (for instance, regarding the 
development of resources, the strategic vision or the organization itself).
Key Issues Related to Entrepreneurial Team Structuring
The problem of structuring the entrepreneurial team appears to be para-
mount given that many studies have focused on the influence of team 
composition on venture performance. On the one hand, some of these 
works have investigated the relationship between specific team charac-
teristics (e.g., composition, heterogeneity, degree of cohesion and types 
of conflicts) and performance, as measured by various indicators such as 
turnover, profit and loss, or cash flow (e.g., Ensley et al., 2002; Ensley and 
Hmieleski, 2005; and Amason et al., 2006). Alternatively, other studies 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

100    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
have examined the influence of team composition on performance using 
the notions of human and social capital. Human capital refers mostly to 
the knowledge, competence and experience of team members, whereas the 
social capital perspective (Adler and Kwon, 2002) focuses on the entre-
preneurial team’s key role in the identification of opportunities and in 
accessing resources (Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986). In the Vyakarnam and 
Handelberg (2005) model, the team possesses certain resources in terms 
of both human capital (knowledge and competences, previous industry 
experience and team size) and social capital (common previous work expe-
rience, team composition, social network and social context).
The resource-­based view of the firm also offers some interesting insights 
on the underlying link between team resources, competences and capa-
bilities. The issue of team composition and size is related to the search for 
member complementarities as a means to diversify competences, as team 
size and composition are likely to influence the development capabilities 
of the firm and ultimately its performance level (Davidsson et al., 2005). 
It is arguable that the resources accumulated by the team could influence 
the performance of the venture through mediator mechanisms such as the 
group process, personal task leadership and group task leadership (Klotz 
et al., 2014). The business environment plays a key role due to the pres-
ence of feedback loops; the performance achieved leading to a review and 
to changes in entrepreneurial behaviours and resources, which are likely 
to involve further changes in team membership (integration or depar-
ture of members, for instance). Given this, behaviour-­based processes 
and affective-­based (or cognitive-­based) emergent states can be viewed 
as complementary, yet relevant types of mediator mechanisms (ibid.). 
The team-­related states and processes are to be associated to changes in 
team membership according to the development phases of the venture; 
new members could, for example, influx innovative ideas and alterna-
tive ways to solve problems, or expand the social network of the busi-
ness. For these types of considerations, the study of entrepreneurial team 
functioning, and its cognitive dimensions, are likely to shed light on the 
entrepreneurial process of the venture to the extent that shared mental 
models can improve team member coordination and performance due to 
emerging task complexity generated by the development process (Wright 
and Stigliani, 2012). Considering the link between team composition and 
a firm’s performance, three major practical challenges emerge during the 
entrepreneurial team structuring process: (1) defining the adequate char-
acteristics of team members; (2) selecting and integrating new members 
properly; and (3) getting a common and shared vision of the venture within 
the evolving entrepreneurial team. The characteristics of team members in 
terms of experience and values at the time the venture is established are 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­101
likely to influence the path of entrepreneurial development, hence the first 
challenge. Indeed, the experience gained by team members from that point 
onward is likely to influence entrepreneurial development as well. But 
the experience acquired by team members during the structuring phase is 
likely to modify their characteristics, which could ultimately alter the task 
allocation dynamic (Séville and Wirtz, 2010). Similarly, the addition of a 
new team member may boost its capabilities, yet it may also reshape its 
functioning (Borchert et al., 2006). For example, a new member can bring 
in additional human capital, although that capital does not simply add 
to the one of existing members but rather it combines with it, which may 
improve the team’s capabilities or it may contribute to their decline (given 
the emergence of new emotional or of potential interpersonal conflicts, for 
instance).
The second challenge pertains to the selection and integration process of 
a new member. The social capital perspective helps enlighten the identifi-
cation and selection process of a new team member (ibid.). The recruiting 
process can either be initiated by existing members or by potential candi-
dates seeking membership. The more elaborate the founding members’ 
network, the more the venture becomes prone to generating these latter 
types of requests from potential members. Similarly, from the standpoint 
of their position within the network, venture capitalists can help identify 
potential new members. The social capital theory helps explain why the 
integration of new team members often appears to be directed toward 
candidates already known to existing members rather than unknown ones. 
Indeed, competences and skills are only one side of the equation while con-
sidering new team membership, while the other side requires a ‘good fit’ 
in terms of values, norms and the organization already in place. The other 
side of the equation also explains why it is perceived as easier and less risky 
to integrate potential team candidates who are personal acquaintances of 
existing team members. This appears to represent a balancing act in the 
search for cohesion as a means to accelerate the decision-­making process 
within the enterprise.
The third challenge, stemming from the start-­up phase of the venture, 
is about the achievement and maintenance of a common and shared 
vision within the entrepreneurial team, especially in terms of values and 
objectives. The literature suggests that at the start-­up phase there is often 
little formalization of this vision by the leaders as they informally share 
their vision of the venture with other members of the entrepreneurial 
team (Vyakarnam et al., 1999). Nonetheless, this challenge appears to 
grow even more impinging on the team’s purpose as the venture develops 
(growth phase). The expansion of the entrepreneurial team happens at 
that time and this translates into the integration of new members with 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

102    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
complementary profiles, different from the ones at the start of the project. 
Hence, it becomes critical to consider the integration of new members 
while reconsidering the communication of the shared vision (ibid.). The 
leadership question also becomes pivotal at this juncture to ensure that 
members share a common vision regarding the team development (ibid.).
Numerous questions have remained unanswered regarding the best 
way to structure an entrepreneurial team so that it can contribute to 
the continued development of the venture’s project. In particular, the 
jury is still out regarding the appropriate balance to strike between the 
development of the team based on the integration of members from 
the environment (on the basis, for example, of membership linked to 
specific industrial, commercial or financial considerations) and the pro-
motion of collaborators within the venture who could become drivers 
of the entrepreneurial project given the possibility to nurture early on, 
and over time, their interest in this regard. However, as highlighted by 
Vyakarnam et al. (1999), the expansion of the entrepreneurial team over 
time leads to a distinction between the existing ‘inner team’ and the newer 
‘outer team’. This terminology illustrates widespread issues associated 
with new member integration within the founding group of the venture. 
These distinctions also stress this tension in that the development of an 
entrepreneurial team implies some degree of openness toward the envi-
ronment, which may threaten to alter the initial vision and ‘spirit’ of the 
venture. This latter element refers to the dual and complex tension facing 
the entrepreneurial team (Schjoedt, 2009), ensuring the management of 
the venture and also responding to business environment imperatives. 
On that front, an entrepreneurial team should maintain the appropriate 
mix of members to ensure the cohesion for internal management, while 
cultivating some degree of heterogeneity in order to respond to various 
expectations from the business environment.
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Research conducted in the field of team science has given consideration to 
measurement methods of team mental models, such as multidimensional 
scaling, concept mapping, card sorting, as distinct relevant methods to 
enquire about shared mental maps of team members (Mohammed et al., 
2000; Mohammed et al., 2010). In addition, the GCM approach, that 
forms the basis of the methodological framework employed to conduct 
this research, has been used in a study to help define the science of the field 
of team science (Falk-­Krzesinski et al., 2011). But for some reason, these 
contributions and methods do not appear to have penetrated much the 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­103
research agenda in entrepreneurship research in general, or in the study of 
entrepreneurial teams in particular.
Open-­ended survey response and qualitative content analyses research 
are research methods that are often employed as a means to conduct 
exploratory inductive research (Allard-­Poesi et al., 2003; Miles and 
Huberman, 2003). The GCM can be conceived as an alternative approach 
to conducting exploratory-­type research that ties together mixed method-­
based measurement approaches. Accordingly, GCM is seen as useful for 
the type of research questions raised in this chapter, that is, when there is 
no need to impose a priori a structured set of relationships amongst vari-
ables to a coding scheme, especially because theoretical propositions are 
lacking and there is a need to identify key underlying concepts to examine 
an organizational phenomenon (Jackson and Trochim, 2002). Hence, 
GCM uses complexity theory principles to explore emerging concepts from 
the ground up, without imposing category schemas potentially associated 
with a researcher’s underlying understanding, or biases, of the phenom-
ena. As such, GCM and its underlying multivariate statistical procedures 
allow for an examination of emerging concepts that are representative of 
a combination of both participants’ representations,1 and perceptions, 
garnered using both qualitative coding and quantitative measurements, 
hence the mixed method-­based approach. The GCM approach also differs 
from other concept mapping approaches, which make use of software to 
represent concepts and relationships from a ‘top-­down’ perspective, rather 
than engage a broad and diverse group of participants to develop a shared 
representation of concepts (Kane and Trochim, 2007).
Kane and Trochim (2007) recommend a number of research steps to 
conduct a GCM investigation. This process, as depicted in Figure 5.1, 
comprises six steps: (1) preparing for GCM; (2) generating the ideas; 
(3) structuring the statements; (4) analysing concept maps; (5) ­interpreting 
maps and results; and (6) answering questions. The execution of these 
steps to generate the GCM results presented below is consistent with the 
process proposed by Kane and Trochim (2007), yet some specific nuances 
are indicated when methodological choices were applied differently in 
context:
6
5
4
3
2
1
Answering
Questions
Interpreting
Maps and
Results
Analysing
Concept
Maps
Structuring
the
Statements
Generating
the Ideas
Preparing
for GCM
Figure 5.1  Group concept mapping overview
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

104    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Step 1	
Preparing for GCM included all research planning and logis-
tics with the project’s steering committee in preparation for a 
GCM enquiry or intervention. The steering committee included 
research team members and two main leaders of a professional 
association of young entrepreneurs. This participative research 
process took place at a local chapter of an international associa-
tion of young business leaders in France.
Step 2	
Generating the ideas involved 25 participants in a group discus-
sion where the objective was to generate ‘ideas’. These ideas were 
prompted by the sentence to be completed: ‘A specific action that 
must be undertaken by the entrepreneur to develop the entrepre-
neurial team is. . .’. This sentence encompassed the motivation of 
participants’ involvement in this research as a paramount busi-
ness management issue to them, as they have had many activi-
ties (e.g., conferences, training sessions) held over the preceding 
months on this and other closely related topics. The participants 
were recruited because of their significant membership as part of 
an entrepreneurial team. As such their experience on an entrepre-
neurial team is one that can be operationalized as: ‘two or more 
members associated, at some point in time, whether at the start-
­up or in later stages, and whose contributions and involvement, 
whether financial or in kind, are critical to the development of the 
business project’. This definition is consistent with recent ones 
found in the literature (Cooney, 2005; Klotz et al., 2014). Over 
the days that followed the group discussion, a list of approxi-
mately 150 collected ideas was established as statements, refined 
and pretested amongst researchers and other local consultants 
involved in entrepreneurial development. The final list of action 
statements was narrowed down to 102. An identifying number 
was attributed to each statement on the list to ensure traceability 
across all steps of the project’s data analysis process.
Step 3	
Structuring the statements included individual written data col-
lection from 30 participants (N = 30). The two main profiles 
defining entrepreneurial team membership included 11 partici-
pants in family businesses and 19 ones involved with associates in 
other types of small businesses. As part of data structuring, the 
statements on the list were used to collect qualitative and quan-
titative data from participants. First, to collect the qualitative 
data, each participant was asked, using specific instructions, to 
sort statements and form any number of piles to group ideas that 
appeared similar to them. After completing this work, each pile of 
ideas was recorded on a form using each statement’s ­identifying 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­105
number and given a label to complete the participants’ ‘sort 
data’. These data were used to generate the collective or group 
concept map representation of participants. Second, quantitative 
data were collected by asking each participant to rate each state-
ment on the list on two five-­point numerical Likert-­type scales. 
These formed the ‘rating data’ of the participants where the aim 
was to measure their perceptions of the ‘importance’ and of the 
‘feasibility’ of each statement on the list.
Step 4	
Analysing concept maps used the non-­metric multidimensional 
scaling (MDS) methods (Kruskal and Wish, 1978; Davidson, 
1983) that were applied to the sort data of statements formed into 
a 102 × 102 total similarity matrix. The MDS solution returns 
coordinates (x, y) through which each individual statement is 
represented as a ‘dot’ on a bidimensional Euclidian space, along 
with associated statistical indicators. Then, the results from the 
MDS solution were used to determine the number of clusters on 
a concept map, using agglomerative hierarchical cluster analy-
sis (Kane and Trochim, 2007). Mathematically, it consisted in 
generating cluster maps that included a series from 15 to five 
clusters of aggregated statements. This process needed to be sup-
plemented with some heuristics applied on the part of the steering 
committee members, to make a final determination regarding 
the number of clusters that produced the resulting clusters on 
the retained concept map. The process, as applied within this 
research, involved all members of the steering committee. The 
final suggestions were discussed and debated to determine con-
sensually the number of clusters that defined the ‘best’ concept 
mapping representation from the perspective of the participants, 
as a means to express the entrepreneurs’ voice, on actions to be 
undertaken to structure the entrepreneurial team. In the end, the 
determination of the number of concept clusters on the map was 
made using both mathematically based solutions combined with 
some heuristics based on human judgement. The quantitative 
scale ratings were processed to obtain perception measures of 
action importance and feasibility so that they could be juxta-
posed on the final concept map representation. These results are 
useful to determine the congruence regarding relative average 
importance and feasibility using pattern matches and t-­statistics 
to appraise differences between these ratings for each concept 
cluster represented.
Step 5	
This step’s objective, interpreting the maps and results, was to 
present and debrief the results with a group of participants from 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

106    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
the project. Hence, the research findings were presented during 
a facilitated knowledge transfer and uptake session with 20 par-
ticipants. Many types of visuals (including the cluster map, the 
importance and feasibility rating maps, and pattern matches, 
strategic ‘go-­zones’) were produced for result assessment and 
evaluation by participants. The labelling of each cluster on the 
map was also revised and finalized with the group.
In typical GCM projects, Step 6, answering questions, is dedicated to an 
action-­oriented purpose with regards to the results generated. However, 
the project’s purpose for this group of participants was the assessment of 
their own collective perspective on the set of actions they would undertake 
to develop the entrepreneurial team. At this step, the research team used 
the GCM results to further the analyses and answer the questions to arrive 
at practical implications regarding the entrepreneurial team development 
at the structuring phase.
RESULTS
The results provide a series of interesting findings and insights on the 
structuring of the entrepreneurial team from the perspective of entrepre-
neurs involved in this process. First, the stress value, a standard statistic in 
MDS, indicates how the processed data are an acceptable representation 
of the raw data provided by participants’ sort data. A lower stress value 
is preferred as it indicates higher results reliability. In a pooled study of 
internal validity and statistical reliability of 69 GCM projects, the mean 
stress value was found to be 0.285, with a 0.26−0.29, 95 per cent confi-
dence interval (Rosas and Kane, 2012). The stress value for this study is 
0.26 indicating a better than average goodness of fit.2
Second, as seen in Figure 5.2, eight clusters of action statements 
were identified to shed light on the entrepreneurial team growth at the 
structuring phase. This eight-­cluster solution was retained as it strikes a 
reasonable balance between most details and provides a nuanced, yet inter-
pretable, set of clusters. The results detailed below were obtained using 
input from the initial group discussion with participants, the point map, 
the ­eight-­cluster map solution, debriefing discussions with participants of 
the cluster ­solution with detailed examination of statements, and statistical 
inference to compare importance and feasibility ratings.
These clusters of action statements are distributed amongst two broad 
regions of meaning on the resulting concept map, representing the inter-
face between two distinct yet relevant types of ­environments for the 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­107
structural phase of the entrepreneurial team. First, the Organizational 
Environment includes five clusters: Entrepreneur’s Role, HR Management, 
Organizational Structuring, Team Cohesion and Spirit, and Team 
Leadership and Evolution. This environment corresponds to the suben-
vironment of the entrepreneurial team level as part of the broader task 
environment of the venture. According to Castrogiovanni (1991, p. 545) 
‘This subenvironment level is most relevant for studying the decision 
and actions taken by those subunits and their managers’. Second, the 
Resource Pool Environment comprises three clusters: Team Definition 
and Composition, Team Competences Development and Team-­Oriented 
Financial Capital Development. The Resource Pool Environment defines 
the most specific environmental level, such as stocks of specific resources, 
and so on. The evaluation of specific resource acquisition and use 
requires an environmental analysis at the resource pool environment level 
(Castrogiovanni, 1991).
Prior to providing a more detailed discussion of the resulting overall 
group concept map, a description of both quantitative and qualitative 
results is introduced for all clusters on the map. In Table 5.1, a short 
description for each cluster rated from the relatively most to the relatively 
Team
competences
development  
Organizational
structuring
Team
cohesion,
spirit 
Team-oriented
financial capital
development
Team
definition,
composition 
Team
leadership,
evolution  
Entrepreneur’s role
HR management 
Resource Pool
Environment
Organizational
Environment
Figure 5.2  Eight clusters map of action statements and two regions of 
meaning to structure the entrepreneurial team
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

108    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Table 5.1  Participants’ ratings of action statements to structure the 
entrepreneurial team
Clusters and Action Statements 
Importance 
Ratings
Feasibility 
Ratings
Entrepreneur’s Role (mean ratings: importance = 4,13;  
feasibility = 3,76 )
  To be able to decide
4.80
4.10
  To behave exemplary in order to serve as a role model  
  (e.g., attitude, punctuality, leadership)
4.70
4.13
  To be able to question oneself continuously
4.67
3.83
  To give one’s vision
4.53
4.03
Team Cohesion and Spirit (mean ratings: importance =  
4,09; feasibility = 3,37)
  To consider team members with respect 
  To listen to the needs of the team 
  To foster a cohesion among team members 
  To maintain the team spirit
4.70
4.47
4.27
4.17
4.60 
3.60
3.40
3.40
Organizational Structuring (mean ratings: importance =  
3,96; feasibility = 3,50)
  To determine the objective
4.50
4.03
  To structure the organization of the venture 
  To anticipate changes in the environment 
  To define targets for overall performance
4.23
4.24
4.17
3.70 
3.20
3.30
HR Management (mean ratings: importance = 3,93;  
feasibility = 3,42)
  To know how to delegate tasks
4.60
4.40
  To determine the roles and missions of each one
4.30
3.70
  To define the hierarchy
4.17
4.20
  To welcome feedback on the part of team members  
  toward management
3.93
3.37
Team Leadership and Evolution (mean ratings: 
importance = 3,93; feasibility = 3,23 )
  To identify the competences of team members
4.37
3.37
  To give an outlook regrding the development of the  
  venture
4.17
3.33
  To favour the adaptation of the team according to  
  changes in the environment
4.10
2.93
Team Competences Development (mean ratings:  
importance = 3,92; feasibility = 3,18)
  To select best suited teams members for the job  
  description
4.43
3.20
  To exclude team members who do not buy-­in the  
  venture’s project
4.37
2.97
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­109
least important one (on average) is given. In what follows, each cluster is 
detailed with either three or four actions statements that were assigned the 
highest importance (I) ratings along with their corresponding feasibility 
(F) ratings.
The cluster labelled Entrepreneur’s Role has ten statements related to 
actions an entrepreneur ought to take to structure an entrepreneurial 
team, such as to be able to decide, to serve as a role model, to question 
oneself constantly, and to give vision. The action statements of this cluster 
are associated with the notion of entrepreneurial capital (Erikson, 2002) 
and even more specifically with the dimension of entrepreneurial commit-
ment defined as the capacity to mobilize all that is required to ensure the 
venture’s success. They embody the core of what is required from entre-
preneurs with respect to the role that they perform. The average impor-
tance and feasibility ratings (I = 4.13; F = 3.76) for this cluster are both 
ranked the highest of all clusters on the map, and no statistical ­difference 
Table 5.1  (continued)
Clusters and Action Statements 
Importance 
Ratings
Feasibility 
Ratings
  To know how to surround oneself with  
  complementary skills
4.23
3.23
  To identify the competence threshold required for  
  team members to be promoted internally
4.17
3.27 
Team Definition and Composition (mean ratings:  
importance = 3,60; feasibility = 3,40)
  To adapt compensation to attract and retain team  
  members of strategic importance 
  To determine the team composition according to  
  objectives (e.g., growth, downsizing) 
  To determine the size of the team with respect to  
  objectives (e.g., growth, downsizing) 
  To be surrounded by specialists
4.30 
4.00 
3.97
3.97
3.60 
3.43
3.27
3.20
Team-­Oriented Financial Capital Development  
(mean ratings: importance = 2,89; feasibility = 2,62)
  To diversify or develop activities to insure the  
  continued existence of the venture
4.30
3.30
  To find new customers beforehand
4.07
3.33
  To reinvest all earnings in the business
3.20
3.23
  To integrate new team members likely to increase the  
  capital of the venture
2.60
2.90
Note:  Ratings are based on a five-­point Likert-­type scale.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

110    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
is reported between them, hence there appears some congruence between 
actions perceived as relatively more important versus relatively more 
feasible.
The cluster named Team Cohesion and Spirit includes 17 statements 
about priorities for entrepreneur-­team member interactions, such as for 
entrepreneurs to consider them with respect, to listen, to foster some cohe-
sion amongst them, and to maintain a team spirit. This set of action state-
ments refers to mediator effects associated with group-­based processes, 
leadership and personal commitment to the task (group task leadership) 
(Vyakarnam and Handelberg, 2005). They are related to interpersonal 
processes and cognitive states as identified by Klotz et al. (2014). They are 
also linked to the individual entrepreneurial orientation (Bolton, 2012), in 
particular, as to how the entrepreneur could encourage the development of 
proactiveness, risk-­taking and innovativeness, all being associated with the 
individual entrepreneurial orientation of collaborators. Although  these 
actions are relatively important, the lower feasibility ratings for this cluster 
also indicate some associated challenges. Indeed, as seen on the pattern 
matches of Figure 5.3, the difference between the average importance 
and feasibility ratings for this cluster is statistically significant (I = 4.09 > 
F = 3.37, p < 0.001).
The Organizational Structuring cluster included ten statements and is 
associated with actions related to organizational objectives, to the entre-
preneurial venture structuring, the anticipation of changes in the environ-
ment, and the definition of targets for overall performance. This set of 
statements also refers to the notion of entrepreneurial capital, although 
with the added dimension of entrepreneurial competence, that is, ‘the 
combined capacity to identify and pursue opportunities, and to obtain and 
coordinate resources’ (Erikson, 2002, p. 278). The support and insertion 
in entrepreneurs’ networks are likely to contribute to the improvement 
of entrepreneurial competences and to the feasibility of actions regarding 
the structuring of the organization in order to transform opportunities 
into concrete business achievements. While the importance ratings are 
relatively high for this cluster, the feasibility ratings are somewhat lower, 
in particular for statements related to performance goal setting and the 
anticipation of changes in the environment. The average importance and 
feasibility rating differences for the Organizational Structuring cluster is 
statistically significant (I = 3.96 > F = 3.50, p < 0.01). The entrepreneurs 
who participated in the GCM study are possibly less apt it appears to 
interface effectively with the resource pool at the structuring phase of the 
entrepreneurial team.
The HR Management cluster is the largest one with 19 action statements 
and it addresses the management of employees, collaborators and team 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­111
members. These action statements range from actions about task delega-
tion know-­how, roles and missions of each one, hierarchy definition, and 
ways to convey feedback on the part of HR toward management. These 
statements mostly refer to action process regarding goal-­oriented activities 
(Klotz et al., 2014) and to commitment processes in-­group task leadership 
(Vyakarnam and Handelberg, 2005). As seen on Figure 5.3, the average 
importance rating for this cluster is statistically different from the average 
feasibility rating (I = 3.93 > F = 3.42, p < 0.001), also indicating challenges 
associated with perceived obstacles when implementing these actions. This 
result is not too surprising given these entrepreneurs are at the structur-
ing phase of the entrepreneurial team. They raise questions on actions to 
take on, but required processes to execute are potentially underdeveloped, 
and implementation is more limited due to a lack of experience and a low 
process maturity.
Team Leadership and Evolution included only eight statements associ-
ated with the identification of competences required of team members, 
Entrepreneur’s role 
Team cohesion,
spirit*** 
Organizational
structuring*
3.50 
4.50 
2.50 
HR management***
Team leadership,
evolution** 
Team competences
development*** 
Team definition,
composition 
Team-oriented
financial capital
development   
Importance
Feasibility
Note:  *p < 0.01; **p < 0.005; ***p < 0.001; the ratings are based on a five-­point Likert-­
type scale.
Figure 5.3  Pattern matches of action clusters to structure the 
entrepreneurial team: importance versus feasibility ratings
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

112    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
provide an outlook regarding the development of the venture, and favour 
the adaptation of the team in relation to changes in the environment. 
These statements are related to leadership abilities required for structur-
ing the venture. They correspond to the notion of leadership (Vyakarnam 
et al., 1999), and to personal commitment processes in-­group task leader-
ship (Vyakarnam and Handelberg, 2005). The average importance rating 
for this cluster is statistically different from the average feasibility rating 
(I = 3.93 > F = 3.23, p < 0.005), as seen by the large absolute difference 
in Table 5.1 and in Figure 5.3. The relative importance is widely recog-
nized by participants, but the experience is still lacking implementation.
The 16 statements in the Team Competences Development cluster report 
on the values these entrepreneurs share and the norms they perceived 
need to be established regarding actions to ensure challenges of the job 
description can be met, the importance of project buy-­in, complementary 
skills and expectations regarding competence threshold required for team 
members. These statements refer to team size and composition to structure 
according to the phase in the life cycle of the venture (Fayolle, 2012), plus 
the search for complementarities and diversity amongst team members 
leading to the strengthening of development capabilities (Davidsson et al., 
2005). The average feasibility rating is statistically lower than the average 
importance rating (I = 3.92 > F = 3.18, p < 0.001), thereby indicating 
practical challenges and obstacles associated with the deployment of this 
action set on the ground.
Team Definition and Composition included 12 statements pertaining 
to issues of compensation for strategic importance of some of the team 
members, team composition and size, as well as the need for the entre-
preneur to be surrounded by specialists. While these statements are also 
oriented toward team size and composition, but with an emphasis on 
evolution and venture capability reinforcement (Davidsson et al., 2005), 
they are also cast in relation to transition processes (Klotz et al., 2014). 
There appears to be some congruence in these pattern matches between 
the average importance and feasibility ratings (I = 3.60; F = 3.40). This 
result may be an indication that these entrepreneurs have been successful 
in getting through the phase of launching the venture and have estab-
lished a network of peers and other relationships, allowing them to gain 
the confidence necessary to move to the structuring phase (Naffakhi and 
Bayad, 2008).
Finally, Team-­Oriented Financial Capital Development (ten statements) 
addresses how developing the entrepreneurial team is associated with 
the growth in capital development that encompasses activities aimed at 
fostering the continued existence of the venture, new customers identified 
as a prerequisite to financial backing, the reinvestment of all earnings, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­113
and finally the integration of team members likely to increase the finan-
cial capital development of the venture. This set of statements refer to 
the growth in social capital (Adler and Kwon, 2002) and some degree of 
openness on the resource pool environment, both for securing additional 
financial resources and greater visibility of the venture (for instance, with 
existing and potential clients and financial backers). It is noteworthy 
that the Team-­Oriented Financial Capital Development is undoubtedly 
considered both the least important and least feasible (I = 2.89; F = 2.62) 
cluster of action statements in comparison with all other clusters on the 
map. This result is also well illustrated in the pattern matches of Figure 5.3 
where action statements are rated as slightly more feasible on average as 
important. Team-­oriented financial capital development clearly is not a 
top priority in entrepreneurial team development at this juncture!
The next set of results shown in Figure 5.4 contrasts strategic action 
‘go-­zones’ for relative importance and feasibility. Following up upon 
the results for the Team-­Oriented Financial Capital Development cluster 
in zone 4 (the lower importance – lower feasibility zone), it is startlingly 
clear this is not where the priority lies for entrepreneurial team develop-
ment at the structuring phase. In sharp contrast, the Entrepreneur’s Role 
cluster, not surprisingly, is in zone 1 that delineates both the relatively 
1
2
3
Entrepreneur’s role
HR management
Organizational
structuring
Team cohesion, spirit
Team definition,
composition
Team leadership, evolution
Team competences
development
Team-oriented
capital development
Importance
Feasibility
3.88
3.34
2.80
2.80
3.80
4.80
4
Figure 5.4  Strategic action ‘go-­zones’ to structure the entrepreneurial 
team: importance versus feasibility ratings
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

114    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
high importance – relatively high feasibility action zone. Also in zone 1 are 
located Organizational Structuring, HR Management and Team Cohesion 
and Spirit. However, the nuance is that the average feasibility rating 
is much lower in a statistical sense, for these action clusters than the 
average importance rating, again an indication that the implementation 
of these actions may be lagging behind. The clusters Team Leadership 
and Evolution, and Team Competences Development are found in zone 2, 
the relatively high importance – low feasibility zone. Finally, the Team 
Definition and Composition is in the relatively low importance – high fea-
sibility area in zone 4.
DISCUSSION
The first contribution of this research concerns the complex and systemic 
representation of entrepreneurs, as exhibited in the eight-­cluster map 
solution underlying actions that need to be taken to structure an entre-
preneurial team. The complex and systemic character of this representa-
tion is achieved by virtue of the multivariate estimations of the MDS 
that distribute these actions over the bidimensional cluster map that were 
obtained from the analyses of the aggregated sort data of all participants 
(see Steps 3 and 4 of the methodological framework). The concept map, 
with its regions of meaning, illustrates the dual and complex nature of the 
venture’s entrepreneurial development that is based on the resource pool 
available in the environment while simultaneously managing the organi-
zation (Schjoedt, 2009). Therefore, either as an individual or as part of a 
team, a ‘young’ entrepreneur must face numerous conflicting challenges 
associated with the emerging growth phase of the venture. The systemic 
nature of the collective representation is revealed by the interrelation-
ships between the clusters on the map. The complexity of the process is 
highlighted in this collective representation as it encompasses the devel-
opment of various forms of capital (whether financial, social, human or 
entrepreneurial).
The development of the team based on the Organizational Environment 
region of meaning appears to be a first step toward responding to emerging 
growth challenges. The map shows the wide scope of the entrepreneurial 
team concept, a finding that is consistent with the broad entrepreneurial 
team definition used as part of this study (Cooney, 2005; Klotz et al., 
2014). Its expansion entails bolstering the development of a venture based 
on nurtured drivers or champions from within the organization. An 
important concern also for structuring the team is the manner by which 
the entrepreneurial capital can be developed within the venture (Erikson, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­115
2002) and the individual entrepreneurial orientation taken with collabora-
tors (Bolton, 2012). The ability of an entrepreneur to take on its role and 
to structure the organization in order to transform opportunities into 
business success relates back to the paramount notion of action process as 
suggested by Klotz et al. (2014). This action consists of managing human 
resources, overseeing team cohesion, as well as taking on the role of leader, 
all of fundamental importance. The cluster at the centre on the concept 
map, HR Management for team-­members, collaborators and employees 
can be considered as critical, both conceptually and in context. From a 
systemic perspective, this cluster is a central attractor in the dynamic and 
complexity cycle of the overall map (if one disregards the cluster Team-­
Oriented Financial Capital Development situated far out at the map’s 
outskirts in the Resource Pool Environment). This result was reinforced 
by both low importance and feasibility ratings for the pattern-­matches 
(Figure 5.3) and strategic ‘go-­zones’ (Figure 5.4) as these actions are less 
‘central’ to the issue of the team structuring from the perspective of the 
entrepreneurs. By contrast, the development of an entrepreneurial team 
based on the Resource Pool Environment is an alternative (yet a comple-
mentary) way to meet growth challenges. Such environmental inputs into 
the entrepreneurial venture concern the development of both the financial 
and the social capital of the venture, due for instance to the recruitment 
of new collaborators to fill a gap in connection with the strategic intent 
regarding the scope of the team.
The second contribution of the research findings highlights some 
trade-­offs entrepreneurs must face regarding action priorities (given their 
feasibility) about environmental versus organizational matters during the 
structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team. The results of the study 
suggest that organizational team structuring actions are dominant during 
the emerging growth phase, as shown by the importance ratings associated 
with the five clusters of the Organizational Environment region of meaning 
relative to the ones found in the Resource Pool Environment. This result 
is interesting to the extent that the literature has thus far brought much 
more attention to the team development from the region of meaning of 
the Resource Pool Environment, in particular as it relates to the integra-
tion of new members who carry with them knowledge, competences and 
financial capital. The set of actions required in these clusters within the 
Organizational Environment region of meaning refers mostly to mediator 
effects identified by Vyakarnam and Handelberg (2005): group process, 
personal task leadership and group task leadership. The personal task 
leadership performed as a collaborator or as an entrepreneur consists in 
sharing with collaborators the entrepreneur’s own engagement, and thus, 
in identifying drivers and champions within the organization to bring 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

116    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
the venture to the next phase. However, at that next development phase, 
actions to be implemented to develop the team (based on actions regarding 
the Resource Pool Environment region of meaning) are expected to become 
relatively more important than what is currently revealed by the findings 
that have focused on the structuring phase. This reflects the fact that the 
social capital is fostered more prevalently as the team matures (Naffakhi 
and Bayad, 2008). Indeed, at the structuring phase of the team develop-
ment, the entrepreneur or the team members are relatively more absorbed 
by tasks oriented toward building the venture’s entrepreneurial project, 
organizational structuring and strategic development. Nevertheless, the 
team development based on actions oriented toward the Resource Pool 
Environment would probably help boost growth at this juncture. The 
entrepreneurial team must simultaneously maintain a certain cohesion 
and heterogeneity, while attempting to respond adequately to pressures 
and expectations from the business environment (Schjoedt, 2009). Perhaps 
this reluctance or hesitation to evolve the entrepreneurial team (which may 
require turning to the Resource Pool Environment) can be explained by the 
uneasiness of the founding ‘inner team’ to losing the original vision and 
entrepreneurial ‘spirit’ of the venture, or because of the challenges associ-
ated with developing a shared vision with potential newer ‘outer team’ 
members (Vyakarnam et al., 1999).
Overall, the focus on organizational matters during reflections on the 
structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team appears as a double-­edged 
sword and highlights a key balancing act regarding the venture’s imminent 
growth phase. On the one hand, the focus on organizational matters is 
somewhat justified when the venture is at the outset of the growth phase, 
but on the other hand, it can also hinder or delay the capability building 
required to fully take advantage of it.
CONCLUSION
The research findings, although exploratory in nature, are quite enlighten-
ing as they provide a unique perspective from a group of entrepreneurs 
on actions to be undertaken on structuring an entrepreneurial team. The 
results are also interesting because they enrich previous work and existing 
knowledge on team development at the structuring phase (Vyakarnam 
et  al., 1999; Vyakarnam and Handelberg, 2005; Naffakhi and Bayad, 
2008). These findings additionally contribute to this perspective using a 
primary data collection process.
Two main practical upshots are noteworthy from this work. First, the 
GCM results provide a basis for entrepreneurs, peers, support providers, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­117
policy-­makers and scholars to determine or to engage in conversations 
regarding their next set of actions when undertaking to develop an entre-
preneurial team. In GCM, concept clusters are considered as interacting 
agents (Trochim and Cabrera, 2005), and therefore the eight-­cluster map 
can generate 56 possible interacting 2-­tuple sets of actions that emerge in 
a cohesive and interacting system. Anyone interested can study the map’s 
clusters, its contents, and appraise the extent to which they constitute 
a benchmark in a list of priorities for their own future course of action. 
As other clusters interact in multiple complex ways on the map, all these 
actions converge onto the central cluster where team structuring gravitates 
around the development of the venture based on the Entrepreneur’s Role. 
In turn, these actions influence new interactions and feedback on the 
external rim formed by the other clusters on the map. Insights from these 
can be used to set up role-­play simulation in entrepreneurship training and 
in strategic thinking. As a result, future training, curriculum development, 
and research on entrepreneurial team development can be proposed as the 
results also indicate areas that require further attention.
Second, the GCM process provides some shared indications regarding 
scope, breadth and depth of action areas underlying entrepreneurial team 
development. The group’s shared conceptual framework obtained from 
these analyses can be translated to suggest a set of best-­practice proposi-
tions, as revealed by the two contributions highlighted in the previous 
section. The GCM process and its associated metrics can thus be used to 
prompt questions, for instance about how best practices from a business 
management perspective would become manifest in the team structuring 
development. Additionally, the set of results from GCM-­based research, 
representations and perception measures, can be helpful in providing 
‘why’ and ‘how’ answers to questions about these best practices. The inter-
est for these follow-­up activities originates from the fact that the research 
is mostly informed by the entrepreneurs’ perspectives that are embed-
ded in their representation and perceptions, both of which are driven by 
experience.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to express their thanks and gratitude to all partici-
pants who were members of a local chapter of the international association 
of young business leaders in France. In particular, these young entrepre-
neurs have given roughly six hours of their time each to participate in a 
group discussion, to ‘play cards’ with action statements to be rated, and 
then attended and actively engaged in a results debriefing session. Two of 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

118    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
their local leaders were critical in identifying the ­‘entrepreneurial team’ 
as the utmost key issue that needed further investigation from the field, 
and to provide the required leadership to mobilize their membership 
to get involved in this study. The authors are also indebted to all col-
leagues for relevant comments at the 1st Developmental Workshop on 
Entrepreneurial Teams and Collective Entrepreneurship Research held 
at Groupe ESC Troyes (Champagne School of Management), Troyes, 
France on 24 June 2014. Special thanks are offered to Cyrine and Tom for 
their encouragement to pursue the preparation of this chapter as well as 
for their insightful advice and detailed feedback regarding the direction it 
should take. Any remaining insufficiency regarding results presented is the 
sole responsibility of the authors.
NOTES
1.	 A mental or cognitive representation is the foundation of the mental structure of indi-
viduals that makes it possible to process information relative to their own experience 
(Gallina, 2006). The translation of such a mental representation can be an artefact, that 
is, a model, a graphical model, an image, a mathematical equation, a system (Trochim 
and Cabrera, 2005; Danks, 2014) of a cognitive object not directly observable. As argued 
by many from various perspectives (e.g., Schmitt, 2004; Filion, 2008; Danks, 2014), these 
methods, graphical models and tools can be used to organize or plan actions by individu-
als and groups (Denis, 1989; Mannoni, 1998), by contributing to information appro-
priation. The types of visuals and spatial model representations produced by the GCM 
approach constitute in essence a collective representation of individual representations.
2.	 A series of internal validity and statistical reliability estimates were carried out on both 
the sort and the rating data and all are faring exceedingly well relative to results obtained 
in a pooled study assessing the reliability and validity of GCM-­based estimates and 
measures (Rosas and Kane, 2012).
REFERENCES
Adler, P.S. and S.W. Kwon (2002), ‘Social capital: Prospects for a new concept’, Academy of 
Management Review, 27 (1), 17–40.
Aldrich, H. and C. Zimmer (1986), ‘Entrepreneurship through social networks’, in 
D.L. Sexton and R.W. Smilor (eds), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship, Cambridge, 
MA: Ballinger, pp. 2–23.
Allard-­Poesi, F., C. Drucker-­Godard and S. Ehlinger (2003), ‘Analyses de représenta-
tion et de discours’ [Analyses of representation and discourse], in R.-­A. Thiétart (ed.), 
Méthodes de recherche en management, 2nd edition, Paris: Dunod, pp. 449–75.
Amason, A.C., R.C. Shrader and G.H. Tompson (2006), ‘Newness and novelty: Relating 
top management team composition to new venture performance’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 21 (1), 125–48.
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C. (2012), ‘Essai de modélisation de la constitution des équipes ­entrepreneuriales’ 
[Essay on modelling the composition of entrepreneurial teams], Vie & Science des Entreprises, 
193 (1), 11–37.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

The structuring phase of the entrepreneurial team    ­119
Bolton, D.L. (2012), ‘Individual entrepreneurial orientation: Further investigation of a meas-
urement’, Academy of Entrepreneurship Journal, 18 (1), 91–8.
Borchert, P.S., D.P. Forbes, H.J. Sapienza and M.E. Zellmer-­Bruhn (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial 
team formation: An exploration of new member addition’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 30 (2), 225–48.
Castrogiovanni, G. (1991), ‘Environmental munificence: A theoretical assessment’, Academy 
of Management Review, 16 (3), 542–65.
Cloutier, L.M., S. Cueille and G. Recasens (2013), ‘Facteurs structurants et leviers d’un 
développement pérenne de la jeune entreprise dans un dispositif d’accompagnement’ 
[Structural factors and levers of the sustainable development of the young enterprise in an 
entrepreneurial support structure], Question(s) de Management, 1 (2), 41–54.
Cloutier, L.M., S. Cueille and G. Recasens (2014), ‘Mise à l’épreuve de la cartographie 
des concepts comme méthode intégrative d’identification et d’analyse d’un écosystème 
entrepreneurial’ [An evaluation of group concept mapping as an integrative method to 
identify and analyse an entrepreneurial ecosystem], Revue Internationale PME, 27 (3), 
15–49.
Cooney, T.M. (2005), ‘What is an entrepreneurial team?’, International Small Business 
Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Danks, D. (2014), Unifying the Mind: Cognitive Representations as Graphical Models, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davidson, M.L. (1983), Multidimensional Scaling, New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Davidsson, P., L. Achtenhagen and L. Naldi (2005), ‘Research on small firms growth: 
A review’, in Proceedings of the European Institute of Small Business, p. 27.
Denis, M. (1989), Image et cognition [Image and cognition], Paris, France, PUF.
Ensley, M.D. and K.M. Hmieleski (2005), ‘A comparative study of new venture top man-
agement team composition, dynamics and performance between university-­based and 
independent startups’, Research Policy, 34 (7), 1091–105.
Ensley, M.D., A.W. Pearson and A.C. Amason (2002), ‘Understanding the dynamics of 
new venture top management teams: Cohesion, conflict, and new venture performance’, 
Journal of Business Venturing, 17 (4), 365–86.
Erikson, T. (2002), ‘Entrepreneurial capital: The emerging venture’s most important asset 
and competitive advantage’, Journal of Business Venturing, 17 (3), 275–90.
Falk-­Krzesinski, H.J., N. Contractor and S.M. Fiore et al. (2011), ‘Mapping a research 
agenda for the science of team science’, Research Evaluation, 20 (2), 145–58.
Fayolle, A. (2012), Entrepreneuriat: Apprendre à Apprendre [Entrepreneurship: Learning 
how to learn], 2nd edition, Paris: Dunod.
Filion, L.-­J. (2008), ‘Les représentations entrepreneuriales: Un champ d’études en ­émergence’ 
[Entrepreneurial representations: An emerging research field], Revue Internationale de 
Psychologie, 14 (32), 13–43.
Gallina, J.-­M. (2006), Les représentations mentales [Mental representations], Paris: Dunod.
Greiner, L.E. (1972), ‘Evolution and revolution as organizations grow’, Harvard Business 
Review, 50 (4), 37–46.
Hoy, F. (2006), ‘The complicating factor of life cycles in corporate venturing’, Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 30 (6), 831–6.
Jackson, K.M. and W.M.K. Trochim (2002), ‘Concept mapping as an alternative approach 
for the analysis of open-­ended survey responses’, Organizational Research Methods, 5 (4), 
307–36.
Kamm, J.B., J.C. Shuman, J.A. Seeger and A.J. Nurick (1990), ‘Entrepreneurial teams in 
new venture creation: A research agenda’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14 (4), 
7–17.
Kane, M. and W.M.K. Trochim (2007), Concept Mapping for Planning and Evaluation, 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Klotz, A.C., K.M. Hmieleski, B.H. Bradley and L.W. Busenitz (2014), ‘New venture teams: 
A review of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 
40 (1), 226–55.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

120    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Kruskal, J.B. and M. Wish (1978), Multidimensional Scaling, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage 
Publications.
Mannoni, P. (1998), Les représentations sociales [Social representations], Paris, France, PUF.
Miles, M.B. and A.M. Huberman (2003), Analyse des données qualitatives [Qualitative data 
analysis], 2nd edition, Paris: De Boeck.
Mohammed, S., L. Ferzandi and K. Hamilton (2010), ‘Metaphor no more: A 15-­year review 
of the team mental model construct’, Journal of Management, 36 (4), 876–910.
Mohammed, S., R. Klimoski and J.R. Rentsch (2000), ‘The measurement of team mental 
models: We have no shared schema’, Organizational Research Methods, 3 (2), 123–65.
Naffakhi, H. and M. Bayad (2008), ‘Les équipes entrepreneuriales: une opportunité pour la 
réussite du projet entrepreneurial’ [Entrepreneurial teams: An opportunity for the success 
of the entrepreneurial project], in C. Schmitt (ed.), Regards sur l’Évolution des Pratiques 
Entrepreneuriales, Québec, QC: Presses de l’Université du Québec, pp. 123–39.
Rosas, S.R. (2016), ‘Group concept mapping methodology: Toward an epistemology of 
group conceptualization, complexity, and emergence’, Quality and Quantity, doi: 10.1007/
s11135-­016-­0340-­3.
Rosas, S.R. and M. Kane (2012), ‘Quality and rigor in the concept mapping methodology: A 
pooled study analysis’, Evaluation and Program Planning, 35 (2), 236–45.
Schjoedt, L. (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial teams: Definition and determinants’, Management 
Research Review, 32 (6), 513–24.
Schmitt, C. (2004), ‘Pour une approche dialectique de la relation entre recherche et pra-
tique entrepreneuriales: Une relation en quête de sens’ [For a dialectical approach to the 
relationship between entrepreneurial research and practice: A relationship in search of 
meaning], Revue Internationale PME, 17 (3–4), 43–68.
Séville, M. and P. Wirtz (2010), ‘Caractéristiques et dynamique de l’équipe dirigeante dans 
une jeune entreprise en hyper croissance’ [Characteristics and dynamics of the manage-
ment team in a young company in hyper growth], Revue Internationale PME, 23 (3–4), 
43–70.
Stigliani, I. and D. Ravasi (2012), ‘Organizing thoughts and connecting brains: Material 
practices and the transition from individual to group-­level prospective sensemaking’, 
Academy of Management Journal, 55 (5), 1232–59.
Tarakci, M., N.F. Ates and J.P. Porck et al. (2014), ‘Strategic consensus mapping: A 
new method for testing and visualizing strategic consensus within and between teams’, 
Strategic Management Journal, 35 (7), 1053–69.
Trochim, W.M.K. and D. Cabrera (2005). ‘The complexity of concept mapping’, Emergence: 
Complexity and Organization, 7 (1), 11–22.
Vyakarnam, S. and J. Handelberg (2005), ‘Four themes of the impact of management teams 
on organizational performance: Implications for future research of entrepreneurial teams’, 
International Small Business Journal, 23 (3), 236–56.
Vyakarnam, S., R. Jacobs and J. Handelberg (1999), ‘Exploring the formation of entrepre-
neurial teams: The key to rapid growth business?’, Journal of Small Business and Enterprise 
Development, 8 (2), 153–65.
Wright, M. and I. Stigliani (2012), ‘Entrepreneurship and growth’, International Small 
Business Journal, 31 (1), 3–22.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

121
6.  Which deep-­level diversity compositions 
of new venture teams lead to success or 
failure?
Stephanie Schoss, René Mauer and 
Malte Brettel
INTRODUCTION
Over the past 20 years management and entrepreneurship researchers have 
been engaged in a contentious discussion about the benefits of increased 
sources of diversity relative to team effectiveness and firm performance. 
The upper echelon theory (Hambrick and Mason, 1984) suggests that firm 
performance is a reflection of the characteristics and actions of a firm’s 
top management team. While this framework is still the most referenced 
theory in this field advocating diversity, research studies have not yet been 
able to arrive at a clear-­cut answer. Diversity research is not only of inter-
est to academia given that the business world itself has also invested in this 
area of research as companies strive to improve team effectiveness. Similar 
to established corporate organizations, entrepreneurs and venture capital-
ists share the belief that an entrepreneurial team and its composition (in 
terms of the right mix of knowledge, skills, abilities, and personalities) is 
of utmost importance for new venture performance. Research has also 
extended the top management team concept to the field of entrepreneur-
ship, assuming that new ventures – just like established corporations – are 
also managed in a shared effort (Gartner et al., 1994). However, when it 
comes to evaluating the importance of teams in relation to organizational 
success, the differences in context (entrepreneurial versus corporate) play 
a major role. Top management teams, for example, often rely on specific 
functional titles and roles (Sanders and Carpenter, 1998), whereas new 
venture teams often lack clear titles. Instead, their members frequently 
assume leadership roles across a wide range of business areas. Fewer sub-
stitutes and blockers exist on the new venture leadership level and hence 
managerial discretion leaves a greater imprint on how the organization 
develops over time (Klotz et al., 2014). Thus, in the context of entrepre-
neurship, teams have an even more direct effect on firm success.
This chapter adopts the term new venture team (NVT) as defined by 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

122    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Klotz et al. (2014, p. 227) in their detailed review on new venture teams, 
namely that a new venture team is a: ‘group of individuals that is chiefly 
responsible for the strategic decision-­making and ongoing operations of a 
new venture. In doing so, NVTs include all team members that actively par-
ticipate in both the development and the implementation of the evolving 
strategy of new ventures’. Research on personality-­related characteristics 
of entrepreneurs has been a field of interest for over 20 years and, despite 
being criticized for various reasons, it is now experiencing a strong renais-
sance. Klotz et al. (2014) suggest that future research should advance the 
heterogeneity discussion revolving around new venture teams by including 
more dispositional variables (e.g., cognitions, motivations, emotions) in 
addition to demographic data. Until now little insight has been gained into 
which combination of deep-­level characteristics in a venture team is most 
important for venture success; hence, Klotz et al. (2014) explicitly propose 
focusing on the variables that have already been found to be relevant to 
the task of entrepreneurship on the individual level and then taking these 
to the team level. Furthermore, new research methods, more complex 
models, and better analysis tools were (and will be) needed to better inves-
tigate deep-­level characteristics (as opposed to surface-­level criteria like 
age or gender) and their impact on new venture success. Finally, research 
has suggested that researchers should use more primary data instead of 
publicly available data to gain a better understanding of the effectiveness 
of NVTs. Just like researchers, venture capitalists also identify personal 
characteristics as the dominant reason for success or failure and so wish to 
have a greater awareness of how they influence team performance (Smith 
and Smith, 2000; Sexton, 2001). Given such a background, this study 
aims to contribute to a better understanding of the relationship between 
the deep-­level diversity configuration of a team and new venture success. 
The cluster analysis applied herein will shed more light on the following 
research questions:
Q1  Should all entrepreneurship-­matched traits found in literature ideally 
be combined in one person (like a dispositional super-­entrepreneur) or are 
different and distinctive team member types required to cover the whole set 
of favorable variables in the best possible way?
Q2  Do successful and unsuccessful teams show a certain pattern in their 
deep-­level diversity configuration?
Q3  Which individual traits are of the highest significance for successful 
teams compared to unsuccessful teams?
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­123
LITERATURE REVIEW
The latest review on venture teams by Klotz et al. (2014) stimulates the 
discussion that, according to the resourced-­based view, new venture teams 
with more resources (these may be financial, human, social, or psycho-
logical assets) should perform better than those with fewer resources. 
However, given that most entrepreneurs face initial and ongoing resource 
constraints, the following questions remain in the context of personality 
resources and diversity: ‘Should priority be given to certain characteristics 
when forming NVTs [new venture teams]? Is it better to have extroverted 
team members or agreeable ones and in what combination?’ (Klotz et al., 
2014, p. 247). Klotz et al. (2014) further conclude that there is still limited 
knowledge regarding the trade-­offs to be made between character traits 
when forming new venture teams because so far only few research efforts 
directly compare different deep-­level characteristics.
Deep-­level Diversity in Team Research
Initially, research into diversity was mainly focused on the so-­called 
surface-­level diversity factors such as age, gender and ethnicity, whereas 
deep-­level factors (including differences in attitudes, personality, and 
values) have only gained more attention over the last decade (Barrick 
et al., 1998; Harrison et al., 2002; Mohammed and Angell, 2004). Empirical 
research even suggests that surface-­level differences become less important 
while deep-­level features become more important as groups continue to 
interact over time (Harrison et al., 1998, 2002). However, recent studies 
on the relationship between deep-­level diversity in teams and performance 
have started to dig deeper into the causality between diversity and perfor-
mance as its complexity is being increasingly recognized (Albright et al., 
1988; Neuman et al., 1999; Van Vianen and De Dreu, 2001; Mohammed 
and Angell, 2004; Bell, 2007). One of the reasons for this is that deep-­level 
diversity studies are often primarily restricted to measuring personality 
conceptualized according to the general five-­factor model (McCrae and 
Costa, 1987; see also meta-­analysis by Bell, 2007). More and more studies 
repeatedly call for expanding the range of diversity dimensions to include 
behavioral styles, values, motives, and beliefs, which cannot simply be 
captured by the five-­factor model (Mohammed and Angell, 2003; Klotz 
et al., 2014). Furthermore, even though personality differences of team 
players have been studied quite well in general, applying them to the 
context of new venture teams and success is a much less well-­developed 
approach and deserves deeper investigation.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

124    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Entrepreneurship-­specific Traits
Early entrepreneurship research focused on finding traits and objectives 
particular to successful entrepreneurs (Brockhaus, 1980). For example, 
Johnson (1990) concluded in his meta-­analysis that ‘need for ­achievement’ 
was the most significant trait predictor of new venture performance; 
however, he found that less than 7 percent of the variance in new venture 
performance is explained by this motive. Gartner (1989) and Aldrich 
(1999) even labeled it a dead-­end strategy to study the personal charac-
teristics of entrepreneurs. Rauch and Frese (2007) systematically ana-
lyzed the field and reported in their meta-­analysis that the relationship 
between personality traits and entrepreneurial behavior was actually still 
frequently and controversially addressed in entrepreneurship research for 
a good reason. While many studies indeed revealed a strong relationship 
between personality traits and both venture creation and success (Chell 
et al., 1991; Cooper and Gimeno-­Gascon, 1992; Rauch and Frese, 2000), 
other studies found no such relationship (Brockhaus and Horwitz, 1986; 
Gartner, 1989; Low and MacMillan, 1988). However, along with Rauch 
and Frese (2007), many other meta-­analyses do provide positive evidence 
for the predictive validity of personality traits in entrepreneurial behavior 
and success (Stewart and Roth, 2001, 2004; Mohammed and Angell, 2003; 
Collins et al., 2004; Zhao and Seibert, 2006; Bell, 2007; Rauch and Frese, 
2007; De Jong et al., 2013).
This study draws both on highly significant entrepreneurship-­specific 
traits discussed in literature and on the current state of research into 
deep-­level diversity in teams, and studies these traits in the context of new 
ventures. The relevant variables used in this study were selected based on 
an extensive literature analysis and subsequently evaluated by an expert 
group, as described in the methodology section.
METHODOLOGY
The aim of this study is to explore in how far the dispositional personality-­
related characteristics of the founding team members can serve as leading 
indicators of new venture success. Owing to the development of more 
complex models and better analysis tools, the research community is again 
more and more interested in dispositional deep-­level characteristics (as 
opposed to surface-­level criteria like age or gender) and their impact on 
new venture success (Busenitz and Barney, 1997; Baron, 1998; Mitchell 
et al., 2000; Baum et al., 2001; Baron and Hannan, 2002; Baum and Locke, 
2004; Ensley et al., 2006; Klotz et al., 2014). This study applies the method 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­125
of cluster analysis to develop a better understanding of which personal-
ity characteristics are most relevant to team success and, especially, in 
what configuration.
Sample
Data were collected using a start-­up simulation (www.topsim.com) that 
was conducted with undergraduate students at the University of Aachen 
in 2008 and 2009. The initial sample of 1200 students with backgrounds 
in business and engineering participated in the experiment. Of these 1200 
students, 29.1 percent of the participants were female and 70.9 percent 
were male. The research design followed the suggestions for simulation 
methods by Davis et al. (2007). Students were assigned to teams of similar 
sizes, and it was ensured that business and engineering backgrounds 
were allocated evenly. Several students in the initial sample failed certain 
selection criteria and had to be eliminated from the study and so the final 
sample consisted of 1166 students who were grouped into 235 teams 
included in the research. Team sizes ranged from two to five members, 
with a mean team size of 4.4. Five teams played against each other in one 
market, all with the same starting basis. They were given the task to start 
a new venture and were responsible for planning and managing their busi-
nesses in a simulated competitive environment. The participants filled out 
a personality questionnaire (covering the 16 traits presented in Box 6.1) 
before they started working on their assignment. Teams were included 
only if the personality questionnaire was filled out by all or by all minus 
one team member.
Research Setting
Studying entrepreneurial teams always brings with it a trade-­off between 
analyzing real teams versus proxy teams. Real teams – though most 
­desirable – are usually hard to investigate and difficult to compare 
due to the impact of external influencing factors and the dissimilar-
ity of the tasks; furthermore, there is also the problem of survivorship 
bias. Proxy teams present the researcher with the problem of inherent 
haziness on many dimensions because as in the context of this study, non-­
entrepreneurs are used to study entrepreneurial characteristics. Despite 
these limitations, the authors decided to draw on a sample of university 
students who had voluntarily enrolled in an entrepreneurship class, 
which might, at least, reflect above-­average entrepreneurial intentions. 
This setting allows the researchers to control for the task type performed 
and the effects induced by it. The comparably large number of 235 teams 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

126    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
offers the necessary variety of different team configurations for our 
investigation. External validity is another benefit of the sample as it helps 
avoid biases that might result from survival (that is, the discontinuation 
of teams) or from the incomparability of the task performed or from a 
performance evaluation at a given time. Hence, for the purpose of this 
analysis, it seemed to be appropriate to apply this experimental research 
design and to involve university students who performed an identical task 
and could thus clearly be distinguished into successful and unsuccessful 
teams. This setting allowed the researchers to study in detail the relevant 
deep-­level diversity differences between successful (profit-­making) and 
unsuccessful (loss-­making) teams.
Deep-­level Variables and Measurement Scales
The participants filled out a personality questionnaire covering 16 traits 
and each trait was measured by three to four positively formulated items 
(53 indicators in total). These were scored on a five-­point Likert scale, with 
1 representing the absence of a specific trait in a particular person and 
5 representing a very strong presence of the specific trait. Each trait vari-
able was then derived by calculating the means of its respective items. The 
higher a team member’s score on such a variable, the more pronounced 
the specific trait was in that person. Following Churchill’s (1979) recom-
mendation, well-­established existing scales were used to operationalize 
the entrepreneurial trait constructs as well as the team-­related constructs. 
However, it was necessary to adjust and modify the existing scales. To 
ensure content validity of the measurement instruments, the practical rel-
evance and the wording of each item were discussed in expert interviews 
with several researchers and practitioners. Additionally, a pretest with 
48 students in an entrepreneurial project class was conducted to guarantee 
the quality of the constructs (Bohrnstedt, 1970). Regarding the measure-
ment specification, only reflective indicator constructs were used (Bollen 
and Rochard, 1991). By following this process, suitable methods for the 
subsequent data analyses were determined, as well as the appropriate cri-
teria for reliability and validity testing (Diamantopoulos and Winklhofer, 
2001). Apart from the independent variables, each team produced a profit 
or loss figure as a result of how they managed their new venture and this 
figure served as the dependent variable. The profit or loss data are consid-
ered a proxy measure of team success or failure.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­127
Selection of Variables
In a two-­step process, 16 specific task-­ and team-­matched variables were 
finally selected for inclusion: first, an extensive literature review served to 
identify the universe of potential variables (Watson et al., 1995; Cooper 
and Daily, 1997; Ensley, 1997; Lechler, 2001; Rauch and Frese, 2007; 
Cardon and Stevens, 2009; Chen et al., 2009); the seminal meta-­analysis by 
Rauch and Frese (2007) was then drawn on to further qualify the variables. 
Over 50 variables were preselected in this first process step. In a second 
step they were validated by a group of 15 experts, among them success-
ful ­entrepreneurs (who have proven their success with an exit or constant 
­valuation – for example, the two founders of Scout24), reputable venture 
capitalists (who have been in business for over ten years and have invested 
more than US$100 million in entrepreneurial ventures – for example, 
the founders of Wellington Partners, Brains to Venture and Venture 
Incubator) and experienced entrepreneurship professors. The methodolog-
ical approach of coding the traits according to their relevance followed the 
procedure that Rauch and Frese (2007) employed for their expert group.
Three criteria for final inclusion in this study were applied: first, 
literature had to provide strong support for the relevance of the vari-
ables (e.g., need for achievement, assertiveness). Second, there had to be 
­previous seminal works calling for further research into these ­variables – 
for example, Rauch and Frese (2007) suggested further analysis of 
empathy, passion, and learning orientation. The third criterion required 
the expert group to be of the opinion that the variables qualified as 
relevant (e.g.,  communication, conflict management abilities). Box 6.1 
presents the list of variables that were found to be relevant for the task of 
entrepreneurship and team work.
BOX 6.1  16 PERSONALITY-­RELATED CHARACTERISTICS 
SELECTED BY LITERATURE REVIEW AND EXPERT 
ANALYSIS
Active learning
Assertiveness
Communication
Conflict management
Emotional stability
Empathy
Generalized self-­efficacy
Learning orientation
Locus of control
Metacognition
Need for achievement
Passion for work
Proactive personality
Sociability
Tenacity
Willingness for leadership
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

128    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Cluster Analysis Method
With traditional methods (e.g., the team mean perspective where 
individual-­level data are simply aggregated to a team mean score) it is 
difficult to operationalize and value precisely the impact of individual-­
level traits on a team or even company level. This approach is imprecise 
because it does not reveal how individual traits (e.g., assertiveness) 
should be distributed across team members to achieve a desirable 
outcome. Thus, this method provides no indication whether every team 
member should ideally have an equally high level of a particular trait 
or whether it would be preferable if one member had an extremely 
high level, with the particular trait being less pronounced in other team 
members. Another drawback of a simple team mean calculation is that 
it does not reveal whether the relevant traits in a successful team should 
preferably exist in one person alone or be distributed among different 
members. Basically, the team mean perspective merely provides infor-
mation on which desirable traits should best be present within a team, 
but it does not reveal the ideal distribution and configuration of such 
traits. To counter these general shortcomings, this study uses cluster 
analysis to shed more light on the question of the ideal distribution of 
traits among team members in successful versus unsuccessful teams. On 
the basis of multivariate data, a cluster analysis provides a statistical 
method for revealing differences and similarities among individuals or 
groups (Overall and Klett, 1972). The authors employed a hierarchi-
cal clustering technique using Ward’s method (Ward, 1963) as well as 
a subsequent two-­step cluster analysis. The latter can include both the 
discrete (personality variables) and the continuous variables (profit and 
loss) in one step and suggests clusters according to their relative signifi-
cance (SPSS Inc., 2001).
The hierarchical cluster analysis was performed according to the pro-
cedural recommendations of Hair and Black (2000). The personality trait 
scores were standardized and a hierarchical cluster analysis was performed 
using Ward’s linkage method (Ward, 1963). Ward’s method is designed 
to create a classification scheme maximizing between-­group variance 
while simultaneously minimizing within-­group variance (Rasmussen and 
Willett, 1988). With respect to the data of this study, a cluster can be 
interpreted as a particular type of personality that exhibits certain traits 
but not others. A particular cluster also reveals which of the 16 relevant 
variables are related to one another and hence tend to be found in one 
particular type.
Subsequently, a two-­step cluster analysis was employed to analyze the 
personality trait data while also including the profit and loss variables in 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­129
the analysis. The Bayesian information criterion (BIC) was used as the 
criterion statistic for the clustering method as suggested by Fraley and 
Raftery (1998). A two-­step clustering method uses an internal algorithm 
to determine the appropriate number of clusters and hence is considered 
most reliable (SPSS Inc., 2001). In the first step, a sequential cluster-
ing approach (Theodoridis and Koutroumbas, 1999) was used to form 
subclusters; in this context each cluster represents a different category of 
team member with a distinctive set of personality-­related characteristics. 
The two-­step clustering method then scans the variables one by one and 
decides whether the current variable should merge with the previously 
formed clusters to define a more complex team type exhibiting more traits 
at the same time or whether a new cluster should be started based on the 
distance criterion. This would mean that the other traits should better be 
represented by another person in the team. In the second step, the sub-
clusters resulting from the first step are considered to rank the individual 
traits according to their relevance for the continuous profit and loss vari-
able. This step reveals the relative importance of the traits for successful 
or unsuccessful teams.
RESULTS AND FINDINGS
The authors conducted an extensive assessment of the reliability of the 
trait scores. The calculation of Cronbach’s alpha as well as the item and 
construct discriminate validity analysis showed sufficient validity and reli-
ability for all constructs.
Results of the Hierarchical Cluster Analysis
First, the whole set of personality trait data was taken to determine the 
clustering of the traits in the overall student sample. This clustering served 
to gain insights into which traits tend to correlate, independent of how 
they might affect success. It also provided an early indicator of whether 
the 16 selected traits tend to form one cluster (resulting in the dispositional 
super-­entrepreneur) or whether they are spread out over different team 
types determined by different clusters in this study.
The number of clusters was defined through Ward’s method 
(­maximizing between-­group variance while simultaneously minimizing 
within-­group variance) and anchored in theory (Hamachek, 1978). This 
approach revealed the presence of three clusters, which are presented in 
Table 6.1.
Ward’s classification scheme provides a rationale for the hierarchy 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

130    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
of the clusters: Cluster 1 represents the first cluster to form, meaning 
that out of all variables empathy and conflict resolution skills are most 
closely related to one another and most different from the traits in 
Cluster 3. In the context of this study, a Cluster 1-­type personality can be 
interpreted as a team member with high empathy and a good ability to 
resolve conflicts actively. Since it is the first cluster to form according to 
the definition of Ward’s classification scheme, it is supposed to be a very 
clear cluster, in this case a pronounced team type. Clusters 1 and 2 are 
hence more distinctive than Cluster 3 in which many traits are present at 
the same time. Translated into the context of team composition, Clusters 
1 and 2 each symbolize team members with a more distinctive personal-
ity type: very pronounced in their character and thus easy to identify 
(also for fellow team members). Cluster 3 in contrast comprises person-
alities with more of an all-­rounder character type: they exhibit many 
traits in parallel, but each trait is less strongly developed and thus not 
so clearly visible to their fellows. These assumptions were later verified 
in an ad hoc qualitative experiment in which team members were asked 
to assess their teammates according to the traits tested in the personal-
ity questionnaire. Team members ranking high on the Cluster 1 traits 
were identified much easier by their teammates than members exhibiting 
many less developed traits in parallel. With respect to research question 
1, it can be said that even though all theoretically grounded variables 
were found to be important and specific for entrepreneurs in general, 
they do not tend to appear in the same person but rather in three dif-
ferent personality types that are represented by the different clusters. At 
this point, however, the question still remains whether individuals whose 
Table 6.1  Clusters formed by hierarchical analysis of all the participants
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Conflict management
Sociability
Need for achievement
Empathy
Communication 
Passion for work
 
Assertiveness
Active learning
 
 
Metacognition
 
 
Learning orientation
 
 
Self-­efficacy
 
 
Locus of control
 
 
Tenacity
 
 
Willingness for leadership
 
 
Proactive personality
 
 
Emotional stability
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­131
traits are fewer but more strongly developed (here referred to as Type 1) 
or the all-­rounder type (Type 3) will be more important when correlated 
to success or failure.
In a second step the data were separated into two groups: the profit-­
making teams were considered successful whereas the loss-­making ones 
were considered unsuccessful. The same cluster analysis was run again 
on the personality trait data for the successful and the unsuccessful team 
members. Table 6.2 presents the results.
An interesting finding is that the clustering for successful teams shows 
four, instead of three, different clusters, with the clusters being much 
smaller and featuring much more pronounced traits. This means that 
members of successful teams score higher on a small number of traits 
(rather than simultaneously demonstrating multiple traits). Remarkably, 
the all-­rounder type personality is not even present in successful teams, 
but is split up into two distinctive types (3, 4), while other traits of the 
former all-­rounder cluster (like metacognition, proactive personality, 
and so on) do not appear to be significant for success at all. This result is 
highly ­relevant since current literature on entrepreneurial traits creates the 
impression that the more relevant traits an individual exhibits, the higher 
the individual’s chances of becoming a successful entrepreneur. This 
finding suggests rejecting question 1 regarding the super-­entrepreneur 
who combines all traits in one person. On the contrary, successful venture 
teams seem to have more diverse and pronounced types of team members, 
hence advocating maximal deep-­level diversity.
The picture looks much different for the population of unsuccessful 
teams, as can be seen in Table 6.3. For unsuccessful teams, the combi-
nation of traits per cluster changes to a large extent. Only two types of 
individuals were found in unsuccessful teams, whereas the original cluster 
types 1 and 2 (see Table 6.1) now cluster together in more of an all-­rounder 
social type of person; cluster types 3 and 4 in the context of successful 
teams (see Table 6.2) are combined with many other traits not relevant to 
successful teams to form an all-­rounder, assertive type of person. These 
results also suggest that more types (that is, greater deep-­level diversity) 
Table 6.2  Clusters formed by hierarchical team member analysis – teams 
with positive profit/loss
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Conflict management
Sociability
Learning orientation Need for achievement
Empathy
Communication Self-­efficacy
Passion for work
 
Assertiveness
 
 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

132    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
are found in successful teams and fewer types (that is, lower deep-­level 
diversity) are present in unsuccessful teams.
To sum up the findings of the hierarchical analysis, it can be said that 
generally there is a significant relationship between the personality trait 
composition of a venture team and venture outcomes. It has also become 
apparent that not all traits identified as relevant in entrepreneurial success 
are usually found in the same person: the success of a team rather depends 
on the mix of different types of team members. Along those lines: Cluster 1 
containing passion for work and need for achievement shows the greatest 
distance from Cluster 4 – containing empathy and conflict management. 
This means that these two sets of traits are quite the opposite, and if a 
person ranks high on the traits of one cluster, it is likely that this person 
ranks low on the other. Hence, an achiever-­type of person (e.g., a person-
ality like Steve Jobs) will rarely simultaneously be the most empathetic 
and social person in the team. In the case of unsuccessful teams, passion 
for work was clustered with many other traits to form a single cluster, 
whereas in successful teams, passion for work and need for achievement 
form a separate cluster type (4) and were distant from others. This indi-
cates that pronounced types who rank high only on passion for work and 
need for achievement are very significant and distinctive for the success of 
a team.
Table 6.3  Clusters formed by hierarchical team member analysis – teams 
with negative profit/loss
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Conflict management
Need for achievement
Empathy
Passion for work
Sociability
Active earning
Communication
Metacognition
Assertiveness
Learning orientation
 
Self-­efficacy
 
Locus of control
 
Tenacity
 
Willingness for leadership
 
Proactive personality
 
Emotional stability
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­133
RESULTS OF THE TWO-­STEP CLUSTER ANALYSIS
After these initial results, a two-­step cluster analysis was performed that 
defined clusters according to the continuous profit and loss variable; these 
were then grouped into a range from the most successful to the least suc-
cessful. Basically, all teams were hierarchically ranked from the highest 
to the lowest profit and loss, and the most and least significant traits for 
each team were analyzed. Table 6.4 shows the ranking hierarchically of the 
most significant traits for successful and unsuccessful teams.
Related to the results of the hierarchical cluster analysis, assertiveness 
and empathy rank highest in terms of relevance among the most suc-
cessful teams (empathy constantly ranks higher than passion for work). 
While it does not come as a surprise that assertiveness and passion for 
work are supremely important (and was also consistently ranked as sig-
nificant by our expert group), the high ranking of empathy is a rather 
unexpected result. Research has suggested that entrepreneurial success is 
more in correlation to dominance-­related traits (at least on the level of the 
individual entrepreneur) like assertiveness, proactive personality or need 
for achievement and seems to assume that such traits determine success. 
Hence, it might be interesting in the future to analyze how far individual-­
level traits differ from team-­level traits in terms of their significance. In 
the team that generated the highest profit of all, the significance values 
for empathy and assertiveness were the highest of all groups, indicating 
that the more successful a team was, the more significant these traits 
were within a group. This result answers research question 3 enquiring 
which individual traits are of the highest significance for successful and 
­unsuccessful teams.
Table 6.4  Summary of two-­step cluster analysis: traits ranked by relative 
significance with respect to success or failure of teams
Successful Teams
Unsuccessful Teams
1. Assertiveness
1. Locus of control
2. Empathy
2. Proactive personality
3. Willingness for leadership
3. Learning orientation
4. Passion for work
4. Metacognition
5. Sociability 
6. Conflict management
7. Communication 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

134    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS
The analysis reveals two major findings: first, personality factors are sig-
nificantly related to venture success; second, the relevant traits are much 
more effective when they are present in different team member types 
instead of only in one person. Consequently, the deep-­level diversity con-
figuration of the team plays an important role for its success or failure. 
Theories of group dynamics could help explain how team members lever-
age their distinct characteristics to organize their task work with the aim 
to achieve collective goals (Mohammed and Angell, 2004). One common 
approach in this context is the perspective of different informal team roles 
exhibited by the team members. Each team role usually represents a set of 
behavioral variables that serves the team in a specific way. Defining team 
roles based on the individual attributes of the members is virtually the 
logical translation from team composition to team processes in the over-
arching input–process–output framework (McGrath, 1964) under which 
teams are usually considered. The rationale behind this is that a team 
member with a certain personality disposition is naturally urged to assume 
a certain informal team role. In the context of top management teams, 
formal team roles are considered more important because they are related 
to a specific competence field and are associated with a certain power and 
influence. In contrast, informal team roles are much more relevant for new 
venture teams who often have not yet established clear roles and responsi-
bilities. Furthermore, depending on their respective skills, motivation, and 
personality, their members frequently assume different roles simultane-
ously and across a wide range of business areas.
In an attempt to relate the findings of this study to the common team 
role theory and thus make them usable for practitioners, the authors 
chose Belbin’s (1981, 2005a, 2005b) team roles as a suitable organizing 
framework since they are theoretically derived and at the same time widely 
appreciated in the business world. To academically infer behaviors related 
to the traits analyzed in this study and consequently match them to the 
respective Belbin roles, the authors consulted a scientific collaboration for 
the development of advanced measures of personality and other individual 
differences (called the International Personality Item Pool – IPIP) as a 
comprehensive source of items describing the thinking and acting styles 
relating to each trait (IPIP, 2014). The IPIP website provides access to 
measures of individual differences, all in the public domain, with the inten-
tion to have these measures developed conjointly among scientists world-
wide. It provides a trait index currently listing 302 scales for 230 different 
traits (more than one standard scale is presented for more common traits).
Drawing on the IPIP resources allows access to a much greater set of 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­135
behaviors per traits than studied in this research project. For example, 
someone scoring high on empathy in the context of this study relates to 
the behaviors of all other IPIP empathy scales, informing us about the 
general related ability to anticipate the needs of others (and four other 
social abilities) according to the AB5C Facets Scale (Hofstede et al., 
1992) or the natural tendency to make others feel welcome according 
to Cloninger’s Temperament and Character Inventory (Cloninger et al., 
1994). Consequently, when assigning team roles to the clusters analyzed 
here, a person scoring high on empathy and conflict management skills 
(Cluster 1) can naturally play a vital social and mediating role in a team 
and hence can be matched to Belbin’s role of the team worker, who is 
described as cooperative, mild, and perceptive, and strives to avert fric-
tions (Belbin, 2005b). Table 6.5 presents an overview of the different 
clusters (representing different personality types) derived by this study 
for successful and unsuccessful teams and the match of these clusters with 
the most appropriate Belbin team roles. Given that start-­ups are subject 
to certain resource constraints, one can learn which types of personalities 
should be picked and combined in the first place to cover all necessary 
team roles – or analyze what type of person is missing in an existing new 
venture that is facing difficulties.
Table 6.5 clearly shows that the most successful teams do not consist 
only of members who simultaneously exhibit many of the traits that litera-
ture found to be relevant. In fact, it even provides negative evidence that 
teams comprising members who do portray many traits simultaneously 
were more likely to be unsuccessful. The difference between a successful 
and an unsuccessful team rather relates to the combination of sufficiently 
distinctive personality types that form a team.
So what exactly is the difference in the deep-­level diversity mix between 
successful and unsuccessful teams? In short, successful teams seem to have 
more different personality types (four vs two for unsuccessful teams) and 
among those are more character heads than all-­rounders.
Given the average team size of 4.4 members and four different person-
ality types in the successful teams, one can infer that the greatest deep-­
level diversity possible works in favor of success. Another suggestion is 
that winning teams seem to have more distinctive types than all-­rounder 
types of team members. For example, a person pertaining to Cluster 4 is 
defined only by the two traits (need for achievement and passion for work) 
but these are strongly pronounced. The all-­rounder type in unsuccessful 
teams, in contrast, is part of Cluster 2 and features 11 different traits. This 
reflects the tendency of venture capitalists to search for the individual 
assertive entrepreneur rather than to concentrate on establishing a bal-
anced team. However, this study also suggests focusing on less extrovert 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

136    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Table 6.5  Mapping of Belbin roles to team types defined by cluster 
analysis of un-­/successful teams
Successful Teams
Personality 
type cluster and 
respective traits
Matching 
Belbin team 
role
Contribution to 
team
Allowable 
weaknesses
Strategic 
dimension
Cluster 1
Conflict  
  management
Empathy
‘Teamworker’
Cooperative, mild, 
perceptive, and 
diplomatic; listens, 
builds a team, and 
averts frictions
Indecisive 
in crunch 
situations
Social
Cluster 2
Sociability
Communication
Assertiveness
‘Resource 
investigator’
Extrovert, 
enthusiastic, 
communicative; 
explores 
opportunities, 
develops contacts
Over-­
optimistic, 
loses interest 
once initial 
enthusiasm 
has passed
Social
Cluster 3
Learning  
  orientation
Self-­efficacy
‘Specialist’
Single-­minded, 
self-­starting, 
dedicated;  
provides 
knowledge and 
skills in rare  
supply
Contributes 
on only a 
narrow  
front; 
dwells on 
technicalities
Thinking
Cluster 4
Need for  
  achievement
Passion for work
‘Shaper’
Challenging, 
dynamic, thrives 
on pressure; 
has the drive 
and courage to 
overcome  
obstacles
Prone to 
provocation; 
offends 
people’s 
feelings
Acting
Unsuccessful Teams
Cluster 1
Conflict 
management
Empathy
Sociability
Communication
Assertiveness
‘Teamworker’
Cooperative, mild, 
perceptive, and 
diplomatic; listens, 
builds a team, and 
averts frictions
Indecisive 
in crunch 
situations
Social
Cluster 2
Need for  
  achievement
‘Shaper’
Challenging, 
dynamic, thrives  
on pressure; 
Prone to 
provocation; 
offends
Acting
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­137
team members who have sufficient social skills to bridge the edgy attitudes 
and behaviors a very assertive person is prone to demonstrate.
In fact, this study suggests that social team roles might add more to 
team success than generally recognized today. The results of the two-­step 
cluster analysis indicate that the most significant traits for venture success 
are empathy, assertiveness, willingness for leadership, and passion for 
work, which, when matched to Belbin’s roles, can be found in the roles of 
the resource investigator, the team worker, and the shaper (see Tables 6.4 
and 6.5). When compared to unsuccessful teams, the two social roles 
cluster together into one type, which could indicate a team’s belief that one 
social team member is enough. Second, the shaper in the case of unsuccess-
ful teams is not such a distinctive type as in the case of successful teams, 
which could indicate a preference to rather invite moderate, likable, and 
similar people into the team. This conclusion could be also derived from 
the fact that there is no specialist role in the unsuccessful teams analyzed 
within this study.
Implications for Researchers
The two-­step cluster analysis shows that assertiveness, empathy, will-
ingness for leadership, and passion for work are highly correlated with 
Table 6.5  (continued)
Unsuccessful Teams
Personality 
type cluster and 
respective traits
Matching 
Belbin team 
role
Contribution to 
team
Allowable 
weaknesses
Strategic 
dimension
Passion for work
Active learning
Metacognition
Learning  
  orientation
Self-­efficacy
Locus of control
Tenacity
Willingness for  
  leadership
Proactive  
  Personality
Emotional  
  stability
has the drive 
and courage to 
overcome  
obstacles
people’s 
feelings
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

138    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
venture success, which mainly validates the findings of many previous 
researchers (Smilor, 1997; Locke, 2000; Timmons, 2000). However, more 
interesting is the fact that empathy consistently (for both cluster analysis 
methods) turned out to be an even more important construct, ranking 
even higher than passion and leadership skills. At the same time, the two-­
step cluster analysis also proved in this study that empathy was one of the 
traits least present in unsuccessful teams. This has important implications 
for researchers who previously paid little attention to empathy as a highly 
important trait for venture success. Team research fellows might want 
to study more profoundly the importance of empathy as well as the sig-
nificance of social roles as contributors to venture success. As mentioned, 
formal roles, which are certain to exist in the top management teams 
(CEO, CFO, and so forth) of established ventures, often do not exist in 
start-­ups or are not so important as the informal roles of a shaper or team 
worker (Belbin, 2005b) might be. However, it would be interesting for 
future research to investigate how these informal roles should be matched 
to the key roles in new venture teams, assuming that it makes a difference 
whether it is the founder or the secretary in the team who takes on the role 
of the shaper. In accordance with Klotz et al. (2014), this study also aims 
to stimulate more deep-­level diversity research, particularly in the context 
of new venture teams. Such research should apply the latest research 
methods available to gain new and deeper insights.
Recommendations for Practitioners
It should be a valuable finding for entrepreneurs and venture capital-
ists that the deep-­level composition of venture teams is as important as 
surface-­level criteria. Intuitively, venture capitalists have surely already 
been aware of the importance of the personality and attitude of the lead 
founder. However, this study now suggests that a team not only needs 
one ‘Mr. Right’ to be successful, but that the success lies in the mix. And 
even though strong personalities like Steve Jobs and Mark Zuckerberg 
are often celebrated as role model entrepreneurs, their success is probably 
also largely facilitated by fellow team members who complement their 
­behavior by displaying a more social attitude. Having said that, in the 
world of a new venture team, which is typically characterized by limited 
resources, it seems to be a wise decision to choose different and more pro-
nounced personalities. Greater deep-­level diversity seems to play in favor 
of success as long as the team understands and does not underestimate 
that it needs social bridge builders. It is also recommended for practition-
ers to have a closer look at the informal roles of their new venture team 
members since they might be even more important than the formal roles 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­139
assigned. An especially important implication for practitioners could be 
the finding that empathy is a particularly relevant trait for team success. 
This is a highly valuable insight because the business world still tends to 
rate all tangible skills like intelligence and more dominance-­related traits 
like assertiveness higher than empathy.
In summary, these results have potentially strong implications for prac-
titioners. Founding members of new ventures could draw on these findings 
when selecting their team members, while venture capitalists could use the 
insights for their team member due diligence to make better investment 
decisions or help building a more successful team over time.
LIMITATIONS
This study uses a university student sample because in the case of real-­
life venture teams, tasks are usually not comparable, external condi-
tions may vary, and data on unsuccessful teams might be difficult to 
obtain. Nonetheless, two major constraints remain: (1) a sample of 
non-­entrepreneurs is taken to analyze entrepreneur-­related traits; and (2) 
random assignments of the teams did not allow for self-­selection, which is 
a key foundational principle of entrepreneurial teams.
To address these limitations and validate the results of this study, future 
research could therefore copy this research design but (also) invite real 
entrepreneurial teams to participate to test actual entrepreneurial team 
constellations against the archetypes highlighted in this study.
For the selection of variables to be tested on a team level, specific 
entrepreneurship-­matched traits were taken into consideration as sug-
gested by the seminal work of Klotz et al. (2014). However, for the final 
set of variables there is no clear-­cut recommendation in the literature and 
hence its selection inevitably remains partly a qualitative decision. For 
this reason the authors first presented a rather large set of variables to 
the expert group for validation and, second, decided to finally include a 
sizable set of 16 variables instead of the few but more robust variables 
studied in literature.
Last, in order to ground the results in common team composition theory 
and to make them more tangible and easy to use for practitioners, the 
authors attempted to match the archetype personality clusters unearthed 
to the well-­studied and widely applied Belbin roles (1981, 2005b). Thus, 
if practitioners decided to act upon the results of this study, they would 
find a great variety of actionable recommendations herein on how to best 
deal with the different team roles in their team composition. Even though 
utmost diligence was applied to derive an appropriate ­matching, no 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

140    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
­statistical methods were employed to do so. The authors therefore present 
the idea of the matching as part of the discussion section and not in the 
results and findings. It is thus hoped that this approach will offer more rel-
evant recommendations to those readers who wish to leverage the results.
REFERENCES
Albright, L., D.A. Kenny and T.E. Malloy (1988), ‘Consensus in personality judgment at 
zero acquaintance’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55 (3), 387–95.
Aldrich, H. (1999), Organizations Evolving, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Baron, J.N. and M.T. Hannan (2002), ‘Organizational blueprints for success in high-­
tech start-­ups: Lessons from the Stanford Project on Emerging Companies’, California 
Management Review, 44 (3), 8–36.
Baron, R.A. (1998), ‘Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: Why and when 
­entrepreneurs think differently than other people’, Journal of Business Venturing, 13 (4), 
275–94.
Barrick, M.R., G.L. Stewart, M.J. Neubert and M.K. Mount (1998), ‘Relating member 
ability and personality to work-­team processes and team effectiveness’, Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 83 (3), 377–91.
Baum, J.R. and E.A. Locke (2004), ‘The relationship of entrepreneurial traits, skill, and 
motivation to new venture growth’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 89 (4), 587–98.
Baum, J.R., E.A. Locke and K.G. Smith (2001), ‘A multidimensional model of venture 
growth’, Academy of Management Journal, 44 (2), 292–303.
Belbin, M.R. (1981), Management Teams: Why They Succeed or Fail, Oxford, UK and 
Burlington, MA: Butterworth-­Heinemann.
Belbin, M.R. (2005a), Management Teams: Why They Succeed or Fail, 2nd edition, Oxford, 
UK and Burlington, MA: Butterworth-­Heinemann.
Belbin, M.R. (2005b), Team Roles at Work, Oxford, UK and Burlington, MA: 
Butterworth-­Heinemann.
Bell, S.T. (2007), ‘Deep-­level composition variables as predictors of team performance: A 
meta-­analysis’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 92 (3), 595–615.
Bird, B.J. (1989), Entrepreneurial Behavior, Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and Company.
Bohrnstedt, G.W. (1970), ‘Reliability and validity assessment in attitude measurement’, 
in G.F. Summers (ed.), Attitude Measurement, London: Kershaw Publishing Company, 
pp. 80–99.
Bollen, K.A. and L. Rochard (1991), ‘Conventional wisdom on measurement: A structural 
equation perspective’, Psychological Bulletin, 110 (2), 305–14.
Brockhaus, R.H. (1980), ‘Psychological and environmental factors which distinguish the suc-
cessful from the unsuccessful entrepreneur: A longitudinal study’, Academy of Management 
Journal, 23 (3), 509–20.
Brockhaus, R.H. and P.S. Horwitz (1986), ‘The psychology of the entrepreneur’, in D.L. Sexton 
and R.W. Smilor (eds), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship, Cambridge, MA, pp. 25–48.
Busenitz, L.W. and J.B. Barney (1997), ‘Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in 
large organisations: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision making’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 12 (1), 9–30.
Cardon, M.S. and C. Stevens (2009), ‘The discriminant validity of entrepreneurial passion’, 
Academy of Management Review, 34 (3), 511–32.
Chell, E., J.M. Haworth and S. Brearley (1991), The Entrepreneurial Personality, London, 
UK: Routledge.
Chen, X., X. Yao and S. Kotha (2009), ‘Entrepreneur passion and preparedness in busi-
ness plan presentations: A persuasion analysis of venture capitalists’ funding decisions’, 
Academy of Management Journal, 52 (1), 199–214.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­141
Churchill, G.A. (1979), ‘A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing c­onstructs’, 
Journal of Marketing Research, 16 (1), 64–73.
Cloninger, C.R., T.R. Przybeck, D.M. Svrakic and R.D. Wetzel (1994), The Temperament 
and Character Inventory (TCI): A Guide to Its Development and Use, St. Louis, MO: Center 
for Psychobiology of Personality, Washington University School of Medicine.
Collins, C.J., P.J. Hanges and E.A. Locke (2004), ‘The relationship of achievement 
­motivation to entrepreneurial behavior: A meta-­analysis’, Human Performance, 17 (1), 
95–117.
Cooper, A.C. and C.M. Daily (1997), ‘Entrepreneurial teams’, in D.L. Sexton and 
R.W. Smilor (eds), Entrepreneurship 2000, Chicago, IL: Upstart, pp. 127–50.
Cooper, A.C. and F.J. Gimeno-­Gascon (1992), Entrepreneurs, Processes of Founding and 
New Firm Performance, in D.L. Sexton and J.D. Kasarda (eds), The State of the Art of 
Entrepreneurship, Boston, MA: PWS Kent Publishing, pp. 301–40.
Davis, J.P., K.M. Eisenhardt and C.B. Bingham (2007), ‘Developing theory through simula-
tion methods’, Academy of Management Review, 32 (2), 480–99.
De Jong, A., M. Song and L.Z. Song (2013), ‘How lead founder personality affects new 
venture performance. The mediating role of team conflict’, Journal of Management, 
39 (7), 1825–54.
Diamantopoulos, A. and H.M. Winklhofer (2001), ‘Index construction with formative 
indicators: An alternative to scale development’, Journal of Marketing Research, 38 (2), 
269–77.
Ensley, M.D. (1997), ‘The effect of entrepreneurial team skill heterogeneity and conflict on 
new venture strategic orientation and performance: A study of the Inc. 500’, PhD disserta-
tion, Mississippi State University.
Ensley, M.D., K.M. Hmieleski and C.L. Pearce (2006), ‘The importance of vertical and 
shared leadership within new venture top management teams: Implications for the perfor-
mance of startups’, Leadership Quarterly, 17 (3), 217–31.
Fraley, C. and A.E. Raftery (1998), ‘How many clusters? Which clustering method? Answers 
via model-­based cluster analysis’, The Computer Journal, 41 (8), 578–88.
Gartner, W.B. (1989), ‘Who is an entrepreneur? Is the wrong question’, Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 13 (4), 47–68.
Gartner, W.B., K.G. Shaver, E. Gatewood and J.A. Katz (1994), ‘Finding the entrepreneur 
in entrepreneurship’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 18 (1), 5–10.
Hair, Jr, J.F. and W.C. Black (2000), ‘Cluster analysis’, in L.G. Grimm and P.R. Yarnold 
(eds), Reading and Understanding More Multivariate Statistics, Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association, pp. 147–205.
Hamachek, D.E. (1978), ‘Psychodynamics of normal and neurotic perfectionism’, 
Psychology, 15 (1), 27–33.
Hambrick, D.C. and P.A. Mason (1984), ‘Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection 
of its top managers’, Academy of Management Review, 9 (2), 193–206.
Harrison, D.A., K.H. Price and M.P. Bell (1998), ‘Beyond relational demography: Time 
and the effects of surface and deep-­level diversity on work group cohesion’, Academy of 
Management Journal, 41 (1), 96–107.
Harrison, D.A., K.H. Price, J.H. Gavin and A.T. Florey (2002), ‘Time, teams, and task 
performance: Changing effects of surface-­ and deep-­level diversity on group functioning’, 
Academy of Management Journal, 45 (5), 1029–45.
Hofstede, W.K.B., B. de Raad and L.R. Goldberg (1992), ‘Integration of the Big-­Five and 
circumplex approaches to trait structure’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
63 (1), 146–63.
IPIP (2014), International Personality Item Pool, accessed 2 September 2014 at http://ipip.
ori.org/.
Johnson, B.R. (1990), ‘Towards a multidimensional model of entrepreneurship: The case 
of achievement motivation and the entrepreneur’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 
14 (3), 39–54.
Klotz, A.C., K.M. Hmieleski, B.H. Bradley and L.W. Busenitz (2014), ‘New venture teams: 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

142    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
A review of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 
40 (1), 226–55.
Lechler, T. (2001), ‘Social interaction: A determinant of entrepreneurial team venture 
success’, Small Business Economics, 16, 263–78.
Locke, E.A. (2000), The Prime Movers, New York: Amacom.
Low, M.B. and I.C. MacMillan (1988), ‘Entrepreneurship: Past research and future chal-
lenges’, Journal of Management, 14 (2), 139–61.
McCrae, R.R. and P.T. Costa (1987), ‘Validation of the five-­factor model of personality 
across instruments and observers’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52 (1), 
81–90.
McGrath, J.E. (1964), Social Psychology: A Brief Introduction, New York: Holt Rinehart 
and Winston, Inc.
Mitchell, R.K., B. Smith, K.W. Seawright and E.A. Morse (2000), ‘Cross-­cultural cognitions 
and the venture creation decision’, Academy of Management Journal, 43 (5), 974–93.
Mohammed, S. and L.C. Angell (2003), ‘Personality heterogeneity in teams: Which differ-
ences make a difference for team performance?’, Small Group Research, 34 (6), 651–77.
Mohammed, S. and L.C. Angell (2004), ‘Surface-­ and deep-­level diversity in workgroups: 
Examining the moderating effects of team orientation and team process on relationship 
conflict’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25 (8), 1015–39.
Neuman, G.A., S.H. Wagner and N.D. Christiansen (1999), ‘The relationship between work-­
team personality composition and the job performance of teams’, Journal of Group and 
Organization Management, 24 (1), 28–45.
Overall, J. and C. Klett (1972), Applied Multivariate Analysis, New York: McGraw-­Hill.
Rasmussen, E.M. and P. Willett (1988), Cluster Analysis Using Parallel Computer 
Architecture, final report for the period April 1986 to March 1988 to the British Library 
Research and Development Department on Project SI/G/760, Department of Information 
Studies, University of Sheffield, May, 1988.
Rauch, A. and M. Frese (2000), ‘Psychological approaches to entrepreneurial success: 
A general model and an overview of findings’, in C.  Cooper and I. Robertson (eds), 
International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Vol. I, Chichester, UK: 
Wiley, pp. 101–42.
Rauch, A. and M. Frese (2007), ‘Let’s put the person back into entrepreneurship research: 
A meta-­analysis on the relationship between business owners’ personality traits, business 
creation, and success’, European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 16 (4), 
353–85.
Sanders, W.G. and M.A. Carpenter (1998), ‘Internationalization and firm governance: The 
roles of CEO compensation, top management team compensation, and board structure’, 
Academy of Management Journal, 41 (2), 158–78.
Sexton, D.L. (2001), ‘Wayne Huizenga: Entrepreneur and wealth creator’, Academy of 
Management Executive, 15 (1), 40–48.
Smilor, R.W. (1997), ‘Entrepreneurship: Reflections on a subversive activity’, Journal of 
Business Venturing, 12 (5), 341–6.
Smith, J.K. and R.L. Smith (2000), Entrepreneurial Finance, New York: Wiley.
SPSS Inc. (2001), The SPSS Two Step Clustering Component, accessed 10 December 2009 
at 
http://www.spss.ch/upload/1122644952_The%20SPSS%20TwoStep%20Cluster%20
Component.pdf.
Stewart, W.H. and P.L. Roth (2001), ‘Risk propensity differences between entrepreneurs and 
managers: A meta-­analytic review’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 86 (1), 145–53.
Stewart, W.H. and P.L. Roth (2004), ‘Data-­quality affects meta-­analytic conclusions: A 
response to Miner and Raju (2004) concerning entrepreneurial risk propensity’, Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 89 (1), 14–21.
Theodoridis, S. and K. Koutroumbas (1999), Pattern Recognition, San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press.
Timmons, J.A. (2000), New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship 2000, 5th edition, 
Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Which diversity compositions of teams lead to failure?    ­143
Van Vianen, A.E.M. and C.K.W. de Dreu (2001), ‘Personality in teams: Its relations to 
social cohesion, task cohesion, and team performance’, European Journal of Work and 
Organizational Psychology, 10 (2), 97–120.
Ward, Jr, J.H. (1963), ‘Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function’, Journal of 
American Statistical Association, 58 (301), 236–44.
Watson, W.E., L.D. Ponthieu and J.W. Critelli (1995), ‘Team interpersonal process effective-
ness in venture partnerships and its connection to perceived success’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 10 (5), 393–411.
Zhao, H. and S.E. Seibert (2006), ‘The Big Five personality dimensions and entrepreneurial 
status: A meta-­analytical review’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 91 (2), 259–71.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

144
7.  How owner-­manager team size influences 
the potential economic contribution of 
owner-­managed businesses
Jonathan Levie and Johan P. de Borst
INTRODUCTION
This chapter examines the relationship between team size and the potential 
economic contribution of early-­stage and established businesses across 
89 countries,1 using data from Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) 
collected between 2003 and 2012. It uses Cooney’s (2005, p. 229) basic 
definition of entrepreneurial teams as ‘two or more individuals who have 
a significant financial interest and participate actively in the development 
of the enterprise’. Entrepreneurial team size is measured by counting the 
number of individuals who both own and manage the same business, a 
measure that also fits a more complex definition of entrepreneurial teams 
by Schjoedt and Kraus (2009, p. 515).
The chapter explores how the impact of team size is affected by the 
quality of owner-­managers and the complexity of the business. Potential 
economic contribution is measured in a variety of ways, including growth 
expectation, export propensity, export intensity and product/market inno-
vation. Young and small firms are known to make significant economic 
contributions, for example in job creation in both developed and develop-
ing countries (Ayyagari et al., 2014). What makes some young and small 
firms contribute more than others is therefore a central issue for entrepre-
neurship academics and policy-­makers.
Previous original empirical studies related to teams are limited to 
single-­country studies, tend to be skewed to samples of high-­technology 
ventures, and rarely consider team size as a predictor of performance 
but rather treat it as a control variable. In contrast, this chapter includes 
89 ­countries, treats the complexity of the business as a variable, and treats 
team size as the principal predictor.
The main findings are that the odds of an entrepreneur having a busi-
ness with a high versus low potential economic contribution rises with 
their education level, the size of their team, and the knowledge intensity of 
their business, both separately and in a three-­way combination.
The next section briefly reviews the literature on team size, entrepreneur 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­145
quality and business complexity and explores how these might interact to 
affect the potential economic contribution of entrepreneurial ventures. 
Hypotheses are deduced to guide research on these interactions. Following 
a methodology section, the results are presented. Finally, conclusions are 
drawn, including implications for entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship 
policy.
LITERATURE REVIEW
It has been widely argued in the academic literature that entrepreneurial 
teams are more likely to grow their ventures substantially than solo entre-
preneurs (e.g., Birley and Stockley, 2000; Stam and Schutjens, 2006). 
Indeed, studies of nascent entrepreneurs suggest an association between 
entrepreneurial experience, team size and growth intentions at the pre-­
start stage (e.g., Perry et al., 2011). However, researchers have focused 
more on the heterogeneity of founding teams than on their size (Davidsson 
and Gordon, 2012). Many studies just compare solo versus team start-­ups 
(e.g., Sapienza and Grimm, 1997; Lechler, 2001; Stam and Schutjens, 
2006; Robson et al., 2012). This risks conflating ‘mom and pop’ teams 
with more sophisticated functional teams. A recent review of research on 
the influence of entrepreneurial teams on venture performance found that 
only 5 out of 28 quantitative papers included team size as an independent 
variable but 12 included it as a control variable (Mashke and Knyphausen-­
Aufsess, 2012). This focus on teams versus solo entrepreneurs and general 
lack of interest in the size of teams may have arisen because of attempts by 
academics to counter the popular image of entrepreneurs as ‘lone heroes’ 
(Kamm et al., 1990). But if performance varies by team size, this binary 
focus may be misplaced, especially since theory and empirical findings 
often conflict when the independent variable is solo versus team rather 
than team size.
There is less research on how big entrepreneurial teams should be, or 
why. Reviews by Mayer-­Haug et al. (2013) and Mashke and Knyphausen-­
Aufsess (2012) concluded that the association between team size and per-
formance in terms of sales and employee growth was in general positive 
(see also earlier reviews by Kamm et al., 1990 and Gimmon, 2008). More 
recent research supports this conclusion (e.g., Czarnitzki et al., 2014).
Several theories have been proposed that would support a relationship 
between team size and firm performance. For example, Ben-­Hafaïedh and 
Hamelin (2015) suggested that since the collective opportunity costs of 
teams rises with their size, then so should their growth ambition. Others 
have taken a resource-­based perspective. As a general rule, the larger the 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

146    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
team, the more resources are available to it (Hambrick and D’Aveni, 1992; 
Haleblian and Finkelstein, 1993). For example, team size may correlate 
significantly with the size and strength of ties in a firm’s social networks 
(Zane, 2011), while larger teams tend to attract more resources such as 
funding (Teach et al., 1986; Cooper et al., 1989; Baum and Silverman, 
2004), which may in turn attract further high-­quality business partners 
(Hierman and Clarysse, 2004) and enable greater economic performance.
While larger teams should cost more to sustain, members of a team can 
draw on each other for support (Cooper and Bruno, 1977; Moreau, 2005) 
in what could otherwise be a lonely undertaking. On the other hand, larger 
teams should be associated with greater affective conflict (Amason and 
Sapienza, 1997; Mooney et al., 2007), which can negatively affect venture 
performance (Ensley at al., 2002) and slow down decision-­making. One 
implication of this could be that ventures in complex and fast-­changing 
business environments may have to trade off the promise of additional 
entrepreneurial capital furnished by additional team members against the 
need for speed of strategic decision-­making.
Cognitive conflict, another likely feature of larger teams (Amason and 
Sapienza, 1997), can throw up alternative solutions and reduce ‘group 
think’ (Janis, 1972) and this has been shown to be associated with better 
venture performance (Ensley at al., 2002). Indeed, some studies suggest 
that larger teams in more complex environments may actually make 
better decisions, faster as a result of active consideration of a wider set of 
options (Eisenhardt and Bourgeois, 1988; Eisenhardt, 1989; Eisenhardt 
and Schoonhoven, 1990).
There is some evidence from research on opportunity identification 
to support the notion that team size expands option sets. For example, 
Gruber et al. (2013) found that larger team size in a sample of UK and 
German high-­technology start-­ups significantly increased the number and 
variety of opportunities identified before start-­up. Similarly, Ucbasaran 
et al. (2008) found that the number of business opportunities identified 
and pursued within the past five years in a large sample of UK firms was 
related to the number of equity partners in the business. Also, Borchert and 
Zellmer-­Brun (2010) found that the ambition level of new venture goals 
correlated significantly with team size in a sample of high-­technology ven-
tures. Whether larger team sizes are of benefit to ventures in less complex 
business settings is open to question, as Haleblian and Finkelstein (1993) 
suggest that small groups may be better at decision-­making in less complex 
environments.
While a large team size may bring with it problems of coordination 
(Haleblian and Finkelstein, 1993; Ucbasaran et al., 2003), in the new 
venture context a common remedy for coordination problems, that is, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­147
formalization, may have advantages. Hechavarria et al. (2012) found in a 
panel of nascent entrepreneurs that team size was associated with business 
plan formalization, which was in turn associated with persisting in the 
start-­up phase rather than quitting.
While most measures of economic performance of entrepreneurial 
ventures are in terms of sales or employment growth, the economic 
contribution of entrepreneurial ventures may be assessed in other ways. 
For example, entrepreneurial ventures that open up new export markets 
may be particularly valuable to the economy, especially for more devel-
oped countries (Hessels and Van Stel, 2011). Not surprisingly, large 
firm studies find associations between top management team size and 
internationalization (e.g., Sanders and Carpenter, 1998). Evidence at 
the new and small firm level is more mixed. DeClercq and Bosma (2008) 
found using 2003 GEM data for Belgium and the Netherlands that for 
existing firms, growth orientation and team size are positively associ-
ated with internationalization. Hauser et al. (2012) found in a German 
sample that new ventures with productive matched teams overcame 
barriers to internationalization with greater ease than solo start-­ups. 
However, other authors have not found such associations with samples 
of high-­technology ventures in Germany (Baum et al., 2011) and the UK 
(Ganotakis and Love, 2012).
Team size may also affect the innovativeness of a venture’s offering in 
a market. Hechavarria et al. (2012) found in a panel of nascent entrepre-
neurs that team size was associated with degree of firm innovativeness. 
Ruef (2002) found that perception of firm innovativeness among alumni 
entrepreneurs from a US university was increased by team size, control-
ling for team diversity, network characteristics and experience. Allen and 
Hall (2007) found that larger teams and teams having a greater percentage 
of members holding college degrees in start-­ups in Wisconsin are signifi-
cantly more likely to have developed a new product. In a Ghanaian sample 
of private firms, Robson et al. (2012) found that the presence of partners 
in a business seemed to reduce the likelihood of innovation introductions. 
But they did not differentiate by size of team.
From this prior work, which is mostly based in the USA and on high-­
technology ventures, it can be concluded that team size is a strong predic-
tor of venture growth in ventures in complex environments such as high 
technology, and perhaps a weaker one in more representative samples of 
new ventures. The evidence on other indicators of economic contribution, 
such as internationalization and innovation, is less clear-­cut. Collectively, 
the theoretical arguments and empirical findings in favour of larger teams, 
at least in complex business environments, outlined above lead to the first 
hypothesis:
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

148    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Hypothesis 1: The complexity of an owner-­managed firm’s business environ-
ment moderates the positive relationship between owner-­manager team size 
and the firm’s potential economic contribution such that team size positively 
predicts the potential economic contribution of entrepreneurial ventures 
more strongly in highly complex business environments than in less complex 
business environments.
An alternative argument could be made that the quality of the team 
may matter more than the size of the team. For example, higher-­quality 
entrepreneurs may have fewer gaps in resources that need to be filled 
(see Forbes et al., 2006 on gap-­filling as a team recruitment strategy). 
However, research on high-­technology ventures suggests that large teams 
tend to be more rounded in terms of skills and experience (Eisenhardt 
and Schoonhoven, 1990; Roberts, 1991) and thus team quality may well 
rise with team size, at least in highly complex businesses. To explain this 
association, we draw on Ruef et al. (2003) who proposed five mechanisms 
of social group formation, and applied these to venture team formation: 
homophily, functionality, status expectations, network constraint and 
ecological constraint.
One of the paradoxes of the literature on team size is that while hetero-
geneity tends to lead to greater performance (Mashke and Knyphausen-­
Aufsess, 2012), homophily in terms of similarity of teams for example by 
age, sex and ethnicity is very popular in practice (Ruef et al., 2003; Steffens 
et al., 2012; Hart, 2014). Interpersonal attraction seems to be an important 
factor in team member recruitment and divestment (Forbes et al., 2006); 
homophilous teams might be more behaviourally integrated.
Similarly, while the effect of educational heterogeneity in teams has 
been explored comprehensively in organizational literature (e.g., Shin 
and Zhou, 2007), the effect of education on team venture formation has 
received scant attention. Yet arguments could be made that the quality of 
people, often proxied with measures of education or income, divides indi-
viduals in venture teams along all five mechanisms discussed by Ruef et al. 
(2003). Education and household income are associated with social class 
and one’s portfolio of human capital, social capital, symbolic capital and 
economic capital (Bourdieu, 2011). Cassar (2006) has argued that indi-
viduals with higher education and income levels are likely to have higher 
opportunity costs of entrepreneurship. Though he found mixed support 
for this, we suspect that this may be because he studied solo entrepreneurs 
only (Cassar, 2007, p. 106, note 1).
Social network theory (e.g., Lin, 1999) proposes that the higher individ-
uals are positioned in the social hierarchy, the more likely they are to have 
social networks that contain or have access to greater resources. It follows 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­149
that better educated (or wealthier) potential entrepreneurs are more likely 
to attract the resources, including funding and business partners, to build 
businesses with greater economic potential. There is some recent evidence 
to support this: Agarwal et al. (2013) found in a large sample of firm 
spinouts that ‘higher quality founders attract larger teams of followers and 
more experienced followers’ (p. 22).2 Whether this always leads to higher 
performance is open to question. For example, the Apollo Syndrome sug-
gests that teams of highly intelligent people often underperform (Belbin, 
2010). A recent meta-­analysis by Mayer-­Haug et al. (2013) found a signifi-
cant correlation between education and team size across a range of studies 
on small and medium-­sized enterprise (SME) performance. However, 
these authors did not study interaction effects of education, team size and 
performance. Interestingly, their findings suggested that while team size 
had a medium effect on SME performance, the effect of education was 
unclear. They suggested that the effect of education may be contingent. 
This leads to the second hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2: The quality of an owner-­manager moderates the positive 
relationship between team size and the firm’s potential economic contribu-
tion such that team size positively predicts the potential economic contribu-
tion of entrepreneurial ventures more strongly in teams with higher-­quality 
owner-­managers.
METHODOLOGY
To test the two hypotheses and thus address gaps in prior research, the 
combined individual-­level Global Entrepreneurship Monitor database 
for the years 2003 to 2012 was utilized. This was an unbalanced (not all 
­countries were sampled in all years) pseudo-­panel (new samples were taken 
at random each year) of adults aged 16 or over, which contained informa-
tion on 1 542 298 individuals in 97 economies. From this, two different 
groups of entrepreneurs were selected: ‘early-­stage’ entrepreneurs and 
established owner-­managers. ‘Early-­stage’ entrepreneurs are defined as 
individuals who at the time of the survey were either nascent entrepreneurs 
or new business owner-­managers. The former are actively trying to start a 
business that they will own in whole or in part and that has not paid them 
any income for more than three months. The latter are managing a business 
that they own in whole or in part and that has paid income to the owners 
for more than three months and up to 42 months. Established owner-­
managers are defined as individuals who at the time of the survey were 
managing a business that they owned in whole or in part and that had paid 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

150    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
income to the owners for more than 42 months. Surveys of start-­ups tend 
to suffer from survivor bias in that they exclude individuals who have tried 
to start a business but have given up or failed. By including nascent entre-
preneurs with new entrepreneurs, this study partly compensates for this.
Cleaning the database of missing data for our variables of interest and 
removing country-­year samples that had less than 50 cases of early-­stage 
entrepreneurs or established business owner-­managers as recommended 
by Moineddin et al. (2007) left a sample of 96 002 early-­stage entrepre-
neurs and 82 428 established business owner-­managers in 89 countries and 
352 country-­year clusters.3
There are five dependent variables: two growth expectation variables 
commonly used in GEM-­based analyses of growth expectation, a measure 
of export propensity, a measure of export intensity and a measure of 
product/market innovation. These are defined in Table 7.1, along with 
means and standard deviations.
Control variables used include gender and age group, an opportunity 
perception measure and an indicator of whether the early-­stage entrepre-
neur was also an established business owner or whether the established 
business owner expected to start a new business in the next three years. 
The main predictor is team size. This was split into four categories: solo 
entrepreneur, two owner-­managers, three or four owner-­managers and 
five or more owner-­managers. Two owner-­manager quality predictors 
were used: education level and household income level. Finally, a measure 
of business complexity was constructed from four-­digit ISIC codes. All 
cases in medium-­ and high-­technology manufacturing and knowledge-­
intensive services as defined by Eurostat (2015) were coded 1 and others 
coded 0. Such businesses are often portrayed as ‘knowledge-­based indus-
tries’ (OECD, 1999, p. 18). Table 7.2 lists a Spearman correlation matrix, 
which is appropriate for categorical variables. Correlations between pre-
dictor and control variables are low.
Given the binary nature of our dependent variables, the data were ana-
lysed using logistic regression. Because of the unbalanced nature of the 
pseudo-­panel, and the reasonable expectation that individual responses 
may be correlated by country, and by year within each country, the models 
were adjusted for clustering of individual responses by country-­year (Guo 
and Zhao, 2000; Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002), using the cluster option 
in Stata 12.1, which computes robust standard errors for the coefficient 
using a hierarchical estimation technique. There were 352 clusters and the 
largest cluster was 2 per cent of the total sample size.
Our two hypotheses specifically test for interactions between team 
size and two categorical variables. Testing for interaction effects is 
not straightforward in logistic regression. Reported odds ratios and 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­151
­significance levels for interactions can be misleading. Accordingly, we use 
methods developed by Ai and Norton (2003), Norton et al. (2004) and 
Cornelissen and Sonderhof (2009) to estimate sample average marginal 
effects and significance for our main predictors and their interactions. This 
requires the collapsing of our ordinal variables into binary variables. We 
Table 7.1  Descriptive statistics
Variable
Description
Early-­stage 
Entrepreneur 
Sample
Established 
Business  
Owner-­ 
Manager 
Sample
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Dependent variables
Growth1 Expects to employ 20 or more people other 
than the owners in five years’ time
0.09
0.29
0.07
0.26
Growth2 Expects to employ at least ten people and 
increase current employment by at least  
50% in five years’ time
0.15
0.36
0.04
0.20
ExpP
Has (or expects to on start-­up) customers 
from outside the country
0.41
0.49
0.37
0.48
ExpI
Has (or expects to on start-­up) more than 
25% of customers from outside the country
0.13
0.34
0.10
0.30
Innov
Sells in product/markets where the product 
is new to all or most customers and where 
there is little or no competition
0.26
0.44
0.13
0.33
Control variables
Sex
Gender (male = 1)
0.59
0.49
0.63
0.48
Age
Five age groups: 18–24 (1), 25–34 (2),  
35–44 (3), 45–54 (4), 55–64 (5)
2.79
1.17
3.50
1.09
Opp
Respondent agrees there are good 
opportunities for starting a business in the 
local area (no, yes, don’t know)
2.24
1.96
2.19
2.12
Ebo
Respondent is established business owner
0.05
0.22
Expstart
Respondent expects to start a business in  
the next three years
0.22
0.42
Predictors
Size
Number of owner-­managers in the business
1.60
0.85
1.45
0.78
Edu
Education level (three levels standardized 
across sample: no/primary only, secondary, 
post-­secondary level)
2.09
0.83
2.01
0.85
Bcomp
Business complexity (low versus high, see 
text)
0.22
0.41
0.22
0.41
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

152
Table 7.2  Spearman correlation matrix
Early-­stage Entrepreneurs (N = 96 002)
Variable
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
  1
Growth1
1
  2
Growth2
0.66
1
  3
ExpP
0.13
0.15
1
  4
ExpI
0.12
0.12
0.47
1
  5
Innov
0.09
0.13
0.12
0.09
1
  6
Sex
0.1
0.10
0.07
0.06
0.01
1
  7
Age
−0.01
−0.03
0.01
0.01
−0.01
−0.01
1
  8
Opp
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.04
−0.01
−0.03
1
  9
Ebo
0.02
0.04
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.08
0.01
1
10
Edu
0.11
0.13
0.16
0.09
0.10
0.04
−0.00
−0.01
0.01
1
11
Bcomp
0.05
0.06
0.10
0.05
0.09
0.05
0.02
0.00
−0.00
0.26
1
12
Tsize
0.17
0.19
0.12
0.08
0.07
0.06
−0.06
−0.01
0.03
0.13
0.06
  1
Established Business Owner-­Managers (N = 82 428)
Variable
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
  1
Growth1
1
  2
Growth2
0.57
1
  3
ExpP
0.14
0.09
1
  4
ExpI
0.11
0.07
0.44
1
  5
Innov
0.06
0.07
0.10
0.08
1
  6
Sex
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.00
1
  7
Age
−0.02
−0.05
0.02
−0.00
−0.02
0.02
1
  8
Opp
0.03
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.04
−0.00
−0.05
1
  9
Expstart
0.08
0.12
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.04
−0.16
0.11
1
10
Edu
0.12
0.06
0.18
0.08
0.07
0.02
−0.03
0.01
−0.02
1
11
Bcomp
0.05
0.03
0.11
0.02
0.06
0.02
0.04
0.04
−0.05
0.31
1
12
Esize
0.19
0.08
0.09
0.06
0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.00
−0.00
0.10
0.04
  1
Note:  Because of the large sample size, almost all correlations are significant at p < 0.05.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­153
therefore display the results in three ways: first, a standard logistic regres-
sion that reports odds ratios for the main effects, controlling for but not 
reporting results on two-­way and three-­way interactions between our three 
main predictors: team size, quality and business complexity. This analysis 
includes the full ordinal variables.
Second, we report main predictor and interaction average marginal 
effects expressed as the average percentage increase in probability of 
having high potential economic contribution for a change from zero 
to one in a specific independent variable for all cases in the sample, 
using Cornelissen and Sonderhof’s (2009) method. In this report, the 
team size variable is split into those with and without three or more 
owner-­managers, and the education variable is split into those with 
and without post-­secondary education. Age is split into those aged 
between 55 and 64 and others and the opportunity variable is col-
lapsed into yes versus no/don’t know. Finally, to show visually the 
relationship between potential economic contribution and team size, 
owner-­manager quality and business complexity, we graph average 
probabilities of an early-­stage entrepreneur having high growth expec-
tation (Growth1) for ­different combinations of these variables for the 
sample.
RESULTS
Tables 7.3 and 7.4 show the results of logistic regressions for each measure 
of potential economic contribution. The main effects of variables are 
reported in terms of the ratio of the odds of high versus low potential 
economic contribution (for example, high growth expectation) for an 
entrepreneur with the characteristic listed to the odds of high versus low 
potential economic contribution for the base case, or comparison group. 
For example, in the first model, the odds of an entrepreneur having high 
versus low growth expectation are almost doubled (increased 1.86 times) 
if they are male than if they are female, controlling for other variables in 
the model. In Tables 7.3 and 7.4, the increase in odds ratios as team size 
increases is notable. Across all models except for innovativeness in estab-
lished owner-­managers, team size increased the odds of high versus low 
potential economic contribution more than category changes in any of the 
other independent variables.
Tables 7.5 and 7.6 show that across the five models, having a team 
of three or more increased the probability that an early stage entrepre-
neur’s firm would have high potential economic contribution by around 
11 ­percentage points on average (eight percentage points for established 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

154    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
business owner-­managers). This result supports the results of previous 
studies and emphasizes the relative strength of the relationship. The odds 
of high versus low potential economic contribution (and the average 
marginal effect) also increase significantly with business complexity and 
education level.
Hypothesis 1 states that the complexity of an owner-­managed firm’s 
business environment moderates the positive relationship between owner-­
manager team size and the firm’s potential economic contribution such 
that team size positively predicts the potential economic contribution of 
entrepreneurial ventures more strongly in highly complex business envi-
ronments than in less complex business environments. From the two-­way 
interaction of team size and business complexity in Tables 7.5 and 7.6, we 
see that Hypothesis 1 is supported in most models; the interaction of team 
Table 7.3  Logistic regression models for early-­stage entrepreneurs  
(N = 96 002)
Odds Ratios for High Versus 
Low Potential Economic 
Contribution
Growth1
Growth2
ExpP
ExpI
Innov
or
sig.
or
sig.
or
sig.
or
sig.
or
sig.
Controls
Gender: male vs female
1.86
***
1.67
***
1.24
***
1.32
***
0.96
*
Age 18–24 vs 55–64
1.11
*
1.46
***
0.97
 
0.97
1.09
**
Age 25–34 vs 55–64
0.99
 
1.17
***
0.96
0.89
***
1.02
 
Age 35–44 vs 55–64
1.09
*
1.20
***
1.00
 
0.93
**
1.01
 
Age 45–54 vs 55–64
1.08
1.17
***
1.07
**
0.99
 
1.06
*
Opportunity: yes vs no
1.33
***
1.41
***
1.10
**
1.05
1.36
***
Opportunity: yes vs don’t know 0.81
***
0.79
***
0.93
0.97
 
1.01
 
Established business owner
1.18
**
1.43
***
1.04
1.27
***
1.44
***
Predictors
Team size: two owners vs solo  
  owner
1.47
***
1.67
***
1.39
***
1.11
1.09
Three to four owners vs solo  
  owner
3.22
***
2.88
***
1.95
***
1.84
***
1.31
***
Five+ owners vs solo owner
8.12
***
6.01
***
2.43
***
2.10
***
1.61
***
High vs low business complexity 1.63
***
1.38
***
1.95
***
1.48
***
1.77
***
Medium vs low education
1.80
***
1.77
***
1.66
***
1.42
***
1.29
***
High vs low education
2.79
***
2.64
***
2.23
***
1.80
***
1.67
***
Constant
0.00
***
0.03
***
0.29
***
0.08
***
0.18
***
McFadden’s pseudo R2 
0.09
***
0.08
***
0.03
***
0.02
***
0.02
***
Notes:
*  p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01, two tailed.
Two-­way and three-­way interactions included in the model but odds ratios not reported: 
see text.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­155
size and business complexity significantly increases the probability of a 
higher potential economic contribution in four out of the five measures 
used for early-­stage entrepreneurs, and in both growth expectation meas-
ures for established owner-­managers.
Hypothesis 2 states that the quality of an owner-­manager moder-
ates the positive relationship between team size and the firm’s potential 
economic contribution such that team size positively predicts the poten-
tial economic contribution of entrepreneurial ventures more strongly 
in teams with higher-­quality owner-­managers. From the ­two-­way 
Table 7.4  Logistic regression models: established business owner-­
managers (N = 82 428)
Odds Ratios for High 
Versus Low Potential 
Economic Contribution
Growth1
Growth2
ExpP
ExpI
Innov
or
sig.
or
sig.
or
sig.
or
sig.
or
sig.
Controls
Gender: male vs female
1.74
***
1.78
***
1.17
***
1.23
***
0.99
 
Age 18–24 vs 55–64
1.01
 
1.83
***
0.82
***
0.94
1.22
**
Age 25–34 vs 55–64
0.92
1.55
***
0.80
***
0.91
*
1.09
*
Age 35–44 vs 55–64
1.09
*
1.35
***
0.93
**
0.94
1.08
**
Age 45–54 vs 55–64
1.11
**
1.24
***
0.93
***
0.89
***
1.03
Opportunity: yes vs no
1.32
***
1.79
***
1.11
*
1.06
**
1.30 ***
Opportunity: yes vs don’t  
  know
0.94
0.98
 
1.04
1.06
**
1.10
**
Expects to start a business
1.77
***
2.53
***
1.11
**
1.24
***
1.37 ***
Predictors
Team size: two owners vs  
  solo owner
1.98
***
1.33
**
1.30
***
1.33
***
1.01
 
Three to four owners vs  
  solo owner
3.96
***
2.07
***
1.64
***
1.88
***
1.04
 
Five+ owners vs solo  
  owner
12.64
***
5.00
***
1.86
***
2.77
***
1.24
High vs low business  
  complexity
2.24
***
1.59
**
1.88
***
1.44
***
1.64 ***
Medium vs low education
1.79
***
1.48
***
1.88
***
1.50
***
1.30 ***
High vs low education
3.43
***
2.22
***
2.47
***
2.11
***
1.62 ***
Constant
0.01
***
0.01
***
0.27
***
0.06
***
0.08 ***
McFadden’s pseudo R2
0.12
***
0.09
***
0.04
***
0.02
***
0.02 ***
Notes:
*  p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01, two tailed.
Two-­way and three-­way interactions included in the model but odds ratios not reported: see 
text.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

156    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
­interaction of ­education level and team size in Tables 7.5 and 7.6, we find 
that Hypothesis 2  is  supported in both growth models for early-­stage 
entrepreneurs and the first growth model for established business owner-­
managers. We note that the interaction of education level and business 
complexity has a negative and significant average marginal effect on the 
probability of high potential economic contribution in almost all models, 
but that the three-­way interaction has no significant marginal effect on 
average.
To better demonstrate the effect of the three main predictors and 
the way they interact, Figure 7.1 plots the probabilities of early-­stage 
entrepreneurs with different combinations of these three variables 
having growth expectation (Growth1), as predicted by the first model 
in Table  7.3. This illustrates in a visual way the strong relationship 
between  growth expectation and team size, and the positive moder-
ating effect of both business complexity and education level on this 
relationship.
A series of checks was conducted on the model fit and on ­multicollinearity 
Table 7.5  Average marginal effects for early-­stage entrepreneurs, showing 
two-­way and three-­way effects (N = 96 002)
Variables
Growth1
Growth2
ExpP
ExpI
Innov
Team size: at least  
  three owners
0.125***
(0.0066)
0.160***
(0.0098)
0.126***
(0.0082)
0.065***
(0.0049)
0.070***
(0.0073)
High business  
  complexity
0.014***
(0.0037)
0.023***
(0.0051)
0.081***
(0.0101)
0.025***
(0.0041)
0.079***
(0.0063)
At least post-­ 
  secondary 
education
0.044***
(0.0039)
0.065***
(0.0055)
0.114***
(0.0113)
0.043***
(0.0044)
0.063***
(0.0068)
Team size and  
  complexity
0.023**
(0.0095)
0.026**
(0.0103)
−0.008
(0.0125)
0.025***
(0.0086)
0.037***
(0.0113)
Team size and  
  education
0.023***
(0.0077)
0.025***
(0.0096)
−0.044***
(0.0117)
0.001
(0.0077)
0.006
(0.0094)
Complexity and  
  education
−0.026***
(0.0057)
−0.039***
(0.0074)
−0.053***
(0.0120)
−0.026***
(0.0072)
−0.041***
(0.0084)
Team size,  
  complexity and 
education
0.023
(0.0374)
0.030
(0.0552)
0.050
(0.0799)
0.006
(0.0448)
0.025
(0.0645)
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05; * p < 0.1.
Control variables and constant included in the model but not reported here.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­157
of the independent variables, and these checks suggested that the addition 
of the team size variable tended to double the variance explained by the 
model, while the interaction terms also significantly added ­variance.4 We 
replaced education with household income, another indicator of quality, 
and found that Hypothesis 2 was only supported for one measure of 
growth intention (Growth1) for early-­stage entrepreneurs, but for both 
growth intention measures for established entrepreneurs. We also used 
the Norton et al.’s (2004) method to check the range of average marginal 
effects and z-­statistics for all two-­way interactions to assure ourselves that 
the average marginal effects were a reasonable representation of the range 
of effects for the vast majority of cases across the sample.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Team size correlates with, but is much easier to measure than, more 
complex constructs such as human and social capital that are known 
Table 7.6  Average marginal effects for established owner-­managers, 
showing two-­way and three-­way effects (N = 82 428)
Variables
Growth1
Growth2
ExpP
ExpI
Innov
Team size: at least  
  three owners
0.162***
(0.008)
0.053***
(0.0040)
0.104***
(0.0094)
0.052***
(0.0052)
0.018***
(0.0048)
High business  
  complexity
0.017***
(0.0037)
0.007***
(0.0022)
0.089***
(0.0116)
0.008**
(0.0039)
0.040***
(0.0046)
At least post-­ 
  secondary 
education
0.046***
(0.0031)
0.020***
(0.0022)
0.127***
(0.0126)
0.040***
(0.0045)
0.034***
(0.0047)
Team size and  
  complexity
0.079***
(0.0095)
0.033***
(0.0089)
0.017
(0.0160)
−0.009
(0.0108)
0.013
(0.0116)
Team size and  
  education
0.049***
(0.0093)
0.010
(0.0068)
−0.005
(0.0122)
0.001
(0.0090)
−0.005
(0.0091)
Complexity and  
  education
−0.041***
(0.0064)
−0.011**
(0.0046)
−0.061***
(0.0155)
−0.031***
(0.0061)
−0.011
(0.0077)
Team size,  
  complexity  
and education
0.010
(0.0369)
0.019
(0.0263)
0.032
(0.0893)
−0.008
(0.0403)
0.017
(0.0406)
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Control variables and constant included in the model but not reported here.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

158    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
to affect venture performance. It is surprising then that it seems in 
­academic studies to be relegated to the status of control variable, alongside 
­demographic variables such as sex and age, or indeed left out altogether in 
favour of combined years of experience (e.g., Eckhardt et al., 2006). This 
study brought team size to centre stage and showed how powerful it is as a 
predictor of the potential economic contribution of owner-­managed busi-
nesses. For time-­poor investors or government policy-­makers, it deserves 
to be taken seriously as an indicator of potential. For entrepreneurs 
who wish to generate a business of substance, especially those who may 
not have much human or social capital of their own, it offers a way of 
increasing their chances of making a significant economic contribution. It 
appears that earlier studies that focused on a dichotomous measure of solo 
­entrepreneurs versus teams may have missed the increased returns from 
increasing team size.
The study presents evidence that in addition to having a strong direct 
effect on the economic potential of early-­stage and established firms, larger 
teams are associated with greater economic potential in more complex, 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Mean probability of high growth expectation
0.4
Low Business Complexity
High Business Complexity
No/Primary
Ed.
Secondary
Ed.
Third level
Ed.
No/Primary
Ed.
Secondary
Ed.
Third level
Ed.
Solo owner-manager
2 owner-managers
3–4 owner-managers
5+ owner-managers
Figure 7.1  Predicted mean probabilities of an early-­stage entrepreneur 
expecting to employ 20 or more people in five years, by team 
size, education level and business complexity
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­159
knowledge-­intensive businesses and with higher growth expectation where 
owner-­managers have higher education levels. There seems to be no 
evidence in our data for the argument, based on the concept of affective 
conflict (Amason and Sapienza, 1997; Ensley at al., 2002; Mooney et al., 
2007), that smaller teams might be more successful in more complex envi-
ronments. This could have implications for enterprise support agencies and 
for entrepreneurship educators and trainers: for knowledge-­intensive busi-
nesses, the more owner-­managers, the merrier – for the economy, at least.
A great deal of variance in our models remains unexplained. Given that 
one of the assumptions of logistic regression is that there is no unobserved 
heterogeneity, we need to be cautious with these results, although report-
ing effects in terms of average marginal effects reduces this possible source 
of bias (Mood, 2010, p. 76). At the individual level, different motivations 
for starting the business could be expected to affect potential economic 
contribution (Cassar, 2007). While models were adjusted for clustering 
of individual responses by country-­year, future work should control for 
specific country-­level variables that might affect individual entrepreneurs’ 
propensity to create teams, or control for country-­level effects that might 
impact on entrepreneurs’ decisions to make significant economic contribu-
tions. For example, Hessels et al. (2008) found that countries with a higher 
incidence of increase-­wealth-­motivated entrepreneurs tend to have a higher 
prevalence of high-­job-­growth and export-­oriented entrepreneurship and 
that a country’s level of social security relates negatively to the prevalence 
of innovative, high-­job-­growth, and export-­oriented entrepreneurship.
It remains to be seen if these country-­level effects have an impact at the 
individual level. Temporal variables such as economic cycles or exogenous 
shocks to the economy and industry sectors could also be controlled for.
We were unable to control for the quality of team members other than 
the GEM survey respondent, although this is available in some single-­
country longitudinal surveys, such as the Kauffman Firm Survey. If addi-
tional questions on the quality (for example, education level) of additional 
team members could be added to future GEM surveys, we might be able to 
shed more light on the issue of team heterogeneity and potential economic 
performance in addition to team size.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to an anonymous reviewer and the editors for 
most helpful reviews and encouragement. Data for this study were pro-
vided by the Global Entrepreneurship Research Association. Names of 
the members of national teams, the global coordination team, and the 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

160    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
financial sponsors are published in the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 
Global Reports for 2003 to 2012, which can be downloaded at www.gem-
consortium.org. The authors thank all the researchers and their financial 
supporters who made this research possible. Whilst this work is based on 
data collected by the GEM consortium, responsibility for analysis and 
interpretation of those data is the sole responsibility of the authors.
The authors acknowledge funding for this chapter as part of the 
research programme of the Enterprise Research Centre (ERC). The ERC 
is an independent research centre funded by the Economic and Social 
Research Council (ESRC), the Department for Business, Innovation & 
Skills (BIS), Innovate UK and, through the British Bankers Association 
(BBA), by the Royal Bank of Scotland PLC, HSBC Bank PLC, Barclays 
Bank PLC and Lloyds TSB Bank PLC.
NOTES
1.	 The term country is used for convenience; 88 were nation states and one was a Special 
Administrative Region of China (Hong Kong).
2.	 These authors used earnings of the founder rather than education level as a measure of 
quality. In our sample, we found that education and household income were correlated 
(rs = 0.25).
3	
The countries in our sample in order of sample size and number of sample years were: 
Spain, Brazil, United States, Netherlands (10); Chile, Germany, Argentina, Denmark, 
Greece (9); United Kingdom, China, Peru, Ireland, Norway, Finland (8); Iceland, Latvia, 
Switzerland, Slovenia (7); Colombia, Jamaica, Sweden, Turkey, Uruguay, Australia, 
Croatia (6); Thailand, Hungary, Korea, Malaysia, Belgium, Italy (5); Uganda, Ecuador, 
Canada, Singapore, South Africa, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Israel, Japan (4); Iran, 
Trinidad & Tobago, Algeria, Egypt, Mexico, Poland, New Zealand, Pakistan, Taiwan, 
Macedonia, Portugal (3); Bolivia, Nigeria, Zambia, Angola, Guatemala, Costa  Rica, 
Barbados, Austria, Slovakia, Russia, Lithuania, Romania, Czech Republic, India, 
Serbia, Tunisia (2); Ghana, Malawi, Vanuatu, Botswana, Philippines, Panama, Ethiopia, 
Indonesia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Jordan, Montenegro, Bangladesh, Estonia, 
Morocco, West Bank & Gaza Strip, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, 
Kazakhstan, Hong Kong, France (1).
4.	 No variable had a variance inflation factor (VIF) score greater than 3.06 (1.72 for estab-
lished business owners); the average VIF score was 1.59 (1.24). The condition number 
was within acceptable limits at 11.22 (13.48). An increase in a series of pseudo-­R2 esti-
mates was observed as predictors and the interaction terms were added, and a decrease in 
the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) statistic, suggesting that adding the predictors 
and the interaction terms improved the model.
REFERENCES
Agarwal, R., B. Campbell, A. Franco and M. Ganco (2013), ‘What do I take with me? 
The mediating effect of spin-­out team size and tenure on the founder–firm performance 
relationship’, US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies, Paper No. CES-­WP-­13–17.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­161
Ai, C. and E. Norton (2003), ‘Interaction items in logit and probit models’, Economic Letters, 
80 (1), 123–9.
Allen, W.D. and T.W. Hall (2007), ‘Innovation, managerial effort, and start-­up perfor-
mance’, Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance and Business Ventures, 12 (2), 87–118.
Amason, A.C. and H.J. Sapienza (1997), ‘The effects of top management team size and inter-
action norms on cognitive and affective conflict’, Journal of Management, 23 (4), 495–516.
Ayyagari, M., A. Demirguc-­Kunt and V. Maksimovic (2014), ‘Who creates jobs in develop-
ing countries?’, Small Business Economics, 43 (1), 75–99.
Baum, J.A.C. and B.S. Silverman (2004), ‘Picking winners or building them? Alliance, intel-
lectual, and human capital as selection criteria in venture financing and performance of 
biotechnology startups’, Journal of Business Venturing, 19 (3), 411–36.
Baum, M., C. Schwens and R. Kabst (2011), ‘A typology of international new ven-
tures: Empirical evidence from high technology industries’, Journal of Small Business 
Management, 49 (3), 305–30.
Belbin, R.M. (2010), Management Teams: Why They Succeed or Fail, Oxford: Elsevier.
Ben-­Hafaïedh, C. and A. Hamelin (2015), ‘L’ambition est-­elle la clé du succès? Une étude de 
PME Européennes’ [Is ambition the key to success? A study of European SMSs], Revue de 
l’Entrepreneuriat, 14, 17–46.
Birley, S. and S. Stockley (2000), ‘Entrepreneurial teams and venture growth’, in D.L. Sexton 
and H. Landström (eds), The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship, Oxford: Blackwell, 
pp. 287–307.
Borchert, P. and M. Zellmer-­Brun (2010), ‘Great expectations: The influence of human and 
relational capital on the magnitude of early venture goals’, Journal of Applied Management 
and Entrepreneurship, 15 (4), 53–72.
Bourdieu, P. (2011), ‘The forms of capital’, in I. Szeman and T. Kaposy (eds), Cultural 
Theory: An Anthology, Madden, MA: Wiley-­Blackwell. pp. 81–93.
Cassar, G. (2006), ‘Entrepreneur opportunity costs and intended venture growth’, Journal of 
Business Venturing, 21 (5), 610–32.
Cassar, G. (2007), ‘Money, money, money? A longitudinal investigation of entrepreneur 
career reasons, growth preferences and achieved growth’, Entrepreneurship and Regional 
Development, 19 (1), 89–107.
Cooney, T. (2005), ‘Editorial: What is an entrepreneurial team?’, International Small Business 
Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Cooper, A.C. and A. Bruno (1977), ‘Success among high technology firms’, Business 
Horizons, 20 (2), 16–22.
Cooper, A.C., C.Y. Woo and W.C. Dunkelberg (1989), ‘Entrepreneurship and the initial size 
of firms’, Journal of Business Venturing, 4 (5), 317–32.
Cornelissen, T. and K. Sonderhof (2009), ‘Partial effects in probit and logit models with a 
triple dummy-­variable interaction term’, The Stata Journal, 9 (4), 571–83.
Czarnitzki, D., C. Rammer and A.A. Toole (2014), ‘University spin-­offs and the ­“performance 
premium”’, Small Business Economics, 43 (2), 309–26.
Davidsson, P. and S.R. Gordon (2012), ‘Panel studies of new venture creation: A methods-­
focused review and suggestions for future research’, Small Business Economics, 39 (4), 853–76.
De Clercq, D. and N. Bosma (2008), ‘An exploratory study of international commitment by 
nascent and existing firms’, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 21 (3), 293–308.
Eckhardt, J.T., S. Shane and F. Delmar (2006), ‘Multistage selection and the financing of 
new ventures’, Management Science, 52 (2), 220–32.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989), ‘Making fast strategic decisions in high-­velocity environments’, 
Academy of Management Journal, 32 (3), 543–76.
Eisenhardt, K.M. and L.J. Bourgeois (1988), ‘Politics of strategic decision making in high-­
velocity environments: Toward a midrange theory’, Academy of Management Journal, 
31 (4), 737–70.
Eisenhardt, K. and C.B. Schoonhoven (1990), ‘Organizational growth: Linking founding 
team, strategy, environment, and growth among U.S. semiconductor ventures, 1978–
1988’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (3), 504–29.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

162    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Ensley, M.D., A.W. Pearson and A.C. Amason (2002), ‘Understanding the dynamics of new 
venture top management teams: Cohesion, conflict and new venture performance’, Journal 
of Business Venturing, 17 (4), 365–86.
Eurostat (2015), ‘Eurostat indicators on high-­tech industry and knowledge-­intensive ­services: 
Annex 3 – High-­tech aggregation by NACE Rev. 2’, accessed 28 April 2015 at ec.europa.
eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/Annexes/htec_esms_an3.pdf.
Forbes, D.P., P.S. Borchert, M.E. Zellmer-­Bruhn and H.J. Sapienza (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial 
team formation: An exploration of new member addition’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 30 (2), 225–48.
Ganotakis, P. and J.H. Love (2012), ‘Export propensity, export intensity and firm perfor-
mance: The role of the entrepreneurial founding team’, Journal of International Business 
Studies, 43 (8), 693–718.
Gimmon, E. (2008), ‘Entrepreneurial team-­starts and teamwork: Taking the investors’ 
­perspective’, Team Performance Management, 14 (7/8), 327–39.
Gruber, M., I.C. MacMillan and J.D. Thompson (2013), ‘Escaping the prior knowledge 
corridor: What shapes the number and variety of market opportunities identified before 
market entry of technology start-­ups?’, Organization Science, 24 (1), 280–300.
Guo, G. and H. Zhao (2000), ‘Multilevel modeling for binary data’, Annual Review of 
Sociology, 26 (1), 441–62.
Haleblian, J. and S. Finkelstein (1993), ‘Top management team size, CEO dominance, and 
firm performance: The moderating roles of environmental turbulence and discretion’, 
Academy of Management Journal, 36 (4), 844–63.
Hambrick, D.C. and R.A. D’Aveni (1992), ‘Top team deterioration as part of the downward 
spiral of large corporate bankruptcies’, Management Science, 38 (10), 1445–66.
Hart, D.M. (2014), ‘Founder nativity, founding team formation, and firm performance in the 
U.S. high-­tech sector’, International Entrepreneurship Management Journal, 10 (1), 1–22.
Hauser, C., P. Moog and A. Werner (2012), ‘Internationalisation in new ventures: What role 
do team dynamics play?’, International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business, 
15 (1), 23–38.
Hechavarria, D.M., M. Renko and C.H. Matthew (2012), ‘The nascent entrepreneur-
ship hub: Goals, entrepreneurial self-­efficacy and start-­up outcomes’, Small Business 
Economics, 39 (3), 685–701.
Hessels, J. and A. van Stel (2011), ‘Entrepreneurship, export orientation, and economic 
growth’, Small Business Economics, 37 (2), 255–68.
Hessels, J., M. van Gelderen and R. Thurik (2008), ‘Entrepreneurial aspirations, motiva-
tions, and their drivers’, Small Business Economics, 31 (3), 323–39.
Hierman, A. and B. Clarysse (2004), ‘How and why do research-­based start-­ups differ at 
founding? A resource-­based configurational perspective’, Journal of Technology Transfer, 
29 (3–4), 247–68.
Janis, I.L. (1972), Victims of Groupthink: A Psychological Study of Foreign-­Policy Decisions 
and Fiascoes, Oxford: Houghton Mifflin.
Kamm, J.B., J.C. Shuman, J.A. Seeger and A.J. Nurick (1990), ‘Entrepreneurial teams in new 
venture creation: A research agenda’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14 (4), 7–17.
Lechler, T. (2001), ‘Social interaction: A determinant of entrepreneurial team venture 
success’, Small Business Economics, 16 (4), 263–78.
Lin, N. (1999), ‘Building a network theory of social capital’, Connections, 22 (1), 28–51.
Mashke, K. and D. zu Knyphausen-­Aufsess (2012), ‘How the entrepreneurial top manage-
ment team setup influences firm performance and the ability to raise capital: A literature 
review’, BuR – Business Research, 5 (1) 83–123.
Mayer-­Haug, K., S. Read and J. Brinckmann et al. (2013), ‘Entrepreneurial talent and venture 
performance: A meta-­analytic investigation of SMEs’, Research Policy, 42 (6), 1251–73.
Moineddin, R., F.I. Matheson and R.H. Glazier (2007), ‘A simulation study of sample size 
for multilevel logistic regression models’, BMC Medical Research Methodology, 7 (1), 34.
Mood, C. (2010), ‘Logistic regression: Why we cannot do what we think we can do, and what 
we can do about it’, European Sociological Review, 26 (1), 67–82.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Owner-­manager team size and economic contribution    ­163
Mooney, A.C., P.J. Holahan and A.C. Amason (2007), ‘Don’t take it personally: Exploring 
cognitive conflict as a mediator of affective conflict’, Journal of Management Studies, 
44 (5), 733–58.
Moreau, R. (2005), ‘Les raisons de l’entrepreneuriat collectif: Le cas des équipes créatrices 
d’entreprises de nouvelles technologies’ [The reasons for collective entrepreneurship: The 
case of the creative teams in new-­technology companies], Gestion 2000, 22 (3), 123–42.
Norton, E.C., H. Wang and C. Ai (2004), ‘Computing interaction effects and standard errors 
in logit and probit models’, The Stata Journal, 4 (2), 154–67.
OECD (1999), Science and Technology Indicators Scoreboard, Paris: Organisation for 
Economic Co-­operation and Development.
Perry, J.T., G.N. Chandler, Y. Xin and T.L. Pett (2011), ‘Founder characteristics and 
legitimacy-­seeking behaviors’, New England Journal of Entrepreneurship, 14 (2), 41–51.
Raudenbush, S.W. and A.S. Bryk (2002), Hierarchical Linear Models, Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Roberts, E.B. (1991), Entrepreneurs in High Technology: Lessons from MIT and Beyond, 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Robson, P.J.A., C.K. Akuetteh, P. Westhead and M. Wright (2012), ‘Innovative opportunity 
pursuit, human capital and business ownership experience in an emerging region: Evidence 
from Ghana’, Small Business Economics, 39 (3), 603–25.
Ruef, M. (2002), ‘Strong ties, weak ties and islands: Structural and cultural predictors of 
organizational innovation’, Industrial and Corporate Change, 11 (3), 427–49.
Ruef, M., H.E. Aldrich and N.M. Carter (2003), ‘The structure of organizational ­founding 
teams: Homophily, strong ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs’, American 
Sociological Review, 68 (2), 195–222.
Sanders, W.G. and M.A. Carpenter (1998), ‘Internationalization and firm governance: The 
roles of CEO compensation, top team composition, and board structure’, Academy of 
Management Journal, 41 (2), 158–78.
Sapienza, H. and C.R. Grimm (1997), ‘Founder characteristics, start-­up process, and ­strategy/
structure variables as predictors of shortline railroad performance’, Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 22 (1), 5–14.
Schjoedt, L and S. Kraus (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial teams: Definition and performance 
factors’, Management Research News, 32 (6), 513–24.
Shin, S.J. and J. Zhou (2007), ‘When is educational specialization heterogeneity related to 
creativity in research and development teams? Transformational leadership as a modera-
tor’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 92 (6), 1709–21.
Stam, E. and V. Schutjens (2006), ‘The fragile success of team start-­ups’, in R. Oakey, 
W.  During and S. Kauser (eds) (2006), New Technology-­based Firms in the New 
Millennium, Vol. V, Oxford, Elsevier Science.
Steffens, P., S. Terjesen and P. Davidsson (2012), ‘Birds of a feather get lost together: New 
venture team composition and performance’, Small Business Economics, 39 (3), 727–43.
Teach, R.D., F.A. Tarpley and R.G. Schwartz (1986), ‘Software venture teams’, in 
R. Ronstadt et al. (eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Wellesley, MA: Babson 
College, pp. 546–62.
Ucbasaran, D., P. Westhead and M. Wright (2008), ‘Opportunity identification and pursuit: 
Does an entrepreneur’s human capital matter?’, Small Business Economics, 30 (2), 153–73.
Ucbasaran, D., A. Lockett, M. Wright and P. Westhead (2003), ‘Entrepreneurial founder 
teams: Factors associated with member entry and exit’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 28 (2), 107–28.
Zane, L.J. (2011), ‘How social capital and firm knowledge influence the acquisition of 
resources in technology-­based new ventures’, unpublished PhD thesis, University of 
Drexel.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

164
8.  Dispositional antecedents of shared 
leadership emergent states on 
entrepreneurial teams
Wencang Zhou and Donald Vredenburgh
INTRODUCTION
Because many new ventures are founded by teams rather than indi-
viduals (Cooper et al., 1989; Lechler, 2001; Beckman, 2006; West, 2007), 
­entrepreneurship research has begun to explore phenomena related to 
entrepreneurial teams (ETs). These teams have been referred to by dif-
ferent terms in the literature, such as new venture teams, start-­up teams, 
or founding teams. Building upon the definition of ETs by Ensley et al. 
(1998), this study defines an ET as a set of individuals who fulfill three 
criteria: (1) they jointly establish a firm; (2) they have a financial interest in 
the venture; and (3) they have a direct influence on the strategic choices of 
the firm. While the importance of ETs has been recognized by researchers 
(Cooper et al., 1989; Lechler, 2001; Beckman, 2006) and the conditions 
that contribute to ETs’ success have received increasing attention, findings 
remain inconsistent and inconclusive. A continuing question regarding 
ETs is, what enables some ETs to outperform others?
Recent reviews (Klotz et al., 2014; Zhou and Rosini, 2015) of ET 
research indicated that several research gaps exist with respect to ET 
functioning and outcomes. First, most studies adopted either an upper 
echelons strategic management perspective (Hambrick and Mason, 1984) 
or a traditional input–process–output (IPO) model (McGrath, 1984) and 
focused on demographic input variables while overlooking deep-­level team 
composition variables such as team personality composition. Another 
research need for ETs is a focus on the role of mediating variables, includ-
ing a distinction between internal processes and emergent states (Klotz 
et al., 2014). As an emergent state, shared leadership has received some 
attention in ET research (Ensley et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2015), but the 
conditions leading to shared leadership on ETs remain unknown.
In responding to these research needs, the current study is pursuing two 
purposes. The first objective is to investigate the antecedents of shared 
leadership on ETs by examining their personality compositions. The 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­165
second objective is to study the performance outcomes of the shared lead-
ership emergent state.
SHARED LEADERSHIP AS AN EMERGENT STATE
As team research has progressed, it has begun to differentiate emergent 
states from team process variables while unpacking the black box within 
the input–mediator–output–input (IMOI) framework for studying team 
effectiveness. Marks et al. (2001, p. 357) defined emergent states as ‘quali-
ties of a team that represent member attitudes, values, cognitions, and 
motivations’ and being ‘dynamic in nature and varying as a function of 
team context, inputs, processes, and outcomes’. That is, the collective 
attributes of team members can meld into a group condition capable of 
significant consequences. Although the study of emergent states on ETs 
has made progress (Klotz et al., 2014), especially in studies of collective 
cognition (Klimoski and Mohammed, 1994), shared cognition (Ensley and 
Pearce, 2001) and cohesion (Beal et al., 2003), the emergent state of shared 
leadership has received limited attention in ET research.
This issue first received consideration by Gibb (1954), who challenged 
the traditional assumption that leadership should reside in a single indi-
vidual and stated that leadership was best conceived as a quality that must 
be carried out by the group. More recently, Day et al. (2004) described 
shared leadership as a capacity developed from the leadership repertoire 
of an entire team, and Carson et al. (2007) viewed leadership as distrib-
uted influence across multiple team members. Shared leadership is defined 
here as an emergent state on ETs where complementary leadership influ-
ence flows among team members in response to particular team strategic, 
task, and relational requirements. Empirical research has demonstrated 
the importance of shared leadership in teams, particularly in ETs. For 
example, Ensley et al. (2006) found that shared leadership positively 
related to new venture growth rates.
Researchers have been trying to identify the antecedents of shared lead-
ership by focusing on the situational factors of a team, for example team 
environment and external team coaching (Carson et al., 2007). Results 
have indicated that shared leadership is more likely to emerge when indi-
viduals share a common purpose and when members offer social support 
to one another (ibid.). Also, a supportive external coach can facilitate 
shared leadership (ibid.). However, researchers have not sought to iden-
tify the dispositional attributes that influence the emergence of a shared 
leadership emergent state, although previous studies have identified the 
personality traits that predict the emergence of individual leadership 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

166    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
behavior (Smith and Foti, 1998; Judge et al., 2002). The willingness to 
exercise leadership may be a prerequisite to shared leadership emergence, 
but how team members’ personalities in concert might affect the emer-
gence of shared leadership remains unknown.
ETS’ PERSONALITY COMPOSITION AS 
ANTECEDENTS OF SHARED LEADERSHIP
Team personality includes two components: team mean score on a given 
personality predisposition and team diversity score on a particular pre-
disposition. The mean score reflects the average amount of a particular 
personality trait on a given team, while the diversity score reflects the 
variance among team members on a specific predisposition. A team with 
a high mean score on openness to experience, for example, would suggest 
that the team is more likely to confront novel conditions with innovative 
leadership behaviors. Of course a high score does not indicate that all 
members are high on this trait, but that at least some team members score 
high and elevate the average on this trait for the team. Research suggests 
that team effectiveness is often a function of both similar and diverse traits 
(Hackman, 1987; Moreland and Levine, 1992). Thus regarding personal-
ity, the performance of teams may depend on not only the team’s mean 
score on certain traits but also on the team diversity in some traits. While 
certain personality traits may enhance team performance when diversity 
is low, other traits may benefit team performance when team diversity 
is high. One area of possible application would be new ventures, where 
common entrepreneurial tasks such as scanning environments, selecting 
opportunities, and formulating strategies (Chandler and Jansen, 1992; 
Shane and Venkataraman, 2000) could benefit from different amounts of 
select personality attributes. ET activities may be affected by the amount 
and variety of members’ personality predispositions, such that a team’s 
personality composition becomes an emergent state that can influence 
team functioning and outcomes.
Personality Mean Scores as Antecedents of Shared Leadership
According to the trait theory of leadership, individuals with certain per-
sonality traits are more likely to exercise leadership roles than others. A 
recent meta-­analysis of research on Big Five personality dimensions and 
leadership revealed that emergent leadership is moderately correlated with 
Big Five personality traits (Judge et al., 2002). Shared leadership requires 
that multiple team members be willing to assume leadership roles in 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­167
response to situational conditions. Because of this requirement for emer-
gent leadership, Big Five personality predispositions may be important for 
shared leadership. Specifically, personality traits that predict leadership 
emergence at the individual level may collectively predict team leadership 
as well.
The Big Five personality schema is a well-­established conceptualization 
of personality that consists of five traits: extraversion, conscientiousness, 
openness to experience, emotional stability, and agreeableness (Judge 
et al., 1999). Individuals high on extraversion are described as asser-
tive, talkative, energetic, and optimistic (Costa and McCrae, 1992) and 
are more likely to seek excitement and social attention (Ashton et al., 
2002). In the leadership literature, extraversion has been shown to be 
strongly related to relationship leadership (Costa and McCrae, 1988) and 
leadership emergence (Watson and Clark, 1997) and moderately associ-
ated with leadership effectiveness (Judge et al., 2002). Extraverts’ social 
assertiveness may heighten their inclination to lead, and on a team some 
degree of extraversion may be necessary for enactment of a collaborative 
leadership style such as shared leadership. Another Big Five personality 
trait, conscientiousness, may also relate to the emergent state of shared 
leadership. Conscientious individuals display a strong sense of direction, 
work hard to achieve goals (Costa and McCrae, 1992), and reflect self-­
discipline and organization, and thus they are likely to want to influence 
team performance (Bass, 1990; Hogan and Ones, 1997). Being a member 
of a team may tap a sense of obligation among conscientious individuals. 
Judge et al. (2002) indicated that conscientiousness is a strong predictor of 
emergent leadership.
Openness to experience refers to whether people accept new experiences 
and are interested in novel thought processes (McCrae and John, 1992). 
Openness to experience is strongly related to divergent thinking (McCrae, 
1987) and creativity (McCrae, 1987; Feist, 1998), which can serve as impor-
tant skills for some leadership positions (Sosik et al., 1998). For example, 
on some entrepreneurial teams, members high in openness to experience 
might question old assumptions and stimulate new perspectives (Judge 
et al., 2002). Such creativity is relevant for new ventures for recognizing 
opportunities and stimulating novel ideas about products and practices 
(Ensley et al., 2002). A fourth Big Five personality predisposition poten-
tially associated with shared leadership is emotional stability. Individuals 
high on emotional stability tend to be calm and even-­tempered. Similar 
to extraversion, some degree of emotional stability may be required for 
shared leadership to provide the conditions for cooperation and progress. 
To the extent that emotional stability is associated with self-­esteem, which 
has been linked empirically to leadership (Hill and Ritchie, 1977; Eysenck, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

168    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
1990), an association of emotional stability with shared leadership can be 
expected. Among the Big Five personality traits, agreeableness appears 
unrelated to leadership (Judge et al., 2002), in part because agreeable indi-
viduals are likely to be modest (Goldberg, 1990) and thus unlikely to assert 
themselves (Bass, 1990). A high level of team agreeableness may generate 
sharing but not the leadership component of shared leadership.
At the team level, shared leadership demands that multiple team 
members have a willingness to act as a leader. The previous evidence about 
leadership emergence suggests that teams with a high mean score on extra-
version, conscientiousness, openness to experience, and emotional stabil-
ity will more likely incorporate shared leadership, while a team’s mean 
score on agreeableness will not relate significantly to shared leadership:
Hypotheses 1–4: An ET’s mean score on (1) extraversion, (2) conscien-
tiousness, (3) emotional stability, and (4) openness to experience, respec-
tively, will positively relate to the level of shared leadership.
Hypothesis 5: An ET’s mean score on agreeableness will not relate to the 
level of shared leadership.
Personality Diversity as Antecedents of Shared Leadership
Another aspect of team personality composition, personality diversity, 
may be important to the emergence of the emergent state of shared lead-
ership on entrepreneurial teams. Research suggests that the operational 
compatibility of team members depends on both similar and diverse traits 
(Hackman, 1987; Moreland and Levine, 1992). That is, shared leadership 
involves not only amounts of certain personality traits but also a team’s 
personality diversity on select traits. While certain traits may facilitate the 
emergence of shared leadership when team personality diversity is low, 
other traits may do so when team diversity is high. In addition the require-
ment for task and relationship behaviors for effective groups (McGrath, 
1984; Halfhill et al., 2005) suggests that particular personality traits may 
serve specific purposes regarding shared leadership. Conscientiousness 
and openness to experience are task-­oriented personality traits that lend 
themselves to aiding completion of work activities while agreeableness, 
extraversion, and emotional stability facilitate the interpersonal interac-
tions necessary for teamwork (Halfhill et al., 2005).
One way shared leadership can enhance team performance is through a 
shared purpose among members (Carson et al., 2007). A shared purpose 
refers to similar understandings of a team’s objectives and a focus on col-
lective goals (ibid.). Teams with a higher mean level but lower diversity of 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­169
task-­oriented personality predispositions should reflect consensus about 
task issues, including the degree of effort to put in and the level of per-
formance desired. This will help the team to feel motivated and empow-
ered (O’Leary-­Kelly et al., 1994; Kirkman and Rosen, 1999; Liden et al., 
2000). Teams with higher levels of diversity on task-­oriented personality 
traits may find it difficult to build common purpose and agree on major 
task decisions. As task-­oriented personality traits, conscientiousness and 
openness to experience affect work activities (Halfhill et al., 2005). 
Conscientiousness and openness are predictors of leadership emergence 
(Judge et al., 2002), and thus team members higher on these traits are more 
likely to take leadership roles. Therefore on teams that are diverse on con-
scientiousness and openness, individuals lower on the traits would be less 
willing to assume leadership roles, even when the tasks at hand might tap 
their expertise. In addition, because conscientiousness and openness are 
task-­oriented traits, teams diverse on these attributes may have difficulty 
coordinating task activities (Halfhill et al., 2005). Thus these two traits, 
distributed diversely, likely relate inversely to shared leadership.
Another Big Five personality predisposition, emotional stability, can 
affect relational conditions on teams. Emotional behavior can affect team 
processes (Barsade, 2002) and performance (Van Rooy and Viswesvaran, 
2004). Emotional instability can disrupt team members’ relationships by 
causing distraction, stress, or conflict, and thus diversity on emotional 
stability, including harmful emotions, will prove detrimental to teams’ 
shared leadership. Therefore diversity on conscientiousness, openness to 
experience, and emotional stability will negatively relate to the level of 
shared leadership on teams:
Hypotheses 6–8: Team diversity on (6) conscientiousness, (7) openness to 
experience, and (8) emotional stability, respectively, will negatively relate to 
the level of shared leadership.
Sharing leadership on teams encourages the emergence of needed strategic, 
structuring, and operational leadership behavior as situations require, but 
for this leadership behavior to occur the team must possess a supportive 
interpersonal culture. When members recognize and accept one another 
as potential leaders, focused expertise can guide leadership efforts (Mehra 
et al., 2006). Relationship-­oriented personality traits facilitate team inter-
personal process and determine recognition, emergence, and acceptance 
of others’ leadership skills. Extraversion and agreeableness are attributes 
about which some team diversity can foster a group culture that generates 
contributory interpersonal relations. Uniform extraversion could enhance 
the likelihood of conflict (ibid.) and lessen ­collaboration, whereas member 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

170    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
diversity on extraversion can result in a pattern of contributory assertive-
ness and interaction. The sociability component of extraversion contrib-
utes to a positive relational culture (Gough, 1990). Similarly, uniform 
agreeableness across members can generate groupthink or diminish the 
expression of functional disagreement, suggesting the desirability of diver-
sity regarding agreeableness for the emergence of relationship behavior 
fostering shared leadership. Agreeableness diversity on a team can lead to 
norms favoring goal behaviors (Digman, 1990):
Hypotheses 9–10: Team diversity on (9) extraversion and (10) agreeable-
ness, respectively, will positively relate to the level of shared leadership.
PERFORMANCE EFFECT OF SHARED LEADERSHIP 
IN ETS
As an intangible resource a shared leadership emergent state should 
enhance team performance (Day et al., 2004). First, shared leader-
ship improves the experience of work for individuals by offering incre-
mental self-­determination and opportunity for meaningful impact (Cox 
et al., 2003). This significant work experience should bring higher team 
members’ commitment and thus higher team performance. Second, shared 
leadership also benefits team performance by fully utilizing team members’ 
knowledge and expertise. In complex team environments, a single, hierar-
chical leader is less likely than the team as a whole to have the knowledge 
and skills required to effectively lead (Pearce and Sims, 2000). Shared lead-
ership reaches beyond the limits of individual leader capability through 
the provision of mutual influence among informed team members (Cox 
et al., 2003). Thus teams with high degrees of shared leadership should 
experience higher commitment, bring greater personal and organizational 
resources, and share more information (Katz and Kahn, 1978).
Several recent empirical studies suggest that shared leadership relates 
to team performance, such as team sales (Mehra et al., 2006) and growth 
in revenue (Ensley et al., 2006). Pearce et al. (2004) found that shared 
leadership in teams was a stronger predictor of team performance than 
hierarchical leadership, although Ensley et al. (2006) generated results 
demonstrating both models of leadership contributed value to the per-
formance of start-­ups. Conditions that might moderate the relationship 
between shared leadership and team performance have been explored. 
According to Pearce (2004), shared leadership is more appropriate for 
certain types of knowledge work characterized as interdependent, creative, 
and complex, and Carson et al. (2007) found that shared leadership was 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­171
more likely to be beneficial when the group culture was egalitarian rather 
than hierarchical, when the tasks were complex, and when the functional 
roles on the team were interdependent.
This research demonstrating performance effects for shared leader-
ship and particular appropriateness for interdependent, complex tasks 
undertaken with egalitarian norms suggests the applicability of shared 
leadership for new ventures. Tasks of ETs typically reflect these charac-
teristics because founding teams operate with environmental uncertainty 
and without prior structuring (Bryant, 2004). For ETs, it is rare that the 
leading entrepreneur has all the knowledge and skills to effectively lead 
a team confronting comprehensive, novel tasks (Pearce and Sims, 2000). 
Thus this study of ETs includes this hypothesis:
Hypothesis 11: Shared leadership will positively relate to ETs’ performance.
METHOD
The sample for this study derived from ETs in a technology incubator 
founded in 2009 by the local government of Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 
of China. With support from the government, the incubator aims to 
support start-­up companies by offering office space and shared adminis-
trative services. Entrepreneurs who wish to enter the incubation program 
apply for admission, and those with feasible business ideas and a work-
able business plan are admitted. Other general acceptance criteria include: 
(1)  team members are college students or graduates within five years; 
(2) the start-­up was registered after 2008; and (3) the leading entrepreneur 
owns more than 30 percent of the start-­up.
Data were gathered from 154 ETs, consisting of 516 individual entre-
preneurs. The average age of entrepreneurs was 28 years (SD = 3.6). Of 
the 516 entrepreneurs, 42 percent were female and 58 percent were male. 
Of the 154 teams, ten teams consisted of only two members for each 
team. These ten teams were dropped from the sample because a diversity 
measure could not be calculated from a two-­member team. Thus, data 
analysis was based on usable data from 144 ETs.
This study used a cross-­sectional study design. Participants were 
given a questionnaire that collected data on the independent, depend-
ent, moderator, and control variables. The web-­based survey instrument 
was translated into Chinese and back-­translated into English by two 
independent bilinguals to ensure meaning equivalence across the two 
cultures. ­High-­quality back-­translations are important because close 
­correspondence between the original source language version and the 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

172    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
back-­translated source ­language version is required before reliance can be 
placed on results based on translated scales (Hulin, 1987).
MEASURES
In analyzing the data generated from the research, the following measures 
were utilized to gain a better understanding of the topic.
Team’s Mean Score and Diversity Score on Personality Traits
Team members’ Big Five personality traits were measured by the Chinese 
version of the NEO-­Five Factor Inventory (NEO-­FFI) (Costa and 
McCrae, 1992). The NEO-­FFI includes 12 items measuring each of five 
personality traits: openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, 
agreeableness, and emotional stability. The Cronbach’s coefficient alphas 
for the five traits have ranged from 0.75 to 0.83 (ibid.). A team’s mean 
score on the personality traits was measured by the mean personality score 
on each trait for each team. Team personality diversity was measured by 
the standard deviation of personality scores on each personality trait for 
each team (Barrick et al., 1998).
ETs’ Performance
Both subjective and objective measures of performance were used in this 
study. First, team performance was measured by a 16-­item scale devel-
oped by Pearce and Sims (2002) to evaluate facets of team effectiveness. 
Cronbach’s alpha for the present sample was 0.92. Second, team perfor-
mance was also measured with growth in employment, which has been 
widely used as an objective measure of start-­up performance (Westhead and 
Storey, 1994; Colomb and Delmastro, 2002; Löfsten and Lindelöf, 2002).
Shared Leadership
Shared leadership was measured with the approach used by Carson et al. 
(2007) focusing on density, which is a measure of the total amount of 
leadership displayed by team members as perceived by the members. 
Every team member rated each of his or her peers (1, ‘not at all’, to 5, ‘to 
a very great extent’) on the following question: ‘To what degree does your 
team rely on this individual for leadership?’ The density was calculated 
by summing all values and then dividing that sum by the total number of 
­possible relationships among team members (Sparrowe et al., 2001).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­173
Control Variables
Team size can influence team functioning. For example, Bantel and 
Finkelstein (1991) found that larger teams have lower cohesion. Team size 
may influence resources and workload requirements that can affect entre-
preneurial team performance (Kirkman and Rosen, 1999). Therefore, 
team size was included as a control variable in this study and was meas-
ured as the actual number of members on each team. Employee ownership 
can affect a member’s commitment to an enterprise and thus the willing-
ness to work together productively (Rosen and Quarrey, 1987; Buchko, 
1992). Therefore, stock ownership dispersion among entrepreneurial team 
members may have an effect on their shared leadership behavior and per-
formance and thus should be included as a control variable.
RESULTS
Table 8.1 presents the means, standard deviations, and zero-­order cor-
relations for all of the variables used in the analysis. While this study 
concentrates on antecedents of shared leadership, it is noteworthy that 
the correlations reveal several significant relationships between team 
personality characteristics and team performance, suggesting the appro-
priateness of examining a model of relationships among team members’ 
personalities, shared leadership, and team performance.
To test Hypotheses 1 through 4 that team mean score on extraversion, 
conscientiousness, emotional stability, and openness will positively relate 
to level of shared leadership and Hypothesis 5 that team mean score on 
agreeableness will not, shared leadership was regressed on the independ-
ent variables using hierarchical regression analysis. Table 8.2 shows the 
results for these analyses. In Model 1 only the control variables of team 
size and ownership dispersion were entered into the model, and neither 
of the control variables was significantly related to shared leadership. 
In Model 2, team mean scores on the Big Five personality traits were 
entered. Results of Model 2 (F = 4.59, p < 0.01) indicate that the consci-
entiousness mean score had a significant relationship with shared leader-
ship (b = 0.28, p < 0.01), as did the openness to experience mean score 
(b = 0.22, p  <  0.05). These findings provide support for Hypotheses  2 
and 4. However, Hypothesis 5 indicating that group agreeableness is not 
significantly related to shared leadership was not supported. Actually, 
agreeableness was shown to be negatively related to shared leadership 
(b = −0.25, p < 0.01). The relationships between the extraversion mean 
score (b = −0.01, n.s.) and emotional stability mean score (b = −0.10, n.s) 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

174
Table 8.1  Descriptive statistics
Mean
SD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
  1 Team size
3.5
0.68
  2 Ownership  
dispersion
0.2
0.33
−0.06
  3 A_mean
30.0
3.36
0.01
0.12
  4 C_mean
31.7
3.40
0.05
−0.05
0.07
  5 E_mean
29.2
3.83
−0.16
0.08
0.24** 0.44**
  6 ES_mean
27.4
3.60
−0.04
0.05
0.06
0.42**
0.53**
  7 O_mean
28.3
4.52
−0.09
0.06
0.16
0.09
0.33** 0.25**
  8 A_sd
5.3
2.71
0.00
0.01 −0.28** 0.15
0.05
0.14
0.15
  9 C_sd
5.8
3.02
0.08
0.00
0.06
−0.30** −0.02
0.018
0.07
−0.19*
10 E_sd
6.0
2.89
0.15
−0.03
0.03
0.06
−0.016
0.10
0.15
0.18*
0.27**
11 ES_sd
7.2
3.17
0.05
−0.16
0.05
0.27**
0.07
0.05
0.17*
0.14
0.17*
0.28**
12 O_sd
6.2
3.09
−0.10
0.10 −0.02
0.18*
0.00
0.00
−0.16* −0.20*
0.07
−0.07
0.13
13 Shared 
leadership
3.5
0.64
0.00
−0.03 −0.21*
0.22**
0.04
0.03
0.17*
0.27** −0.14
0.25** 0.19*
−0.17*
14 ET 
effectiveness
42.4
8.57
−0.03
−0.13 −0.17*
0.27**
0.26** 0.19*
0.36**
0.48** −0.22** 0.22** 0.23** −0.2*
0.45**
15 Employment 
growth rate
0.49
0.52
0.02
−0.03 −0.13
0.19*
0.19*
0.16
0.28**
0.32** −0.15
0.09
0.24** −0.16
0.33** 0.57**
Notes:
N = 144 teams.
O = Openness to experience; C = Conscientiousness; E = Extraversion; A = Agreeableness; ES = Emotional Stability.
* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

175
Table 8.2  Results of hierarchical regression models
Shared Leadership
ET Effectiveness
Employment Growth Rate
Model 1
b
Model 2
b
Model 3
b
Model 4
b
Model 5
b
Model 6
b
Model 7
b
Team size
−0.01
−0.01
−0.05
−0.01
−0.01
0.05
0.06
Ownership dispersion
−0.03
0.01
0.05
−0.11
−0.11
0.01
0.01
Extraversion mean
−0.05
−0.01
0.20*
0.20*
0.12
0.12
Conscientiousness mean
0.28**
0.23*
0.06
0.01
0.01
−0.03
Emotional stability mean
−0.10
−0.12
−0.04
−0.01
0.03
0.05
Openness mean
0.22*
0.13
0.24**
0.21**
0.20*
0.17*
Agreeableness mean
−0.25**
−0.24**
−0.17*
−0.12
−0.15
−0.11
Extraversion diversity
0.23**
0.15*
−0.10
0.01
−0.04
Conscientiousness diversity
−0.11
−0.21*
−0.18*
−0.16
−0.14
Emotional stability diversity
0.10
0.12
−0.10
0.22*
0.20*
Openness diversity
−0.18*
−0.11
−0.07
−0.12
−0.09
Agreeableness diversity
0.06
0.28**
0.26**
0.15*
0.14
Shared leadership
0.23**
0.18*
Model F statistics
0.06
4.59**
3.74*
8.50**
9.61**
3.61**
3.77**
R2
0.001
0.15
0.25
0.45
0.49
0.25
0.27
Adjusted R2
0.001
0.10
0.18
0.40
0.44
0.18
0.20
Notes:
N = 144 teams.
b: Standardized regression coefficient.
* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

176    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
with shared leadership were not significant, therefore Hypotheses 1 and 3 
were not supported. Thus three personality predispositions were signifi-
cantly associated with the emergence of shared leadership, and the pattern 
of significant relationships indicated the importance of task oriented per-
sonality predispositions as compared to relationship-­oriented traits.
To test Hypotheses 6 through 10 regarding the relationships between 
personality diversity on each Big Five trait and shared leadership, the 
five personality diversity variables were included in Model 3. Results 
of Model 3 (F = 3.74, p < 0.05) show that openness diversity was nega-
tively related to shared leadership (b = −0.18, p < 0.05), and therefore 
Hypothesis 7 was supported. As Hypothesis 9 predicted, extraversion 
diversity was positively related to shared leadership (b = 0.23, p < 0.01). 
Thus some variance in some personality characteristics appears desirable 
for the development of shared leadership. The relationships of conscien-
tiousness diversity, emotional stability diversity, and agreeableness diver-
sity with shared leadership were not significant and thus the respective 
hypotheses (6, 8, 10) were not supported.
Hypothesis 11 asserted that shared leadership will positively relate to 
team performance. Perceived team effectiveness and employment growth 
rate, respectively, were regressed on control and independent variables. In 
Model 4 (F = 8.50, p < 0.01), team effectiveness was regressed on team size, 
ownership dispersion, and Big Five mean and diversity scores. In Model 
5 (F = 9.61, p < 0.01), shared leadership was included. Model 5 explains a 
significant amount of the variance in team effectiveness (R2 = 0.49 p < 0.01) 
and indicates a positive and significant relationship between shared leader-
ship and team effectiveness (b = 0.23, p < 0.01), supporting Hypothesis 11.
In Model 6 (F = 3.61, p < 0.01), employment growth rate was regressed 
on team size, ownership dispersion, and Big Five mean and diversity 
scores. In Model 7 (F = 3.77, p < 0.01), shared leadership was included. 
The results indicate a positive and significant relationship between shared 
leadership and employment growth rate (b = 0.18, p < 0.01), supporting 
Hypothesis 11 as well.
DISCUSSION
Individual attributes of team members can accumulate to emerge as an 
identifiable state that affects group functioning (Marks et al., 2001), and 
personality traits can constitute an important component of such an emer-
gent state. In this context the primary purpose of this study was to inves-
tigate the dispositional antecedents of a shared leadership emergent state 
on ETs. The findings provided support for the significant relation between 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­177
personality composition and shared leadership in ETs. As hypothesized, 
ET mean scores on conscientiousness and openness and diversity scores 
on extraversion were positively related to the amount of shared leadership, 
while diversity on openness was negatively related to shared leadership. 
The second purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between 
shared leadership and team performance. Using a subjective measure of 
team effectiveness and an objective measure of employment growth rate, 
this study provided empirical support that shared leadership improves 
entrepreneurial team performance. Thus this study contributed to under-
standing antecedents and consequences of shared leadership on teams, 
with both theoretical and applied implications.
Theoretical Implications
Although the importance of shared leadership in working teams has been 
established (Ensley et al., 2002; Pearce and Sims, 2002; Wang et al., 2014), 
limited understanding of its antecedent conditions has existed. Previously 
studied conditions include shared purpose, social support, and team coach-
ing (Carson et al., 2007). However, there is a need to examine individual 
attributes of team members as possible determinants. Operationalizing 
personality composition as a characteristic of teams, this study explored 
its impact on shared leadership for ETs. The findings show that team con-
scientiousness and team openness to experience predict shared leadership. 
Similar to previous research demonstrating linkage between individual 
conscientiousness and leadership emergence (Judge et al., 2002), conscien-
tiousness may instill felt responsibility to act in pursuit of goals by assert-
ing leadership, particularly in instances of shared ownership. The finding 
that team openness to experience is positively related to shared leadership 
is understandable in view of the unstructured, complex nature of entrepre-
neurial tasks that require collaboration. Openness to experience has been 
shown to be related to individual creativity (Feist, 1998), coping well with 
change (Judge et al., 1999), and capability for adapting to the environment 
(LePine, 2003).
The other three personality attributes included here, extraversion, 
agreeableness, and emotional stability, did not relate to shared leader-
ship as hypothesized. The hypothesis of the extraversion mean effect was 
not supported while the diversity effect of extraversion was supported. 
The person–team fit perspective (Kristof, 1996; Hollenbeck et al., 2002) 
may provide an explanation for this finding. Complementary fit suggests 
that individuals fit the team when they bring added value to the team 
and assume interdependent roles with specific skills or traits necessary 
to team needs (Biddle, 1979; Cable and Edwards, 2004). Thus, focused 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

178    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
­participation and not frequent participation may be desirable for shared 
leadership on ETs. The possibility of a counterintuitive finding of a nega-
tive relationship between team agreeableness and shared leadership could 
derive from team members’ willingness to accept emergent leadership of 
an assertive or high-­status individual. This agreeable acceptance of such 
influence may not be experienced as shared leadership. Regarding emo-
tional stability, while it appears surprising that emotional stability was not 
significantly associated with shared leadership, the Big Five dimension of 
emotional stability taps a broad domain, such that a more precise emo-
tional sensibility may be relevant to shared leadership.
Several complementary findings in this study further help explain per-
sonality composition for shared leadership. The hypothesized finding that 
team diversity on openness to experience is negatively associated with 
shared leadership complements the result that the amount of team open-
ness relates positively to shared leadership, indicating clearly the impor-
tance of members’ receptivity to acquiring varied information for sharing 
leadership. Of course this study’s research design allows the possibility 
that sharing leadership may contribute to more openness as well, but it is 
not likely that a short-­term team experience would affect a personality pre-
disposition. A second pair of complementary findings contributes further 
to knowledge about shared leadership. The amount of team extraversion 
did not relate significantly to shared leadership but team extraversion 
diversity did, suggesting that group variance in social assertiveness fur-
thers shared leadership, whereas uniformly high or low social assertiveness 
does not. A mix of extroverted and introverted personalities on a team can 
foster desirable balance (Barry and Stewart, 1997). Another meaningful 
pattern of complementary findings emerged in this study in that higher 
extraversion diversity and lower team agreeableness were found associated 
with shared leadership. This pair of findings may suggest the importance 
of selective, goal-­defined team member input for effective shared leader-
ship. These findings enhance understanding of personality composition 
for ET shared leadership and suggest that the structure of emergent states 
on teams involves diversity, as well as an amount of individual attributes.
It is important to consider the nature of the sample in this study when 
interpreting the findings. The sample of the current study was limited to 
young entrepreneurs with limited professional experience. Although no 
conclusive evidence indicates that age influences entrepreneurial activity 
or outcome (Lange et al., 2014), young entrepreneurs possess little or no 
professional or entrepreneurial experience. Prior entrepreneurial experience 
has been shown as important to entrepreneurial outcomes at individual and 
team levels (Zhou and Rosini, 2015; Zhou et al., 2015). More specifically, 
young entrepreneurs lacking relevant experience may affect team dynamics 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­179
(Beckman, 2006). The sample of the current study was also limited to entre-
preneurial teams with a limited partnership structure (i.e., one team member 
possessed at least 30 percent of the shares), such that limited partners may 
have relinquished some managerial influence in exchange for limited liabil-
ity for the partnership’s debts. This study also excluded entrepreneurial 
teams with only two members because dyads potentially behave differ-
ently than single entrepreneurs or large entrepreneurial teams (Forster, 
2008). With data from the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics, 
Forster (2008) found that nascent entrepreneurs who partner with one 
other individual early in the life of the firm, and especially those who share 
equity evenly, are both more likely to establish a business and less likely to 
abandon the start-­up process than any other number of founding partners. 
Furthermore, since only new start-­ups were considered in the current study, 
findings cannot be generalized to later stages of new ventures. It may be that 
the relative importance of vertical versus shared leadership is dependent on 
the developmental stage of the organization (Ensley et al., 2006). Therefore, 
it might be useful to examine the relationships among team diversity, shared 
leadership and entrepreneurial team performance longitudinally across 
various stages in the entrepreneurship life cycle.
Practical Implications
Because the social dynamics of ETs carry consequences for team lead-
ership and performance, public and private funding agencies should 
consider entrepreneurial team composition and leadership structuring 
when making funding decisions. While technical skills obviously deserve 
evaluation by potential funders, the form of leadership does as well. In 
addition to funding decisions incorporating leadership criteria, funding 
purposes should include allocations for leadership development and train-
ing. Second, this study provides entrepreneurs with implications regarding 
team member selection. The findings suggest that entrepreneurial team 
founders, to benefit from the informational diversity team members desir-
ably bring, should share leadership. That is, each team member should 
be willing and able to assume leadership roles when tasks require, but 
additional comparative research should be undertaken to determine the 
generalizability of this implication. Finally, ETs can promote shared lead-
ership by selecting team members who have a good ‘fit’ regarding person-
ality traits. Based on this study, fit should be addressed in terms of both 
amount and diversity of personality traits.
While this study lends further support to the efficacy of the emergent state 
of shared leadership for ETs, the contingent nature of emergent states and 
leadership styles should constrain urges for comprehensive ­prescription. 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

180    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
The results of this study apply to ETs in their early stages of venture 
development. As new ventures grow and tasks and structure become more 
defined, the findings may not be pertinent to later stages of new ventures. It 
would be desirable to examine the relationships among team composition, 
shared leadership, and entrepreneurial team performance longitudinally 
across various stages in the entrepreneurship life cycle and with different 
samples. Different patterns of antecedents and different leadership models 
may assume more importance. Demonstrating the relevance of personal-
ity composition to shared leadership on ETs and the mediating function 
of this leadership for team performance encourages additional research 
incorporating other shared leadership models and settings. The promise of 
meaningful applied knowledge should reinforce these initiatives.
REFERENCES
Ashton, M.C., K. Lee and S.V. Paunonen (2002), ‘What is the central feature of ­extraversion? 
Social attention versus reward sensitivity’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
83 (1), 245–52.
Bantel, K.A. and S. Finkelstein (1991), ‘The determinants of top management teams’, paper 
presented at the Academy of Management Meeting, Miami.
Barrick, M.R., G.L. Stewart and M.J. Neubert et al. (1998), ‘Relating member ability and 
personality to work-­team processes and team effectiveness’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 
83 (3), 377–91.
Barry, B. and G.L. Stewart (1997), ‘Composition, process, and performance in self-­managed 
groups: The role of personality’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 82 (1), 62–78.
Barsade, S.G. (2002), ‘The ripple effect: Emotional contagion and its influence on group 
behavior’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 47 (4), 644–75.
Bass, B.M. (1990), ‘From transactional to transformational leadership: Learning to share the 
vision’, Organizational Dynamics, 18 (3), 19–31.
Beal, D.J., R.R. Cohen, M.J. Burke and C.L. McLendon (2003), ‘Cohesion and perfor-
mance in groups: A meta-­analytic clarification of construct relations’, Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 88 (6), 989–1004.
Beckman, C.M. (2006), ‘The influence of founding team company affiliations on firm behav-
ior’, Academy of Management Journal, 49 (4), 741–58.
Biddle, B.J. (1979), Role Theory: Expectations, Identities and Behaviors, New York: 
Academic Press.
Bryant, T.A. (2004), ‘Entrepreneurship’, in G.R. Goethals, G.J. Sorensen and J.M. Burns 
(eds), Encyclopedia of Leadership, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 442–8.
Buchko, A. (1992), ‘Employee ownership, attitudes, and turnover: An empirical assessment’, 
Human Relations, 45, 711–33.
Cable, D.M. and J.R. Edwards (2004), ‘Complementary and supplementary fit: A theoretical 
and empirical integration’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 89 (5), 822–34.
Carson, J.B., P.E. Tesluk and J.A. Marrone (2007), ‘Shared leadership in teams: An inves-
tigation of antecedent conditions and performance’, Academy of Management Journal, 
50 (5), 1217–34.
Chandler, G.N. and E. Jansen (1992), ‘The founder’s self-­assessed competence and venture 
performance’, Journal of Business Venturing, 7 (3), 223–36.
Colomb, M.G. and M. Delmastro (2002), ‘How effective are technology incubators? 
Evidence from Italy’, Research Policy, 31 (7), 1103–22.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­181
Cooper, A.C., C. Woo and W.C. Dunkelberg (1989), ‘Entrepreneurship and the initial size of 
firms’, Journal of Business Venturing, 4 (5), 317–32.
Costa, Jr., P.T. and R.R. McCrae (1988), ‘From catalog to classification: Murray’s needs 
and the five-­factor model’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55 (2), 258–65.
Costa, P.T. and R.R. McCrae (1992), NEO PI-­R. Professional Manual, Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.
Cox, J.F., C.L. Pearce and M.L. Perry (2003), ‘Toward a model of shared leadership and 
distributed influence in the innovation process: How shared leadership can enhance new 
product development team dynamics and effectiveness’, in C.L. Pearce and J.A. Conger 
(eds), Shared Leadership: Reframing the Hows and Whys of Leadership, Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publishing, pp. 48–76.
Day, D., P. Gronn and E. Salas (2004), ‘Leadership capacity in teams’, Leadership Quarterly, 
15 (6), 857–80.
Digman, J.M. (1990), ‘Personality structure: Emergence of a five-­factor model’, Annual 
Review of Psychology, 41, 417–40.
Ensley, M.D. and C.L. Pearce (2001), ‘Shared cognition in top management teams: Implica­
tions for new venture performance’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22 (2), 145–60.
Ensley, M.D., J.W. Carland and J.C. Carland (1998), ‘The effect of entrepreneurial team skill 
heterogeneity and functional diversity on new venture performance’, Journal of Business 
and Entrepreneurship, 10 (1), 1–14.
Ensley, M.D., K.M. Hmieleski and C.L. Pearce (2006), ‘The importance of vertical and 
shared leadership within new venture top management teams: Implications for the perfor-
mance of startups’, Leadership Quarterly, 17 (4), 217–31.
Ensley, M.D., A.W. Pearson and A.C. Amason (2002), ‘Understanding the dynamics of new 
venture top management teams: Cohesion, conflict and new venture performance’, Journal 
of Business Venturing, 17 (4), 365–86.
Eysenck, H. (1990), ‘Biological dimensions of personality’, in L.A. Pervin (ed.), Handbook of 
Personality: Theory and Research, New York: Guilford Press, pp. 244–76.
Feist, G.J. (1998), ‘A meta-­analysis of personality in scientific and artistic creativity’, 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2 (4), 290–309.
Forster, W. (2008), ‘The enduring partnership’, Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 
28 (11), Article 3, summary accessed 16 August 2016 at http://digitalknowledge.babson.
edu/fer/vol28/iss11/3.
Gibb, C.A. (1954), ‘Leadership’, in G. Lindzey (ed.), Handbook of Social Psychology, Vol. 2, 
Reading, MA: Addison-­Wesley, pp. 877–917.
Goldberg, L.R. (1990), ‘An alternative “description of personality”: The Big-­Five factor 
structure’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59 (6), 1216–29.
Gough, H.G. (1990), ‘Testing for leadership with the California Psychological Inventory’, 
in K. Clark and M. Clark (eds), Measures of Leadership, Greensboro, NC: Center for 
Creative Leadership, pp. 355–79.
Hackman, J.R. (1987), ‘The design of work teams’, in J.W. Lorsch (ed.), Handbook of 
Organizational Behavior, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, pp. 315–42.
Halfhill, T., E. Sundstrom and J. Lahner et al. (2005), ‘Group personality composition and 
group effectiveness: An integrative review of empirical research’, Small Group Research, 
36 (1), 83–105.
Hambrick, D.C. and P.A. Mason (1984), ‘Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection 
of its top managers’, Academy of Management Review, 9 (2), 193–206.
Hill, N.C. and J.B. Ritchie (1977), ‘The effect of self-­esteem on leadership and achievement: 
A paradigm and a review’, Group and Organization Studies, 2 (4), 491–503.
Hogan, R. and D. Ones (1997), ‘Conscientiousness and integrity at work’, in R. Hogan, 
J. Johnson and S. Briggs (eds), Handbook of Personality Psychology, New York: Academic 
Press, pp. 849–70.
Hollenbeck, J.R., H. Moon and A.P.J. Ellis et al. (2002), ‘Structural contingency theory and 
individual differences: Examination of external and internal person-­team fit’, Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 87 (3), 599–606.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

182    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Hulin, C.L. (1987), ‘A psychometric theory of evaluations of items and scale translations: 
Fidelity across languages’, Journal of Cross-­Cultural Psychology, 18 (2), 115–42.
Judge, T.A., J.E. Bono, R. Ilies and M.W. Gerhardt (2002), ‘Personality and leadership: A 
qualitative and quantitative review’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 87 (4), 765–80.
Judge, T.A., C.A. Higgins, C.J. Thoresen and M.R. Barrick (1999), ‘The Big Five personality 
traits, general mental ability and career success across the lifespan’, Personnel Psychology, 
52 (3), 621–52.
Katz, D. and R.L. Kahn (1978), The Social Psychology of Organizations, 2nd edition, 
New York: Wiley.
Kirkman, B.L. and B. Rosen (1999), ‘Beyond self-­management: Antecedents and conse-
quences of team empowerment’, Academy of Management Journal, 42 (1), 58–74.
Klimoski, R. and S. Mohammed (1994), ‘Team mental model: Construct or metaphor’, 
Journal of Management, 20 (2), 403–37.
Klotz, A.C., K.M. Hmieleski, B.H. Bradley and L.W. Busenitz (2014), ‘New venture teams: 
A review of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 
40 (1), 226–55.
Kristof, A.L. (1996), ‘Person–organization fit: An integrative review of its conceptualiza-
tions, measurement, and implications’, Personnel Psychology, 49 (1), 1–49.
Lange, J., E. Marram and I. Murphy et al. (2014), ‘Born lucky? A study of the birthdates 
and ages of paradigm-­shifting entrepreneurs’, accessed 22 March 2015 at http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2412096.
Lechler, T. (2001), ‘Social interaction: A determinant of entrepreneurial team venture 
success’, Small Business Economics, 16 (4), 263–78.
LePine, J.A. (2003), ‘Team adaptation and postchange performance: Effects of team 
composition in terms of members cognitive ability and personality’, Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 88 (1), 27–39.
Liden, R.C., S.J. Wayne and R.T. Sparrowe (2000), ‘An examination of the mediating role of 
psychological empowerment on the relations between the job, interpersonal relationships, 
and work outcomes’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 85 (3), 407–16.
Löfsten, H. and P. Lindelöf (2002), ‘Science parks and the growth of new technology-­based 
firms – academic–industry links, innovation and markets’, Research Policy, 31 (6), 859–76.
Marks, M.A., J.E. Mathieu and S.J. Zaccaro (2001), ‘A conceptual framework and tax-
onomy of team processes’, Academy of Management Review, 26 (3), 356–76.
McCrae, R. (1987), ‘Creativity, divergent thinking, and openness to experience’, Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 52 (6), 1258–65.
McCrae, R.R. and O. John (1992), ‘An introduction to the five-­factor model and its applica-
tions’, Journal of Personality, 60 (2), 174–214.
McGrath, J.E. (1984), Groups: Interaction and Performance, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-­
Hall, Inc.
Mehra, A., B. Smith, A. Dixon and B. Robertson (2006), ‘Distributed leadership in teams: 
The network of leadership perceptions and team performance’, Leadership Quarterly, 
17 (3), 232–45.
Moreland, R.L. and J.M. Levine (1992), ‘The composition of small groups’, in E. Lawler, 
B. Markovsky, C. Ridgeway and H. Walker (eds), Advances in Group Processes, Vol. 9, 
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, pp. 237–80.
O’Leary-­Kelly, A.M., J.J. Martocchio and D.D. Frink (1994), ‘A review of the influence of 
group goals on group performance’, Academy of Management Journal, 37 (5), 1285–301.
Pearce, C.L. (2004), ‘The future of leadership: Combining vertical and shared leadership to 
transform knowledge work’, Academy of Management Executive, 18 (1), 47–57.
Pearce, C.L. and H.P. Sims (2000), ‘Shared leadership: Toward a multi-­level theory of 
leadership’, in M.M. Beyerlein, D.A. Johnson and S.T. Beyerlein (eds), Advances in 
Interdisciplinary Studies of Work Teams, Vol. 7, Amsterdam: JAI Press, pp. 115–39.
Pearce, C.L. and H.P. Sims (2002), ‘The relative influence of vertical vs. shared leadership 
on the longitudinal effectiveness of change management teams’, Group Dynamics: Theory, 
Research, and Practice, 6 (2), 172–97.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Dispositional antecedents of shared leadership    ­183
Pearce, C.L., Y. Yoo and M. Alavi (2004), ‘Leadership, social work and virtual teams: The 
relative influence of vertical vs. shared leadership in the nonprofit sector’, in R.E. Riggio 
and S. Smith-­Orr (eds), Improving Leadership in Nonprofit Organizations, San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-­Bass, pp. 180–203.
Rosen, C. and M. Quarrey (1987), ‘How well is employee ownership working?’, Harvard 
Business Review, 65 (5), 126–32.
Shane, S. and S. Venkataraman (2000), ‘The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of 
research’, Academy of Management Review, 25 (1), 217–26.
Smith, J. and R. Foti (1998), ‘A pattern approach to the study of leader emergence’, 
Leadership Quarterly, 9 (2), 147–60.
Sosik, J.J., S.S. Kahai and B.J. Avolio (1998), ‘Inspiring group creativity’, Small Group 
Research, 29 (1), 3–31.
Sparrowe, R.T., R.C. Liden, S.J. Wayne and M.L. Kraimer (2001), ‘Social networks and the 
performance of individuals and groups’, Academy of Management Journal, 44 (2), 316–25.
Van Rooy, D. and C. Viswesvaran (2004), ‘Emotional intelligence: A meta-­analytic investi-
gation of predictive validity and nomological net’, Journal of Vocational Behavior, 65 (1), 
71–95.
Wang, D., D. Waldman and Z. Zhang (2014), ‘A meta-­analysis of shared leadership and 
team effectiveness’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 99 (2), 181–98.
Watson, D. and L.A. Clark (1997), ‘Extraversion and its positive emotional core’, in 
R. Hogan, J. Johnson and S. Briggs (eds), Handbook of Personality Psychology, San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press, pp. 767–93.
West, G.P. (2007), ‘Collective cognition: When entrepreneurial teams, not individuals, make 
decisions’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31 (1), 77–102.
Westhead, P. and D.J. Storey (1994), An Assessment of Firms Located On and Off Science 
Parks in the United Kingdom, London: HMSO.
Zhou, W. and E. Rosini (2015), ‘Entrepreneurial team diversity and performance: Toward an 
integrated model’, Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 5 (1), 31–60.
Zhou, W., D. Vredenburgh and E.G. Rogoff (2015), ‘Informational diversity and entre-
preneurial team performance: Moderating effect of shared leadership’, International 
Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 11 (1), 39–55.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

PART III
CONTEXTUALIZING 
ENTREPRENEURIAL 
TEAMS
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

187
9.  Family entrepreneurial teams
Allan Discua Cruz, Elias Hadjielias and 
Carole Howorth
INTRODUCTION
Throughout the world, the majority of firms are family-­owned businesses. 
On average they comprise 75 per cent of all businesses (Burkart et al., 
2003; IFERA, 2003), yet researchers continue to focus their attentions 
on the role of the individual entrepreneur. Indeed, until recently, very 
little attention has been paid to any collective form of entrepreneurship 
(Gartner et al., 1994; Ogbor, 2000). Whilst some individuals clearly engage 
in the entrepreneurial process entirely on their own, others turn to those 
closest to them for information, support and resources, and some team up 
with family, friends or acquaintances to start, acquire and/or develop one 
or more ventures. This teaming up of individuals is a collective approach 
to entrepreneurship and has only started to attract serious research atten-
tion since the turn of the century, most notably under the concept of entre-
preneurial teams (Cooney, 2005; Wright and Vanaelst, 2009; Iacobucci 
and Rosa, 2010). Compared to solo entrepreneurs, entrepreneurial teams 
may have distinct advantages in the start-­up and development of busi-
nesses (Lechler, 2001). However, entrepreneurial teams composed of 
family members have received very little attention Ucbasaran et al., 2003; 
Howorth et al., 2014), despite families representing the strongest and most 
enduring relationship for many individuals and would-­be entrepreneurs 
who look first to family for support, resources and potential partners in 
entrepreneurship (Alsos et al., 2014).
Entrepreneurship by family members banding together predates written 
records (Hoy and Verser, 1994; Discua Cruz, 2013) and it is arguable that 
family businesses, more than any other enterprises, have stood the test of 
time (Howorth et al., 2010). The most common entrepreneurial team is the 
husband and wife model (Marshack, 1993; Cooney, 2005), but studies of 
entrepreneurial teams have generally tended to dismiss family entrepre-
neurial teams (Wright and Vanaelst, 2009). Instead, studies of family busi-
ness have traditionally focused on the family business as a unit of analysis 
rather than the families behind businesses, who may have a portfolio of 
enterprises and operate as an entrepreneurial team (Discua Cruz et al., 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

188    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
2013). So, while family members often act jointly to establish, grow, and 
perpetuate family businesses, the study of entrepreneurial teams in the 
context of family businesses (Pearson et al., 2014) and families in business 
remains scarce (Chua et al., 2003).
This chapter aims to provide a better understanding of entrepreneurial 
teams composed of family members. In doing this, the emphasis is on 
the family in business, not a family business (Moores, 2009; Nordqvist 
and Melin, 2010). It is important to avoid oversimplifying the concept, 
role and functioning of the entrepreneurial team and to recognize that 
entrepreneurial teams are contextually situated. Family entrepreneurial 
teams (FETs) have particular challenges that arise from their unique com-
position of individuals related to each other by kinship or marriage; their 
formation process may be fraught with emotion and obligation; inter-
personal processes may dominate team dynamics; family team members 
may find it more difficult to exit than non-­family, and families may have 
non-­financial objectives that distinguish them from other entrepreneurial 
teams (Wright and Vanaelst, 2009; Discua Cruz et al., 2013).
This chapter explains the challenges and issues that family entrepre-
neurial teams face and compares them with other types of entrepreneurial 
teams. A synthesis of the key concepts in entrepreneurial teams enables 
refinement of the definition of FET. The chapter then delves into the for-
mation, composition, interpersonal processes, turnover and potential out-
comes of FETs. In concluding, the implications of the distinction between 
FETs and other types of entrepreneurial teams are drawn out.
ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS
The chapters in this book on entrepreneurial teams challenge the mythical 
atomized entrepreneur who seeks out, evaluates and materializes opportu-
nities in isolation (Gartner et al., 1994; Ogbor, 2000; Johannisson, 2003). 
Studies of entrepreneurial teams appreciate that entrepreneurship is often 
a collective activity (Cooney, 2005; Wright and Vanaelst, 2009; Iacobucci 
and Rosa, 2010) and early studies emphasized the economic rationale 
for entrepreneurial teams’ formation being linked mainly to new venture 
creation (Wright and Vanaelst, 2009). In 2005, a special issue of the 
International Small Business Journal defined entrepreneurial teams as ‘two 
or more individuals who have a significant financial interest and partici-
pate actively in the development of the enterprise’ (Cooney, 2005, p. 229). 
Cooney’s definition did not restrict the entrepreneurial team concept 
to venture creation or economic rationales. For family entrepreneurial 
teams, this is especially relevant as families in business have been shown to 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­189
have a wide range of financial and non-­financial motivations (Westhead 
and Howorth, 2007) and families may form entrepreneurial teams at 
varying points of business development, for example as part of the suc-
cession process, not just at the initial venture creation stages (Discua Cruz 
et  al., 2013). Family business research has emphasized the ­succession 
of ownership and management within an existing business. Taking an 
entrepreneurial team’s perspective moves away from only examining 
established management teams or boards to consider how family members 
respond to stimuli and engage in entrepreneurship outside of the bounds 
of an established business (Forbes et al., 2006).
Entrepreneurial teams may come together to seek opportunities or 
they may be formed after an opportunity is identified (Cooney, 2005). 
For family entrepreneurial teams, formation may be a long process with 
evolving roles as junior family members become increasingly involved. 
Like family firms, entrepreneurial teams are not homogeneous (Forbes 
et al., 2006; Westhead and Howorth, 2007) and vary as size and roles 
relate to the type of venture being created, the skills and experience of 
individual members and when they join the team (Kamm et al., 1990). 
The composition of entrepreneurial teams may also be linked to their 
effectiveness; although entrepreneurial teams have more human capital 
(skills, expertise, education) and social capital than a solo entrepreneur 
(Ucbasaran et al., 2003; Westhead et al., 2005), homophily may negate 
the marginal effect as entrepreneurs seek trusted others and those with 
whom they have existing strong relationships (e.g., family and friends) 
(Ruef et al., 2003). If entrepreneurial team formation and composition 
are examined purely from a resource-­based perspective (Barney, 1991), 
then homophily is viewed negatively and variety is seen as advantageous. 
However, trust, psychological safety and team dynamics may be more 
important to effective team working than resource-­based advantages. 
Johnson et al. (2015) found that team relationships were crucial for 
the exchange of relevant information or knowledge to complete tasks. 
Conflict is increased where norms are not established and relationships 
lack positive interactions (Jehn and Mannix, 2001; Hackman, 2002) that 
may increase team turnover (Ucbasaran et al., 2003). Trust takes time 
to develop and will be lower in entrepreneurial teams with no previous 
experience of working together. Family members have long-­established 
knowledge of each other prior to coming together, which may increase 
trust and psychological safety, but where ingrained beliefs about the 
expected behaviour, work ethic and trustworthiness of other family 
members are negative, family members may position themselves in 
opposing factions and entrepreneurial team relationships could be belea-
guered by conflict and emotional responses.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

190    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
The entry and exit of entrepreneurial team members has also been exam-
ined from a resource-­based view, highlighting association with the need 
for specific human or social capital, finance or other resources (Ucbasaran 
et al., 2003). However, even in non-­family entrepreneurial teams, new 
member entry may be concerned with aspects such as trust and familiar-
ity more than with functional competence. Exit is more often associated 
with a breakdown in relationships. For family members, entry may be 
associated with long-­held expectations about individuals’ rights to be 
in the team and exit may be more difficult due to strong ties and family 
obligations and expectations (Zolin et al., 2011). Thus it is important that 
entrepreneurial teams’ research goes beyond a resource-­based perspective: 
interpersonal processes are of paramount importance to examinations of 
entrepreneurial teams that are, in practice, relationship-­based approaches 
to ­entrepreneurship. The next section considers in more detail the specific 
context of entrepreneurial teams developed by members of the same family.
WHAT IS A FAMILY ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAM?
Entrepreneurial teams composed of family members are not new, as they 
are implicitly present in the foundation and development of family firms 
(Ucbasaran et al., 2001; Chua et al., 2003). Indeed, the most common 
entrepreneurial team is a partnership between spouses (Marshack, 1993). 
Family members’ participation in entrepreneurial teams varies in its for-
mality and can often be ‘invisible’, creating an entrepreneurial team that 
is permeable, with family members undertaking a variety of roles, func-
tions and activities when businesses are created or developed (Rosa, 1998; 
Hamilton, 2006). The influence of family in entrepreneurial teams may 
therefore be more far-­reaching than has previously been acknowledged 
(Dyer, 2003) and any focus on the family business entity has failed to 
acknowledge family members who may be involved as a team in a variety 
of entrepreneurial endeavours (Howorth et al., 2014).
Many families engage in portfolio entrepreneurship and operate as a 
family entrepreneurial team (Discua Cruz et al., 2013), creating, acquiring 
and developing businesses with varying permutations of family owner-
ship and management. Building on definitions of entrepreneurial teams 
(Cooney, 2005; Ucbasaran et al., 2003; Wright and Vanaelst, 2009) and of 
family businesses (Westhead et al., 2001), Discua Cruz et al. (2013, p. 20) 
defined family entrepreneurial teams (FETs) as:
[. . .]two or more family members, related by kinship or marriage, who engage 
in the identification and pursuit of business opportunities to establish or 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­191
­purchase a firm, have an equity stake in the firm, and have a direct influence on 
the strategic choice of the firm at the time of founding.
FETs unfold in the context of intrafamily entrepreneurship, that is, 
entrepreneurial activities within families. Intrafamily entrepreneurship 
includes entrepreneurship in existing family businesses as well as new 
ventures, shifting focus from the family business to the family in busi-
ness (Moores, 2009). FETs engage in the identification, evaluation and 
exploitation of business opportunities, and may be driven by a commit-
ment to stewardship of the family’s assets, in addition to or instead of 
individual motivations. Teams of family members engaging in entrepre-
neurial activities are distinctive in their intergenerational nature and often 
take a longer-­term view of business (Moores, 2009; Nordqvist and Melin, 
2010). However, the long-­term view may make them slower to respond to 
opportunities, which would be a disadvantage for FETs in industries and 
environments that are subject to rapid change. Whilst FETs can provide a 
vehicle for junior family members to fulfil their entrepreneurial ambitions, 
they could be dominated by the older generation, and younger members 
may become frustrated if expectations are that they should defer to older 
members. The intergenerational perspective provides FETs with a broad 
social capital as younger and older members will have very different 
personal and professional networks, in contrast to non-­family entrepre-
neurial teams, which are likely to be composed of members from similar 
age groups.
A number of studies have explored the FET concept and related find-
ings to contribute to academic conversations in entrepreneurship and 
family business research, including: how family contributes to building a 
business portfolio and uses knowledge and resources (Alsos et al., 2014); 
intergenerational entrepreneurship and family as incubators of nascent 
entrepreneurs (Le Breton-­Miller et al., 2015); the creation and shaping of 
multiple ventures by families over a long period of time (Michael-­Tsabari 
et al., 2014); stewardship orientation in family firms (Stevens et al., 2015); 
family businesses and their relationship with time (Drakopoulou Dodd 
et al., 2013); family bonds in knowledge recombination in the family firm 
(Chirico and Salvato, 2015); family and non-­family team members in the 
ownership of high-­tech firms (Colombo et al., 2014); family entrepre-
neurial team culture’s influence on strategic direction (Craig et al., 2014); 
leading a family firm through changing environments (Reisinger and 
Lehner, 2015); stewardship in family firms (Stieg, 2015); start-­up team 
contributions and the role of experience in the family (Muñoz-­Bullon 
et al., 2015); entrepreneurial team cognition (Mol et al., 2015); and the 
implementation and operational difficulties of succession teams in family 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

192    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
firms (Thevenard-­Phudot, 2014). The concept of an FET is clearly gaining 
ground and there is growing interest in the way FETs contribute to the 
long-­term transgenerational perspective of existing family businesses 
(Pearson et al., 2014, Sharma et al., 2014).
The definition of FETs, however, remains undecided. Discua Cruz 
et al.’s (2013) definition relates to new ventures, requires involvement in 
the founding of the business and entails financial ownership. Whilst such 
a requirement is the norm for entrepreneurial teams that form to pursue 
new ventures, it is less relevant to families who have pre-­existing relation-
ships, existing businesses, and may be involved from a young age prior to 
inheriting ownership. Hadjielias (2013) posits that family members con-
sider new opportunities jointly, in a combination of formal and informal 
social spaces. Multigenerational interactions allow younger members to 
learn entrepreneurship and to build collective entrepreneurial efforts and 
the team’s entrepreneurial capacity over time. FETs, in this sense, include 
family members that do not have an immediate financial interest.
The entrepreneurial process for FETs may be more chaotic and dis-
organized than it is portrayed in stage approaches to entrepreneurship 
(Roscoe et al., 2013). The FET may need to change resource configura-
tions over time, adapting and reacting to the outcomes of their decisions. 
Opportunities are thus only intelligible within the specific context that 
they occur. FETs may have a role beyond new venture creation, and incor-
porate practices that also concern the strategic renewal of existing family 
businesses (Salvato and Melin, 2008; Hadjielias, 2013). Thus, the family 
entrepreneurial team can be defined more accurately as:
[. . .]two or more family members, related by kinship or marriage, who engage 
in the pursuit of business opportunities to establish, purchase, or expand a firm, 
have an actual or planned equity stake in the firm and a direct or legitimate 
influence on the strategic choice of the firm.
Having presented a definition, the sections that follow delve into the 
dynamics and outcomes associated with FETs. First, in understanding 
how FETs function there is a focus on three key dimensions of entrepre-
neurial teams (Wright and Vanaelst, 2009): formation and composition, 
team interaction and team turnover. Then a description of the outcomes of 
FETs is presented that emphasizes their diversity and context.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­193
HOW DO FAMILY ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS 
FUNCTION?
Family entrepreneurial teams have been shown to vary from other types 
of entrepreneurial teams in that membership is permeable but exit may 
be more difficult, motivations may be more long term and an intergen-
erational perspective may endure. The importance of context has been 
highlighted but it should be noted that as well as distinguishing FETs from 
other types of entrepreneurial teams, care should be taken not to assume 
that all family entrepreneurial teams will be the same. Delineating dimen-
sions of entrepreneurial team functioning can help appreciate the context 
of FETs and the way they vary from other types of entrepreneurial teams.
Formation and Composition
Entrepreneurial team formation may be sparked by different stimuli and 
may be strongly driven by individuals with common objectives and aspira-
tions. Existing literature illustrates that entrepreneurial teams may emerge 
either to pursue a business idea or as a response to a critical event that entices 
either an individual to assemble a team or a team to form (Cooney, 2005).
The formation of many FETs is believed to be underpinned by stew-
ardship principles (Discua Cruz et al., 2013). Altruism and the welfare of 
family members may drive FET formation (Alsos and Carter, 2006) more 
than a resource-­based logic, as opportunities are sought in line with family 
members’ needs and aspirations. A stewardship perspective in entrepre-
neurial teams assumes a relationship-­based system with a focus on non-­
financial objectives, and individuals working together to serve the interests 
of an organization (Donaldson, 1990). High levels of identification with 
the organization provide a source of motivation for team members that is 
based on intrinsic and intangible rewards; conflict is minimized (Lee and 
O’Neill, 2003) and agency costs do not apply (Davis et al., 1997). Where 
stewardship relationships predominate in family businesses, opportuni-
ties will be sought that are in the interests of the organization as a whole. 
In this case, the organization is the family entrepreneurial team, but that 
might be extended to include family members who are not members of the 
recognized entrepreneurial team. Thus, in an FET, members might seek 
to protect the assets of the family or the family in business rather than 
pursuing interests that maximize their own personal gain (Donaldson 
and Davis, 1991). Stewardship is entrepreneurial because family entre-
preneurial teams are not mere custodians of their assets; they also seek 
opportunities to build the family’s assets by developing new businesses 
together (Discua Cruz et al., 2013). In teams (FETs or ETs) that do not 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

194    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
share common objectives, team members may pursue individual goals and 
the team will be subject to agency costs.
If a stewardship perspective is advantageous then entrepreneurial teams 
might be expected to seek members on the basis of shared goals and com-
mitment to an organization. Newly formed entrepreneurial teams will 
struggle to achieve this ideal as they will not have a deep understanding 
of each other’s goals and affiliations. Instead, the entrepreneurial team 
literature indicates that membership is based on a rational process driven 
by a resource-­seeking approach, or a process driven by interpersonal 
attraction within social networks (Forbes et al., 2006). In the former, 
teams seek out members to solve resource deficiencies while the latter 
emphasizes membership based on social-­psychological explanations, such 
as similarity, attraction, homophily and social capital. It is argued that 
social-­psychological theories may better explain team membership than 
resource-­based theories (ibid., p. 232), as entrepreneurial teams appear 
to prefer to add members whom they like, trust or with whom they have 
previous experiences.
A social capital perspective suggests that family entrepreneurial teams 
could have strong bonds, shared understandings, norms and trust that 
determine team membership (i.e., who is included and who is excluded) 
(Sorenson, 2011; Discua Cruz et al., 2013). The result is often a very tight 
family unit, with substantial experience of working together, a common 
language and strong trust within its members, to the exclusion of non-­
family members (Pearson et al., 2008). Studies of teams and groups rarely 
consider who has been excluded from membership. Research on family 
entrepreneurial teams is able to identify specifically who has been excluded 
from membership within the family because family members are known, 
whereas other entrepreneurial teams could choose from an infinite pool 
of potential members. Practically, however, the exclusion of non-­family 
poses several drawbacks for FETs. Nicholson (2015) suggests that nepo-
tism, the preference of kin over non-­kin without regard for ability, is to 
be expected in a family context. Families may have a diverse range of 
skills but they are still limited in terms of the pool of candidates eligible as 
members. Opportunities may be rejected or constrained because skills are 
not available within the pool of family members.
Compared to other entrepreneurial teams, members of FETs have 
a longer period of socialization and the home context, which provides 
a practice ground for entrepreneurial skills development and enables 
potential team members to build understanding of each other’s aptitudes 
and values. Family entrepreneurial teams are more likely to have more 
shared values and meanings from the initial stages in comparison with 
other teams because values and beliefs are part of the early and lengthy 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­195
socialization of family members in business (Discua Cruz et al., 2012). 
New FETs will therefore resemble established entrepreneurial teams with 
prior formal experience. Family members involved in existing family firms 
are believed to enjoy a comparative advantage in building trust (Eddleston 
et al., 2010). Thus, FETs with a history of working together may have 
increased levels of trust. Trust builds psychological safety, allowing family 
members to believe in each other and to feel safe to work together openly 
(Hadjielias, 2013). These values and beliefs help shape a common cause 
that supersedes individual interests and contributes to high-­performing 
FETs.
Team Interaction
The working of entrepreneurial teams is underscored by social interac-
tion and interpersonal relationships. Frequent interaction builds rela-
tionships after the team has been formed, increasing effectiveness and 
commitment (Johnson et al., 2015). Interactions build knowledge about 
each member, including an understanding of strengths and weaknesses, 
thereby increasing cooperation (Lechler, 2001) and trust (Mayer et al., 
1995). However, more diverse teams may find it more challenging to build 
shared knowledge and understanding. Conflicts and tensions may arise 
due to divergent or hidden goals and objectives, power struggles and lack 
of shared ­experiences, impeding team effectiveness (Wright and Vanaelst, 
2009). FETs are less likely to lack shared experiences and goals are less 
likely to remain hidden. Family members who do not share the same goals 
are likely to be excluded from the team (Discua Cruz et al., 2013) and 
therefore one might expect less conflict within FETs. This contrasts with 
family businesses where family members may gain ownership through 
inheritance or birthright rather than selection and, particularly where 
many family members own small percentages of shares, individual goals 
may vary and conflict and tension may occur. FETs are smaller, more 
exclusive and therefore more likely to base relationships and interaction 
on social cooperation (Hadjielias, 2013). Social cooperation is ‘a socially 
contrived mechanism’ (Ring and Van de Ven, 1994, p. 97) that is driven 
by solidarity and collectivism (Tuomela, 2000). Solidarity drives mutual-
ity and interchange between people that move beyond the need to secure 
individual economic gains, and towards reinforcing the sense of commu-
nity (Ouchi, 1980). The cooperation between family members takes place 
within both formal and informal spaces, balancing both the economic 
and social needs of the family in business (Hadjielias, 2013; Hadjielias 
and Poutziouris, 2014). Team members in FETs may not necessarily be 
restricted to ­economic decisions but may also have family aims such as the 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

196    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
preservation of the family community in the business and the nurturing of 
the younger generation.
The presence of older and more experienced members alongside younger, 
less-­skilled family members provides FETs with a unique learning environ-
ment and the potential to derive benefits from more experienced members’ 
knowledge of business practices, competition analysis and expertise in 
evaluating opportunities (Alsos and Kolvereid, 1998), alongside junior 
members’ access to new networks, knowledge and creativity. Compared 
to other entrepreneurial teams, intergenerational entrepreneurial learning 
could be seen as a critical component of the functioning of FETs. The role 
of the family in business is an institution fostering multigenerational inter-
actions and a community for transferring the practice of entrepreneurship 
across the generations (Hadjielias, 2013). As a result, entrepreneurial team 
interactions acquire a multigenerational character, as the younger gen-
eration progressively contribute new ideas and opinions in the context of 
entrepreneurial decision-­making.
Family relationships in teams vary (Brannon et al., 2013) and interper-
sonal relations and social cooperation may not always be developmental 
and conducive to the smooth functioning of family entrepreneurial teams. 
Nicholson (2015) suggests that there are different conflict dynamics 
that lurk in FETs that make them extremely sensitive to conflicts such 
as parent–offspring conflict, affinal bonds and sibling rivalry. Patterns 
of behaviour developed during early interactions between close family 
members in business may appear again when working as an entrepreneur-
ial team. Evidence by Hadjielias (2013) illustrates that family members 
may not always act altruistically and collectively, and may free-­ride on 
other more committed family members. At the same time, personal dif-
ferences between family members may undermine the cohesiveness of the 
team and impair its ability to effectively identify and respond to poten-
tially profitable opportunities. Disagreements may be amplified due to 
expectations that family members should work towards the benefit of the 
team (Kidwell et al., 2013) and this factor may impede the functioning of 
existing and future teams (Thevenard-­Puthod, 2014).
Team Turnover
Entrepreneurial teams evolve and are sensitive to both gaps in skills and 
tensions within members. Turnover may occur as new venture opportuni-
ties emerge and existing ventures develop or face challenges (Ucbasaran 
et al., 2003). Disagreements, conflicts and tensions within the team may 
lead to the exit of members or to the need to find members who keep up 
positive relationships within a team. Recent studies by Zolin et al. (2011) 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­197
demonstrate that choosing someone they know well to join the entrepre-
neurial team increases a founder’s ability to modify the team member’s 
work role when they enter the team, but complicates the position of asking 
the team member to leave the team if required. This is a particular issue 
for novice entrepreneurs who may not know fully the interests, objectives 
or skills of other team members. Experienced or portfolio entrepreneurs, 
with limited time on their hands to pursue additional opportunities, may 
choose people they trust and are familiar with to shape an entrepreneurial 
team (Iacobucci and Rosa, 2010), and therefore have fewer issues in ensur-
ing that ineffective members exit.
Team member turnover in FETs is influenced by the family life cycle 
and the presence of extended family influences (Gersick et al., 1997; 
Nicholson, 2015). While FETs may be very welcoming of diverse family 
members, team member exit can be particularly difficult, with concerns 
about maintaining cohesion (i.e., protecting the ownership and control 
of family members in business) and the impact on family relationships 
(Ucbasaran et al., 2003). For some FETs, exit is eased by having a ­flexible 
membership with varying permutations of family members involved in 
different businesses within the portfolio (Discua Cruz et al., 2013). In 
larger business families, the family entrepreneurial team might consist 
of subgroups of family members who work within the same overarching 
enterprise (Uhlaner, 2006; Hadjielias, 2013). Smaller family teams may 
also engage in the pursuit of new opportunities in line with family aspira-
tions, so that if these pursuits are kept separate from the existing family 
businesses the risk is controlled by ring-­fencing.
Nicholson (2015) suggests that exit from an FET may be fuelled by 
intense sibling rivalry or the lack of commitment of family members 
who do not share the same objectives, or prefer different career choices. 
Exit and rivalries can be common sources of derailment in FETs, with 
often lasting consequences for family relationships and cohesion. Where 
bonding social capital is less strong, family members with unfulfilled 
entrepreneurial ambitions will most likely exit and pursue individual 
entrepreneurial opportunities (Discua Cruz et al., 2013).
This section explained the dynamics governing the functioning of FETs 
across three critical dimensions. The next section focuses on the diverse 
outcomes associated with FET functioning and the dynamics (across the 
three dimensions of FET functioning) that come into play with respect to 
each outcome. The context-­specificity of FETs shapes idiosyncratic ends 
of FET functioning that cannot be easily found in other types of entrepre-
neurial teams.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

198    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
WHAT DO FETS DO? PERMUTATIONS AND 
OUTCOMES
The pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunities is at the heart of what entre-
preneurial teams do (Wright and Vanaelst, 2009). Families most often 
pursue opportunities as a collective team effort. The outcomes for family 
entrepreneurial teams, however, vary widely depending on the form that 
FETs take, as Table 9.1 demonstrates. While some families concentrate on 
the strategic renewal of one firm throughout time (the traditional ‘family 
business’), others may go about setting up diverse ventures in a variety of 
structures and forms.
Table 9.1 shows that family entrepreneurial teams are context specific 
and occur in a variety of forms. FETs that create informal family enter-
prises are impacted by the nature of sporadic and seasonal informal busi-
ness structures compared to FETs that create and expand one-­shot formal 
family firms for the long term. FETs that engage in the creation and 
succession of single-­family businesses may employ a single team that may 
shuffle roles over time as it moves from one business to the next. FETs that 
engage in portfolio entrepreneurship are prone to generating tiered teams 
to address the entry or exit of members. Branded family businesses may 
see the development of a more diverse FET in terms of family and non-­
family members in the make-­up of existing firms. The diverse outcomes 
reflect that formation, membership, interaction and turnover favour the 
involvement of family members and will showcase diverse aspirations 
in a family in business. Therefore it is important not to assume that all 
family entrepreneurial teams will have the same objectives or dynamics, 
as studies have shown that they vary greatly and therefore the outcomes 
of their entrepreneurial efforts will also vary (Westhead and Howorth, 
2007). It is therefore important to note that entrepreneurial teams are 
context-­specific.
In considering how FETs’ activities contrast with other entrepreneurial 
teams, it is essential to recognize the role of FETs as learning communi-
ties where younger family members learn to be entrepreneurs and family 
entrepreneurial knowledge is nurtured and transmitted. Hadjielias (2013) 
suggests that the family in business is a community-­like team that exists 
not only for seizing new opportunities, but also for developing younger 
members to become entrepreneurs and key players in the future of FETs. 
A key difference, therefore, between FETs and other types of entrepre-
neurial teams is the long-­term perspective that is associated with family 
business. The FET is an organization within a family in business that 
transforms itself through collective entrepreneurial learning and can be 
conceived as an organization in its own right, acquiring the capacity to 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­199
Table 9.1  Types of family entrepreneurship outcomes by family teams
Outcomes
Definition/
Team 
Approach
Formation and 
Composition
Social 
Interaction and 
Interpersonal 
Relationships 
Team Turnover
Informal  
  family 
enterprise: 
monoactive, 
pluriactive or 
hybrid
No formally 
registered firm 
or business. 
Can involve 
several family 
members in 
one or more 
informal 
enterprises 
or economic 
activities 
(permanent or 
seasonal)
Formation 
motivated by 
ideas or events. 
FET members 
come from 
immediate 
family. 
Altruism and 
trust may be 
more important 
for membership 
than a 
resource-­based 
logic
Early informal 
relations 
are critical, 
exchange of 
ideas occurring 
in both family 
and business 
context but 
likely to rely on 
outside expertise 
to recognize 
opportunities for 
growth
New FET 
members may 
be added either 
when informal 
opportunities 
arise or to 
facilitate welfare 
for family 
members. As 
activities are 
often seasonal 
then FETs may 
favour entry of 
trusted family 
members. Exit 
may not be 
problematic as 
the nature of 
businesses may 
push the team 
to be disbanded 
periodically
‘One-­shot’  
  formal family 
business: 
entrepreneur-­
led, partner-­
led, team-­led,  
second 
generation
A family 
associated 
with only 
one formally 
registered 
business. A 
family business 
established by 
one or more 
family members 
or non-­family 
partners and, 
over time, 
including family 
members in 
management 
and ownership
Formation 
motivated 
by an idea or 
event. FET 
members 
at start-­up 
come from 
family circles. 
Altruism and 
trust may be 
more important 
in membership
Interactions 
between FET 
members, 
though informal, 
become more 
meaningful and 
effective. FETs 
are increasingly 
seen as a 
community to 
nurture younger 
members in 
entrepreneurship
As ventures are 
formalized FET 
members may 
turn into a top 
management 
team (TMT). 
New member 
entry may favour 
family members. 
Entry provides 
room for new 
generations 
joining the firm 
over time and 
may be geared 
towards business 
expansion. 
Exit may be 
problematic 
due to family 
expectations
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

200    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Table 9.1  (continued)
Outcomes
Definition/
Team 
Approach
Formation and 
Composition
Social 
Interaction and 
Interpersonal 
Relationships 
Team Turnover
and a long-­term 
perspective 
in existing 
businesses
Serial business  
  family: 
occasional and 
regular
A family with a 
serial succession 
of single 
businesses. 
Several 
members 
involved in 
business change 
influenced 
by adverse 
circumstances 
or when new 
opportunities 
arise
Formation 
motivated 
largely by 
critical events. 
FET composed 
by circle of 
family members 
who have 
participated 
in a series of 
businesses 
ventures. Trust 
and knowledge 
of previous 
performance 
relevant for 
membership
FET members 
draw upon their 
accumulated 
experiences 
and expertise 
in seizing new 
opportunities. 
High level 
of unity and 
concerted 
coordination of 
tasks towards 
the identification 
and exploitation 
of new 
opportunities
FET new 
member entry 
favours family 
members. Trust, 
shared objectives 
and knowledge 
of members’ 
skills, interests 
and commitment 
in previous 
experiences may 
serve as a filter. 
Exit may not be 
problematic when 
the business is 
sold or divested 
and members 
may look for 
new career paths, 
or new FET 
permutations 
may emerge when 
pursuing the next 
business
Portfolio  
  business 
family: 
uncoordinated 
or coordinated
A family that 
has established 
a group of 
formally 
registered 
businesses. 
Members of a 
family that have 
founded an 
uncoordinated 
group of 
businesses 
or that use 
a central 
mechanism to 
Formation 
motivated by 
entrepreneurial 
stewardship: 
looking after 
ideas to 
enhance the 
family assets. 
Membership 
favours family 
members and 
is influenced 
by socio-­
psychological 
motives and
Socialization 
and cooperation 
between family 
members 
in business 
may become 
fragmented, 
taking place 
in diverse 
subgroups of the 
initial FET
The creation or 
acquisition of 
several businesses 
may demand the 
entry of family 
members who 
are trusted and 
whose ability 
is known. The 
pursuit of 
several business 
opportunities 
over time may 
see the exit of 
members into
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­201
learn, nurture, and develop competencies in entrepreneurship. Family 
members’ (collective) multigenerational interactions in entrepreneurship 
across generations lead to collective learning, which strengthens the 
entrepreneurial knowledge base of the family. This knowledge is accu-
mulated over time and allows the family in business to build capabilities 
and become more proficient in seizing new opportunities, as FETs, across 
Table 9.1  (continued)
Outcomes
Definition/
Team 
Approach
Formation and 
Composition
Social 
Interaction and 
Interpersonal 
Relationships 
Team Turnover
coordinate the 
expansion into 
new business 
areas
by knowledge 
of skills and 
ability derived 
from shared 
experiences 
in existing 
businesses
two-­tiered teams, 
with diverse 
permutations 
pursuing several 
opportunities
Branded  
  family 
businesses: 
corporate 
owned, family 
owned, 
complex 
owned or 
reverted
A business 
or group of 
businesses 
associated with 
a single-­family 
brand name 
but whose 
ownership 
changes over 
time. Originally 
established by a 
family but may 
be currently 
owned by 
another family 
or non-­family 
members, or 
a mixture of 
family and non-­
family owners
Formation 
motivated 
by ideas. 
Membership 
may include 
family and 
non-­family 
members 
and will be 
influenced by 
both socio-­
psychological 
and resource-­
based aspects
Social/informal 
relationships 
are replaced 
by formal 
obligations 
dictating roles 
and tasks in 
pursuing and 
seizing new 
opportunities. 
Conflicts 
between family 
and non-­family 
owners may 
occur
New FET 
members may 
include family 
or non-­family 
members (former 
employees, 
current 
employees 
or other 
entrepreneurs) 
and they may 
be added to 
counteract skill 
deficiency or to 
meet the need for 
expertise/access 
to particular 
resources. Two-­
tiered FETs are 
likely and are 
mostly geared 
towards business 
expansion 
or corporate 
entrepreneurship
Sources:  Adapted from Discua Cruz (2010); Hadjielias (2013); Rosa et al. (2014).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

202    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
­generations (ibid.). Thus, FETs can become organizations where multi-
generational interactions across the generations are materialized into col-
lective entrepreneurial learning at the level of the family in business.
DISCUSSION AND CONTRIBUTIONS
In understanding the family-­specific influences that impact entrepreneur-
ial teams, a unique type of entrepreneurial team is identified with charac-
teristics that are specific to the family context. A key contribution of this 
chapter is the introduction of the family entrepreneurial team as one of the 
contextual manifestations of the entrepreneurial team, and as an appropri-
ate unit of analysis for understanding and explaining entrepreneurship in 
the context of families in business. The FET as a unit of analysis is critical 
in understanding the true complexities of entrepreneurial processes in the 
family firm, which cannot be captured by focusing on continuity or the 
founding of one family business. Identification of the cooperative norms, 
shared values and learning processes within FETs provides relevant 
insights into the way entrepreneurial teams operate, as well as helping to 
explain the dynamics of entrepreneurship in the family context.
FETs extend current understandings of the formative stages of entre-
preneurial teams. An FET is a form of self-­organization that includes 
both business and family objectives. FETs allow people to understand 
entrepreneurial teams as changing yet enduring structures that continue 
beyond a founder generation and are critical to the creation of new busi-
nesses and the strategic renewal of existing ventures (Schjoedt et al., 2013; 
Pearson et  al., 2014). Further, FETs convey a transformative under-
standing of entrepreneurial teams; family members working together in 
­entrepreneurship are seen to learn collectively and become more profi-
cient in developing new opportunities as a team over time and across the 
generations. FETs can be seen as communities nurturing the learning of 
younger members in the practice of entrepreneurship and transmitting 
entrepreneurial acumen across generations.
The examination of families in business functioning as an entrepreneurial 
team highlights how members’ actions, intentions and ideals can become 
collective. Collective approaches, shaped by close cooperative relations, 
stewardship and altruistic norms, trust relationships and team psychologi-
cal safety support a type of entrepreneurship that may be less frequently 
experienced within non-­family entrepreneurial teams. Even within family 
entrepreneurship, there is an over-­emphasis on an individual perspective 
regarding family firm creation and development (e.g. Begin and Fayolle, 
2014; Bettinelli et al., 2014). FETs extend the current ­understanding of 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­203
family entrepreneurship to consider the collective level, which is a growing 
area of research. Recent studies have examined transgenerational entre-
preneurship (Nordqvist and Zellweger, 2010), which is entrepreneurship 
across generations, but they have not been linked to extant literature on 
entrepreneurial teams.
While entrepreneurial teams are seen as hubs where new opportunities 
are identified, negotiated or organized, there is still insufficient under-
standing of how different types of entrepreneurial teams can collectively 
act upon new opportunities. Recent studies suggest that complex owner-
ship management and entrepreneurial dynamics in family business groups 
can be explicated by family entrepreneurial teams (Rautiainen, 2012; 
Reisinger and Lehner, 2015). Further insight is required on the prevalence 
of family entrepreneurial teams in different contexts, for example com-
parisons between more individual and more collective cultures (Gupta and 
Levenburg, 2010). More detailed comparisons of different permutations 
of family membership are also required – for example, FETs comprised of 
nuclear and extended families, or entrepreneurial teams in non-­traditional 
family structures.
CONCLUSION
This study advocates that an individualistic view of entrepreneurship 
often fails to recognize that in many contexts entrepreneurship is a col-
lective effort that is better understood when family is brought into the 
equation. This chapter contributes to literature on entrepreneurial teams 
by shedding light on a unique type of entrepreneurial team that is con-
textually bounded and shaped by the involvement of family members in 
business. Family entrepreneurial teams are central to studies of collective 
approaches to entrepreneurship leading to the establishment or develop-
ment of family businesses. FETs are different from other types of entrepre-
neurial teams, both in terms of how they function and what they do. FETs 
represent a distinctive context for entrepreneurship, where stewardship 
drives team efforts, kinship ties determine team membership, and informal 
social cooperation, communal thinking and intergenerational learning 
practices prevail in the modus operandi. In the quest to fill the research 
void between entrepreneurship and family business, FETs may present 
an appropriate unit of analysis. Entrepreneurial teams’ research should 
not ignore the potential existence of a family influence in their analysis. 
Similarly, family business research should go beyond the boundaries of a 
single family business to really understand entrepreneurship in the context 
of families in business.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

204    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
REFERENCES
Alsos, G.A. and S. Carter (2006), ‘Multiple business ownership in the Norwegian farm 
sector: Resource transfer and performance consequences’, Journal of Rural Studies, 22 (3), 
313–22.
Alsos, G.A. and L. Kolvereid (1998), ‘The business gestation process of novice, serial, and 
parallel business founders’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22 (4), 101–14.
Alsos, G.A., S. Carter and E. Ljunggren (2014), ‘Kinship and business: How entrepreneur-
ial households facilitate business growth’, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 
26 (1–2), 97–122.
Barney, J.B. (1991), ‘Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage’, Journal of 
Management, 17 (1), 99–120.
Begin, L. and A. Fayolle (2014), ‘Family entrepreneurship: What we know, what we need to 
know’, in A. Fayolle (ed.), Handbook of Research in Entrepreneurship, Cheltenham, UK 
and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 183–212.
Bettinelli, C., A. Fayolle and K. Randerson (2014), ‘Family entrepreneurship: A developing 
field’, Foundations and Trends® in Entrepreneurship, 10 (3), 161–236.
Brannon, D.L., J. Wiklund and J.M. Haynie (2013), ‘The varying effects of family 
­relationships in entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 
107–32.
Burkart, M., F. Panunzi and A. Shleifer (2003), ‘Family firms’, The Journal of Finance, 
58 (5), 2167–201.
Chirico, F. and C. Salvato (2015), ‘Knowledge internalization and product development in 
family firms: When relational and affective factors matter’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 40 (1), 201–29.
Chua, J., J.J. Chrisman and L.P. Steier (2003), ‘Extending the theoretical horizons of family 
business research’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27 (4), 331–8.
Colombo, M.G, A. de Massis and E. Piva et al. (2014), ‘Sales and employment changes 
in entrepreneurial ventures with family ownership: Empirical evidence from high-­tech 
­industries’, Journal of Small Business Management, 52 (2), 226–45.
Cooney, T.M. (2005), ‘Editorial: What is an entrepreneurial team?’, International Small 
Business Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Craig, J.B., C. Dibrell and R. Garrett (2014), ‘Examining relationships among family influ-
ence, family culture, flexible planning systems, innovativeness and firm performance’, 
Journal of Family Business Strategy, 5 (3), 229–38.
Davis, J.H., F.D. Schoorman and L. Donaldson (1997), ‘Toward a stewardship theory of 
management’, Academy of Management Review, 22 (1), 20–47.
Discua Cruz, A. (2010), ‘Collective perspectives in portfolio entrepreneurship: A study of 
Honduran family business groups’, EDAMBA Journal, 8, 91–105.
Discua Cruz, A. (2013), ‘Christian family businesses: Opportunities for further research’, 
Journal of Biblical Integration in Business, 16 (2), 7–28.
Discua Cruz, A., E. Hamilton and S.L. Jack (2012), ‘Understanding entrepreneurial cultures 
in family businesses: A study of family entrepreneurial teams in Honduras’, Journal of 
Family Business Strategy, 3 (3), 147–61.
Discua Cruz, A., C. Howorth and E. Hamilton (2013), ‘Intrafamily entrepreneurship: The 
formation and membership of family entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 37 (1), 17–46.
Donaldson, L. (1990), ‘The ethereal hand: Organizational economics and management 
theory’, Academy of Management Review, 15 (3), 369–81.
Donaldson, L. and J.H. Davis (1991), ‘Stewardship theory or agency theory: CEO ­governance 
and shareholder returns’, Australian Journal of Management, 16 (1), 49–64.
Drakopoulou Dodd, S., A. Anderson and S.L. Jack (2013), ‘Being in time and the family 
owned firm’, Scandinavian Journal of Management, 29 (1), 35–47.
Dyer, W.G. (2003), ‘The family: The missing variable in organizational research’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27 (4), 401–16.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­205
Eddleston, K.A., J.J. Chrisman, L.P. Steier and J.H. Chua (2010), ‘Governance and trust 
in family firms: An introduction’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34 (6), 1043–56.
Forbes, D.P., P.S. Borchert, M.E. Zellmer-­Bruhn and H.J. Sapienza (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial 
team formation: An exploration of new member addition’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 30 (2), 225–48.
Gartner, W.B., K.G. Shaver, E. Gatewood and J.A. Katz (1994), ‘Finding the entrepreneur 
in entrepreneurship’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 18 (3), 5–9.
Gersick, K.F., J.A. Davis, M.M. Hampton and I. Lansberg (1997), Generation to Generation: 
Life Cycles of the Family Business, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Gupta, V. and N. Levenburg (2010), ‘A thematic analysis of cultural variations in family 
businesses: The CASE project’, Family Business Review, 23 (2), 155–69.
Hackman, J.R. (2002), ‘Why teams don’t work’, in R. Scott Tindale, L. Heath and 
J. Edwards et al. (eds), Theory and Research on Small Groups, Vol. 4, New York: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, pp. 229–44.
Hadjielias, E. (2013), ‘Cooperation and collective entrepreneurial learning in family business 
organisations’, unpublished PhD thesis, Lancaster University, Lancaster.
Hadjielias, E. and P. Poutziouris (2014), ‘Re-­conceptualising organisational entrepreneur-
ship: Cooperation within and between family-­owned cooperative-­based businesses’, 
IFERA 2014 Conference Proceedings, 24–27 June 2014, Lappeenranta, Finland.
Hamilton, E. (2006), ‘Whose story is it anyway? Narrative accounts of the role of women in 
founding and establishing family businesses’, International Small Business Journal, 24 (3), 
253–71.
Howorth, C., M. Rose, E. Hamilton and P. Westhead (2010), ‘Family firm diversity and 
development: An introduction’, International Small Business Journal, 28 (5), 437–51.
Howorth, C., J. Jackson and A. Discua Cruz (2014), ‘Entrepreneurship in family busi-
nesses’, in E. Chell and M. Karataş-­Özkan (eds), Handbook of Research in Small Business 
and Entrepreneurship, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar 
Publishing, pp. 333–57.
Hoy, F. and T.G. Verser (1994), ‘Emerging business, emerging field: Entrepreneurship and 
the family firm’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 19 (1), 9–23.
Iacobucci, D. and P. Rosa (2010), ‘The growth of business groups by habitual entrepre-
neurs: The role of entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34 (2), 
351–77.
IFERA (2003), ‘Family businesses dominate: International Family Enterprise Research 
Academy (IFERA)’, Family Business Review, 16 (4), 235–41.
Jehn, K.A. and E.A. Mannix (2001), ‘The dynamic nature of conflict: A longitudinal study 
of intragroup conflict and group performance’, Academy of Management Journal, 44 (2), 
238–51.
Johannisson, B. (2003), ‘Entrepreneurship as a collective phenomenon’, in E. Genesca, 
D. Urbano and J. Cappelleras et al. (eds), Entrepreneurship, Barcelona: Servei de publica-
cions de la UAB, pp. 87–109.
Johnson, A.R., R. van de Schoot, F. Delmar and W.D. Crano (2015), ‘Social influence 
interpretation of interpersonal processes and team performance over time using Bayesian 
model selection’, Journal of Management, 41 (2), 574–606.
Kamm, J.B., J.C. Shuman, J.A. Seeger and A.J. Nurick (1990), ‘Entrepreneurial teams in 
new venture creation: A research agenda’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14 (4), 
7–17.
Kidwell, R.E., K.A. Eddleston, J.J. Cater III and F.W. Kellermanns (2013), ‘How one 
bad family member can undermine a family firm: Preventing the Fredo effect’, Business 
Horizons, 56 (1), 5–12.
Le Breton-­Miller, I., D. Miller and F. Bares (2015), ‘Governance and entrepreneurship in 
family firms: Agency, behavioral agency and resource-­based comparisons’, Journal of 
Family Business Strategy, 6 (1), 58–62.
Lechler, T. (2001), ‘Social interaction: A determinant of entrepreneurial team venture 
success’, Small Business Economics, 16 (4), 263–78.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

206    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Lee, P. and H. O’Neill (2003), ‘Ownership structures and R&D investments of U.S. and 
Japanese firms: Agency and stewardship perspectives’, Academy of Management Journal, 
46 (2), 212–25.
Marshack, K.J. (1993), ‘Co-­entrepreneurial couples: A literature review of boundaries and 
transitions among copreneurs’, Family Business Review, 6 (4), 355–39.
Mayer, R.C., J.H. Davis and F.D. Schoorman (1995), ‘An integrative model of organiza-
tional trust’, Academy of Management Review, 20 (3), 709–34.
Michael-­Tsabari, N., R. Labaki and R.K. Zachary (2014), ‘Toward the cluster model: The 
family firm’s entrepreneurial behavior over generations’, Family Business Review, 27 (2), 
161–85.
Mol, E., S.N. Khapova and T. Elfring (2015), ‘Entrepreneurial team cognition: A review’, 
International Journal of Management Reviews, 17 (2), 232–55.
Moores, K. (2009), ‘Paradigms and theory building in the domain of business families’, 
Family Business Review, 22 (2), 167–80.
Muñoz-­Bullon, F., M.J. Sanchez-­Bueno and A. Vos-­Saz (2015), ‘Start-­up team contribu-
tions and new firm creation: The role of founding team experience’, Entrepreneurship and 
Regional Development, 27 (1–2), 80–105.
Nicholson, N. (2015), ‘Primal business: Evolution, kinship and the family firm’, in 
S.M. Colarelli and R.D. Arvey (eds), The Biological Foundations of Organizational Work, 
Chicago, IL and London: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 237–67.
Nordqvist, M. and L. Melin (2010), ‘Entrepreneurial families and family firms’, 
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 22 (3–4), 211–39.
Nordqvist, M. and T. Zellweger (eds) (2010), Transgenerational Entrepreneurship: Exploring 
Growth and Performance in Family Firms Across Generations, Cheltenham, UK and 
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Ogbor, J. (2000), ‘Mythicizing and reification in entrepreneurial discourse: Ideology critique 
of entrepreneurial studies’, Journal of Management Studies, 37 (5), 605–35.
Ouchi, W.G. (1980), ‘Markets, bureaucracies, and clans’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 
25 (1), 129–42.
Pearson, A.W., E. Bergiel and T. Barnett (2014), ‘Expanding the study of organizational 
behaviour in family business: Adapting team theory to explore family firms’, European 
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 23 (5), 657–64.
Pearson, A.W., J.C. Carr and J.C. Shaw (2008), ‘Toward a theory of familiness: A social 
capital perspective’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32 (6), 949–69.
Rautiainen, M. (2012), ‘Dynamic ownership in family business systems – a portfolio business 
approach’, doctoral thesis, Laaperanta University of Technology, Finland.
Reisinger, S. and J.M. Lehner (2015), ‘Navigating a family business through a changing 
­environ­ment: Findings from a longitudinal study’, Review of Managerial Science, 9 (2), 
411–9.
Ring, P.S. and A.H. van de Ven (1994), ‘Developmental processes of cooperative inter-­
organizational relationships’, Academy of Management Review, 19 (1), 90–118.
Rosa, P. (1998), ‘Entrepreneurial processes of business cluster formation and growth by 
“habitual” entrepreneurs’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22 (4), 43–62.
Rosa, P., C. Howorth and A. Discua Cruz (2014), ‘Habitual and portfolio entrepreneurship 
and the family in business’, in L. Melin, M. Nordqvist and P. Sharma (eds), The SAGE 
Handbook of Family Business, London: Sage, pp. 364–82.
Roscoe, P., A. Discua Cruz and C. Howorth (2013), ‘How does an old firm learn new 
tricks?  A material account of entrepreneurial opportunity’, Business History, 55 (1),  
53–72.
Ruef, M., H. Aldrich and N. Carter (2003), ‘The structure of founding teams: Homophily, 
strong ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs’, American Sociological Review, 68 (2), 
195–222.
Salvato, C. and L. Melin (2008), ‘Creating value across generations in family-­ 
controlled ­businesses: The role of family social capital’, Family Business Review, 21 (3), 
259–76.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Family entrepreneurial teams    ­207
Schjoedt, L., E. Monsen and A. Pearson et al. (2013), ‘New venture and family ­business 
teams: Understanding team formation, composition, behaviors, and performance’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 1–15.
Sharma, P., A. de Massis and M. Gagne (2014), ‘Family business: A fertile ground for 
research on time, teams and positive organizational study’, European Journal of Work and 
Organizational Psychology, 23 (5), 674–9.
Sorenson, R.L. (2011), Family Business and Social Capital, Cheltenham, UK and 
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Stevens, C.E., R.E. Kidwell and R. Sprague (2015), ‘Bound by laws, or by values? A multi-­
level and cross-­national approach to understanding the protection of minority owners in 
family firms’, Corporate Governance: An International Review, 23 (3), 203–15.
Stieg, P. (2015), ‘Stewardship in der Familienunternehmensforschung: Eine Literaturanalyse’ 
[Stewardship in the family business research: A literature review], ZfKE – Zeitschrift für 
KMU und Entrepreneurship, 63 (1), 47–76.
Thevenard-­Puthod, C. (2014), ‘Formation et difficultés de fonctionnement des équipes 
successorales: Une analyse fondée sur deux études de cas exploratoires et longitudinales’ 
[Training and operating difficulties of succession teams: An analysis based on two explora-
tory and longitudinal case studies], Management International, 18 (4), 131–50.
Tuomela, R. (2000), Cooperation: A Philosophical Study, Vol. 82, Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.
Ucbasaran, D., P. Westhead and M. Wright (2001), ‘The focus of entrepreneurial research: 
Contextual and process issues’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25 (4), 57–80.
Ucbasaran, D., A. Lockett, M. Wright and P. Westhead (2003), ‘Entrepreneurial founder 
teams: Factors associated with member entry and exit’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 28 (2), 107–27.
Uhlaner, L.M. (2006), ‘Business family as a team: Underlying force for sustained competi-
tive advantage’, in P. Poutziouris, K. Smyrnios and S. Klein (eds), Handbook of Research 
on Family Business, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar 
Publishing, pp. 125–44.
Westhead, P. and C. Howorth (2007), ‘“Types” of private family firms: An exploratory 
conceptual and empirical analysis’, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 19 (5), 
405–31.
Westhead, P., M. Cowling and C. Howorth (2001), ‘The development of family companies: 
Management and ownership imperatives’, Family Business Review, 14 (4), 369–85.
Westhead, P., D. Ucbasaran and M. Wright (2005), ‘Decisions, actions, and ­performance: Do 
novice, serial, and portfolio entrepreneurs differ?’, Journal of Small Business Management, 
43 (4), 393–417.
Wright, M. and I. Vanaelst (2009), ‘Introduction’, in M. Wright and I. Vanaelst (eds), 
Entrepreneurial Teams and New Business Creation, Vol. 13, Cheltenham, UK and 
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. iix–xii.
Zolin, R., A. Kuckertz and T. Kautonen (2011), ‘Human resource flexibility and strong ties 
in entrepreneurial teams’, Journal of Business Research, 64 (10), 1097–103.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

208
10.  Te Ohu Umanga Māori: temporality and 
intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team
Mānuka Hēnare, Billie Lythberg, 
Amber Nicholson and Christine Woods
INTRODUCTION
It is estimated that two-­thirds of the world’s 370 million Indigenous 
people are in and of the Pacific-­Asia region (Meir, 1998, p. 10).1 Māori are 
among the many Polynesian-­Austronesian peoples, and share traits with 
the people of Samoa, Tonga, Tahiti, Hawai‘i, Marquesas, Guam-­Saipan-­
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands (i.e., Polynesia-­Melanesia-­
Micronesia), Indonesia, The Philippines, Malaysia, Taiwan, Southern 
China, Madagascar, and parts of South Africa (i.e., Island Southeast 
Asia).2 Thus, research into Māori entrepreneurship has much to offer 
the nascent theorizing of the Indigenous entrepreneurial team, especially 
in the area of Pacific-­Asia Indigenous and regional economics. Māori 
are the Indigenous3 peoples of Aotearoa-­New Zealand. Contemporary 
Māori entrepreneurs innovate from a long history of Indigenous economic 
development in Aotearoa-­New Zealand and historically from the wider 
Asia-­Pacific region. This chapter explores the formation and ongoing 
composition and aspirations of the Māori entrepreneurial team, Te Ohu 
Umanga Māori, in order to present a nuanced understanding of the rela-
tionship between Indigenous entrepreneurship and cultural values in 
Aotearoa-­New Zealand (NZ). Following Ben-­Hafaïedh-­Dridi (2010), the 
chapter focuses on the tensions between resource-­seeking behaviour and 
interpersonal attraction as they play out within a Māori entrepreneurial 
team context. The chapter will also elucidate on other possible perspec-
tives on team formation through the prism offered by Māori approaches 
to time-­space or ‘temporality’, and the attraction and harnessing of col-
lective will or ‘intent’ (two clusters of values that underpin Māori families 
and their enterprises). These can be referred to in appropriate Māori terms 
as ‘ngā wā’ (temporality) and ‘ngā kaupapa’ (intent) (see Authors’ Note 1 
at the end of the chapter). It is proposed that a Māori ‘team with intent’ 
(Hēnare et al., 2014) operates within two dimensions of space (a spiritual 
world called Te Pō – the realm of ancestors – and a physical world called 
Te Ao Mārama – the world of light and humankind) and within three 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­209
dimensions of time (past, present and future). This chapter aims to dem-
onstrate that Māori entrepreneurial teams harmonize the collective intent 
and complementary attributes of individual members, who strive for a 
productive balance between ancestors and descendants, and also between 
heritage and innovation.
The chapter is guided by the following questions: what is the composi-
tion of the Māori entrepreneurial team, and what influence do the value 
clusters of temporality and intent exert on its formation, outcomes and 
turnover? These questions proceed from an assumption that all cultures 
BOX 10.1  AN EXEMPLARY MAˉORI ENTREPRENEURIAL 
TEAM: WHALE WATCH KAIKOˉURA
Kaikoˉura is a small, isolated township on the east coast of the South Island of 
New Zealand. Its tangata whenua (the local people of its land and sea) descend 
from Tahu Poˉtiki, the youngest son of Paikea.4 Tahu Poˉtiki and his people (known 
as Kaˉti Kuri) have been in Kaikoˉura for more than 1000 years. In the 1980s, 90 per 
cent unemployment threatened the tribe’s economic, environmental, spiritual and 
kinship well-­being. At this time, Kaˉti Kuri elder Bill Solomon sought a new future 
by looking to the knowledge of the past, contained in traditional histories passed 
from generation to generation. Solomon recalled the story that while out to sea 
in a canoe with his older brothers threatening him with death, Paikea (the whale-­
rider) called to the whales that were his ancestors to carry him to a new future; 
they brought Paikea safely to the coast of Aotearoa. Encouraged to explore the 
ancestral guidance offered by his opportunity-­seeking ancestor, Solomon turned 
to the many whales that feed in the abundant waters off the Kaikoˉura coast and to 
the many people he was certain would come visit, not to ride them but to watch 
them. He attracted an entrepreneurial team of interrelated families who harnessed 
their collective will with the intention to carry Kaˉti Kuri into a new future, raising 
the necessary funds (initially by mortgaging their houses) to make Whale Watch 
Kaikoˉura a reality.
Though launched with only a single vessel, Whale Watch Kaikoˉura grew stead-
ily, building a significant fleet and international reputation, turning local unemploy-
ment on its head, and winning accolades for achievements in the fields of tourism 
and sustainability. By 2002, the extended kin group Ngaˉi Tahu Holding Corporation 
had purchased a 43 per cent investment stake holding in Whale Watch Kaikoˉura, 
thereby keeping the enterprise in the family and solidifying a business in service 
of not only the contemporary kin group but also their descendants yet to be born.5 
Whale Watch Kaikoˉura pivots on the acknowledgement of people and events past, 
present and future by a team developed with purposive intent. It utilizes ancestral 
knowledge, has a sense of future in which ‘the shareholder doesn’t die’ (Spiller and 
Erakovic, 2005, p. 235), and a commitment to economic, ecological, spiritual and 
kinship well-­being. Whale Watch Kaikoˉura is an example par excellence of Maˉori 
family enterprise and also of the significance of temporality and intent within a 
Maˉori entrepreneurial team.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

210    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
have within them notions and practices of innovation and entrepreneur-
ship. However, they are predicated on the recognition that there may be 
contrasting approaches to both the entrepreneurial team and its aspira-
tions within and between cultures, and perhaps especially between its 
Indigenous and non-­Indigenous incarnations. Difficulties arise when the 
former are expected to fit into the frameworks of the apparently normative 
latter. Furthermore, a simple Indigenous–non-­Indigenous binary often 
neglects differences and distinctions between Indigenous economic devel-
opment practices and philosophies. However, by looking at the world of 
Māori business and economics through the prism offered by notions of 
intent and temporality, one can illuminate a phenomenon and character-
istic embedded more broadly within Island Southeast Asia and the Pacific 
Ocean cultures, languages and historical business and economic trading 
patterns.
Māori recognize spiritual and human ancestors, and descendants not 
yet born as part of entrepreneurial activities and shareholders in their 
outcomes. Ancestors and descendants are thus active participants in 
the construction of entrepreneurial opportunities and in the teams who 
pursue them. Māori also prioritize holistic well-­being and value creation 
over profit maximization. This inclusive humanistic-­spiritual approach 
has ramifications on a Māori entrepreneurial team’s observation of 
history and its teachings, on how it conceives of and plans for the future, 
and on its consideration of potential team members and partnerships. 
A Māori entrepreneurial team is a manifestation of collective enterprise 
emerging from and responsive to both a strategic dynamic that delineates 
desired roles within the team and who might fill them (resource-­seeking 
­behaviour), and the social-­psychological tenets that attract people of 
similar socio-­cultural backgrounds to form entrepreneurial teams (inter-
personal attraction). Through a focus on temporality and intent, it is 
posited that it is the relationship between entrepreneurship and cultural 
values that determines the composition (and guides towards the success) 
of the Māori entrepreneurial team, and which also harmonizes interper-
sonal attraction with resource-­seeking behaviour.
The chapter began with a vignette to illustrate some key principles of 
Māori entrepreneurship and to introduce in context some of the work-
ings of temporality and intent. Next, the chapter turns to a literature 
review that locates definitions of ‘Indigenous’ and ‘Indigenous entrepre-
neurship’ from both academic and practitioner viewpoints. It draws on 
literature from new venture teams and family enterprise teams, before 
leading into a discussion on entrepreneurial teams from conventional 
business ideology and a Māori world view. The discussion includes work 
by academics from NZ who draw on Indigenous knowledge, as well as 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­211
the work of Joseph Schumpeter who argued that in order to understand 
business and economics of the present, one must also understand busi-
ness and economics of the past (1939, 1949 [1969]). This concept is also 
characteristic of a Māori entrepreneurial team’s approach to temporality. 
Thereafter, the chapter moves from the specific to the conceptual, and 
utilizes two Māori models of entrepreneurship to illustrate the emergence, 
composition and motivators of a Māori entrepreneurial team. The ‘He 
Korunga o Ngā Tikanga’ matrix of virtues that inspire human endeavour 
and the ‘Takarangi’ spiral of innovation add a spiritual dimension to 
Schumpeter’s materialistic approach to business and economics that is 
necessary for one’s consideration of Māori entrepreneurship. Together, 
these models are the foundational frameworks for other considerations of 
Māori entrepreneurial activity. They provide literal illustrations of how 
individual and collective virtuous behaviour and moral sentiments, her-
itage and opportunity (and ancestors and descendants) are harmonized 
within the Māori entrepreneurial context. Furthermore, these illustrations 
can be seen to exemplify the specific traits looked for during Māori entre-
preneurial team formation and maintained in its ongoing composition, 
and could be described as the tenets of ‘resource-­seeking behaviour’ and 
‘interpersonal attraction’ of a Māori entrepreneurial team.
CONSIDERING THE LITERATURE ON 
ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS
In order to consider Māori entrepreneurial teams appropriately, it is 
necessary to first critique the positivism and utilitarianism imbued in 
business schools and management theories of the Anglo-­Western world 
and to seek alternative ways of thinking about the cultural roots and 
spirit of business, enterprise and economy more akin to a Pacific-­Asia 
context (cf. Hofsted and Bond, 1988). The growing literature in this area 
has already dispelled ‘one of the great myths of entrepreneurship. . .the 
notion of a lone hero, battling against the storms of economic, govern-
ment, social, and other environmental forces before anchoring in the 
harbor of success’ (Cooney, 2005, p. 226). Successful entrepreneurial 
activity is rarely carried out by a single ‘hero’ entrepreneur; rather it can 
be understood as the actions of a team of people, engaged in opportunity-­
seeking behaviour akin to the notion of cooperating groups (Foster, 
2000; West, 2007). In this context, a team is understood as ‘two or more 
individuals who have a financial interest and participate actively in the 
development of the enterprise’ (Cooney, 2005, p. 229). Such a team is 
engaged in work that is ‘interdependent in the pursuit of common goals’ 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

212    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
(Schjoedt and Kraus, 2009, p. 515) and includes those participating 
in the development and implementation of a new venture. Klotz et al. 
(2014, p. 227) thus describe the new venture team (NVT) as ‘the group of 
individuals that is chiefly responsible for the strategic decision making 
and ongoing operations of a new venture’. In a comprehensive review of 
NVT literature, they outline three aspects of the new venture setting that 
make it unique: (1) few substitutes and/or blockers of leadership; (2) few 
established norms or practices with regard to appropriate behaviour so 
they must create the initial policies and procedures and shape the culture 
of the emerging enterprise; and (3) the behaviour of NVTs has signifi-
cant ‘imprinting effects’ that often survive past the tenure of the NVT 
(ibid., p. 228). While true of many NVTs comprised of unrelated indi-
viduals, this may not be the case for teams comprised of family members 
whereby a family entrepreneurial team (FET) establishes a new venture 
­(frequently from within an existing family business structure). The FET is 
arguably more common than the non-­family-­based team, but it remains 
under-­researched (Chua et al., 2004).
A special issue of Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice addressed this 
research gap to explore ‘the complex dynamics of entrepreneurial teams in 
family businesses and new ventures’ (Schjoedt et al., 2013). Its contribu-
tors argued that challenges for family entrepreneurial teams (FETs) can 
include some of those faced by NVTs, and at the same time family relation-
ships among the team add to the complexity of the decisions being made 
(Mitchell et al., 2003; Schjoedt et al., 2013). It was concluded that prelimi-
nary research suggests ‘relationships among the FET are more important 
for the success of the team than skill diversity’ (Schjoedt et al., 2013, p. 10). 
For example, the strength of relationships is important and can be built 
by strong congruence around values (i.e., limited deep-­level diversity) 
while at the same time encouraging surface diversity with regard to educa-
tion background and other skill sets (Schjoedt and Kraus, 2009). Family 
members are often involved in the family business from an early age (Cruz 
et al., 2013), and as a result FETs may already be ‘imprinted with char-
acteristics’ reflecting the specific family context and relationships from 
which they are emerging (Brannon et al., 2013, p. 107). Further to this, the 
formation of FETs may arise from the context in which the family finds 
itself, and may lead to the pursuit of opportunities to provide employment 
for family members and/or ‘entrepreneurial stewardship’, where ‘steward-
ship explains the bonds between individuals working together to serve the 
interests of an organization such as the family business’ (Cruz et al., 2013, 
p. 21). Activities that engage the FET are ­underpinned by a shared vision 
of improving wealth creation and well-­being for the family (Cruz et al., 
2013).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­213
Although there is still much to be explored with regard to FETs 
(Schjoedt et al., 2013), the emerging focus on relationships, entrepre-
neurial stewardship and the pursuit of employment opportunities for 
family are of direct relevance to the discussion in this chapter on the Māori 
entrepreneurial team. While little has been written about the entrepre-
neurial team in the Indigenous Pacific-­Asia context, what has been written 
acknowledges that entrepreneurial activity comes from the interaction of a 
wider range of actors than the new venture start-­up typically described in 
entrepreneurship literature. As Lindsay (2005, p. 9) noted:
The Indigenous ‘team’ involved in new venture creation and development 
may involve not only the entrepreneur and the business’s entrepreneurial team 
but also the entrepreneur’s family, extended family, and/or the community. 
Thus, in Indigenous businesses, there are more stakeholders involved than 
with ­non-­indigenous businesses. For this reason, Indigenous businesses can 
be regarded as more complex than non-­indigenous businesses and this com-
plexity needs to be reflected in defining entrepreneurship from an Indigenous 
perspective.
Moreover, such entrepreneurial stewardship directly challenges the 
second of the three key traits of the NVT identified by Klotz et al. (2014) 
by drawing on well-­established norms and practices with regard to appro-
priate behaviour that contribute to a venture’s policies and procedures 
and how they shape the culture of an emerging enterprise. Nicholson 
et al. (2012) bring together the complexities of the FET and Indigenous 
business by exploring family business from an Indigenous perspective 
through the concept of Umanga Whanaungatanga, where they consider 
the underlying ethics of Māori, specifically whānau (extended family) 
and its relationship to business. In this approach, the family does not 
sit alongside the business as suggested by the overlapping circles model 
found extensively in family business literature (Gersick et al., 1997). 
Rather the business enterprise or Umanga is located within the context of 
Whanaungatanga – broadly defined as kinship relationships that develop 
a sense of belonging. In such circumstances Stewart (2003, p. 390) has 
suggested that ‘it may be preferable to think of kinship-­based rather than 
family business’. It is evident then that although the Māori entrepreneur-
ial team has some commonalities with the FET, the contexts from which 
each emerges are different. As is the case with other Indigenous societies, 
a Māori business enterprise dwells within, not alongside, the Māori com-
munity context. The enterprise emerges from a cultural foundation rather 
than the other way around, in contrast with a typical Anglo-­Western 
business (including many FETs and NVTs) where the business is the ‘end’ 
rather than the ‘means’. If this is the case, then the key actors in the Māori 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

214    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
entrepreneurial team can also be understood to emerge from this cultural 
context.
Consistent with what is commonly described as the Māori worldview, 
a Māori firm incorporates both spiritual and material dimensions, and 
considers the past, present and future, while at the same time ‘carrying 
out. . .market transactions’ in the economy and managing costs associated 
with such transactions – including social costs (Coase, 2008, pp. 19, 24). 
As Nicholson et al. (2012, p. 44) discuss, ‘Māori are forward looking, with 
whakapapa [relationships], whanaungatanga [sense of family/being part 
of the collective], and mātauranga (knowledge), created and passed down 
with forethought to the future of coming generations. Thus strategic plan-
ning is an in-­built and under-­recognised element of whanaungatanga’. The 
drive to serve the interests of the family or kin group (past, present and 
future) as opposed to the interests of the family business per se serves as 
a bond between the individual members of the team. To utilize terminol-
ogy already in use in the academy, this facet of Umanga Whanaungatanga 
might be understood as ‘entrepreneurial stewardship’ (Cruz et al., 2013), 
a collective response to grow and build the assets of the family. As Cruz 
et al. (2013, pp. 21–2) highlighted, ‘family members who emphasize the 
interests of the family may form entrepreneurial teams aiming to increase 
the wealth, assets, and opportunities of the family overall. In this case, 
stewardship will be entrepreneurial’. ‘Intergenerational entrepreneurship’ 
is another way of describing the contribution to wealth generation and 
transformation that occurs through the complex, dynamic and evolving 
interaction amongst different family generations (Cruz et al., 2013). Poza 
(1988) refers to this as ‘interpreneurship’, which Hoy and Verser (1994, 
p. 9) define as ‘intergenerational entrepreneurship leading to transfor-
mation’. If one proceeds from the understanding that entrepreneurship 
does not emerge without being constructed in relation to events, people, 
or experiences that have gone before, or in relation to events, people, or 
experiences that are yet to occur (Fletcher, 2004), then ­interpreneurship 
is relevant to the temporal nature of Māori business as a complex process 
of intergenerational emergence and re-­emergence (combining and recom-
bining). Team members are interacting and creating new possibilities 
for the interests of the family, and the interests of the family business, 
whilst drawing upon past happenings, conversations and experiences, and 
looking forward to care for future generations.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­215
THEORIZING INDIGENOUS ENTREPRENEURSHIP
In their seminal article ‘Indigenous entrepreneurship research: Themes 
and variations’, Peredo and Anderson (2006) provide a careful delinea-
tion of the emerging field of Indigenous entrepreneurship. Specifically, 
they address the two ‘obvious questions’: who are Indigenous people, and 
what is Indigenous entrepreneurship? Drawing on key authors in the field 
they provide a useful summary of the various definitions and emerging 
areas of interest (Foley, 2003; Peredo et al., 2004; Lindsay, 2005; Hindle 
and Landsdown, 2007). Three key aspects emerge from this summary 
that speaks to both the notion of indigeneity and its possible influence on 
entrepreneurial activity: (1) Indigenous peoples are those who identify as 
the original inhabitants of the land, and are both self-­ and community-­
defined (i.e., one who identifies as Indigenous and is accepted as such 
by their community) (Hēnare, 1998; Lindsay, 2005; Hēnare et al., 2013); 
(2) some form of domination by later inhabitants occurred ‘through con-
quest, occupation, settlement or other means’ (United Nations General 
Assembly, 1995); and (3) Indigenous people have a culture that is distinct 
to that of the dominant society. The third aspect speaks directly to the 
second ‘obvious’ question: what is Indigenous entrepreneurship? Peredo 
and Anderson (2006, p. 261) state that: ‘by far, the dominant theme in 
indigenous entrepreneurship research to date is the relationship between 
indigenous entrepreneurship and indigenous culture’. Of particular note 
is the collective social and economic organization that is common to 
Indigenous societies, specifically ‘communal or collective patterns of 
social organization, including property arrangements and distribution 
of resources’ (ibid., p. 256). Simply put ‘Indigenous entrepreneurship is 
more holistic than non-­Indigenous entrepreneurship: it focuses on both 
economic and non-­economic goals’ (Hēnare, 1998, 2001; Lindsay, 2005, 
p. 265). Māori academic Ella Henry (2007, p. 542) has determined that 
Indigenous entrepreneurial activity is ‘underpinned by social objectives to 
improve wealth and well-­being for the community, rather than the indi-
vidual’. Whereas in mainstream economic discussions/theories the term 
‘social’ is a qualifier, usually prefixed to ‘entrepreneur[ship]’, ‘enterprise’, 
and so on, Indigenous entrepreneurship is by its very nature harnessed to 
(and underpinned by) community well-­being (Keelan and Woods, 2006; 
Henry, 2007; Tapsell and Woods, 2008a, 2008b).
In the 1820s Māori leaders coined the expression ‘Māoritanga’ as a means 
of describing the nascent national culture (cf. Hofsted and Bond, 1988), its 
collective will, and modes of work and productivity of their kinship groups 
(kinship modes of production were the norm). Philosophically and histori-
cally speaking, Māoritanga also refers to the Māori culture and economy 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

216    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
and its four well-­beings; spiritual, ecological, kinship, and economic. 
Hēnare (2011; cf. Merrill, 1954) proposes that these four Māori well-­
beings establish four types of capitals of economic significance – spiritual 
capital, ecological and environmental capital, kinship as human capital, 
and economic capital. In combination they instantiate levels of partner-
ship, of the spiritual with humanity, of humanity in ecological systems, 
of humans with other humans, and economies embedded in the spiritual, 
ecological and human societies in which they are located (Hēnare, 2001, 
2003). This worldview gives rise to community-­based development goals 
that include social and cultural aspirations as well as economic goals, 
which are realized in the composition and aspirations of the Māori entre-
preneurial team. Furthermore, as evinced by Whale Watch Kaikōura, the 
formation and ongoing composition of the Māori entrepreneurial team is 
predicated on a particularly local understanding of both resource-­seeking 
behaviour and qualities or characteristics of interpersonal attraction, the 
conceptual underpinnings of which have been explored in the two models 
of Māori entrepreneurship that follow below. As these models have been 
developed by two of the chapter’s authors and their colleagues, citations 
are offered for further reading.
MODELS OF MĀORI ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND 
THE MĀORI ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAM
In service of the chapter’s guiding questions (what is the composition of 
the Māori entrepreneurial team, and what influence do the value clusters 
of temporality and intent exert on its formation, outcomes and ­turnover?), 
it is necessary to examine the virtues, ethics and primary values that 
inspire and inform innovation and entrepreneurship in a Polynesian-­
Pacific context. These have been articulated in a series of papers by Māori 
academic Mānuka Hēnare (1998, 2001, 2003, 2011) as He Korunga o Ngā 
Tikanga (Figure 10.1), meaning a spiral and matrix of virtues, a pluralism 
ethics for decision-­making and leadership that can be directly applied to 
the formation and composition of a Māori entrepreneurial team. This 
vitalistic spiral represents a constant unfolding of virtues associated with 
temporality and intent. Traditional Māori ethics and morality indicate the 
ultimate purpose of economic activity and business: the four well-­beings 
introduced earlier that are described by the term ‘Māoritanga’. Nicholson 
et al. (2012, p. 43) have argued that ‘the objective of Māori business and 
its unique strength is to generate collective wealth in these broader spir-
itual, environmental, socio-­cultural and economic realms’. In service of 
these well-­beings, and benefitting from them, is a Māori entrepreneurial 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­217
team rooted in ancestral knowledge handed down from the spiritual world 
or kawa atua; the human-­made directives or tikanga tangata determine 
how these kawa are understood and enacted (Nicholson et al., 2012). 
Simultaneous with this use of generative traditional principles, and in 
reference to the actions of ancestors, there is strategic forethought for 
future descendants and an emphasis on ‘value creating’ rather than ‘profit 
­maximizing’ (Nicholson et al., 2012).
The ‘koru’ in the model’s title refers to the centre or core of a spiral from 
which all things emanate, which is a signature form in Māori aesthetics 
and philosophy. The powerful and generative cardinal ethics and virtues 
spiraling out from the ‘koru’ explain the motivation for Māori entrepre-
neurship and are the characteristics that drive interpersonal attraction in 
Māori team formation – they are the qualities looked for in team members 
and together describe the resources required for optimal results. The ‘He 
Korunga o Ngā Tikanga’ illustrates the moral forces from which Te Ohu 
Umanga Māori (the Māori entrepreneurial team) emerges, and which shape 
its ethics and practices. Here it is productive to situate the concept of inter-
personal attraction in a discussion of self-­organization. In a series of papers 
He Korunga o Ngā Tikanga
Sprial/Matrix of Ethics
Kotahitanga
Solidarity
Io - Mauri - Kore
Tiakitanga
guardianship
Hohou rongo
peace
Manaakitanga/Atawhai
generosity
Te Ao Hurihuri
change & tradition
Mana
authority
Hanu
reciprocity
Mauri
life force
Wairua
spirituality
Tangata
humanity
Whānau
kinship
Whānaungatanga
belonging
Te Ao Mārama
enlightenment, cosmos
Tapu
being
potentiality
Sources:  Hēnare (2001, 2003).
Figure 10.1  He Korunga o Ngā Tikanga – spiral/matrix of ethics
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

218    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
authored by Māori anthropologist Paul Tapsell with Christine Woods and 
colleagues (Tapsell and Woods, 2008a, 2008b, 2010; Overall et al., 2010; 
Kawharu et al., forthcoming), they argued that Māori ‘provide an illustra-
tion of how innovative activity, culturally and historically situated, can 
emerge as a result of self-­organization of a tribal community’ (Tapsell and 
Woods, 2010, p. 550). They are interested in the structures and boundaries 
of Māori enterprise leadership and seek to draw on Māori culture as a 
means of both understanding this and developing frameworks that might 
guide both research and practice (Tapsell and Woods, 2008a). In particu-
lar, they draw on the fundamental understanding that the Māori world 
‘is viewed through a genealogical matrix of complementary but different 
counterpoints’ (Tapsell and Woods, 2010, p. 545).
Where He Korunga o Ngā Tikanga illustrates complementary coun-
terpoints at the level of moral forces, the double spiral of the Takarangi 
framework symbolizes the interconnectedness of past, present and future, 
of the spiritual and the material, and the movement from potentiality to 
being (Stewart-­Harawira, 2005). Emerging from one side of the centre of 
Figure 10.2 is the spiral of ancestors and heritage, while from the other 
side of the centre springs another single spiral that represents opportu-
nity and descendants. In constructing the Takarangi framework (and by 
extrapolation, in forming the Māori entrepreneurial team), the potential-
ity of interweaving the mana (power, authority and the common good) of 
both spirals is considered, and heritage is balanced with opportunity just 
as ancestors are balanced with descendants. This framework embodies 
moments in time where two disparate streams intersect to generate a new 
consciousness, whereby the intersectional moment represents the point 
of creation where the past continuously meets the future (Tapsell and 
Woods, 2010). Thus, the members, generators and influencers of a Māori 
entrepreneurial team (past, present and future) are in constant temporal 
proximity. The He Korunga o Ngā Tikanga and Takarangi frameworks 
demonstrate that cardinal ethics, heritage and ancestral knowledge can 
serve as pathways for descendants and innovation when each is held in 
productive and generative tension by the other. Through a complexity 
theory lens, these can be seen as attractors for the self-­organization of a 
Māori entrepreneurial team (Tapsell and Woods, 2008b).
Returning to the work of one of the forefathers of entrepreneur-
ship, Joseph Schumpeter, the Takarangi framework uses his work as a 
theoretical foundation to understand entrepreneurial action. In his early 
work, Schumpeter (1911 [2003]) explored how innovation (the combin-
ing and recombining of existing resources) could be applied to social 
change (Swedberg, 2006; Becker et al., 2012; Newth and Woods, 2014). 
Implementing these new combinations is what characterizes enterprise. 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

219
Source:  Takarangi spiral adapted from Overall et al. (2010, p. 156).
Figure 10.2  Takarangi
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

220    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
One such combination is the combining and recombining of cooperat-
ing groups (Foster, 2000). Several actors ‘combine and recombine’ in a 
Māori entrepreneurial team, giving the team longevity beyond the start-
­up venture model. The first group consists of Rangatira and Tohunga 
who are recognized as leaders of high rank within a community and 
are accountable, respectively, for the material and spiritual well-­being 
of their kinship community and for guiding their decision making. As 
such they are seen as visionary leaders who are skilled in navigating both 
opportunity and heritage for the well-­being of the community. In Māori 
entrepreneurship most groupings would ensure that the membership of 
each team includes a Rangatira and a Tohunga. However, in some cases 
one person has the capability to perform both leadership functions and 
therefore be recognized as both Rangatira and Tohunga. Another set of 
actors is the opportunity-­seeking Pōtiki, characterized metaphorically as 
the mischievous, adventurous youngest child. The Kāti Kuri narrative 
of Paikea offered in the chapter’s opening vignette describes an ancestor 
hero, himself the youngest child or Pōtiki of his family, who saw oppor-
tunities and took advantage of them. The Pōtiki archetype is found in dif-
ferent forms throughout Polynesian ancestral narratives and most widely 
known through the Māui narrative cycle (Keelan and Woods, 2006), and 
is recognized as the genealogical embodiment of the qualities that enable 
Māori to explore and access new opportunities. Whilst the Pōtiki repre-
sent opportunity, a third group of actors are the Kaumātua (elders) of each 
ancestrally related group, who represent family leadership and heritage. 
Kaumātua have the primary responsibility for maintaining customary 
practices or tikanga, plus they are the customary magistrates or cultural 
councillors (Winiata, 1967). They provide the intermediary sounding 
board whenever an innovation requires some form of check and balance 
against customary practice (Kawharu et al., forthcoming). For example, 
the opening vignette offers the example of Bill Solomon (now an ancestor) 
who was both Rangatira and Kaumātua of his extended family (Kāti Kuri) 
and of Whale Watch Kaikōura.
Drawing on Schumpeter’s notion of combining and recombining 
resources, the Rangatira, Tohunga, Kaumātua and Pōtiki will combine to 
develop innovative changes that are guided by customary practice. This is 
represented metaphorically by Takarangi, with its spirals depicting genea-
logical balanced boundaries. This model demonstrates that the formation 
and success of a Māori entrepreneurial team emerges from He Korunga o 
Ngā Tikanga through the interaction/interpersonal attraction of the 
opportunity-­seeing entrepreneur (Pōtiki), the elder heritage protector 
(Kaumātua) and the visionary leaders (Rangatira, Tohunga). The interac-
tion between these leaders and groups in the Māori entrepreneurial team 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­221
gives rise to innovation occurring between the edges of chaos and stability 
(Tapsell and Woods, 2010).
Forming the background to Figure 10.2 are the Māori Earth mother 
Papatūānuku, and Sky father, Ranginui, embracing between them the 
maritime domain of their child Tangaroa. Like the ‘Māori view of 
the environment’ espoused by Whale Watch Kaikōura, this visual refer-
ence is to not only ancestral origins and environmental well-­being but 
also the source of intent. Through the genealogical unfolding of the uni-
verse (as retold in Māori tradition), thought, memory, and consciousness 
emerge in this order from the pure and potent energy source of hihiri and 
its associated processes. Wisdom follows consciousness, and only after 
wisdom is achieved, do matter, people and land evolve (Hēnare, 2003; 
Nicholson et al., 2015). Hihiri is the energy behind intent, and humans are 
imbued with a subtle power of conscious intention. This is the power to 
actively participate in the transformation of well-­being (Peat, 1994; Cajete, 
2000; Hēnare, 2003; Nicholson et al., 2015). It is through clear intention 
that the collective energies and will of cooperating groups are aligned, and 
well-­being pursued, created and maintained. Each group and actor in an 
enterprise is borrowing the will of each other, of the community, of ances-
tors past and of generations to come, and thus becoming attuned to the 
reciprocal energy flow of creation (Nicholson et al., 2015). In this context, 
intent is seen to be reflective of the collective will, to consciously grow and 
build the assets and well-­being of the whānau (kin group).
This notion is brought into tighter focus by returning once again to the 
combining and recombining of resources. Where Schumpeter recognized 
the value that came from combining and recombining resources at the 
level of individuals or cooperating groups, Buddhist economist Ariyaratne 
(1999) takes the metaphor further and sees sentient life as a recombination 
of mind (of consciousness and perception) and elemental matter. Likewise, 
the economic life of a person cannot be separated from total life experience 
(Ariyaratne, 1999). However, in today’s mechanistic market setting there 
is a division between secular and spirit, work and play, well-­being and 
wealth (Polanyi, 1977; Cajete, 2000; Marsden, 2003; Spiller et al., 2010, 
2011; Hēnare, 2014). It is through the recombination of all spheres of life 
that holistic well-­being is created. Through the prism of temporality and 
intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team one can see that the function of 
the economy is to serve the community (Ariyaratne, 1999; Durie, 2003; 
Spiller et al., 2011), and therefore it is the cooperating groups of the com-
munity (and thus economy) that set a shared intention, building their own 
economic future through utilizing the will of the collective. Thus, tempo-
rality and intent are seen to influence the opportunities that are and can be 
developed by a Māori entrepreneurial team, and the formation of the team 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

222    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
itself. Returning to Takarangi, one can also see that tradition and heritage 
form the pathway for innovation, whilst the opportunity-­seeking adven-
turers and leaders capable of articulating clear intention and mobilizing 
collective will are necessary if steps are to be taken along that pathway.
The He Korunga o Ngā Tikanga and Takarangi models encapsulate the 
fundamental values and ethics respectively that inspire and inform Māori 
innovation and entrepreneurship, and Māori entrepreneurial agents and 
agency, in a dynamic, ever-­evolving world. Using the spiral frameworks, 
ancient wisdom and experience merge with the contemporary context 
to enable future possibilities. The name given by Māori to the ‘Turning 
World’ evident in both the koru and takarangi forms is Te Ao Hurihuri 
(Ao: world; Hurihuri: turning), a term in contemporary use to describe 
a world of change and stability, tradition and modernity. This dynamic 
capability of life is imbued in each Māori entrepreneurial team, and evi-
denced by its potential for longevity as new members step into roles within 
the team as actors combine and recombine. There is a proverbial saying 
well-­known in NZ that describes this need for young people to assume 
active roles in leadership and economic development: ‘Ka pū te ruha, ka 
hao te rangatahi’ – ‘The old net is cast aside, the new net goes fishing’. 
Rangatahi is an old name for a net, now used to describe young people. 
The very notion of the net is extremely productive as it symbolizes the need 
for the strength and vigour of the fresh and new together with the guidance 
of their elders (which figuratively represents the meshwork of relational 
connections that hold Māori in generative relationships with each other 
and also with the Māori world), while metaphorically it underpins the 
‘net-­work’ that ultimately drives successful Māori entrepreneurship. Like 
members of family entrepreneurial teams, new members of the Māori 
entrepreneurial team may already be ‘imprinted with characteristics’ 
reflecting the specific context and relationships from which they emerge 
(Brannon et al., 2013). Yet, as Evans and Wolf (2005) noted, the power of 
teams is somehow more than the sum of their parts and may in fact emerge 
from the motivators for, and realization of, team formation: The network, 
in other words, is the innovator.
CONCLUSION
This chapter set out to describe the composition of a Māori entrepre-
neurial team and the influence of temporality and intent on its formation, 
outcomes and turnover. Temporality is evinced in the long-­term outlook 
and activity of a Māori entrepreneurial team, which is both forward reach-
ing and backward looking, and influenced by multiple generations within 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­223
and beyond a Māori entrepreneurial team, and which (given the potential 
longevity of a successful Māori entrepreneurial team) is quite distinct from 
the entrepreneurial ‘start-­up’ model usually described by academia. Intent 
emerges from Māori cosmology and is related to and constitutive of col-
lective will. It is contended that intent contributes to both the formation of 
a Māori entrepreneurial team and its measures of success, rendered as four 
well-­beings: spiritual, ecological, kinship and economic.
As an illustration of the workings of temporality and intent, the chapter 
opened with a vignette of Whale Watch Kaikōura, which is an example 
par excellence of Māori family enterprise, and of temporality and intent 
in the Māori entrepreneurial team. In many ways Whale Watch Kaikōura 
also challenges ‘an assumption that conventional Anglo-­Western business 
ideology can be applied to a Māori framework without modification; it 
is Māori who are expected to adapt’ (Nicholson et al., 2012, p. 38). As 
Peredo and Anderson (2006, p. 262) explain, ‘The implication [of much 
entrepreneurial literature] is that the requirements of entrepreneurship 
are universal, and successful entrepreneurial responses require that indig-
enous people leave behind, or at least adapt, those features of culture, 
which are incompatible’. In contrast, Whale Watch Kaikōura focuses 
attention on ‘the fundamental issue of the relation between entrepreneur-
ship and cultural values’ (ibid., 2006, p. 254). With its roots in an oral 
tradition describing the incredible journey of a powerful, resource-­ and 
opportunity-­seeking ancestor, the story of Whale Watch Kaikōura also 
asserts the value of wisdom conveyed in oral literature.
The value clusters of temporality and intent emerge from and continue 
to motivate an economic philosophy many millennia old. Whilst Māori 
firms as tribal enterprises started trading internationally from 1805 with 
Australia, England, Canada and the USA (Merrill, 1954; Hēnare, 2003, 
2014; Petrie, 2006; Hēnare et al., 2013), meaning the history of Māori 
economic engagement with the Anglo-­West is only two centuries old, the 
longue durée of the Māori economy extends some 6000+ years via the 
Island Pacific Ocean to Island Southeast Asia. Thus, a chronoclasm is 
apparent (Gomel, 2009) in the homogenizing of Māori entrepreneurial 
histories, activities and intentions to fit Anglo-­Western time frames and 
models of both entrepreneurship and success.
Rather than being incompatible with successful entrepreneurial 
responses, Māori cultural values (such as those clustered around this 
chapter’s themes of temporality and intent) are crucial to the success of 
the Māori entrepreneurial team and offer a lens onto the motivations for 
Indigenous entrepreneurship and team formation, and their aspirations 
and turnover. Academic literature relating to entrepreneurial teams has 
focused primarily on the start-­up or new venture. The new venture is 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

224    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
broadly defined ‘as a firm in its early stages of development and growth’ 
(Klotz et al., 2014). Teams leading an entrepreneurial venture are referred 
to by a number of terms that refer to temporality, including found-
ing team, new venture team or start-­up team. Significantly, the Māori 
entrepreneurial team is not predicated upon the short-­termism and usual 
turnover of the start-­up or new venture team. Rather, it includes ances-
tors, living descendants and those yet to be born – the shareholders and 
members of the Māori entrepreneurial team who do not die. It also pre-
sumes longevity and the coming forth of Rangatahi, the young people who 
will strengthen the enterprise’s network.
The chapter has described temporality and intent as they contribute 
to the Māori Entrepreneurial Team, ‘Te Ohu Umanga Māori’; a team 
that is drawn together in the pursuit of a business enterprise, that har-
nesses collective will to a specific purpose, and which is now referred to as 
entrepreneurial. This offering of context-­ and culture-­specific terminology 
and two conceptual models based in oral tradition and the teachings of 
ancestors, go some way towards addressing the partial and contingent 
standard views of the entrepreneurial team (Peredo and McLean, 2010). 
Furthermore, viewing Māori entrepreneurship through the prism of 
temporality and intent reveals other traits common to Māori enterprises 
that demand more widespread attention, such as a commitment to future 
generations and their well-­being. Indeed, scholars in the global community 
are calling for a ‘new epistemology’ (Loomis, 2000), a new business para-
digm engendering sustainable development (Warren, 1996; Senge et al., 
2010). The manner in which Māori entrepreneurial teams harmonize the 
­collective intent and complementary attributes of individual members 
(and strive for a productive balance between ancestors and descend-
ants, and heritage and ­innovation) are captured in the spiral models of 
He Korunga o Ngā Tikanga and Takarangi frameworks. Together, they 
illustrate the value of cardinal ethics, heritage and ancestral knowledge for 
descendants and innovation. This Māori worldview offers academia a new 
(old) epistemology that might be conceptualized as a ‘spiral of understand-
ing’ ­(Stewart-­Harawira, 2005) – a (re)discovery, (re)generation and ­(re)
vitalization of an age old holistic worldview, deeply embedded within the 
traditional knowledge systems and ancient wisdom of Indigenous commu-
nities (Suzuki et al., 1997; Cajete, 2000; Spiller et al., 2010). This is not to 
suggest the abolition of the prevailing economic frameworks and philoso-
phies of academia, but rather to urge a widening of scope to encompass 
the spiritual, environmental and socio-­cultural aspects of society – here 
situated within Māori entrepreneurial teams as the ­metaphysical tenets of 
­temporality and intent.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­225
NOTES
1.	 See also ‘State of the world’s indigenous people’, UN Economic and Social Affairs, 
accessed 26 July 2015 at http://undesadspd.org/IndigenousPeoples/LibraryDocuments/
StateoftheWorldsIndigenousPeoples.aspx.
2.	 In 2013, of 4.417 million people resident in NZ, 598 605 people identified with the Māori 
ethnic group and 668 724 people were of Māori descent. See Statistics New Zealand (2013), 
2013 Census, accessed 23 December 2014 at http://www.stats.govt.nz/Census/2013-­census.
aspx. In 2010, the asset base of the Māori economy was estimated to be worth at least 
NZ$36.9 billion. It includes: businesses of Māori employers NZ$20.8 billion; other Māori 
entities NZ$6.7 billion; businesses of self-­employed Māori NZ$5.4 billion; trust and incor-
porations NZ$4 billion (Berl Economics, 2011, The Asset Base, Income, Expenditure and 
GDP of the 2010 Māori Economy, accessed 18 August 2016 at http://www.berl.co.nz/assets/
Economic-­Insights/Economic-­Development/Maori-­Economy/BERL-­2011-­The-­Asset-­ 
Base-­Income-­Expenditure-­and-­GDP-­of-­the-­2010-­Mori-­Economy.pdf.
3.	 Following Lindsay (2005) and Hindle and Moroz (2010), as a matter of respect this 
chapter uses a capital letter for Indigenous except where quoting from other sources that 
do not.
4.	 Paikea was made famous internationally by the book by Māori novelist Witi Ihimaera, 
The Whale Rider (1985), and the very successful film of the same name by Niki Caro 
(2003). For a more detailed iteration of the story of Paikea and his contemporary 
­relevance see Lythberg et al. (2015).
5.	 To put the achievements of Whale Watch Kaikōura in perspective, in 1987, when 
Solomon conceived his vision for Kaikōura and began attracting his coalition of the 
willing, the town’s visitor information centre received just 3400 visitors (Spiller and 
Erakovic, 2005, p. 224); by 2013, Kaikōura was hosting more than 800 000 visitors a 
year (Kaikōura Official Visitor Guide, 2013, p. 7). By 2002, unemployment is said to have 
dropped to just ‘six people’ (Devereaux, 2004, in Spiller and Erakovic, 2005, p. 225). The 
town has accepted several major tourism awards, and in 1999, Kaikōura District Council 
adopted the EarthCheck Sustainable Communities Program, which has provided a 
framework for reducing the environmental impact of the community and its visitors’ 
activities upon the region.
REFERENCES
Ariyaratne, A.T. (1999), Buddhist Economics in Practice in the Sarvodaya Shramadana 
Movement of Sri Lanka, Salisbury, UK: Sarvodaya Support Group UK.
Becker, M., T. Knudsen and R. Swedberg (eds) (2012), The Entrepreneur: Classic Texts By 
Joseph A. Schumpeter, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Ben-­Hafaïedh-­Dridi, C. (2010), ‘Entrepreneurial team formation: Any rationality?’, Frontiers 
of Entrepreneurship Research, 30 (10), Article 1, accessed 18 August 2016 at http://digital 
knowledge.babson.edu/fer/vol30/iss10/1.
Brannon, D., J. Wiklund and J. Haynie (2013), ‘The varying effects of family relationships in 
entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 107–32.
Cajete, G. (2000), Native Science: Natural Laws of Interdependence, Santa Fe, NM: Clear 
Light Publishers.
Chua, J., J. Chrisman and E. Chang (2004), ‘Are family firms born or made? An exploratory 
investigation’, Family Business Review, 17 (1), 37–54.
Coase, R.H. (2008), ‘The nature of the firm: Meaning’, Journal of Law, Economics, and 
Organization, 4 (1), 19–32.
Cooney, T. (2005), ‘Editorial: What is an entrepreneurial team?’, International Small Business 
Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

226    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Cruz, A.D., C. Howorth and E. Hamilton (2013), ‘Intrafamily entrepreneurship: The for-
mation and membership of family entrepreneurial teams’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 37 (1), 7–46.
Devereaux, M. (2004), ‘Kaikoura enjoys hard-­won boom’, The New Zealand Herald, 
26 March.
Durie, M. (2003), Ngā Kahui Pou: Launching Māori Futures, Wellington, NZ: Huia.
Evans, P. and B. Wolf (2005), ‘Collaboration rules’, Harvard Business Review, July–August, 
1–8.
Fletcher, D. (2004), ‘“Interpreneurship”: Organisational (re)emergence and entrepreneurial 
development in a second-­generation family firm’, International Journal of Entrepreneurial 
Behaviour and Research, 10 (1/2), 34–48.
Foley, D. (2003), ‘An examination of Indigenous, Australian entrepreneurs’, Journal of 
Developmental Entrepreneurship, 8 (2), 133–51.
Foster, J. (2000), ‘Competitive selection, self-­organisation and Joseph A. Schumpeter’, 
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 10 (3), 311–28.
Gersick, K.E., J.A. Davis, M.M. Hampton and I. Lansberg (1997), Generation to Generation: 
Life Cycles of the Family Business, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Gomel, E. (2009), ‘Shapes of the past and the future: Darwin and the narratology of time 
travel’, HighBeam Research, 1 October, accessed 2 January 2015 at http://www.highbeam.
com/doc/1G1-­213855279.html.
Hēnare, M. (1998), ‘Globalisation: An indigenous religious/cultural perspective’, in 
J. Camilleri and C. Muzaffar (eds), Globalisation: The Perspectives and Experiences of the 
Religious Traditions of Asia Pacific, Selangor, Malaysia: International Movement for a 
Just World, pp. 75–89.
Hēnare, M. (2001), ‘Tapu, mana, mauri, hau, wairua. A Māori philosophy of vitalism 
and cosmos’, in J.A. Grim (ed.), Indigenous Traditions and Ecology: The Interbeing of 
Cosmology and Community, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press for the Center for 
the Study of World Religions, pp. 197–221.
Hēnare, M. (2003), ‘Changing images of nineteenth century Māori society – From tribes to 
nation’, unpublished PhD thesis, Victoria University of Wellington.
Hēnare, M. (2011), ‘Lasting peace and the good life: Economic development and the 
“Te Ātanoho” principle of Te Tiriti o Waitangi’, in V.M.H. Tawhai and K. Gray-­Sharp 
(eds), Always Speaking: The Treaty of Waitangi and Public Policy, Wellington, NZ: Huia, 
pp. 261–75.
Hēnare, M. (2014), ‘The economy of Mana’, in D. Cooke, C. Hill, P. Baskett and R. Irwin 
(eds), Beyond the Free Market. Rebuilding a Just Society in New Zealand, Auckland, NZ: 
Dunmore Publishing, pp. 65–9.
Hēnare, M., B. Lythberg and C. Woods (2014), ‘Teaming with intent: Harmonizing heritage, 
innovation and multiple generations within the Māori entrepreneurial team’, paper at the 
IMRA-­ABRM Conference, Cambridge University, UK, 23–24 June 2014, The Business 
and Management Review, 5 (1).
Hēnare, M., A. Middleton and A. Puckey (2013), He Rangi Mauroa Ao te Pō: Melodies 
Eternally New. Ngā Rangi-­Waiata a Te Aho: Ngā Waiata o te Māramatanga. Songs of Te 
Aho: Songs on the Theme of Knowing, Te Aho Collective Alliance Oral and Traditional 
History Wai 1040 Paparahi o te Raki Waitangi Tribunal Claim (Northern Enquiry).
Henry, E. (2007), ‘Kaupapa Māori entrepreneurship’, in L. Dana and R.B. Anderson (eds), 
International Handbook of Research on Indigenous Entrepreneurship, Cheltenham, UK and 
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 536–48.
Hindle, K. and M. Landsdown (2007), ‘Brave spirits on new paths: Toward a globally rel-
evant paradigm of indigenous entrepreneurship research’, in L. Dana and R.B. Anderson 
(eds), International Handbook of Research on Indigenous Entrepreneurship, Cheltenham, 
UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 8–10.
Hindle, K. and P. Moroz (2010), ‘Indigenous entrepreneurship as a research field: Developing 
a definitional framework from the emerging canon’, The International Entrepreneurship 
and Management Journal (IEMJ), 6 (5), 357–85.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­227
Hofsted, G. and M.H. Bond (1988), ‘The Confucius connection: From cultural roots to eco-
nomic growth’, Organisational Dynamics, 16 (4), 6–21.
Hoy, F. and T.G. Verser (1994), ‘Emerging business, emerging field: Entrepreneurship and 
the family firm’, Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 19 (1), 9–23.
Kaikōura Official Visitor Guide 2013, accessed 20 December 2014 at http://www.kaikoura.
co.nz/content/library/KDC7359_Kaikoura2013OVG_1301WEB3.pdf.
Kawharu, M., P. Tapsell and C. Woods (forthcoming), ‘Indigenous entrepreneurship in 
Aotearoa New Zealand: The Takarangi framework of Māori kin community resilience 
and innovation’, Journal of Enterprising Communities, 15 (4).
Keelan, J. and C.R. Woods (2006), ‘Mauipreneur: Understanding Māori ­entrepreneurship’, 
International Indigenous Journal of Entrepreneurship, Advancement, Strategy and 
Education, 2 (1), 1–20.
Kelly, D., B. Lythberg, C. Woods and M. Hēnare (2016), ‘Interviewing the ancestors: A 
methodology for building an intentional community from the living histories of the century 
just passed’, working paper, Mira Szászy Research Centre, University of Auckland.
Klotz, A., K. Hmieleski, B. Bradley and L. Busenitz (2014), ‘New venture teams: A review 
of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 40 (1), 226–55.
Lindsay, N.J. (2005), ‘Toward a cultural model of indigenous entrepreneurial attitude’, 
Academy of Marketing Science Review, 5 (5), 1–17.
Loomis, T.M. (2000), ‘Indigenous populations and sustainable development: Building on 
Indigenous approaches to holistic, self-­determined development’, World Development, 
28 (5), 893–910.
Lythberg, B., J. Newell and W. Ngata (2015), ‘Houses of stories: The whale rider at the 
American Museum of Natural History’, Museum and Society, 13 (2), 195–220.
Marsden, M. (2003), The Woven Universe: Selected Writings of Rev Māori Marsden, 
Masterton, NZ: The Estate of Rev. Māori Marsden.
Meir, M. (1998), ‘Empowering indigenous peoples in Asia through communication’, paper 
for the UNDP Oslo Governance Centre.
Merrill, R.S. (1954), ‘Some social and cultural influences on economic growth: The case of 
the Māori’, Journal of Economic History, 14 (4), 401–8.
Mitchell, R., E. Morse and P. Sharma (2003), ‘The transacting cognitions of non-­family 
employees in the family business setting’, Journal of Business Venturing, 18 (4), 533–51.
Newth, J. and C.R. Woods (2014), ‘Resistance to social entrepreneurship: How context 
shapes innovation’, Journal of Social Entrepreneurship, 5 (2), 192–213.
Nicholson, A., C. Spiller and M. Hēnare (2015), ‘Arohia te rangi o te hihiri: Heeding the 
melody of pure and potent energy’, in C. Spiller and R. Wolfgramm (eds), Indigenous 
Spiritualties at Work: Transforming the Spirit of Business Enterprise, Charlotte, NC: 
Information Age Publishing, pp. 273–98.
Nicholson, A., C.R. Woods and M. Hēnare (2012), ‘Umanga Whanaungatanga: Family 
business’, Journal of Australian Indigenous Issues, 15 (4), 36–50.
Overall, J., P. Tapsell and C.R. Woods (2010), ‘Governance and indigenous social 
­entrepreneurship: When context counts’, Social Enterprise Journal, 6 (2), 146–61.
Peat, F.D. (1994), Blackfoot Physics: A Journey Into the Native American Universe, London: 
Fourth Estate.
Peredo, A.M. and R.B. Anderson (2006), ‘Indigenous entrepreneurship research: Themes 
and variations’, in C. St. Galbraith (ed.), International Research in the Business Disciplines, 
Vol. 5, Bingley, UK: Emerald, pp. 253–73.
Peredo, A.M. and M. McLean (2010), ‘Indigenous development and the cultural captivity of 
entrepreneurship’, Business and Society, 54 (4), 592–620.
Peredo, A.M., R. Anderson and C. Galbraith et al. (2004), ‘Towards a theory of indigenous 
entrepreneurship’, International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business, 1 (1/2), 
1–20.
Petrie, H. (2006), Chiefs of Industry: Māori Tribal Enterprise in Early Colonial New Zealand, 
Auckland: Auckland University Press.
Polanyi, K. (1977), The Livelihood of Man, New York: Academic Press.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

228    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Poza, E.J. (1988), ‘Managerial practices that support interpreneurship and continued 
growth’, Family Business Review, 1 (4), 339–59.
Schjoedt, L. and S. Kraus (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial teams: Definition and performance 
factors’, Management Research News, 32 (4), 513–24.
Schjoedt, L., E. Monsen and A. Pearson et al. (2013), ‘New venture and family busi-
ness teams: Understanding team formation, composition, behaviour and performance’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37 (1), 1–15.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1911 [2003]), ‘The theory of economic development’, in J. Backhaus (ed.), 
Joseph Alois Schumpeter, Boston, MA: Kluwer.
Schumpeter, J. (1939), Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical, and Statistical Analysis of 
the Capitalist Process, New York: McGraw Hill.
Schumpeter, J. (1949 [1969]), ‘Economic theory and entrepreneurial history’, in 
R.V. Clemence (ed.), Essays on Economic Topics of JA Schumpeter, New York: Kennikat 
Press, pp. 248–66.
Senge, P., B. Smith and N. Kruschwitz et al. (2010), The Necessary Revolution, London: 
Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
Spiller, C. and L. Erakovic (2005) ‘Flourishing on the edge: Whale Watch Kaikoura’, in 
M. Wilson (ed.), Case in Point, Auckland: GSE Publications, pp. 219–40.
Spiller, C., L. Erakovic, M. Hēnare and E. Pio (2010), ‘Relational wellbeing and wealth: 
Māori businesses and an ethic of care’, Journal of Business Ethics, 98 (1), 153–69.
Spiller, C., E. Pio, L. Erakovic and M. Hēnare (2011), ‘Wise up: Creating organizational 
wisdom through an ethic of Kaitiakitanga’, Journal of Business Ethics, 104 (2), 223–35.
Stewart, A. (2003), ‘Help one another, use one another: Toward an anthropology of family 
business’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27 (4), 383–96.
Stewart-­Harawira, M. (2005), The New Imperial Order: Indigenous Responses to Globalization, 
Wellington: Huia Publishers.
Suzuki, D., A. McConnell and A. Mason (1997), The Sacred Balance, Vancouver: Greystone 
Books.
Swedberg, R. (2006), ‘Social entrepreneurship: The view of the young Schumpeter’, in 
C. Steyaert and D. Hjorth (eds), Entrepreneurship as Social Change, Cheltenham, UK and 
Northampton, MA, USA; Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 21–34.
Tapsell, P. and C.R. Woods (2008a), ‘Indigenous entrepreneurship in a Māori context’, 
Journal of Enterprising Communities: People and Places in the Global Economy, 2 (3), 
192–203.
Tapsell, P. and C.R. Woods (2008b), ‘A spiral of innovation framework for social 
­entrepreneurship: Social innovation at the generational divide in an indigenous context’, 
Emergence, 10 (3), 25–34.
Tapsell, P. and C.R. Woods (2010), ‘Social entrepreneurship and innovation: ­Self-­organisation 
in an indigenous context’, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 22 (6), 535–56.
United Nations General Assembly (1995), Fact Sheet No. 9 (rev. 1), The Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples, accessed 26 July 2015 at http://www.mercyworld.org/_uploads/fckbl/files/2004/
Report_May04_01.pdf.
Warren, R.C. (1996), ‘FOCUS: Business as a community of purpose’, Business Ethics: A 
European Review, 5 (2), 87–96.
West, G. (2007), ‘Collective cognition: When entrepreneurial teams, not individuals, make 
decisions’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31 (1), 77–102.
Winiata, M. (1967), The Changing Role of the Leader in Māori Society, Auckland: Blackwood 
and Janet Paul.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Temporality and intent in the Māori entrepreneurial team    ­229
AUTHORS’ NOTES
Throughout the chapter, Māori language and oral literatures are referred 
to and quoted. The reasons for this are multiple and include the authors’ 
recognition of oral literatures as legitimate economic histories and their 
acknowledgement of the Māori language (Te Reo Rangatira/the lan-
guage of chiefs). More precisely for the task at hand, they signal certain 
­methodological approaches in development by the authors that are insep-
arable from the goals of this chapter:
1.	 Meeting Indigenous economies on and in their own terms. Beyond the 
importance of determining the (various) key tenets of Indigenous 
economic philosophies in Aotearoa-­New Zealand, it is imperative 
to explore and uphold how these are described in the languages of 
their people. In Māori terms, temporality and intent are described as 
‘ngā wā’ and ‘ngā kaupapa’ and a group that comes together around 
a set purpose can be described as an ‘ohu’, distinguishing them from a 
‘roopu’ or general gathering or collective of people. The Māori entre-
preneurial team is Te Ohu Umanga Māori of the chapter’s title; here 
umanga means the pursuit of business enterprise. These specific terms 
speak to the historical recognition and discussion of temporality and 
intent, and the identification of groups of collective will and specific 
purpose that are now referred to as entrepreneurial. The recognition 
of such terms within the academy is crucial if Indigenous economic 
philosophies and frameworks are to be understood without being 
expected to adapt, even at the level of terminology, to fit dominant 
Anglo-­Western paradigms.
2.	 Listening to, and interviewing, the ancestors. The voices of Māori 
ancestors and their teachings of history are conveyed through oral 
literature. This literature of traditional knowledge and life experience 
is found in ritual prayers, in artistic expression through symbols and 
rituals, song and dance, carvings and paintings, social structures and 
economic institutions, proverbial sayings of divine and human ances-
tors, and the ecological knowledge of the natural world. Moreover, 
as Kelly et al. (2016) explain, with the methodological approach 
described as listening to and interviewing the ancestors, one can 
frame not only the validity of oral histories transmitted as living his-
tories from generation to generation (listening to the ancestors), but 
also the potential to direct these living ancestral narratives towards 
specific topics via interview methods and other active participatory 
techniques. Where the former approach acknowledges the wisdom of 
ancestors conveyed in oral forms (tangible and intangible), the latter 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

230    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
acknowledges ancestral agency in ‘living’ modes of conveyance and 
their contents and opens the possibility of interviewing the ancestors. 
This methodology is evident also in the ‘Koru’ and ‘Takarangi’ visual 
frameworks, both of which draw on ancient wisdom contained in 
and conveyed through Māori oral histories and cosmologies via the 
generative form of the spiral – an appropriate model for the wisdom 
received from ancestors.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

231
11.  Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams 
and the role of culture shock on 
performance
Jean-­François Lalonde
INTRODUCTION
To the extent that it is balanced, heterogeneity in entrepreneurial teams 
is beneficial (Ensley et al., 1998; Chowdhury, 2005; West, 2007) and 
can foster creativity (Ucbasaran et al., 2003). This chapter presents and 
discusses the issues relating to one kind of diversity in entrepreneurial 
teams that is more common as the world becomes more global – that is, 
ethnic diversity. It focuses on the dynamics of these groups and exam-
ines why and how this form of diversity influences a firm’s performance. 
The business start-­up process of a team of partners with different ethnic 
backgrounds is studied in depth and the findings reveal that heightened 
ethnic or cultural heterogeneity can lead to a profusion of ideas as well 
as to dysfunctionality. This heterogeneity needs to be managed so as to 
allow the team to function in a more flexible manner. Heterogeneity also 
adds complexity to decision-­making while allowing for more creativity. As 
such, a balance needs to be struck between differences and agreement to 
maximize the benefits of diversity. The chapter highlights that it is within 
this context that culture shock can play a major role as it is a central 
element of the process of reaching equilibrium since it facilitates commu-
nication and adaptation.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The concept of a multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial team has yet to be developed 
in a detailed manner within entrepreneurship research. Certainly, many 
studies have discussed ethnic entrepreneurs or entrepreneurial teams but it 
is the combination of the two that is rare, as is noted by Chaganti (2008). 
In this section, the concept of entrepreneurial teams is reviewed and is 
juxtaposed with the notions of ethnicity and of ethnic entrepreneurship. 
Certain avenues of discussion with regard to multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial 
teams are also proposed.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

232    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Entrepreneurial Teams
The prevalence of entrepreneurial teams is quite high given that they are 
involved in roughly half of all new business start-­ups in the United States 
(Ruef et al., 2003) and in France (INSEE, 2004). Nevertheless, researcher 
interest in entrepreneurial teams is quite recent since attention has been 
focused for a long time on individual entrepreneurs (Dorion, 2002; 
Forbes et al., 2006; Harper, 2008). Moreover, while there have been many 
studies of management teams in large firms or in SMEs, few have focused 
on entrepreneurial teams active in creating businesses (Chabaud and 
Condor, 2009; Huovinen and Pasanen, 2010). Research on entrepreneur-
ial teams is thus still at the early stage of its development (Vyakarnam and 
Handelberg, 2005; Chirita, 2010). Researchers such as Forbes et al. (2006), 
Huovinen and Pasanen (2010) and Schjoedt and Kraus (2009) have argued 
that an entrepreneurial team is a group made up of at least two people 
who meet the following conditions: (1) they are actively involved in creat-
ing and managing a business; (2) they are responsible for its management, 
its growth and its sustainability; (3) they hope to receive a financial or 
other benefit; and (4) they view themselves (and are viewed by others) as a 
distinct ‘social entity’ (a group). A distinction must be made here between 
management teams and entrepreneurial teams, given that the former are 
more a group of people with management responsibilities in an existing 
business (Moreau, 2006).
Some studies have concluded that diversity in entrepreneurial teams 
is generally beneficial for a business. Skill and knowledge heterogeneity 
(functional heterogeneity) improve the potential for long-­term survival 
and growth, particularly when there are heightened information process-
ing requirements (Leary and DeVaughn, 2009; Schjoedt and Kraus, 2009; 
Weisz et al., 2010). On the other hand, more routine tasks are more effi-
ciently carried out by homogeneous teams given that similarity prevents 
conflicts and misunderstandings (Bouncken, 2004; Schjoedt and Kraus, 
2009). Indeed, caution is also required since too much diversity in the 
makeup of entrepreneurial teams can undermine business performance 
(Ensley et al., 1998; Ucbasaran et al., 2003). Overall, the literature would 
suggest that a balanced dose of differentiation (different perspectives) and 
integration (similar perspectives) is necessary for optimizing an organiza-
tion’s growth (Chowdhury, 2005; West, 2007).
It should be noted that cultural differences also increase the level of 
an entrepreneurial team’s heterogeneity (especially with regard to cog-
nition and values) and, by the same token, creativity. It is important, 
however, that cultural differences do not inhibit communication since 
a firm’s innovation potential could suffer as a result (Bouncken, 2004). 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­233
Also, ­diversity in the national background of team members seems to be 
positively related to an investor’s inclination to provide seed money (Vogel 
et al., 2014). In sum, knowledge about the attributes of entrepreneurial 
teams remains fragmentary, though it has progressed over the past few 
years. For example, it is now known that well-­balanced team heterogene-
ity can represent an advantage for firm performance during start-­up and 
that a diversified entrepreneurial team offers a larger innovative capacity. 
However, the issue of the impact of multi-­ethnicity on the business start-
­up process has still received little attention. Although the cultural hetero-
geneity of entrepreneurial teams has been measured empirically in a few 
studies, the concept itself of a ‘multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial team’ remains 
under-­developed.
Ethnicity and Entrepreneurial Teams
Like culture, the concept of ethnicity lies at the heart of an epistemological 
debate (Hutchinson and Smith, 1996). An operative conception based on 
cultural traditions passed along from one generation to the next is being 
increasingly replaced by a more fluid, more strategic notion of ethnicity. 
This new concept of ethnicity assumes a continually evolving social and 
cultural construction. In the new approach to ethnicity, a heightened 
importance is accorded to actors and groups who have strategies for 
identity construction. Individuals negotiate their relationship with the 
world but they are always integrated into several structures that deter-
mine their action choices (Karner, 2007). This vision of ethnicity is also 
characterized as ‘situationist’ (Malesevic, 2004) given that it differs from 
a more ­‘primordialist’ model, for which ethnicity is stable and transmitted 
through traditions (Geertz, 1973). Within this background, Fenton (2003) 
proposes the following definition of ethnicity:
[. . .]ethnicity refers to the social construction of descent and culture, the social 
mobilization of descent and culture, and the meanings and implications of 
classification systems built around them. People or peoples do not just possess 
cultures or share ancestry; they elaborate these into the idea of a community 
founded upon these attributes. (Fenton, 2003, p. 3)
As such, ethnicity incorporates symbolic and utilitarian aspects related 
to the group of belonging (Eriksen, 2005). In this respect, it is an iden-
tificatory phenomenon that brings into play a semi-­voluntary distinction 
according to symbolic oppositions. Individuals can even change identities 
according to the imperatives of the moment, a phenomenon referred to as 
‘identity strategies’ (Cuche, 2004).
Few studies have focused on the whys and wherefores of the start-­up 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

234    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
process of ethnic businesses (Brenner et al., 2004). Attention has largely 
been focused on the motivations underlying the start-­up decision and 
the success factors. There is thus a gap in the ethnic entrepreneurship lit-
erature as it pays little attention to the entrepreneurial process (the how) 
underlying the act of business creation. As such, researchers tend to show 
that ethnic entrepreneurs differ from others by their motivations (Bates, 
1997; Basu, 1998; Basu and Altinay, 2002; Brenner et al., 2004; Filion 
et  al., 2007; Danes et al., 2008), their specificities (Butler and Greene, 
1997; Basu, 1998; Raijman, 2001; Filion et al., 2002; Landau, 2007) and 
the reasons for their success (Alvarez, 1990; Chu, 1996; Basu, 1998; Dyer, 
2006). Also, multicultural hybrid firms (firms that employ or incorporate 
members of the native culture in the ethnic firm) can have a better access 
to information on the marketplace, skills and contacts (Arrighetti et al., 
2014). However, the study of the decisions made at the moment of creating 
such a business has received less attention.
The juxtaposition of the concepts of ethnicity and entrepreneurial team 
thus raises questions about the inter-­relational dynamics between these 
two realities. First, identities are dynamic and individuals can change as 
a function of the demands of the moment. One can thus wonder about 
the extent to which this kind of identity strategy can arise in multi-­ethnic 
entrepreneurial teams. For example, does being a member of a team whose 
members have an ethnic origin other than one’s own lead to identity 
­transformation? If yes, in what ways does one’s identity transform and with 
what consequences? Moreover, in the event of a change, do all the group 
members change (as compromise, for example) or is it largely the person 
whose ethnicity is unique that changes? Second, managing cultural differ-
ences can be an important aspect for defining multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial 
team processes. It is important therefore to see how interactions occur in 
day-­to-­day activities. As the cultures meet, how are the various kinds of 
misunderstandings to be managed? While communication appears to be 
the favoured response to this problem (Bouncken, 2004), its application 
raises certain questions. Indeed, how should procedures for exchanges 
among partners be established so as not to represent an overly heavy 
burden on top of the already numerous tasks of entrepreneurs engaged 
in starting up a business? Additionally, one can also wonder whether 
considerable ethnic difference is too difficult to manage. In other words, 
do the management imperatives entailed by these differences outweigh the 
advantages associated with the heterogeneity of entrepreneurial teams?
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­235
STUDY DESIGN
To grasp the dynamics of a multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial team, an obser-
vant participation approach was adopted. These observations were com-
plemented by the analysis of all the documents created by the study 
firm over a two-­year period and with semi-­structured interviews with 
all the members of the entrepreneurial team. Three kinds of data were 
analysed: (1) notes from observations conducted over a two-­year period; 
(2) ­transcripts of interviews of members of the entrepreneurial team; and 
(3) all the planning and management documents produced by the team 
since the firm’s creation in July 2009 – marketing plan, financial forecasts, 
development scenarios, agendas of daily meetings, and so on. The findings 
of the data were reviewed and commented on by all the members of the 
entrepreneurial team.
The study firm was well known to the author, who was part of an entre-
preneurial team composed of five partners that acquired a dry cleaning 
business in Quebec (Canada) in the summer of 2009 and that was sold 
in June 2011. The business consisted of four sales outlets and a cleaning 
centre. Each partner had an equal share of the business. One of the part-
ners was the author’s friend (35 years old, account director for a Quebec 
bank). The others were the friend’s brother (29 years old, advisor in a 
Quebec bank), his father (64 years old, retired and a former businessman 
and accountant in Tunisia), and his cousin (28 years old, unemployed). 
Therefore, four partners are of Tunisian origin and the author is from 
Quebec. The author’s friend and friend’s brother have been in Quebec for 
several years and their cousin for three years. The friend’s father has spent 
a few months a year in Quebec over the past years. It should also be noted 
that this business was created with a ‘group approach’ (Kamm et al., 1990; 
Kamm and Nurick, 1993), which refers to a group of people who decide 
to venture together regardless of the fact they might have a business idea 
or not.
Methodology
The data were collected over more than two years, beginning with the 
creation of the firm. The data collection activity was very participative in 
that it was a case of ‘observant participation’ (Wacquant, 2000). Given 
that the author was one of the partners in the business, he was actively 
involved in every aspect of its creation and management. This research 
stands apart from other studies of entrepreneurial teams in its adoption 
of a methodology rarely used in management science (participative obser-
vation or observant participation) (Lalonde, 2013a) and in the analysis 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

236    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
of the author’s emotions and experience (auto-­ethnographic analysis). 
Ethnography is considered an effective methodology for studying cultural 
influences on a process as complex as creating a business (Barrett, 1984) as 
it enables an immersion into a group’s functioning (in this case, an entre-
preneurial team) and makes it possible to draw out processes that are hard 
to identify at first glance (Barley, 1990). Moreover, it can better suited 
than other research methodologies for understanding the complexity of 
entrepreneurial activity (Fadahunsi, 2000).
While the notion of participation is at the heart of the ethnographic 
research method, the degree of participation can vary. Jorgensen (1989) 
argued that certain fields are not accessible unless the researcher partici-
pates actively. This is the case for more closed groups, such as associations 
that require one to be a member before allowing relationships with them. 
For example, Rocheford (1991) would not have been able to gain access 
to Hare Krishna members without becoming a full member of this com-
munity. Also, certain research activities can be better undertaken if the 
researcher fully experiences the field:
One of the principal advantages of participating while observing, however, is 
the possibility of experiencing the world of daily life as an insider. Sometimes 
this only can be accomplished by becoming the phenomenon and experiencing 
it existentially. Membership is a privileged point of view, and ultimately it is 
acquired only by lived experience. (Jorgensen, 1989, pp. 62–3)
Anthropologists and sociologists have been using this approach to data 
collection for some time (see in particular Becker, 1963; Scott, 1968; 
­Jules-­Rosette, 1975; Hayano, 1982; Krieger, 1983; Wacquant, 2000; 
Friedman, 2009). Some authors have codified it as a function of the degree 
of participation. In this regard, Adler and Adler (1987), Jorgensen (1989), 
Dewalt et al. (1998) and Glesne (1999) highlight that the possibilities for 
researcher participation range from non-­participation (analysis of arte-
facts) to full participation as a full member: ‘We believe that the native 
experience does not destroy but, rather, enhances the data-­gathering 
process. Data gathering does not occur only through the detached obser-
vational role, but through the subjectively immersed role as well’ (Adler 
and Adler, 1987, p. 84). Full members become or are already ‘natives’ 
of the group under study. They share the same experiences and have 
the same objectives as the group. Being emotionally and rationally very 
close to group members fosters significant informer openness and enables 
researchers to reach a high level of understanding of the phenomenon 
under study. Access to interpretation of field data by the researcher is thus 
facilitated by ­accepting the other’s subjectivity as one’s own.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­237
RESULTS
The main results coming from this study demonstrate that a culture 
shock occurred in this entrepreneurial team of partners. The findings also 
highlight that it is this culture shock that played the role of balancing the 
exchanges between the two ethnicities (between Arab and Quebec entre-
preneurs) permitting a performance optimum derived from diversity. The 
particularities and differences between Arab and Quebec cultures that are 
at the basis of this cultural shock are not explained in detail here but are 
discussed in another publication (Lalonde, 2013b). Suffice to say, certain 
aspects of the meeting between the two cultures were harder to manage 
than others and that adaptation was gradual. However, although the 
culture shock was a source of anxiety for the author, the experience was 
quite rewarding for the team because it enabled a confrontation of differ-
ent visions that, in turn, gave rise to increased creativity while leading to a 
cultural entente. This culture shock was thus a major contributing element 
to compromise and equilibrium within the team.
Description of the Culture Shock
Certain aspects of the author’s entrepreneurial experience with his ­partners 
struck him as positive though foreign to his culture. He viewed them as 
‘positive’ simply because he appreciated experiencing this cultural differ-
ence and willingly integrated himself into it. Most of these aspects were 
related to the communication aspect of his relations with his partners. 
They made it possible to feel or experience a certain security within the 
group. Other aspects were more difficult to accept and were confronta-
tional. Such difficult aspects were also those that contributed the most 
to the evolution of the author’s role and his position within the team. 
Solidarity and familial logic are part of the positive aspects. On the other 
hand, resource management, short-­term decision-­making, paternalism 
and trust obligations constituted the elements that were the most promi-
nent in nurturing the culture shock. At all times, the author had to adapt 
to the team’s dominant culture.
Solidarity
The heightened solidarity that characterized relations among the partners 
was certainly one of the aspects that the author appreciated the most. Far 
from being formal or procedural, this logic of mutual aid and reciprocity 
is strongly linked to friendship. This feature of Arab culture has already 
been identified in the literature (Bates and Rassam, 1983; Barakat, 1993; 
Patai, 2002), and it manifested itself as a significant support element for 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

238    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
all team members. This feeling of belonging to a brotherhood assumes a 
more reassuring view of the future, which is confronted as a group and not 
alone. As such, the author quickly learned to participate in the acts of con-
sideration that accompany this required group solidarity. For example, 
the author often visited his partners for one or two hours when they were 
in charge of an outlet on the weekend, an action that demonstrated moral 
support. As another example, at a particular stage of its development 
the business was losing money and had to be bailed out or closed. While 
the author’s individualistic reflexes located this decision at the level of the 
individual and of economic rationality, one of his partners reminded him 
of his solidarity obligations towards him. He clearly presented the part-
nership as a symbolic extension of friendship. Indeed, the obligations of 
solidarity inhibited the early sale of the business. It is worth noting that 
Arab culture differs from Quebec culture particularly with regard to this 
tension between communitarianism and individualism. In Quebec, the rise 
of mercantilism and individualism has been identified as an element that 
is eroding Quebeckers’ communitarian values. For some authors there is a 
crisis of solidarity (Tremblay, 1979, 1984; Balthazar, 2003).
Familial logic
One of the other foundations of the entrepreneurial team was a strong 
familial logic very characteristic of Arab culture (Bates and Rassam, 1983; 
Barakat, 1993; Price-­Jones, 2002; Lacoste-­Dujardin and Lacoste, 2004; 
Nydell, 2006; Madoui, 2008) and a resulting heightened paternalism. 
What is interesting and comforting in this logic is that cohesion persists 
despite the presence of tensions. Starting up a business is a time rife with 
anxiety that inevitably leads to frictions. The obligations of reciproc-
ity, fraternity and maintaining relations are accompanied by heightened 
complicity and unity, and also entail very direct and frank communica-
tion, thereby lowering the risk of things getting out of control. The major 
disadvantage of Arab familial logic for the entrepreneurial team resides 
in the fact that there is practically no fear of being excluded. As such, one 
can count on the others to do the work that should logically be performed 
equally by all, at least in Quebec’s cultural logic that is strongly anchored 
in the values of justice (Aktouf et al., 1992; Bagaoui, 1992; Bouchard, 
1993, 2000; Vaugeois, 2009). The author felt privileged to be included in 
his partners’ family logic. However, he had some doubts and wondered 
about the equality of the division of work. Indeed, he did not know how 
to evaluate his contribution to the business: should he compare hours 
worked on an individual basis or should he adopt a mixed logic that took 
into equal account the individual contribution of each of the four partners 
and that of their spouse and parents? For example, while the author’s wife 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­239
had limited involvement in the business, the mother of one of his partners 
devoted entire weeks to helping out on a volunteer basis. How should he 
compare these two kinds of contribution, on a familial or an individual 
basis? This kind of questioning occurred frequently and was symptomatic 
of the author’s obsession, as a Quebecker,1 with justice.
Resource management
It was probably with regard to resource management that the author’s 
vision differed most from that of his partners. Their tendency to save on 
almost everything was a constant source of strategic disagreement among 
them. Despite the fact the windows of the sales outlets were dirty, the floor 
in the counter area not clean, the furniture in the reception area collecting 
dust, and an increasingly out-­of-­date décor, his Arab partners remained 
unconcerned. Even worse in his view, this desire to save money reduced 
the quality of service by affecting production and delivery: at times they 
even had cleaning product shortages because they had not been ordered 
in advance, they skimped on equipment maintenance, they reduced the 
number of hours worked as much as possible, they held off on replacing 
the brakes of the delivery truck, and so forth. In this respect, the Arab 
partners corresponded to the archetypal Arab manager who displays a 
significant capacity for operating in uncertain environments by using 
whatever is at hand (Denieuil, 1992; Zghal, 1994). One can think of this as 
a kind of organized chaos in which formal planning plays a secondary role 
(Hickson and Pugh, 2001). At first, this was very unsettling for the author 
but then, in the fall of 2010, a year after the business had been created, 
he realized that this bothered him much less than before. He seemed to 
have adopted the spirit of resourcefulness and savings of his Arab part-
ners. He noticed the dirtiness of the outlets less than before. He was even 
surprised by the fact that he found it normal to cut costs without think-
ing about the future (skimming strategy). He was less concerned about 
the risks associated with these decisions. He got accustomed to an Arab 
saying taught to him by one of his partners, which was ‘to utilize the same 
cooking oil several times over’. The following are two events that reveal 
this change in attitude. First, towards the end of 2009, he realized that 
one of the outlets had not been insured for several months despite the fact 
that the lease stipulated that it had to be insured. His first reaction was to 
call the insurer right away to speed things up. His partners disagreed with 
this decision and wanted to take the time to find a better price, which made 
him quite nervous at the time. Second, in May 2011, insurance had to be 
renewed for another outlet. It was the author’s responsibility to take care 
of the renewal. Once again, the lease required having damage and liability 
insurance at all times. But the author was surprised to discover that he 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

240    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
preferred to save money and delayed the steps that needed to be taken as 
much as possible. What transpired between late 2009 and the spring of 
2011 that caused the author’s reaction to the same kind of situation to be 
so different? His vision of the business had clearly changed: it was increas-
ingly like that of his partners and was based more on the short term. When 
one situates this observation within the logic of a multi-­ethnic entrepre-
neurial team, it seems clear that the central vision is the one that bests fits 
within the dominant culture of the partners.
The ascendency of the short term in decision-­making
The rejection of planning was also a source of several debates between the 
Arab partners and the author. At the beginning of the business project, 
a fully developed business plan was produced: market study, market-
ing plan, operational plan, financial forecasts, and so on. There was a 
genuine planning effort and the resulting document was its concrete proof. 
Unfortunately, the business plan was not followed in any fashion and in 
the months that followed, the entrepreneurial team quite simply stopped 
planning. In the beginning, the author tried to prevent this tendency to live 
in the short term. He wanted to ‘professionalize’ the entrepreneurial pro-
cesses by improving efficiency through planning. However, he soon came 
to realize that his efforts in this regard were futile. It was not as if his part-
ners rejected planning. Indeed, they understood its usefulness in theory 
and were involved in its realization. The main problem was, rather, with 
its implementation. Decisions were made as a group but not followed, or 
sometimes contrary decisions were made later. In 2010, after a year of 
trying to convince his team members about the importance of planning 
and its implementation, the author finally abandoned this desire to change 
them. He subsequently had the impression that doing so (letting go) was 
a positive element in what followed. He learned to be calmer and more 
level-­headed in his dealings. He understood that his entrepreneurial team, 
even if it did not follow planning, eventually managed to get the job done. 
Curiously, it was from this moment on that the actions taken in the busi-
ness became more coherent. The author realized that his entrepreneurial 
team could not be governed by planning or calls for rigour but by laissez-­
faire, trust and support. He had to shift to an informal approach and 
once this transformation had occurred, he was finally relieved. Months of 
anxiety stopped for him and the team seemed to perform better.
Paternalism
Even though the author trusted each of his partners and appreciated 
the quasi-­family nature of the team’s relationships, he found it hard at 
first to accept the authority of the patriarch of the group. This reaction 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­241
was normal given the relative rejection of family authority characteristic 
of Western culture.2 Once again, he had to adapt to a different cultural 
context. As such, in the spring of 2010, he strongly reacted to his partner’s 
wish to acquire another dry cleaning outlet. During a meeting, he argued 
that this outlet could not be profitable. The patriarch replied by saying: 
‘You don’t want this one but I believe in it and I will get this outlet going 
again. I will buy it by myself if I have to’. His son (the author’s friend) 
added: ‘With all that my father has done for us, the least we can do is help 
with his outlet if he really wants to buy it’. The obligation had been evoked 
and the author literally felt caught in a trap. It was in light of this experi-
ence that he learned to use avoidance strategies to get around some of the 
patriarch’s demands rather than confronting him. In general, the author 
avoided talking to him in certain situations so as not to have to respond 
to his demands. At times, he even drew on a strategy that went against his 
work ethic: he said yes but did not act accordingly. In this regard, he imi-
tated his partners, he adapted to the prevailing ethic. At the same time, the 
author was becoming more patient with the patriarch. In 2009, the author 
tended not to listen to him long enough, to cut him off, and to contradict 
him. He did not take his status in the group into account. The patriarch’s 
son even had to explain to the patriarch that the author was not being 
disrespectful but that he merely wanted to be efficient. Then, in early 2011, 
the author had learned not to question decisions by the patriarch. He let 
him take a greater role in the business and take the main managerial deci-
sions. At the same time, he learned how to say no in Arabic fashion, that 
is, in a vague manner by saying that he could not but that the next time 
maybe he could, God willing.
Trust
Several facts testify in themselves to the pervasiveness of trust in the 
team. First, there was no shareholder agreement binding the partners. 
Second, since the author was out of the city when the purchase agreement 
for the business was signed, two of his partners were the only owners of 
the business for a certain period of time. As such, they were the ones who 
personally guaranteed the rental leases for the outlets and the produc-
tion facility. Last, these same two partners took charge of accounting 
and finances without the others exercising any particular monitoring. 
The fact of not being in control of aspects as important as finances or 
ownership documents required a great deal of trust among the members 
of the entrepreneurial team. It also required that relations in the group be 
managed in a very familial manner since one has to believe that the main 
entrepreneur will manage the firm’s assets in the interests of everyone, 
as in the case with the father of a family. Agreeing to give up control of 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

242    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
a significant part of his investment required a certain evolution from the 
author’s point of view. Everything that happened was based on trust and 
on the quasi-­family relations that bound the partners together. Nothing 
was written down, there were no contracts. In a relationship charged 
with emotions, the author felt that it would be unseemly to require 
additional guarantees. This felt strange to him since Quebeckers have 
a preference for efficaciousness and pragmatism, which lead to a for-
malization of relations within a business (Barmeyer, 1998; Dupuis, 2008), 
while Arabs rely more on the personalization of relationships (Hickson 
and Pugh, 2001).
Analysis of the Culture Shock
The culture shock the author experienced had an impact on his identity 
and his contribution to the team. This change was both subtle and striking. 
In his everyday life, he remained more or less the same. It was within the 
framework of the business that he had changed as he became ‘Arabized’. 
In the literature, this reaction amounts to a reflex that brings into play a 
semi-­voluntary distinction referred to as ‘identity strategies’ (Cuche, 2004). 
Individuals can change identities as a function of the imperatives of the 
moment. As such, they can also change their concrete affiliations accord-
ing to the groups to which they belong (Ruano-­Borbolan, 2004). Entering 
into contact with people from other cultures can change one’s cultural 
identity, though not necessarily in a full or definitive way. There is a discre-
tionary leeway for individuals to partly change their personality according 
to the particular situation (Cuche, 2004). This change of cultural identity 
was clear from the author’s perspective. He was a little more Arab when in 
the presence of his partners. Then, once freed of the pressure to adhere to 
models that were foreign to the majority of the partners (such as ­planning), 
the team concentrated its energy on disordered but concrete actions. 
Whereas the author’s style of risk management led to inaction, following a 
more Arabic operational model enabled the team to concentrate on action. 
More precisely, the following are the traits of the author’s identity that 
changed the most:
●	 He no longer attempted to control everything, which resulted in 
decreasing stress levels.
●	 He came to view responsibility as being increasingly collective and 
no longer individual. For example, whenever he had to perform a 
task for the business, he knew that the ultimate responsibility was in 
the hands of the group.
●	 Fairness was less important in his view than it had been beforehand. 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­243
He better accepted the idea that someone in the group could do 
more or less than him.
●	 It struck him as completely normal that familial relations charac-
terized and sanctioned relations among the partners. In addition, 
informality and the personalization of relationships came to occupy 
an increasingly greater place in his scheme of thought.
It is worth noting that these transformations were both noticed and 
appreciated by his partners. As such, they felt that he was not a ‘normal 
Quebecker’ any more because he agreed to work within their framework. 
One of them even said to him: ‘Now you are a Quebeco-­Tunisian. Now we 
can talk about everything together’.
If one takes a closer look at the culture shock that the author experi-
enced, it was the confrontation of visions that was the most upsetting. 
It was certainly the vision that involved a choice between long-­term and 
short-­term positioning that was the most significant in his culture shock. 
The author had already been in an intercultural situation before (he lived 
for almost two years in China and in Taiwan), something that to a certain 
extent prepared him for this experience. However, he had never been in a 
setting in which a confrontation of values had made such a major impact 
on decision-­making. For the first time in his life, what struck him as 
rational was discarded. It should be noted, however, that the transforma-
tion was not total. There are still parts of him that cannot fully accept the 
Arab mode of thought with regard to entrepreneurship. The initiative that 
enabled him to integrate himself into the team was based more on accept-
ing what was not his to decide but the patriarch’s, which psychologically 
relieved him of fully participating in decision-­making. From that point 
on, if the patriarch had a short-­term vision in mind, it was no longer the 
responsibility of the author to contradict him.
The Arab culture had a profound impact on this group of partners and 
it is particularly interesting to note that a cultural microcosm created by 
an entrepreneurial team had more influence than the culture of the society 
in which it operated. In other words, a member of the host society who 
joins a group of partners who share the same cultural origin and differing 
from that of the host society can experience culture shock. Therefore the 
influence of the surrounding society’s culture can be less than the domi-
nant culture within the group. The concept of culture shock was devel-
oped and popularized by the anthropologist Kalervo Oberg in the 1950s. 
Culture shock occurs when people working in a foreign culture do not 
understand the reality in which they find themselves but which they must 
nevertheless grasp if they are to accomplish the role they are supposed to 
play (Friedman et al., 2009). More precisely, Ferraro (2010), Murdoch 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

244    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
and Kaciak (2011) and Chaney and Martin (2011) argued that culture 
shock is something experienced by someone who is abroad, who must gen-
uinely become involved (e.g., for work) over a long enough period of time 
(at least three months), and who experiences a kind of traumatism caused 
by a communication deficiency and a negative reaction to the values and 
customs of the host society. It is like psychological disorientation, though 
not immediate. It occurs after the individual has become settled in the 
foreign culture, typically following a ‘honeymoon period’ (Oberg, 1960). 
Anxiety, fear and stress are frequent symptoms of this state of shock 
(Ferraro, 2010; Chaney and Martin, 2011). In hindsight, it seems clear 
that the author experienced culture shock. Back in 2009, he did not accept 
the differences impacting decision-­making. Afterwards, as his conception 
of the cultural values in play improved, he was able to ‘include himself’ in 
his entrepreneurial team’s dominant culture. It was at this moment that he 
changed by adapting to his group’s cultural dynamic. It was also at this 
time that his high level of anxiety and stress almost disappeared.
DISCUSSION
This chapter presented an in-­depth study of the cultural dynamic in a 
multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial team during a business start-­up process. 
The main result consists in presenting culture shock as a factor mediat-
ing the heterogeneity of the cultures present in the team and favouring an 
improved performance by it. As highlighted already, cultural differences 
increase the level of heterogeneity (particularly with regard to cognition 
and values) and the possibilities for creativity in an entrepreneurial team 
(Bouncken, 2004). It would thus appear at first glance to be advantageous 
to create culturally heterogeneous teams. However, two important ele-
ments need to be considered. First, this cultural heterogeneity must be 
manageable. In other words, it is important that the cultures involved are 
able to work together through their intrinsic compatibility and/or manage-
ment approaches adapted to meet their differences. In addition, care must 
be taken that this heterogeneity is not too great so as to cause an imbal-
ance between differentiation and integration (Chowdhury, 2005; West, 
2007). What this basically means for a multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial team is 
that in the event of culture shock, it must be reduced so that the individual 
does not remain in a traumatic state. Unfortunately, as is noted in the lit-
erature, some people never manage to adapt (Friedman et al., 2009). They 
are unable to accept the idea of changing and never escape the traumatic 
stage. Clearly, an entrepreneurial team cannot function efficiently in these 
conditions. When workers are posted abroad, this failure means that they 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­245
have to be repatriated. In the case of teams of partners, a failure of this 
nature could mean the end of the business project.
It should be noted that people who are more adventuresome in cultural 
terms are more likely to adapt while those who are more ethnocentric 
generally fail to do so (ibid.). However, over and above the ability of each 
partner to come to terms with cultural differences, certain steps need to be 
taken to prevent the shock from degenerating into a conflictual situation. 
In light of the data gathered through the present research project, it would 
appear that having an ally in the group who can explain the differences 
and who makes an effort to soften the impact of misunderstanding among 
the members constitutes an important facilitating factor (in the author’s 
entrepreneurial team, his friend was this ally). It is thus crucial to make the 
link between cultural realities with a view to encouraging communication 
and to enabling greater reflexivity. It is afterwards that understanding and 
adaption can occur. Feelings of anxiety can also be lessened via targeted 
interventions by this relay person, which predisposes the group to cultural 
reconciliation.
Unfortunately, not all entrepreneurial teams can count on the presence 
of such an individual. In these cases, compensation measures could be set 
in place to encourage exchanges among the partners. For example, they 
could take the form of discussion meetings focused on the difficulties 
encountered in adapting to the other’s culture. They could also consist of 
training activities focused on the cultures present in the business. In any 
event, factors that can facilitate adaptation and cultural entente must be 
developed. In particular, intercultural communication and studying the 
other’s culture should be favoured. However, the management impera-
tives related to cultural differences must not become laborious to the point 
of monopolizing the energy of the entrepreneurs.
Last, it is important to note that some adaptation efforts are easier 
than others, depending on the values and the confrontation they entail. 
For example, it was easier for the author to accept Arab solidarity than 
the absence of planning. As such, culture shock is not characterized by a 
linear process, in an entrepreneurial team at least. Rather, it is a multidi-
mensional process in which certain aspects evolve faster than others. Since 
certain values are accepted more rapidly than others, it is a matter of deter-
mining which values will be the most difficult to accept for a given person. 
If we use a cultural approach to answer this question, it is important to 
identify the values of the cultures in question in order to determine which 
of them are likely to lead to confrontation.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

246    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
CONTRIBUTIONS
It has already been demonstrated that a balance between diversity 
and homogeneity should be struck in entrepreneurial teams to encour-
age creativity and innovation while optimizing company performance 
(Chowdhury, 2005; West, 2007). However, the factors involved in strik-
ing this balance have yet to be identified. The present chapter shows that 
culture shock is one of these factors and contributes to understanding 
this complex phenomenon. Moreover, the choice of the object of study – 
multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial teams – responds to many of the gaps in the 
literature. While there have been a few empirical measurements of the 
ethnic and cultural heterogeneity of entrepreneurial teams, the concept 
itself of ‘multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial team’ has remained underdeveloped 
in the literature. Furthermore, culture shock has never been examined in 
entrepreneurship despite the fact that it is a concept that has existed since 
the 1950s and has been abundantly studied in management. In terms of 
practice, the results of this study make it possible to evaluate and adjust 
public systems of support for entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial teams. 
Good practices for managing ethnic diversity could be developed and rec-
ommended to entrepreneurs.
CONCLUSION
The idea that the meeting of cultures (the intercultural so to speak) fosters 
progress and innovation is not new. In the 1960s, Claude Lévi-­Strauss 
developed the concept of an ‘optimum of diversity’. In his view, cultural 
diversity can unify because it requires the establishment of links to prevent 
fragmentation. These links in return foster creativity (Lévi-­Strauss, 1961). 
The thrust of this chapter is to present the concept of culture shock as 
an element that can play a role in the equilibrium of ethnic diversity of 
entrepreneurial teams. In this respect, it could be a stabilizing element 
that enables an improvement in their performance. It is thus explaining 
how the optimum of diversity can be achieved in the particular context of 
multi-­ethnic entrepreneurial teams.
NOTES
1.	 The inherent solidarity in the act of participating in an entrepreneurial team made up 
of a majority of Arabs assumes a high degree of reciprocity among the partners. This 
tendency of situating what is given to us in a logic of gifting and countergifting has been 
noted in the literature (Nydell, 2006) and is in contrast to Quebeckers’ more egalitarian 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­247
vision (Segal, 2002). Indeed, equity is not experienced in the short term but over a long 
period of time.
2.	 In the Western world, the family as a site for the exercise of the father’s power began 
to decline following the French Revolution. The power of patriarchy was significantly 
diminished by state intervention (Nisbet, 2005). In modern society, the father is no longer 
the master, and has become an advisor. He no longer has the same authority but he does 
have influence (Tocqueville, 1961).
REFERENCES
Adler, P.A. and P. Adler (1987), Membership Roles in Field Research, Newbury Park, CA: 
SAGE.
Aktouf, O., R. Bédard and A. Chanlat (1992), ‘Management, éthique catholique et esprit du 
capitalisme: L’exemple québécois’ [Management, Catholic ethics and spirit of capitalism: 
The example of Quebec], Sociologie du travail, 34 (1), 83–99.
Alvarez, R. (1990), ‘Mexican entrepreneurs and markets in the city of Los Angeles: A case of 
an immigrant enclave’, Urban Anthropology, 19 (1/2), 99–124.
Arrighetti, A., D. Bolzani and A. Lasagni (2014), ‘Beyond the enclave? Break-­outs into 
mainstream markets and multicultural hybridism in ethnic firms’, Entrepreneurship and 
Regional Development: An International Journal, 26 (9/10), 753–77.
Bagaoui, R. (1992), ‘La philosophie Shermag: une analyse du discours des dirigeants’ 
[Shermag philosophy: An analysis of the speech of leaders], Cahiers du CRISES, 
ET9201.
Balthazar, L. (2003), ‘La politique d’une société distincte et plurielle’ [The policy of a distinct 
and plural society], in M.-­C. Weidmann-­Koop (ed.), Le Québec a aujourd’hui – identité, 
société et culture, Saint-­Nicolas, QC: Presses de l’Université Laval, pp. 35–47.
Barakat, H. (1993), The Arab World – Society, Culture, and State, Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Barley, S. (1990), ‘Images of imaging: Notes on doing longitudinal fieldwork’, Organization 
Science, 1 (3), 220–47.
Barmeyer, C. (1998), ‘Le Québec et l’Allemagne – Aspects interculturels du management’ 
[Quebec and Germany – Intercultural aspects of management], in I. Kolboom, M. Lieber 
and E. Reichel (eds), Le Québec: société et cultures, Dresden: Dresden University Press, 
pp. 91–105.
Barrett, S.R. (1984), The Rebirth of Anthropological Theory, Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press.
Basu, A. (1998), ‘An exploration of entrepreneurial activity among Asian small businesses in 
Britain’, Small Business Economics, 10 (4), 313–26.
Basu, A. and E. Altinay (2002), ‘The interaction between culture and entrepreneurship in 
London’s immigrant businesses’, International Small Business Journal, 20 (4), 371–93.
Bates, D. and A. Rassam (1983), Peoples and Cultures of the Middle East, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-­Hall.
Bates, T. (1997), ‘Financing small business creation: The case of Chinese and Korean immi-
grant entrepreneurs’, Journal of Business Venturing, 12 (2), 109–24.
Becker, H.S. (1963), Outsiders, New York: Free Press.
Bouchard, G. (1993), ‘Une nation deux cultures – continuité et rupture dans la pensée québé-
coise traditionnelle (1840–1960)’ [A nation of two cultures – community and rupture in 
traditional Quebec thought], in G. Bouchard and S. Courville (eds), La construction d’une 
culture – Le Québec et l’Amérique française, Saint-­Nicolas, QC: Presses de l’Université 
Laval, pp. 3–47.
Bouchard, Gérard (2000), Genèse des nations et cultures du Nouveau Monde – Essai d’histoire 
comparée [Genesis of nations and cultures of the New World – History essays compared], 
Montréal: Boréal.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

248    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Bouncken, R.B. (2004), ‘Cultural diversity in entrepreneurial teams: Findings of new ven-
tures in Germany’, Creativity and Innovation Management, 13 (4), 240–53.
Brenner, G.A., P. Cimper, T.V. Menzies and L.J. Filion (2004), ‘Démarrage d’entreprises 
ethniques: Quelques particularités du contexte Canadien’ [Starting ethnic businesses: 
Some peculiarities of the Canadian context], Working Paper No. 2002–04, Montréal: HEC 
Montréal, Chaire d’entrepreneuriat Rogers – J.-­A.-­Bombardier.
Butler, J.S. and P. Greene (1997), ‘Ethnic entrepreneurship: The continuous rebirth of 
American enterprise’, in D.L. Sexton and R.W. Smilor (eds), Entrepreneurship 2000, 
Chicago, IL: Upstart, pp. 267–89.
Chabaud, D. and R. Condor (2009), ‘La formation des équipes entrepreneuriales: Une étude 
exploratoire’ [The formation of entrepreneurial teams: An exploratory study], Revue 
internationale PME: économie et gestion de la petite et moyenne entreprise, 22 (1), 81–102.
Chaganti, R.S., A.D. Watts, R. Chaganti and M. Zimmerman-­Treichel (2008), ‘Ethnic-­
immigrants in founding teams: Effects on prospector strategy and performance in new 
Internet ventures’, Journal of Business Venturing, 23 (1), 113–39.
Chaney, L.H. and J.S. Martin (2011), Intercultural Business Communication, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Chirita, M.-­G. (2010), Equipes entrepreneuriales et partenariats – Entreprises technologiques 
[Entrepreneurial Teams and Partnerships – Technology Companies], Montréal, QC: HEC 
Montréal.
Chowdhury, S. (2005), ‘Demographic diversity for building an effective entrepreneurial 
team: Is it important?’, Journal of Business Venturing, 20 (6), 727–46.
Chu, P. (1996), ‘Social network models of overseas Chinese entrepreneurship: The experi-
ence in Hong Kong and Canada’, Revue canadienne des sciences de l’administration, 13 (4), 
358–65.
Cuche, D. (2004), La notion de culture dans les sciences sociales [The notion of culture in the 
social sciences], Paris: La Découverte.
Danes, S.M., J. Lee, K. Stafford and R.K.Z. Heck (2008), ‘The effects of ethnicity, families 
and culture on entrepreneurial experience: An extension of sustainable family business 
theory’, Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, 13 (3), 229–68.
Denieuil, P.-­N. (1992), Les entrepreneurs du développement. L’ethno-­industrialisation en 
Tunisie: La dynamique de Sfax [Entrepreneurs of development. Ethno-­industrialization in 
Tunisia: The dynamics of Sfax], Paris: L’Harmattan.
Dewalt, K., B.R. Dewalt and C.B. Wayland (1998), ‘Participant observation’, in H.R. Bernard 
(ed.), Handbook of Methods in Cultural Anthropology, Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 
pp. 259–99.
Dorion, E. (2002), Le champ de l’entrepreneurship: Une multitude de concepts à découvrir. Une 
vision paradigmatique à développer [The field of entrepreneurship: A multitude of concepts 
to explore. A paradigmatic vision to develop], Sherbrooke, QC: IRECUS, Université de 
Sherbrooke.
Dupuis, J.-­P. (2008), ‘Culture et gestion au Québec: Entre cultures latine, anglo-­saxonne et 
nordique’ [Culture and management in Quebec: Between Latin, Anglo-­Saxon and Nordic 
cultures], in E. Davel, J.-­P. Dupuis and J.-­F. Chanlat (eds), Gestion en contexte intercul-
turel: approches, problématiques, pratiques et plongées, Saint-­Nicolas, QC: Québec: Presses 
de l’Université Laval et Télé-­université (UQAM).
Dyer, W.G. (2006), ‘Examining the “family effect” of firm performance’, Family Business 
Review, 19 (4), 253–73.
Ensley, M.D., J.W. Carland and J.C. Carland (1998), ‘The effect of entrepreneurial team skill 
heterogeneity and functional diversity on new venture performance’, Journal of Business 
and Entrepreneurship, 10 (1), 1–14.
Eriksen, T.H. (2005), ‘Economies of ethnicity’, in J.G. Carrier (ed.), A Handbook of 
Economic Anthropology, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar 
Publishing, pp. 353–69.
Fadahunsi, A. (2000), ‘Researching informal entrepreneurship in Sub-­Saharan Africa: A 
note on field methodology’, Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, 5 (3), 249–60.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­249
Fenton, S. (2003), Ethnicity, Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Ferraro, G.P. (2010), The Cultural Dimension of International Business, 6th edition, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Filion, L.J., T.V. Menzies, C. Ramangalahy and G.A. Brenner (2002), ‘Ethnic entrepreneurs 
in Canada: Problems encountered, as defined by differences in ethnic origin and sex’, 
Working Paper No. 2002–07, Montréal: HEC Montréal, Chaire d’entrepreneuriat Rogers 
– J.-­A.-­Bombardier.
Filion, L.J., G.A. Brenner, L. Dionne and T.V. Menzies (2007), ‘L’identification d’une occa-
sion d’affaires en contexte d’entrepreneuriat ethnique’ [Identifying a business opportunity 
in the context of ethnic entrepreneurship], Working Paper No. 2007–03, Montréal: HEC 
Montréal, Chaire d’entrepreneuriat Rogers – J.-­A.-­Bombardier.
Forbes, D.P., P.S. Borchert, M.E. Zellmer-­Bruhn and H.J. Sapienza (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial 
team formation: An exploration of new member addition’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 30 (2), 225–48.
Friedman, P.-­A., L.S. Dyke and S.A. Murphy (2009), ‘Expatriate adjustment from the 
inside out: An autoethnographic account’, The International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 20 (2), 252–68.
Geertz, C. (1973), The Interpretation of Cultures, New York: Basic Books.
Glesne, C. (1999), Becoming Qualitative Researchers, White Plains, NY: Longman.
Harper, D.A. (2008), ‘Towards a theory of entrepreneurial teams’, Journal of Business 
Venturing, 23 (6), 613–26.
Hayano, D.M. (1982), Poker Faces, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hickson, D.J. and D.S. Pugh (2001), Management Worldwide – Distinctive Styles Amid 
Globalization, London: Penguin Books.
Huovinen, S. and M. Pasanen (2010), ‘Entrepreneurial and management teams: What makes 
the difference?’ Journal of Management and Organization, 16 (3), 436–53.
Hutchinson, J. and A. Smith (1996), Ethnicity, Oxford and New York: Oxford Readers.
INSEE (2004), ‘Créations et créateurs d’entreprises, Enquête SINE, profil du créateur 2002’ 
[Creations and creators of enterprises, SINE survey, creator profile 2002], Insee Résultats 
Economie, 16.
Jorgensen, D.L. (1989), Participant Observation – A Methodology for Human Studies, 
Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Jules-­Rosette, B. (1975), African Apostles, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kamm J.B. and A.J. Nurick (1993), ‘The stages of team venture formation: A decision-­
making model’, Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 17 (2), 17–27.
Kamm, J.B., J.C. Shuman, J.A. Seeger and A.J. Nurick (1990), ‘Entrepreneurial teams in 
new venture creation: A research agenda’, Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 14 (4), 
7–17.
Karner, C. (2007), Ethnicity and Everyday Life, London and New York: Routledge.
Krieger, S. (1983), The Mirror Dance: Identity in a Women’s Community, Philadelphia, PA: 
Temple University Press.
Lacoste-­Dujardin, C. and Y. Lacoste (2004), Maghreb, peuples et civilisations [Mahgreb, 
peoples and civilisations], Paris: La Découverte.
Lalonde, J.-­F. (2013a), ‘La participation observante en sciences de la gestion: Plaidoyer pour 
une utilisation accrue’ [Observing participation in management science: Advocacy for 
increased use], Recherches qualitatives, 32 (2), 13–32.
Lalonde, J.-­F. (2013b), ‘Cultural determinants of Arab entrepreneurship: An ethnographic 
perspective’, Journal of Enterprising Communities, 7 (3), 213–32.
Landau, J. (2007), ‘Enhancing resilience: Families and communities as agents of change’, 
Family Process, 46 (3), 351–65.
Leary, M.M. and M.L. DeVaughn (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial team characteristics that influ-
ence the successful launch of a new venture’, Management Research News, 32 (6), 567–79.
Lévi-­Strauss, C. (1961), Race et histoire [Race and history], Paris: Editions Gonthier.
Madoui, M. (2008), Entrepreneurs issus de l’immigration maghrébine en France: De la stig-
matisation à la quête de la reconnaissance sociale [Entrepreneurs from North African 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

250    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
immigration in France: From the stigma to the quest for social recognition], Montreuil: 
Aux lieux d’être.
Malesevic, S. (2004), The Sociology of Ethnicity, London: SAGE.
Moreau, R. (2006), ‘La formation des équipes d’entrepreneurs’ [The formation of teams of 
entrepreneurs], Revue de l’Entrepreneuriat, 5 (2), 55–68.
Murdoch, A. and E. Kaciak (2011), ‘Culture shock re-­visited: What features of the Polish 
culture most bother expatriates in Poland’, Journal of Applied Business Research, 27 (2), 
87–104.
Nisbet, R.A. (2005), La tradition sociologique [The sociological tradition], Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France.
Nydell, M.K. (2006), Understanding Arabs – A Guide for Modern Times, Yarmouth, ME: 
Intercultural Press.
Oberg, K. (1960), ‘Culture shock: Adjustments to new cultural environments’, Practical 
Anthropology, 7, 177–82.
Patai, R. (2002), The Arab Mind, New York: Haterleigh Press.
Price-­Jones, D. (2002), The Closed Circle – An Interpretation of the Arabs, Chicago, IL: Ivan 
R. Dee.
Raijman, R. (2001), ‘Mexican immigrants and informal self-­employment in Chicago’, 
Human Organization, 60 (1), 47–55.
Rocheford, E.B. (1991), Hare Krishna in America, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press.
Ruano-­Borbolan, J.-­C. (2004), ‘La construction de l’identité’ [The construction of identity], 
in C. Halpern and J.-­C. Ruano-­Borbolan (eds), Identité(s) – L’individu, le groupe, la 
société, Auxerre Cedex: Sciences Humaines, pp. 1–10.
Ruef, M., H.E. Aldrich and N.M. Carter (2003), ‘The structure of founding teams: 
Homophily, strong ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs’, American Sociological 
Review, 68 (2), 195–222.
Schjoedt, L. and S. Kraus (2009), ‘Entrepreneurial teams: Definition and performance 
factors’, Management Research News, 32 (6), 513–24.
Scott, M. (1968), The Racing Game, Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Segal, J.-­P. (2002), ‘Le frère déplace le frère, un épisode de la vie d’une usine québécoise’ 
[Brother displaces brother, an episode in the life of a Quebec factory], in P. d’Iribarne (ed), 
Cultures et mondialisation, gérés par-­delà les frontières, Paris: Seuil, pp. 19–42.
Tocqueville, A. de (1961), De la démocratie en Amérique II [Democracy in America II], Paris: 
Gallimard.
Tremblay, M.-­A. (1979), ‘Les constructions parallèles de l’identité québécoise et l’acculturation’ 
[The parallel construction of the Quebec identity and acculturation], Mémoires de la Société 
Royale du Canada, 17, 71–82.
Tremblay, M.-­A. (1984), ‘L’identité des Québécois francophones: Perspectives théoriques et 
tendances’ [The identity of francophone Quebeckers: Theoretical perspectives and trends], 
Mémoires de la Société royale du Canada, 22, 3–18.
Ucbasaran, D., A. Lockett, M. Wright and P. Westhead (2003), ‘Entrepreneurial founder 
teams: Factors associated with member entry and exit’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 28 (2), 107–28.
Vaugeois (2009), ‘La nation québécoise, le creuset méconnu’ [The Quebec nation, the unsung 
crucible], in L.-­A. Richard (ed.), La nation sans la religion?, Saint-­Nicolas, QC: Les Presses 
de l’Université Laval, pp. 63–95.
Vogel, R., T.X. Puhan and E. Shehu et al. (2014), ‘Funding decisions and entrepreneurial 
team diversity: A field study’, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 107 
(Part B), 595–613.
Vyakarnam, S. and J. Handelberg (2005), ‘Four themes of the impact of management teams 
on organizational performance’, International Small Business Journal, 23 (3), 236–56.
Wacquant, L. (2000), Corps et âme: Carnets d’ethnographie d’un apprenti boxeur [Body and 
soul: Ethnographic notebooks of an apprentice boxer], Paris: Agone.
Weisz, N., R.S. Vassolo, L. Mesquita and A.C. Cooper (2010), ‘Diversity and social capital 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Ethnic diversity in entrepreneurial teams    ­251
of nascent entrepreneurial teams in business plan competitions’, Management Research: 
The Journal of the Iberoamerican Academy of Management, 8 (1), 39–63.
West, G.P. (2007), ‘Collective cognition: When entrepreneurial teams, not individuals, make 
decisions’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31 (1), 77–102.
Zghal, R. (1994), La culture de la dignité et le flou de l’organisation [The culture of dignity and 
the blurring of the organization], Tunis: Centre d’études, de recherches et de publications.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

252
12.  Women empowerment through 
Government Loaned Entrepreneurship 
Teams (GLETs) in Kenya
Mary Wanjiru Kinoti, Moses Kibe Kihiko and 
Thomas M. Cooney
INTRODUCTION
Educators, researchers, policy-­makers and practitioners have increasingly 
recognized entrepreneurship as a key driver of socio-­economic develop-
ment (Kirchhoff, 1991; Bruyat and Julien, 2000; Kelley et al., 2012). 
Indeed, commentators such as Bitange and Fides (2007) have argued 
that entrepreneurship can reduce social and economic problems such as 
poverty and crime while simultaneously helping to increase standards 
of living and wealth creation. Following the post-­election violence that 
Kenya experienced in 2007/08, it was diagnosed that unemployment and 
poverty were amongst the primary reasons for the disturbances. According 
to the Institute of Economic Affairs in Kenya (IEA, 2008) the national 
poverty rate was 52 per cent at that time and the majority of the poor were 
women (who comprised 50 per cent of the population in the rural areas 
and 46 per cent in urban areas). Given that unemployment was a major 
contributor to the serious poverty suffered by women and because women 
faced significant challenges in securing a job, it was considered that self-­
employment might be offered as one element of a long-­term solution to 
the problem. However, in debating this option, there was a realization by 
local enterprise agencies that women entrepreneurs fared badly compared 
to men regarding entrepreneurial activity due to obstacles such as lack of 
credit, inadequate savings, poor education and training, and limited social 
capital resources (Adhiambo et al., 2013). It was against this backdrop of 
challenges that the government introduced the Women Enterprise Fund 
(WEF) towards the end of 2006, an initiative that was hosted within a 
semi-­autonomous government agency under the aegis of the Ministry of 
Gender, Children and Social Development.
To support the WEF programme, the government created a budget 
of KES6 billion (US$75 million) aimed at supporting the economic 
empowerment of women through entrepreneurship. The fund was aimed 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­253
at ­benefiting women across the country’s 47 counties. WEF is a flagship 
of ‘Kenya Vision 2030’, which demonstrates the Kenyan government’s 
commitment to the realization of the 3rd Millennium Development Goal 
on women empowerment and gender equality (Kombo et al., 2014). The 
WEF was established in order to create affordable access to finance for 
Kenyan women who faced difficulties obtaining capital from existing 
microfinance institutions and banks. To ensure that the government funds 
maximized the number of women that participated in the WEF, the loan 
was offered to teams (or groups) of at least ten women and therefore the 
programme became known as the Government Loaned Entrepreneurship 
Teams (GLETs) initiative (the term ‘Entrepreneurship Team’ was chosen 
by the hosting agency rather than the widely used term ‘Entrepreneurial 
Team’).
Given that the WEF initiative was still relatively new and no known 
study had been undertaken to investigate the challenges and successes of 
funded GLETs, it was determined that a research study on this initiative 
would be of significant value to a range of interested parties. The study 
was guided by three principal objectives: (1) to determine the challenges 
of GLETs; (2) to determine the factors that enhance or limit GLETs’ 
group cohesion; and (3) to determine the intervention strategies required 
for improving the WEF in Nairobi. A cross-­sectional descriptive survey 
research design was used for the purpose of this study of women’s groups 
in Nairobi. Primary data were collected using interview guides containing 
open-­ended questions developed in line with the objectives of the research 
study. The choice of interview guide was suitable because it allowed for 
in-­depth information gathering. The study identified several challenges 
that GLETs face that are categorized as group-­ and business-­related 
challenges. Finally it was concluded that the government’s initiative to 
empower women through entrepreneurship, and subsequently to enable 
them to become economically independent, was successful and had 
reached all 47 counties in Kenya. The study highlighted that the Kenyan 
government’s commitment to the realization of the 3rd Millennium 
Development Goal on women empowerment and gender equality had 
achieved some success and that it offered a platform from which addi-
tional initiatives can be developed.
WOMEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP TEAMS
The traditional image of enterprises being established by lone entrepre-
neurs has been challenged for a number of decades (e.g., Harvey and 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

254    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Harrison, 1992; Reynolds, 1993), particularly with regard to the increasing 
body of evidence that suggests that fast-­growth firms are more likely to 
be led by entrepreneurial teams (see Cooney, 2010). The apparent key to 
success in growing a small business according to Wynarczyk et al. (1993) is 
the ability to assemble a managerial team, frequently comprising individu-
als who may not have a financial interest in the business. Stevenson and 
Jarillo-­Mossi (1986) noted that growing a business involved greater com-
plexity than stability and that successfully managing the resulting intrica-
cies requires teamwork, while Chandler and Baucus (1996) associated the 
stability of founding teams with sustained growth. Timmons (1990) also 
noted that an entrepreneurship team was a key ingredient for the success 
of a new venture, together with opportunity recognition and gathering 
of resources. Indeed, there is an increasingly robust body of work by 
entrepreneurship scholars that highlights that entrepreneurship is often 
a collective activity carried out by an entrepreneurial team and even sug-
gesting that an individual entrepreneur is more prone to failure with their 
new venture creation. According to Gordon and Hogan (2012) a team is 
defined as consisting of three to 25 people who operate towards a common 
set of goals, work jointly, share common leadership, hold joint account-
ability for performance and see themselves as being part of a team with 
common goals and shared fates. According to Cooney (2005, p. 229), an 
entrepreneurial team can be defined as ‘two or more individuals who have 
a significant financial interest and participate actively in the development 
of the enterprise’. Given the increasingly complex and competitive com-
mercial environment and the challenges of dealing with it alone, launching 
with a team might give new ventures better possibilities, not only of surviv-
ing but also of thriving. As Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven (1990) attested, 
large teams offer more skills to build strategic alliances, to raise money 
and to meet potential customers. There is also empirical evidence that the 
probability of becoming a fast-­growth company will be positively influ-
enced by an enterprise being founded by a team. The argument that entre-
preneurial teams make little difference to a firm’s growth potential since 
all firms utilize team-­working in some capacity is rejected. This is because 
not all firms believe in or operate a system of team-­working, but firms that 
were established by a team are more likely to behave in a manner of team-­
working, since that is how the founders have innately performed since the 
firm was instituted. Given that an entrepreneurial team may enhance the 
performance of the firm, the government of Kenya argued that such an 
approach was more likely to lead to the WEF initiative being successful.
Female entrepreneurs in any country face many environmental and 
commercial challenges, but even more so in Kenya. Bula (2012) highlighted 
that because Kenya is a patriarchal society, women are not ­considered ‘on 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­255
par’ with their male counterparts, even within the terms of the country’s 
constitution. She also highlighted that women are forced into early mar-
riages and that they endure harmful cultural practices. Research by the 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO, 1986) 
and Williams and Gurtoo (2011), amongst many others, have noted the 
role of women in the informal sector and highlighted that their participa-
tion was approximately 35 per cent representation and that women in the 
informal sector are the highest employer of women (especially in small-­
scale enterprises). It was also suggested that women’s entrepreneurship 
primarily operates within the informal sector or in agricultural activities, 
both of which offer very low rates of income. More broadly, Kelley et al. 
(2012) pinpointed that the rates and profile of women entrepreneurs varies 
markedly across countries. For instance in Pakistan, women entrepreneurs 
represent only 1 per cent of the female population, while 40 per cent of 
women in Zambia are engaged in this activity. The highest regional female 
total entrepreneurship activity (TEA) levels are in Sub-­Saharan Africa 
where 27 per cent of the female population on average are engaged in 
entrepreneurship. Kelley et al. (2012) found that Latin America/Caribbean 
economies have comparatively high levels of TEA at 15 per cent, while the 
MENA/Mid-­Asia region and developed Europe and Asia represent lower 
TEA levels at 4 per cent and 5 per cent respectively. In the past, much of 
women’s participation in entrepreneurship was predominantly in agricul-
ture but, given recent trends in rural–urban migration, this has changed 
with women becoming increasingly proactive in developing their own 
businesses as small and medium-­sized enterprises. The growing presence 
of women entrepreneurs in Africa can be attributable to socio-­economic 
changes in urban areas altering traditional patterns of gender division of 
labour. In addition, women have also attained formal education, which 
makes them eligible for modern wage employment and managing busi-
ness enterprises. Furthermore, a large majority of all microfinance clients 
worldwide are women, ranging from 58 per cent to 86 per cent depending 
on the geographical area, with approximately 60 per cent participation in 
Africa (Lafourcade et al., 2005). Finally, it should be noted that in Africa 
local market trade by women is a very old and traditional occupation. 
For instance, in West Africa women traded along the coast as early as 
the fifteenth century, while in Kenya the Luo women of Kowe started to 
trade in big numbers after 1933 and women-­owned businesses have long 
contributed to the promotion of tourism, employment and export trade in 
Kenya (Misango and Ongiti, 2013). The history of women in Kenya acting 
entrepreneurially is well established but the challenges are significant in 
moving their entrepreneurial endeavour from the informal sector to the 
formal and more affluent sector of the economy. Kibas (2006) said that 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

256    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
the pivotal role of women in society (specifically in rural areas) in fighting 
poverty in Kenya needs to be accepted and supported, while Misango and 
Ongiti (2013) stated that a more proactive move beyond fighting poverty 
and instead a move towards creating wealth was now required.
SUCCESS FACTORS FOR WOMEN 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN KENYA
Many writers have emphasized the significance of small firms to the 
economy of a country, and particularly their ability to engender job crea-
tion (e.g., Storey, 1994). Such a contribution has been widely acknowl-
edged although the value or size of the augmentation remains an issue 
of debate in the literature. What has also been recognized is the role 
of women entrepreneurs within the small enterprise sector. Numerous 
research studies have attempted to understand women entrepreneurs by 
examining the characteristics of the entrepreneurs involved, the motiva-
tional factors concerned with growth, the process that firms (and entrepre-
neurs) go through, the composition of the organization, and the barriers 
to growth that they experience. According to Kelley et al. (2012), the lit-
erature offers many factors associated with success of an entrepreneur or 
entrepreneurship available in literature. They include cohesion, marketing 
skills, societal perceptions of opportunities in the environment, manage-
ment skills, self-­assessment about capabilities and fear of failure, personal 
factors, and level of education and training. One of the key success factors 
highlighted was cohesion, with the key indicators for cohesiveness being 
the size of the group, the level of members participating in group activi-
ties, the rate of turnover of members and the number of meetings to set 
group targets. Karanja and Bwisa (2013) cited research that revealed 
that women-­led groups had high levels of cohesiveness, with the findings 
showing that 70 per cent of the women group members enjoying their 
group activities. Other success factors included confidence in capabilities 
and fear of failure, which are indicative of a person’s self-­perception rela-
tive to entrepreneurship. The first factor assesses whether people believe 
that they have the capabilities for starting a business and can reflect not 
only their prior experience or training, but also their confidence in their 
own abilities. People who believe that they have the ability to carry out the 
tasks required to start a business are more likely to actually engage in this 
process and succeed. Another potential success factor is one’s perception 
about the environment since people view their surroundings with different 
lenses and these perceptions provide an overall impression of how a society 
currently sees the environment for entrepreneurship. For instance, where 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­257
many people see lots of opportunities for entrepreneurship, there are gen-
erally higher rates of venture creation. Gatakaa (2012) noted that where 
gender discrimination prevails in a society, it will have a cumulative effect 
on the psychological, social, economic and educational factors acting as 
impediments to women starting a business. Another influencing factor is 
an entrepreneur’s level of experience, which can be measured in terms of 
the number of years the business has been in existence and whether the 
entrepreneur had other businesses prior to the current business. According 
to Cooney (2010) an entrepreneur with longer experience in their current 
industry and who had other businesses in the past is more likely to be suc-
cessful with new entrepreneurial initiatives. Management skills refer to the 
ability to develop and effect good business plans, to obtain and employ 
resources effectively, to balance obligations with business demand and 
to accurately keep records. Cooney also suggested that the development 
of management skills can be seen as improving the skills of managers in 
relation to finance, marketing, human resources, strategy, planning and 
operational management. The softer management skills relate to com-
munication, decision-­making and team building. Marketing skills are also 
critical to success in entrepreneurship as the identification of customers’ 
needs and delivering greater satisfaction than that offered by competitors 
is essential to securing any market niche. Collectively all of the above con-
stitute influencing factors towards the success of any business but the level 
of impact for each factor will vary with each unique experience.
When one considers the variety of success factors for any business 
as presented above, then the challenges facing women entrepreneurs in 
Kenya look even greater than initial observations might suggest. Though 
Masinde (1987) observed that agricultural projects could generate small 
but stable incomes, women groups in Kenya lacked marketing abilities, 
management skills, equipment and capital. Sagwe et al. (2011) came to 
the conclusion that while the individual capabilities of entrepreneurs (such 
as training, education and prior experience in the same field) were found 
to have a significant effect on the growth of the business venture, they 
were generally lacking amongst local women entrepreneurs. Similarly 
Ijaza et al. (2014) found that one of the biggest challenges among women 
borrowers in the Hamisi Constituency (Vihiga County of Kenya) was 
low levels of education and this was having a significant impact on 
their entrepreneurial activity. Murray (2013) researched 16 women-­only 
groups formed by settled pastoralist women in Northern Kenya (who 
had formed producer-­type groups to improve their economic situation 
through ­cattle-­fattening schemes, trading of cattle and small ruminants, 
sales of dairy products, as well as the processing and sales of hides) and 
observed that such women groups excluded men, mainly because they felt 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

258    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
that men would exert power over them, and this initially led to domestic 
conflicts (because husbands were suspicious of their wives). Mugo (2012) 
found that a general lack of experience and exposure also restricts women 
from venturing out and that dealing with banking institutions was another 
of the critical factors affecting entrepreneur’s performance for women 
groups in Nairobi’s Central Business District. While the number of reports 
and research studies on women entrepreneurs in Kenya may not be as 
plentiful as other countries, they nevertheless paint a consistent picture of 
women entrepreneurs who are poorly educated, under-­resourced, limited 
in terms of management skills, enduring gender inequality and facing chal-
lenges at every turn, and who are attempting to identify income-­generating 
opportunities that will offer them the possibility of moving out of poverty 
and providing a stable existence for their family.
UNDERSTANDING GOVERNMENT LOANED 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP TEAMS (GLETS) IN KENYA
The Kenyan WEF funding initiative is supported by existing literature that 
asserts that women in entrepreneurship play a critical role in the economic 
development of societies, although a substantial proportion of women 
across the world still live a marginalized existence. According to a United 
Nations report (1995), approximately 70 per cent of the world’s poor are 
women due to various factors such as lack of employment opportunities, 
family roles and dependence on social welfare, and it is therefore necessary 
to introduce tailored initiatives to reduce poverty amongst women. While 
the development of women entrepreneurs has been acknowledged as one 
potential avenue towards a change in circumstance, statistics show that 
women-­owned businesses have commonly registered lower business per-
formances compared to businesses owned by men (Saberwal and Terrell, 
2008).
The WEF was established to provide accessible and affordable credit to 
support women who wanted to start a business. The fund also provided 
business support services such as marketing, finance and management. 
The core mandates of the initiative were to provide subsidized credit for 
enterprise development, facilitate the marketing of goods and services, 
support the development of infrastructures beneficial to female entre-
preneurs, and expand linkages between women entrepreneurs and big 
companies. The purpose of the government fund was to empower the 
women but many challenges existed in terms of inhibitive cultural prac-
tices that place women on the periphery of the formal economy. These 
challenges can become greater depending upon a woman’s level of educa-
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­259
tion, ­ethnicity, religion, marital status and age, and therefore creative and 
holistic solutions needed to be employed. The loan was given out through 
registered women’s groups who were interested in expanding or starting a 
new business. These programmes were aimed at engendering the economic 
empowerment of women through entrepreneurial activity and by offering 
30 per cent access to government procurement opportunities reserved for 
women. With the GLETs in place, the government believed that they had 
begun to address the rampant poverty and unemployment that existed 
amongst women, as well as mitigating against the potential recurrence 
of street violence similar to what happened after the 2007 election. In 
Nairobi alone, there were over 1700 groups that benefited from WEF gov-
ernment loans since the fund was launched in 2008.
The major requirement to qualify for the government loan was team 
formation with a minimum of ten members, either 100 per cent women 
or at least 70 per cent women. The leadership of the group had to be held 
by women (i.e., the three main officials of chairperson, treasurer and sec-
retary) and only women leaders could be signatories to the team account. 
Other requirements for the application included being registered with the 
Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services in a specific constitu-
ency, the team must have possessed an active bank account for at least 
three to six months, they must have been trained in business management 
skills by WEF officers before a loan was given and no dual member-
ship (i.e., members being in two or more groups) was allowed. The team 
must have completed a form that was accompanied by minutes of a team 
meeting stating that they agreed to borrow WEF funds. Furthermore, 
the application form had to be accompanied with copies of the national 
identification cards of all team members and the team must have demon-
strated a common business, a group name and they must have a constitu-
tion in place for managing all of their operations. While the requirements 
to apply for a loan were rigorous, the process ensured that the team had 
undertaken a significant amount of business planning before making their 
application and many local observers believe that this increased the pros-
pect of viability for the team.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The research methodology employed was a survey comprising 36 
GLETs and ten Women Enterprise Fund Officers (WEFOs) in 17 con-
stituencies of Nairobi County (namely Dagoretti North, Dagoretti South, 
Embakasi Central, Embakasi East, Embakasi North, Embakasi South, 
Embakasi West, Kamukunji, Kasarani, Kibra, Langata, Makadara, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

260    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Mathare, Roysambu, Ruaraka, Starehe and Westlands). Nairobi County 
was chosen because (1) Nairobi is the capital city of Kenya, (2) it has 
the highest population of any county with 3 138 369 people, and (3) it is 
a cosmopolitan city so it offers a good representative sample of many 
of the communities in Kenya. Primary data was collected from the 36 
GLETs using interview guides containing mainly open-­ended questions 
developed in line with the objectives of the research study. The choice of 
interview guide was suitable because it allowed the respondents to give 
in-­depth information about their experiences within the entrepreneurship 
teams. Though the data collected was both quantitative and qualitative in 
nature, the research utilized a multiple case study method that emphasized 
depth rather than breadth with a smaller number of cases but with richer 
data (Piekkari et al., 2009). To test the validity of the data, the interview 
guide was pre-­tested at two levels. Initially, senior lecturers and profes-
sors in the field of entrepreneurship were asked to read through the guide 
and provide constructive comments on wording, clarity and ambiguity. 
The authors then improved the study instrument based on the comments 
given. The second stage involved a formal pre-­test with two women 
groups from the population of the study who were requested to respond 
to the questions in the research instrument. The feedback of the two 
pre-­tested interviews was then used to improve the final interview guide. 
The data were analysed initially using qualitative content analysis that 
involved categorizing collected data on themes along the study objectives. 
Subsequently, ­percentages were used to aggregate the findings along the 
identified themes and responses.
ANALYSIS OF THE FINDINGS
The initial analysis began with a review of the principal demographics 
of the 36 GLETs so as to build a profile. To understand the age dynam-
ics of a GLET’s members, the ages were grouped into three categories, 
namely: Youth (comprising those aged below 35 year), 35+ (those above 
35 years old), and Mixed (comprising teams with members aged above 
35 years old and below 35). As seen in Figure 12.1, the majority of the 
GLETs comprised mixed age groups (78 per cent), followed by teams 
owned by people above 35. Those teams comprising solely youth members 
accounted for just 6 per cent of the survey respondents.
Three-­quarters of the GLETs existed before WEF started, comprising 
71 per cent mixed aged groups, 100 per cent for those with members above 
35 years of age, while only 50 per cent of the youth group interviewed 
existed before WEF started (Figure 12.2).
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­261
Based on the year that the GLET started, slightly above half of the groups 
have been in existence for a period for six to ten years, followed closely by 
the groups that have been in existence for one to five years. Only 9 per cent 
of the groups have been in existence for more than ten years, compris-
ing those in existence for 16 to 20 years (6 per cent) and 11 to 15 years 
(3 per cent) as shown in Figure 12.3.
Although over half of the GLETs did not provide their reason as to how 
the group started, most groups (39 per cent) started as a ‘merry-­go-­round’, 
which is a revolving fund whereby poor women from a village make small 
savings from daily household budgets and pool that money together, and 
then give the total collections from all members to one member of the 
team either on a daily, weekly or monthly basis, one after the other until 
each member receives a lump sum amount. It is a common practice among 
Mixed Age Group
Above 35
Youth
78%
16%
6%
Figure 12.1  Age composition of GLETs
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Total
Mixed Age Group
Above 35
Youth
75%
71%
100%
50%
25%
29%
0%
50%
YES
NO
%
Figure 12.2  Existence of GLETs before WEF started
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

262    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
African countries, particularly Kenya. The research found that 6 per cent 
of the GLETs started due to the establishment of the WEF, while 3 per cent 
were established for lending money to members (Table 12.1).
It was surprising to learn that many of the younger GLETs had not 
written a business plan (Figure 12.4) given that such a document would 
have been expected. While 100 per cent of GLETs in existence more 
than ten years did have a business plan, just 35 per cent of firms aged 
six to ten years old and 67 per cent of GLETs aged one to five years old 
had a business plan. It could be suggested that those GLETs with long 
experience value the structure and sense of purpose that a business plan 
can offer.
The fact that a great percentage of business plans were prepared by all 
members, followed by those prepared by the programme officials, with a 
small percentage of GLETs looking for outside help in preparing a busi-
ness plan (Figure 12.5), may be a pointer to how GLETs saw themselves as 
solving their own problems, as well as indicating the cohesion levels within 
these GLETs.
Within any entrepreneurial team there will exist difficulties regarding 
the interaction of team members and the overall performance of the team 
(Table 12.2). It is unsurprising to see from the research that the single 
biggest challenge faced by GLETs was a lack of cooperation from team 
members/internal wrangles. Intuitively it makes sense that such a problem 
0
50
100
1 to 5
6 to 10
11 to 15
16 to 20
40%
51%
3%
6%
%
Series1
Figure 12.3  Age of the GLETs
56%
100%
100%
67%
35%
0
20
40
60
80
100
Total
16 to 20
11 to 15
1 to 5
6 to 10
Age of the group (years)
%
Figure 12.4  GLETs with business plan
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­263
is more likely to occur in larger teams, especially those that have at least 
ten members. During the course of operations, it is highly likely that some 
members will underperform or not commit themselves to the goals of the 
team due to any number of reasons. In such large teams it is also highly 
probable that at least one member of the team will struggle to make the 
required individual repayments as their personal or family circumstances 
will cause conflict between catering for the needs of their poverty-­stricken 
family or repaying the loan to the GLET.
It can be seen that not making repayments and missing repayment 
deadlines were the second and third biggest challenges faced by the 
GLETs. Many of the other challenges could be considered minor in 
comparison to these three serious concerns. However, in some way, each 
of the challenges have a bearing on the success rate of GLETs and influ-
enced the key criteria which WEFOs stated that they used to assess the 
success of a GLET:
●	 consistent monthly loan repayment and loan repayment rate of indi-
vidual members;
●	 ability to conduct group meetings in an organized manner according 
to the constitution (and high attendance rate of the members);
●	 maintenance of good records showing GLET saving, loan given and 
loan repayment by individual members and by the whole group;
0
20
40
60
Info. Not
Provided
All Members
Officials
Help from NGO
42%
33%
20%
6%
%
Figure 12.5  Information on who prepared the business plan
Table 12.1  Explanation for GLET existence
Reasons for Group Formation
Total (%)
Information not provided
52
Merry-­go-­round
39
Group began after WEF establishment
6
For lending members money
3
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

264    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
●	 organized groups with strong leadership;
●	 transparency among leaders and members on financial matters of 
the group;
●	 GLET graduation to the next loan cycle (i.e., from KES100000/$1250, 
which is the minimum to KES200000/$2500, KES350000/$4375 and 
KES500000/$6250, which is the maximum a GLET can get);
●	 existence of dispute resolution mechanism to deal with group 
conflict;
●	 maintenance of initial group members;
Table 12.2  GLET group-­related challenges (as presented in the data 
collection)
Challenge
%
Information missing
14
Interpersonal
Lack of cooperation from group members, and internal wrangles
53
Discrimination from other members
3
Lack of transparency and trustworthiness within the group
8
Unaccountability
3
Interferences due to ethnic values and beliefs
6
Violation of group constitution by members
6
Lack of individuals to partner with
3
TOTAL
82
Financial
Delay in loan repayment
36
Delay in group member contribution/disloyalty of members
14
Failure to meet payment deadlines/default in payment/debtors
22
Defaults in loan payments by members
3
Huge burdens of repaying loans belonging to other members
11
TOTAL
86
Turnover
Loss of members through death/absenteeism
6
Members pull out due to loss of interest
3
TOTAL
9
Leadership
Management problems due to huge numbers within the group
8
TOTAL
8
Skills sets
Lack of distributors/lack of man power/unskilled people
8
TOTAL
8
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­265
●	 common project/business started by the GLET and the success of 
the businesses;
●	 commitment of members, members’ maturity, good leadership, 
strong groups.
Triangulated through different sources of information, the research-
ers found that the success rate of the constituencies was nine out of 17 as 
offered by the WEFOs who judged the success rate of the GLETs under 
him or her, as shown in the Table 12.3. Further research is needed to 
understand why these regional differences occurred.
The business-­related challenges were examined using the environmental 
scanning model of political, economic, social, technological, environmental 
and legal (PESTEL), with the addition of ethical dimension (Table 12.4).
There was no challenge that was attributed to political environment (P), 
which was unusual given that previous studies have highlighted that the 
country’s constitution was arguably reinforcing the patriarchal culture 
of the country. It was also interesting to find that one of the biggest chal-
lenges identified was the ‘high city council fees/licenses/expensive broker-
ages’ when this scheme provided funding to help women entrepreneurs to 
overcome the challenges of establishing a business. If the government is to 
continue to improve the environment for women entrepreneurs (indeed, 
all entrepreneurs) then they will need to reduce the cost of business licenses 
and fees charged by local authorities. Another interesting finding was the 
influence of ‘weather conditions affecting production’, which was high-
lighted as one of the biggest challenges faced by GLETs. The other big 
challenges included ‘poor customer turnout’, ‘competition’, ‘inadequate 
Table 12.3  Successful constituencies
Name of the Constituency
Success Rate (%)
Dagoretti South
70
Mathare
70
Kasarani
51
Starehe
65
Dagoretti North
68
Ruaraka
80
Embakasi North
85
Roysambu
89
Embakasi East
90
Westlands
92
Average success rate of GLETS
76 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

266    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Table 12.4  Business-­related challenges
Challenge
(%)
Economic
Poor customer turnout/lack market
25
Competition
22
Price variation/uncertainty
11
Inflation/unfavourable economic conditions/high cost of living
8
Inadequate funds for expansion/insufficient funds/high interest on loans
22
Low returns/non-­profitability/low turnover
17
Maintenance costs
3
Lack of raw materials/packaging/high prices for materials needed for  
  production/animal feeds
14
Transport challenges
11
Poor quality
3
Unfinished products
3
TOTAL
139
Social
Lack of government and society support
3
Lack of incentives from suppliers
3
TOTAL
6
Technological
Underdeveloped technology
6
TOTAL
6
Environmental
Weather conditions affect production
25
Diseases
11
Outbreak of fires
3
Power blackouts
3
Perishability of goods
3
Seasonality of goods
6
Lack of display and selling places
3
Hawking – going from place to place selling
3
TOTAL
57
Legal
High city council fees/licenses/expensive brokerages
17
High statutory fees
6
TOTAL
23
Ethical
Fraud/employee dishonesty
6
Robbery
3
TOTAL
9
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­267
funds’ and ‘low returns’, each of which could be considered normal 
­business challenges within any commercial environment.
The internal intervention strategies (Table 12.5) offer another inter-
esting perspective of the challenges faced by the GLETs. The most 
common requirement for intervention was regarding ‘educate/train 
members to reduce illiteracy’ while the second biggest challenge was 
‘unity amongst members’. One of the great challenges with the WEFOs 
providing intervention strategy is that the public sector within which 
they operate is highly bureaucratic and not very entrepreneurial. The 
high degree of formalization in bureaucracies creates a ‘vicious circle’ 
in which the workers follow the rules, since that is the basis on which 
they are evaluated. The rules become more important than the goals 
they were designed to help accomplish. Therefore, the public sector 
organizations become rigid and have difficulties dealing with custom-
ers and other aspects of the environment. Since the rules prescribe the 
kinds of decisions to be made, those in decision-­making positions tend 
to create more rules when situations arise for which there are no prec-
edents. Rules become security for the employee. There is no drive for 
greater economy, since that would be threatening and there is a strong 
desire to build safeguards through increased rigidity. The personnel in 
such a system become increasingly unable to operate on their own initia-
tive and frequently seek to reduce the amount of freedom to which they 
are subject. So how can WEFOs support entrepreneurial activity within 
GLETs when they operate within highly bureaucratic public sector 
organizations?
In terms of external and other intervention strategies (Table 12.6), the 
main issues identified by the research were ‘introducing new products’ and 
‘expansion’, although it was interesting to note ‘trust in God’ also being 
mentioned in terms of intervention strategies.
The information gathered for Tables 12.4–12.6 was generated through 
discussions with GLETs and WEFOs, and from the data it is clearly 
evident that the biggest challenges facing GLETs are internal and focus 
on the ability of the members of the GLET to work together and the 
capacity of individual members to repay their loan. It is possible that 
some additional training can be provided by the WEFOs on team build-
ing before a loan is provided and this could improve team cohesion. 
However, given the background circumstances of the people involved 
in the programme, it is difficult to imagine what steps might be taken 
in advance to increase the rates of repayment as the risk of loss has 
to be an acceptable element of any entrepreneurial activity. However, 
Bula (2012) did note that many small scale enterprises in Kenya lack 
proper financial management as they have not separated their business 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

268    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Table 12.5  Internal intervention strategies
Internal Interventions
%
Membership, leadership & group size and cohesion
Unity among members
15
Ensures timely repayment of loan/pledges
12
Every member should have her own business
3
Loan advanced to members should be repaid with interest
3
Member should acquire loans using household items as security
3
Encourage democracy among themselves
3
Ensuring business investments have name of next of kin so that any  
  death occurring the group will move on
3
Have a constitution which guides the group
6
A small number of group members to enable members know each other
3
Shares are issued to each member to create a sense of belonging
3
Upon death of a member replacement should be done
3
Trust and support
3
Uniting the members every year by visiting the less privileged with help
3
The group leaders ensure that they have details for all members
3
Groups to form committees for themselves to oversee all the group  
  requirements
3
TOTAL
66
Education and training
Educate/train members to reduce illiteracy to be more accountable
30
Provision of mentors to the group to know their way about business
3
TOTAL
33
Loan borrowing/repayment, savings and investment
The group should be monitored after being given the money
3
Women fund loans should be insured
3
Culture of saving should be instilled at early stage
3
Efficient use of funds
6
Ploughing back the profits to ensure continuity of the business
3
Encourage members to build each other financially in case of defaulting
3
Payment of fine by group members who do not comply by the policies of the  
  group
3
Collaborations is done with the chief and the police in case a member fails 
  to repay
3
TOTAL
27
On WEF intervention 
WEF to increase amount give
3
The head of WEF to visit
3
Have and locate stable offices
3
Empower other individuals to form groups
3
Increase contribution sealing 
6
TOTAL
18
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­269
accounts from their family financial accounts, and maybe therein lies 
the solution.
CONCLUSION
Some of the challenges highlighted in this research are consistent with 
a study undertaken by Ijaza et al. (2014) in the Hamisi constituency in 
Kenya where WEFOs cited (1) the delay of funds from WEF, (2) illiteracy 
Table 12.6  External and other intervention strategies
External Interventions
%
Business continuity and expansion
Introducing new products/services
18
Expansion
15
Have set aside enough funds to ensure continuity of their business activity
3
Motivates members to stay in business
3
Give more money/loans
3
Members to come up with common profitable business to meet their  
  objectives easily
3
Group of similar products should come together as one
3
Joint ownership of property like building a house for renting
3
Make use of financial institutions
6
TOTAL
57
Legal and regulatory
Reduce interest rates
6
The government to give incentives and reduce the tax rate for them
3
Support from the government in terms of discouraging import and  
  encouraging exports
3
Creating a friendly environment
3
TOTAL
15
Marketing and distribution
Feature into the larger markets (supermarkets) and distribute their products
3
Interact with other NGOs to venture beyond Kenya
3
Set up of well-­structured market centers free from harsh conditions
3
Come up with a suitable and conducive meeting place away from disturbances
3
Adding value to products
3
TOTAL
15
Other interventions
Create more employment to other persons
3
Trust in God
3
TOTAL
6
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

270    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
and (3) loan diversion by women, among the key challenges that needed to 
be addressed. The delays, the WEFOs argued, were caused by the failure 
of GLETs to repay their loans on schedule and since WEF is a revolving 
loan fund, then other women applying for the fund are in turn delayed. 
Illiteracy among many GLETs also resulted in difficulties with the loan 
application process, the repayment of the loan through the bank, and with 
proper record keeping. The study also found that some loans intended for 
entrepreneurship were instead used for school fees, to pay medical bills 
and to buy food for the family. According to Misango and Ongiti (2013), 
to properly gauge the impact of WEF on women entrepreneurship teams, 
a more detailed appraisal should be undertaken using parameters such as 
business start-­ups, ability to meet basic needs, ability to take children to 
school, improved standards of living, access to medical facilities, as well as 
the creation of employment opportunities. Kombo et al. (2014) suggested 
that there is a need to increase training of loan beneficiaries in business 
management skills and capacity building, as well as promoting local and 
international marketing, building linkages between businesses owned by 
women with big enterprises, plus attracting and facilitating investment in 
infrastructure that supports women enterprises (for instance, markets and 
business incubators).The findings of this study would support the conclu-
sions of such findings.
This study has determined that the criteria set by the government 
for women to qualify for WEF are very comprehensive and stringent. 
Furthermore, the success rate of the entrepreneurial teams in terms of 
loan repayment was very good on average, while the challenges faced by 
the teams were general in nature. However, based on the wide number of 
challenges faced by the GLETs, more internal interventions by members 
themselves (as well as by the WEF) were needed more than external inter-
ventions. Noting that the intervention strategies are more internal than 
external, in order to strengthen the GLETs it is recommended that the 
WEF should increase the duration, frequency and content of the training 
given to the GLETs. The WEF (Kenyan government) should also consider 
lowering the size of the group from its current figure of ten to a leaner 
group of five members so that there will be better coordination, chemis-
try, cohesion, cooperation and harmony. Additionally, the government 
should finance women’s group assets rather than giving money to provide 
incentives, and they should also reduce the tax and interest rate for women 
and encourage greater levels of export activity. The GLETs also require 
business mentors who can work closely with them to implement what 
they have learned in training. There is also a need for tighter mechanisms 
aimed at reducing or eliminating loan defaulters in order to ensure that 
more women benefit from the WEF, as well as tighter ­monitoring of 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Women empowerment through GLETs in Kenya    ­271
GLET businesses with a view of understanding their challenges, as well 
as regularly carrying out thorough group appraisals and rewarding high-­
performing groups. Finally, the WEF should guide GLETs in marketing 
their products, as well as facilitating linkages with other institutions that 
benefit women.
It is therefore concluded that the Kenyan government’s initiative to 
empower women in entrepreneurship (and subsequently economically) 
is a very noble idea that has reached all 47 counties of Kenya and has 
shown good signs of success. The initiative also demonstrates the Kenyan 
government’s commitment to the realization of the 3rd Millennium 
Development Goal on women empowerment and gender equality, and 
to the achievement of Vision 2030. It has a strong future and it has the 
potential to positively change the lives of thousands of Kenyan women 
and their families.
REFERENCES
Adhiambo, R.M., S. Okelo and P.B. Ojera (2013), ‘Literature review on the relationship 
between microfinance provision and women enterprise performance’, Journal of Social 
Science, 3 (5), 275–83.
Bitange, N. and W.M. Fides (2007), ‘Women entrepreneurs and strategic decision making’, 
Journal of Management History, 45 (10), 118–30.
Bruyat, C. and P.A. Julien (2000), ‘Defining the field of research in entrepreneurship’, 
Journal of Business Venturing, 16 (7), 165–80.
Bula, H.O. (2012), ‘Evolution and theories of entrepreneurship: A critical review on the 
Kenyan perspective’, International Journal of Business and Commerce, 1 (11), 81–96.
Chandler, G.N. and D.A. Baucus (1996), ‘Gauging performance in emerging busi-
nesses: Longitudinal evidence and growth pattern analysis’, paper at the 16th Babson 
Entrepreneurship Research Conference, 21–24 March, Seattle.
Cooney, T.M. (2005), ‘What is an entrepreneurial team?’, International Small Business 
Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Cooney, T.M. (2010), Fast-­Growth Firms and Entrepreneurial Teams, Saarbrucken: Lambert 
Academic Publishing.
Eisenhardt, K.M. and C.B. Schoonhoven (1990), ‘Organisational growth: Linking founding 
team, strategy, environment and growth among US semiconductor ventures, 1978–1988’, 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (3), 504–29.
Gatakaa, G.C. (2012),‘Factors affecting women entrepreneurs’ financial performance in 
Kenya: A case of Ngara market’, MBA dissertation, University of Nairobi.
Gordon, C. and R. Hogan (2012), The Rocket Model: Practical Advice for Building High 
Performing Teams, Tulsa, OK: Hogan Press.
Harvey, S. and R.T. Harrison (1992), ‘Stimulating entrepreneurship: Mechanisms for 
new venture creation’, paper presented at the 12th Babson Entrepreneurship Research 
Conference, 28 June–1 July, Fontainebleau.
IEA (2008), Profile of Women’s Socio-­Economic Status in Kenya, Nairobi: Institute of 
Economic Affairs.
Ijaza, A.K, S.W. Mwangi and K. Ng’etich (2014), ‘Challenges faced by the Women 
Enterprise Fund in Kenya: A survey of Hamisi Constituency, Vihiga County–Kenya’, 
Research Journal of Finance and Accounting, 4 (14), 20–28.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

272    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Karanja, P. and H.M. Bwisa (2013), ‘Factors that influence entrepreneurial success among 
women groups: A case study of Makuyu Division’, International Journal of Academic 
Research in Economics and Management Sciences, 2 (1), 33–46.
Kelley, D.J., C.G. Brush, P. Greene and Y. Litovsky (2012), Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor Women’s Report, Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Kibas, P.B. (2006), Women in Entrepreneurship: Analysis of Factors Influencing Growth 
Oriented Women Enterprises in Kenya, Geneva: International Labour Office.
Kirchhoff, B.A. (1991), ‘Entrepreneurship’s contribution to economics’, Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 12 (2), 93–112.
Kombo, L.A., M. Onyango and A. Mukhebi (2014), ‘The role of Women Enterprise 
Fund in entrepreneurship development: The case of Bondo District, Kenya’, Journal of 
Entrepreneurship, 2 (1), 34–45.
Lafourcade, A.L, J. Isern, P. Mwangi and M. Brown (2005), ‘Overview of the outreach and 
financial performance of microfinance institutions in Africa’, MicroBanking Bulletin, 
April.
Masinde, J. (1987), ‘Determinants of women groups and their implications for rural devel-
opment and planning: A study of Sirisia Division Bungoma District’, MA dissertation, 
University of Nairobi.
Misango, S.B. and O.K. Ongiti (2013), ‘Do women entrepreneurs play a role in reducing 
poverty? A case in Kenya’, Journal of International Review of Management and Business 
Research, 2 (1), 87–103.
Mugo, L.W. (2012), ‘Factors affecting entrepreneurs’ performance for women groups in 
Nairobi’s Central Business District’, MBA dissertation, University of Nairobi.
Murray, U. (2013), ‘Rural child labour: Views of extension agents in Ethiopia’, The Journal 
of Agricultural Education and Extension, 19 (5), 505–19.
Piekkari, R., C. Welch and E. Paavilainen (2009), ‘The case study as disciplinary convention: 
Evidence from international business journals’, Organizational Research Methods, 12 (3), 
567–89.
Reynolds, P. (1993), ‘High performance entrepreneurship: what makes it different?’, in 
N.  Churchill, S. Birley and J. Doutriaux et al. (eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship 
Research, Proceedings of the 13th Annual Babson College Entrepreneurship Research 
Conference, Babson Park, MA: Babson College, pp. 88–101.
Saberwal, S. and K. Terrell (2008), ‘Does gender matter for firm performance? Evidence from 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia’, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4705.
Sagwe, J.S., S. Gicharu and T. Mahea (2011), ‘A study on youth and women entrepreneurs’ 
preparedness in Kenya: A case study of the Kenya Youth Enterprise Development Fund 
and Kenya Women Enterprise Fund beneficiaries using the TRISTART business evalua-
tion tool’, Nairobi: Kenya Institute of Management.
Stevenson, H.H. and J.C. Jarillo-­Mossi (1986), ‘Preventing entrepreneurship as companies 
grow’, Journal of Business Strategy, 7 (1), 10–23.
Storey, D. (1994), Understanding the Small Business Sector, London: Routledge.
Timmons, J.A. (1990), New Venture Creation, Homewood, IL: Irwin.
UNIDO (1986), Women, Industry and Entrepreneurship Report, Vienna: United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization.
United Nations (1995), Women in a Changing Global Environment, New York: United Nations.
Williams, C.C. and A. Gurtoo (2011), ‘Evaluating women entrepreneurs in the informal 
sector: Some evidence from India’, Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, 16 (3), 
351–69.
Women Enterprise Fund (2009), Women Enterprise Fund Strategic Plan (2009–2012), 
Nairobi: Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Development.
Wynarczyk, P., R. Watson and D.J. Storey et al. (1993), Managerial Labour Markets in Small 
and Medium Sized Enterprises, London: Routledge.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

273
13.  Entrepreneurial teams in social 
entrepreneurship: when team 
heterogeneity facilitates organizational 
hybridity
Frédéric Dufays and Benjamin Huybrechts
INTRODUCTION
More than its conventional counterpart, the literature on social entrepre-
neurship has traditionally acknowledged a collective dynamic inherent in 
the entrepreneurial process (Defourny and Develtere, 1999). This collec-
tive dimension is argued to stem from the structure of the social enterprise 
on the one hand (for instance, cooperative legal form, involvement of 
stakeholders in the governance structure) (Shaw and Carter, 2007), or 
alternatively from the ambition to create social value together with, and 
for the benefit of, a variety of actors (Corner and Ho, 2010). Indeed, social 
entrepreneurship is often the result of a collective process undertaken by 
a coalition of individuals forming a team (Schieb-­Bienfait et al., 2009; 
Dufays and Huybrechts, 2014). Therefore, social entrepreneurship consti-
tutes an appealing setting for studying entrepreneurial teams.
Social entrepreneurship is typically characterized as relying on a com-
bination of social welfare logic and market logic (Battilana and Lee, 2014; 
Doherty et al., 2014). Hence, it can be considered as an ideal type of hybrid 
entrepreneurship – that is, entrepreneurship that embraces two or more 
institutional logics rather than just one dominant logic (Fowler, 2000; 
Lee, 2014). A large body of literature has already explored how hybrid 
organizations (including social enterprises) manage this hybridity and 
overcome the possible tensions between the different logics (Oliver, 1991; 
Pache and Santos, 2010), but very few studies have explored how organi-
zational hybridity emerges (Almandoz, 2012) and how it may be sustained 
throughout the entrepreneurial process (Dufays and Huybrechts, 2016). 
While Lee and Battilana (2013) show that single founders’ characteristics 
such as past work experience imprint hybridity into the organizational 
process, they disregard the possibility of observing hybridity emerging 
from a team. Additionally, entrepreneurial teams’ (ETs) composition 
and their effect on various performance indicators (such as profit and 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

274    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
­organizational survival) feed an important stream of literature (Klotz 
et al., 2014), but thus far team composition has been analysed in terms of 
demographic homogeneity rather than in terms of values. Because of its 
inherent tension between social and economic dimensions, social entre-
preneurship appears as an ideal setting to discuss the impact of value het-
erogeneity in an ET. This chapter will investigate social entrepreneurship 
undertaken by teams as a way to (1) enhance distinct institutional logics 
enacted by individual team members embedded in heterogeneous social 
networks, and (2) integrate them in the intra-­team interactions (modera-
tor) throughout the entrepreneurial process.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Building on the premise that founder characteristics have a sustained 
influence on the characteristics of the created organization (Nelson, 2003; 
Johnson, 2007; Hoang and Gimeno, 2010; Lee and Battilana, 2013), studies 
have paid much attention to the imprint of founding team characteristics 
on the organization, with research finding that team size and composition 
appear to affect subsequent organizational behaviour (Eisenhardt and 
Schoonhoven, 1990). For instance, heterogeneity or homogeneity of the 
founding team with regard to demographic characteristics (Steffens et al., 
2012), past organizational affiliation (Beckman, 2006), and functions 
and competences (Beckman et al., 2007) have each been demonstrated to 
impact upon a new venture’s long-­term performance, growth and ability 
to attract venture capital. However, evidence remains rather mixed, sug-
gesting that the effects of team heterogeneity are highly dependent on 
contextual factors (Klotz et al., 2014).
This debate on the potential benefits and pitfalls of heterogeneity in 
teams echoes the discussion between the two schools of thought on entre-
preneurial team composition and formation (Ben Hafaïedh-­Dridi, 2010) – 
that is, the strategic and instrumental view versus the socio-­psychological 
dynamic view (which draws on the similarity-­attraction or homophily 
theory). Based on resource dependence theory, the former argues that 
teams are formed in a pragmatic way to acquire the resources and skills 
that are necessary (Forbes et al., 2006), whereas the latter presumes that 
entrepreneurs form teams with others they are similar to because they hire 
them in their close social network (Ruef et al., 2003). So far, the imprint of 
ET composition has mostly been examined through demographic, status 
and education or work experience heterogeneity and rarely through value 
or ‘logic’ heterogeneity (McPherson et al., 2001; Klotz et al., 2014). To 
address this gap, this chapter aims to explore the implications of logic 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship    ­275
­heterogeneity within the founding team – that is, distinct institutional 
logics borne by team members as has been typically observed in the 
context of social entrepreneurship.
The concept of institutional logics denotes the assumptions, beliefs and 
rules by which individuals confer meaning to their social reality (Friedland 
and Alford, 1991; Thornton and Ocasio, 2008). It implies a two-­way rela-
tionship between agents and institutions because institutional logics guide 
individual behaviour in shaping the agent’s cognition and rational behav-
iour, and agents contribute to constructing and/or transforming institu-
tional logics by mobilizing one logic or another to make sense of particular 
situations in their social world (Powell and Colyvas, 2008; Thornton et al., 
2012). Depending on their socialization, individuals take some rules, 
meanings and assumptions for granted (Berger and Luckmann, 1966 
[1991]; Meyer and Rowan, 1977). In other words, they enact institutional 
logics (Friedland and Alford, 1991) through their education and profes-
sional experience (Pache and Chowdhury, 2012) as well as the social ties 
they maintain in their social network (Greenwood and Suddaby, 2006). 
Thus, individuals are likely to face a plurality of logics and therefore may 
embrace one or several institutional logics to varying degrees (Pache and 
Santos, 2013). The latter situation is likely to occur when they evolve 
within several social spheres and embody compound identities.
When individuals face distinct and possibly conflicting logics, individu-
als may respond in five different ways: ignorance, compliance, defiance, 
compartmentalization and combination (ibid.). While the three first 
strategies result in the prevalence of one logic over the other, the latter 
two involve the articulation of distinct logics and therefore constitute the 
core of hybrid entrepreneurship. Compartmentalization indicates that an 
individual segments across time and/or space compliance and ignorance/
defiance, with competing logics to find consistency in the prescribed values 
and practices. In contrast, a combination suggests an individual’s attempt 
at bringing together, and eventually hybridizing, some of the values and 
practices of the competing logics in any situation (ibid.). So far, the ques-
tion of distinct institutional logics has given rise to a series of research 
studies at the organizational level (Greenwood et al., 2011), or at the level 
of one single individual. This chapter aims to extend this discussion by 
theorizing about logic combinations at the inter-­individual level in the 
context of heterogeneous ETs.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

276    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
MODEL DEVELOPMENT
Prior to the construction of the model, two elements need to be clarified. 
First, it should be noted that the model presented here shows only one pos-
sible path directing ETs to embrace hybrid entrepreneurship. Therefore, 
it does not imply that all ETs undertake hybrid entrepreneurship, nor 
that hybrid entrepreneurship is necessarily conducted by teams. Second, 
for the purposes of this chapter, an entrepreneurial team is understood as 
being composed of two or more individuals who have a significant inter-
est and engagement in the development of an entrepreneurial project, and 
who recognize each other as being part of the team. The interest of team 
members is broadened from financial (Cooney, 2005) to include other 
forms of interest. For example, social entrepreneurs often have an inter-
est that the future venture will tackle a social need that they experience 
personally or experienced by someone in their close environment (Germak 
and Robinson, 2013). A mutual recognition criterion is also included to 
take stock of the mutual inclusion decision that is needed in the team for-
mation process (Ben-­Hafaïedh, 2014).
As a starting point (upper part of Figure 13.1), it is acknowledged 
that individuals are embedded in a network of interpersonal relations 
(Granovetter, 1985) from which they enact institutional logics (Berger and 
Luckmann, 1966 [1991]; Friedland and Alford, 1991). This social network 
evolves over time and depends on various socialization sources: family, 
education, professional experience, religion, and so on. Because people 
prefer cognitive consonance, they tend to keep in touch with others who 
share similar meanings and values (McPherson et al., 2001) and so distinct 
networks may embody distinct institutional logics (Breiger and Mohr, 
2004; Mohr and White, 2008). Consequently, heterogeneity of social 
networks and socialization trajectories among individuals are likely to be 
sources of distinctiveness of the logics enacted by them.
For a team to exist there must be a meeting of two or more individuals. 
Arguably this meeting can potentially trigger the generation of entrepre-
neurial opportunities. Indeed, drawing on the structural-­hole argument, 
‘good ideas’ for entrepreneurship have been found in bridging distinct 
social networks thanks to the informational advantage it provides (Burt, 
2004). Brokering between or binding distinct homogeneous groups may 
offer the possibility to select or generate ideas and innovations that are 
valued by all groups (Obstfeld, 2005; Tortoriello and Krackhardt, 2010). 
This brokerage/binding function is usually assumed in the literature to 
be done by a single individual. However, it may happen that individuals 
representing the various groups form a team to collectively act as a broker, 
which is the case studied in this chapter.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship    ­277
By analogy, bridging institutional logics gives an informational advantage 
that may be transformed into an entrepreneurial opportunity. Indeed, 
a meeting between individuals carrying distinct and eventually compet-
ing institutional logics may be a source of entrepreneurial opportu-
nity through the complementarity between these logics (Marquis and 
Lounsbury, 2007). In social entrepreneurship more particularly, the bridg-
ing of (at least) a social-­welfare logic and a commercial logic may bring 
upfront entrepreneurial opportunities. For such hybridity to be sustained 
throughout the entrepreneurial process of opportunity evaluation and 
exploitation by the team, then structural, individual and interpersonal 
factors are likely to play a role. First, the structure of the network in which 
each team member is embedded is likely to influence the way in which 
logic conflict can be managed. The network structure will determine the 
degree of freedom of individual team members with regard to the expected 
conformity to the institutional logic borne by their network. In particu-
lar, network density is likely to play a role on the ability of an individual 
team member to deal with different institutional logics. Indeed, a denser 
network (Individual B in Figure 13.1) will allow for less deviation from 
Generating
Opportunity
creation/identification
Opportunity
evaluation
Individual
In the entrepreneurial process
Structural
Interactional
Individual
Institutional logic(s)
HYBRIDITY
A
B
Opportunity
exploitation
Figure 13.1  A model of hybridity-­imbued entrepreneurial process
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

278    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
the established norms and values because of the more numerous intercon-
nections between nodes that create more trust and enforcement (Degenne 
and Forsé, 1999). If the focal individual takes distance from the norms 
and values that are carried by the network by conforming to another insti-
tutional logic, they are likely to face punishment from this dense network 
(Granovetter, 2005). In contrast, centrality (Individual A on Figure 13.1) 
of a social network is likely to push the focal individual to face contradict-
ing institutional values. For instance, Greenwood and Suddaby (2006) 
disclosed that elites have very central networks (bridging organizational 
fields) and therefore need to deal with distinct institutional logics.
The second set of factors lies at the individual level. Education and 
socialization are presumed to have an impact on the way an individual 
manages situations in which they face conflicting logics because the 
strategy they are likely to adopt depends on the extent to which an indi-
vidual has previously been familiarized to this other logic (Pache and 
Santos, 2013). Familiarity with different institutional logics is acquired 
through the social interactions an individual has throughout their whole 
life (Morrison, 2002; Bukowski et al., 2007). Education has a special 
role in familiarizing an individual to several logics, as argued by Pache 
and Chowdhury (2012) who plea for social entrepreneurship education 
programmes that would help students to be able to bridge social-­welfare 
and commercial (and eventually public-­sector) institutional logics. Hence, 
it is suggested that individuals who have been exposed to different insti-
tutional logics are more likely to develop practices that are consistent 
with these various logics and to embrace hybridity in an entrepreneurial 
setting. In his study of local community banks establishment, Almandoz 
(2012) observed that the institutional logics espoused by ET members 
and the interaction between them have an influence on the odds of hybrid 
organization creation. Therefore, how each team member is acquainted 
to the logics carried by other team members determines the sustain-
ability of hybridity in the entrepreneurial process. Indeed, although logic 
distinctiveness may be a source of opportunity through the complemen-
tarity of institutional logics, it may also be a cause of conflict between 
team members that impedes the exploitation of a hybrid entrepreneurial 
opportunity. This type of conflict is likely to arise when team members are 
ignoring or denying the relevance of other logics. According to Pache and 
Santos (2013), those behaviours are most likely to occur when individuals 
are identified with one logic and have little or no familiarity with the other 
logic. The competing logics are likely to be subject to power plays within 
the team (Vigoda-­Gadot and Vashdi, 2012), as well as causing leadership 
issues (Somech, 2006). Consequently, conflict between logics during the 
entrepreneurial process may end up in marginalizing or squeezing out one 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship    ­279
of the logics present and result in the domination of one logic only. Specific 
combinations in the team composition may also engender this situation. If 
one team member has been socialized to a single logic, they are therefore 
identified with this logic and will be completely novice at other logics, 
and so they are likely to adopt a mix of compliance and defiance attitudes 
towards the enacted logic and the other logic (Pache and Santos, 2013). 
In the presently modelled two-­person team case, if the other member is 
socialized to the logic enacted by the first team member, that logic is likely 
to dominate over the other. Thus, familiarity with other logics may reduce 
pressure in the conflict and in power struggles, and favour the construc-
tion of a unifying frame for the team, although hindering hybridity in the 
entrepreneurial process.
In contrast, a compartmentalization strategy may be used to avoid 
conflict when each member is novice at the logic of the other team 
member. When both individuals are familiarized to some degree to other 
logics, compartmentalization or hybridization strategies are more likely to 
happen because team members want to be able to justify their behaviour 
towards their social network but are willing to compromise thanks to their 
former socialization towards other logics. In this case, familiarity with 
other logics favours hybridity in the entrepreneurial process. Therefore, 
the effect of familiarity with distinct logics through past socializations on 
hybridity in the entrepreneurial process needs to be understood taking 
into account the interactions between team members. For an ET in the 
context of social entrepreneurship, it means that the extent to which team 
members are acquainted with social-­welfare logic when they enact a com-
mercial logic (and inversely) is very important for sustaining the hybrid 
character of the entrepreneurial process. Therefore the composition of the 
social ET matters if the team is to succeed in balancing the social and com-
mercial dimensions of social entrepreneurship.
Overall, hybridity is imprinted in the entrepreneurial process as a result 
of the heterogeneity of the ET with regard to individual team members’ 
familiarity with and flexibility towards other logics (which they get from 
their education, socialization and social network structure, as well as 
from the manner in which heterogeneity is addressed within the inter-
actions between team members). Hence, team composition is likely to 
play a significant role in shaping and sustaining the hybrid character of 
entrepreneurship. As shown in Figure 13.1, the relationship between the 
social networks of individual team members and the hybridity in the entre-
preneurial process is reciprocal. It has been demonstrated above that the 
network structure and the institutional logics borne by the network influ-
ence the entrepreneurial process and its likelihood to enhance ­hybridity. 
Several studies also show an evolution of an entrepreneur’s social network 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

280    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
due to actions undertaken during the entrepreneurial process (Hoang and 
Antoncic, 2003; Slotte-­Kock and Coviello, 2010). Indeed, entrepreneurs 
(in a team or individually) need to expand their network of contacts in 
order to get information to evaluate the opportunity and to acquire the 
necessary resources to exploit it. In social entrepreneurship, this is par-
ticularly true for several reasons. First, social entrepreneurs need to gain 
legitimacy from a wider variety of stakeholders than their commercial 
counterparts (Shaw and Carter, 2007), which requires regular interactions 
with those stakeholders to secure their support (Huybrechts et al., 2014). 
For instance, it is important for many social entrepreneurial projects to 
see the idea appropriated by the community, which necessitates exchanges 
with other people (Haugh, 2007). Second, social entrepreneurship is 
acknowledged to face greater difficulty with regard to resource acquisi-
tion, against which one possible solution is to expand the network in 
which resources may be found (Spear, 2006). As an illustration of some 
elements of the model, a real-­time case study is presented in the next 
section. This case study has been constructed by interviewing (individually 
and collectively) members of a social ET engaged in the early stages of the 
entrepreneurial process of an organization that is not yet created.
ILLUSTRATIVE CASE STUDY: INTERGEN
InterGen (anonymized name) is a social entrepreneurial project aimed at 
creating a day-­care centre for mentally handicapped grown-­ups next to an 
assisted-­living facility for elderly people. The idea emerged in 2009 from a 
couple of parents, John and Mary, whose youngest daughter is mentally 
handicapped. At that time, she was around 12 years old and entering 
secondary school. This shift made the parents aware that they had to 
start thinking about her life after school. Hence, they started to discuss 
the matter with other parents facing the same situation, who they met at 
their daughter’s school. Realizing that the offer was almost non-­existent 
in the area, they formed a team of nine parents to envisage the creation 
of a centre that would welcome their children once grown up. Although 
the education and work experience of all parents differ, they have similar 
status (intellectual professions, higher middle class), living area, age and 
share a concern for their handicapped child.
First, the team needed to acquire some knowledge regarding the 
legal and financial constraints imposed on a day-­care centre for men-
tally handicapped adults. They started to explore a few ideas, among 
which farm rehabilitation and organic farming were considered by a few 
team members as a worthy option. At the school of his eldest daughter, 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship    ­281
John met Mike, marketing manager for a bank, who was looking for new 
professional challenges in the area of elderly nursing homes. This meeting 
triggered the identification of an opportunity for a social entrepreneurial 
project that would meet the social need of improving the quality of life and 
the social integration of handicapped adults, whilst ensuring a long-­term 
financial viability that would safeguard the handicapped against the risk 
of not having enough to pay for the centre when their parents die. The 
idea of building the day-­care centre next to an assisted-­living facility for 
elderly and allowing for both financial and human exchanges between the 
two structures did not reach a consensus within the team. Two couples of 
parents argued that this was going too far in subordinating the project of 
a day-­care centre to a financial revenue-­generating activity and they left 
the project together with two other parents. Indeed, they felt that such a 
project was sacrificing (1) the creation of activities adapted to their child 
as they considered farming as more suited to handicapped grown-­ups, and 
(2) the living environment they envisioned for their child as the elderly 
living facility implied that it would be located in an urban or semi-­urban 
place to be close to transportation and other services elderly people need.
Nowadays, the team is stabilized around three parents of handicapped 
children, among whom are John and Mary, a friend of theirs who special-
izes in communication and fundraising, and Mike. The project is also 
stabilized and a consensus on what values are borne by the team and the 
discourse to hold towards various stakeholders has progressively been 
enacted. Roles within the team are distributed informally according to 
what each one volunteers to do. Over time, some tasks have crystallized 
around one or the other member. For instance, John is identified as the 
leader, doing the administrative tasks, and communicating with formal 
institutions. Mary is treasurer for the day-­to-­day fundraising activities. 
She is also identified by the team as the guardian of the social mission for 
the handicapped. Mike is taking care of the financial strategy, making sure 
that the project is economically viable, and of the set-­up of the assisted-­
living facility for elderly people.
It can be highlighted from this case that a social entrepreneurial 
opportunity may be generated by the meeting of two needs and distinct 
institutional logics. Whereas the complementarity of the market and the 
social-­welfare logics carries opportunities, it also seems clear that the 
conflict in these logics puts constraints on and may even hinder the entre-
preneurial process. Indeed, this conflict has caused the composition of 
the entrepreneurial team to evolve with the exit of some members and the 
entry of others to manage the balance between the logics in a consistent 
way across all members. Such a consistency is achieved through interper-
sonal negotiation. The exit of some members reflects the failure of the ET 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

282    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
to reach an agreement in these negotiations. This failure may result from 
the inability of individuals to compromise because of their poor familiarity 
with other logics present. For InterGen, the evolution of the team com-
position particularly illustrates a weak crystallization of the team around 
the initial opportunity (Condor and Chabaud, 2012) because of diverging 
framing or interpretations thereof, as well as diverging visions of what the 
social need (of their child) entails, resulting in diverging understandings 
of how to combine institutional logics. As a result, neither compromise 
nor compartmentalization could be achieved to sustain hybrid entrepre-
neurship by the initial ET. Hence, tensions could only be solved through 
a change in the project, or a change in the team, which was the adopted 
solution.
With regard to the roles, it can be noted that the InterGen team attempted 
to exploit the strengths of each member, with some of them playing the 
tacit role of ‘logic guardians’. They ensure that the other logic does not 
squeeze out the logic that they represent. Even though this might create 
tensions, it also ensures the sustained character of hybridity. This informal 
role distribution can constitute one solution for dealing with hybridity in 
ETs. Overall, team composition imprints hybridity to the entrepreneurial 
process whilst team functioning and organization allow team members to 
sustain hybridity throughout the entrepreneurial process.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This chapter has developed a model of social entrepreneurship undertaken 
by teams understood as hybrid entrepreneurship, building its hybrid-
ity on the heterogeneity of an ET and on the interactions between team 
members. Together with the illustrative case study and the broader appli-
cation to social entrepreneurship, it makes several theoretical contribu-
tions. Further, despite some limitations, it has significant implications for 
theory and practice.
Regarding theoretical contributions, this chapter first confirms that the 
composition of entrepreneurial teams, beyond demographic characteris-
tics or skills of team members, can play a major role in shaping the entre-
preneurial process. In other words, it makes clear that value heterogeneity 
(McPherson et al., 2001) influences entrepreneurial action and outcomes 
by showing how team composition contributes to shaping and sustain-
ing the hybrid character of the social entrepreneurial process. Further, 
by articulating multiple levels of analysis and integrating dynamism 
between team members (Humphrey and Aime, 2014), this chapter adds 
to the microfoundations of team entrepreneurship. Indeed, it shows the 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship    ­283
­relationship between the macro-­structure in which an individual is embed-
ded and the ET, and the mediating effect of interactions between team 
members. Inevitably, such a model contains inherent limitations. The 
deductive approach adopted throughout this chapter requires one to sche-
matize and therefore fails to reflect the many shades that can be observed 
in practice. For example, teams may be composed of more than two 
members (as illustrated by the InterGen case), which is likely to change 
the suggested outcomes through power plays (Mangen and Brivot, 2015). 
Another major simplification resides in the assumption that individuals 
are identified principally with one logic, disregarding the possibility for the 
team to include hybrid individual members.
As a theoretical implication, connecting the field of social entre-
preneurship to the field of ETs highlights that studies on team status 
­homogeneity/heterogeneity (McPherson et al., 2001) appear insufficient 
to explain a team composition’s influence on the entrepreneurial process. 
Consequently, this chapter suggests that integrating greater complexity 
in research on team composition is required, particularly with regard to 
values or logics, and to interactions between team members. In addition, 
the chapter underlines the impact of socialization and social networks 
of individual team members in the ET formation process, including the 
likelihood of sustained hybridity. Thereby, it contributes to the literature 
by going beyond the classical opposition between the strategic and the 
homophily approaches of ET formation (Ben Hafaïedh-­Dridi, 2010). 
Indeed, by looking at logic heterogeneity and familiarity, the model sug-
gests that social networks are important antecedents to the generation of 
an opportunity for hybrid entrepreneurship, as well as for the evaluation 
and the eventual exploitation that might occur. The dynamic character 
of the model also points at the importance in considering social networks 
evolution over time as they are likely to change because of the entrepre-
neurial process (Slotte-­Kock and Coviello, 2010). Therefore, there is an 
influence by social networks on the process that itself affects the social 
network. In this way, this chapter follows Giddens’s (1984) proposition 
in positioning the ET and its members as agents in a dual relationship 
with the structure. In the same way that Lechler (2001) demonstrated it 
for technology ventures, the model implies that interactions between team 
members during the team formation process and beyond are likely to have 
profound impacts on the (social) ET’s performance and success. This is 
exemplified by the InterGen case for which the entrepreneurial team had 
to adjust its composition to solve value misunderstandings and thereby to 
overcome barriers hindering the project to go forward. As a consequence, 
interactions should be integrated in future research on ET outcomes.
Overall, the chapter also implies that selecting norms, values or 
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

284    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
i­nstitutional logics, as the research object allows one to better understand 
the interactions taking place within an ET (and their outcomes). The 
literature on conflict in teams demonstrates (Ensley and Pearce, 2001) 
that these interactions have a major influence on team performance. As 
a consequence, the model presented makes the case for a closer analysis 
of individual history of value enactment prior to participation in the 
team. This could contribute to uncovering sources of conflict in an ET 
and strategies individual members use to solve these. For practitioners, 
this chapter helps them to better understand and anticipate interactions 
with team members bearing distinct institutional logics. It makes clear 
that logic distinctiveness may create conflicts hindering the entrepre-
neurial process. Hence, depending on team composition and individual 
members’ familiarity with distinct logics, several strategies exist to 
manage and/or avoid these conflicts. Practitioners, regardless of whether 
they act in support of hybrid entrepreneurship or if they are entrepre-
neuring themselves, should therefore not overlook the background of 
individual team members, in particular with regard to values and sociali-
zation to logics. Further, the chapter highlights the potential added 
value and pitfalls of entrepreneuring in teams in institutionally complex 
settings such as social entrepreneurship. It has shown that the potential 
generation of opportunities exists in bridging networks and institutional 
logics by forming a heterogeneous team. However, this opportunity may 
fade because of the need to conform to some logic to remain in line with 
one team member’s social network strong expectations or the unwilling-
ness to familiarize and/or to compromise with distinct logics. Hence, 
practitioners may be encouraged to exploit team heterogeneity as a way 
to sustain hybridity throughout the entrepreneurial process.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research has been carried out in the framework of an Interuniversity 
Attraction Pole funded by the Belgian Science Policy Office under the title 
‘If Not For Profit, For What and How?’
REFERENCES
Almandoz, J. (2012), ‘Arriving at the starting line: The impact of community and 
­financial  logics on new banking ventures’, Academy of Management Journal, 55 (6), 
1381–406.
Battilana, J. and M. Lee (2014), ‘Advancing research on hybrid organizing – Insights from 
the study of social enterprises’, The Academy of Management Annals, 8 (1), 397–441.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship    ­285
Beckman, C.M. (2006), ‘The influence of founding team company affiliations on firm behav-
ior’, Academy of Management Journal, 49 (4), 741–58.
Beckman, C.M., M.D. Burton and C. O’Reilly (2007), ‘Early teams: The impact of team 
demography on VC financing and going public’, Journal of Business Venturing, 22 (2), 
147–73.
Ben Hafaïedh-­Dridi, C. (2010), ‘Entrepreneurial team formation: Any rationality?’, Frontiers 
of Entrepreneurship Research, 30 (10), accessed 22 March 2013 at http://digitalknowledge.
babson.edu/fer/vol30/iss10/1.
Ben Hafaïedh, C. (2014), ‘Entrepreneurial team formation: Taking into consideration 
the  mutuality of the decision-­making process’, paper presented at RENT XXVIII 
­conference  – Research in Entrepreneurship and Small Business, Luxemburg, 19–21 
November, 2014.
Berger, P. and T. Luckmann (1966 [1991]), The Social Construction of Reality. A Treatise in 
the Sociology of Knowledge, New York: Penguin Books.
Breiger, R.L. and J.W. Mohr (2004), ‘Institutional logics from the aggregation of 
­organizational networks: Operational procedures for the analysis of counted data’, 
Computational & Mathematical Organization Theory, 10 (1), 17–43.
Bukowski, W.M., M. Brendgen and F. Vitaro (2007), ‘Peers and socialization: Effects 
on externalizing and internalizing problems’, in J.E. Grusec and P.D. Hastings (eds), 
Handbook of Socialization: Theory and Research, New York: The Guilford Press, 
pp. 355–81.
Burt, R.S. (2004), ‘Structural holes and good ideas’, American Journal of Sociology, 110 (2), 
349–99.
Condor, R. and D. Chabaud (2012), ‘La formation de l’équipe entrepreneuriale autour 
du projet de création d’entreprise: Constats et enjeux’ [Entrepreneurial team forma-
tion round the enterprise creation project: Acknowledgments and challenges], Revue de 
l’Entrepreneuriat, 11 (2), 31–52.
Cooney, T.M. (2005), ‘Editorial: What is an entrepreneurial team?’, International Small 
Business Journal, 23 (3), 226–35.
Corner, P.D. and M. Ho (2010), ‘How opportunities develop in social entrepreneurship’, 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34 (4), 635–59.
Defourny, J. and P. Develtere (1999), ‘The social economy: The worldwide making of a third 
sector’, in J. Defourny, P. Develtere and B. Fonteneau (eds), L’économie sociale au Nord et 
au Sud, Bruxelles: De Boeck, pp. 25–56.
Degenne, A. and M. Forsé (1999), Introducing Social Networks, translated by Arthur Borges, 
London: Sage.
Doherty, B., H. Haugh and F. Lyon (2014), ‘Social enterprises as hybrid organizations: A 
review and research agenda’, International Journal of Management Reviews, 16 (4), 417–36.
Dufays, F. and B. Huybrechts (2014), ‘Connecting the dots for social value: A review on 
social networks and social entrepreneurship’, Journal of Social Entrepreneurship, 5 (2), 
214–37.
Dufays, F. and B. Huybrechts (2016), ‘Where do hybrids come from? Entrepreneurial team 
heterogeneity as an avenue for the emergence of hybrid organizations’, International Small 
Business Journal, 34 (6), 777–96.
Eisenhardt, K.M. and C.B. Schoonhoven (1990), ‘Organizational growth: Linking found-
ing team, strategy, environment, and growth among U.S. semiconductor ventures, 
­1978–1988’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (3), 504–29.
Ensley, M.D. and C.L. Pearce (2001), ‘Shared cognition in top management teams: 
Implications for new venture performance’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22 (2), 
145–60.
Forbes, D.P., P.S. Borchert, M.E. Zellmer-­Bruhn and H.J. Sapienza (2006), ‘Entrepreneurial 
team formation: An exploration of new member addition’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 30 (2), 225–48.
Fowler, A. (2000), ‘NGDOs as a moment in history: Beyond aid to social entrepreneurship 
or civic innovation’, Third World Quarterly, 21 (4), 637–54.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

286    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
Friedland, R. and R.R. Alford (1991), ‘Bringing society back in: Symbols, practices, 
and institutional contradictions’, in W.W. Powell and P.J. DiMaggio (eds), The New 
Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 
pp. 232–63.
Germak, A.J. and J.A. Robinson (2013), ‘Exploring the motivation of nascent social entre-
preneurs’, Journal of Social Entrepreneurship, 5 (1), 5–21.
Giddens, A. (1984), The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration, 
Oxford: Polity Press.
Granovetter, M. (1985), ‘Economic action and social structure: The problem of embedded-
ness’, American Journal of Sociology, 91 (3), 481–510.
Granovetter, M. (2005), ‘The impact of social structure on economic outcomes’, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 19 (1), 35–50.
Greenwood, R. and R. Suddaby (2006), ‘Institutional entrepreneurship in mature fields: The 
Big Five accounting firms’, Academy of Management Journal, 49 (1), 27–48.
Greenwood, R., M. Raynard and F. Kodeih et al. (2011), ‘Institutional complexity and 
organizational responses’, Academy of Management Annals, 5 (1), 317–71.
Haugh, H. (2007), ‘Community-­led social venture creation’, Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice, 31 (2), 161–82.
Hoang, H. and B. Antoncic (2003), ‘Network-­based research in entrepreneurship: A critical 
review’, Journal of Business Venturing, 18 (2), 165–87.
Hoang, H. and J. Gimeno (2010), ‘Becoming a founder: How founder role identity affects 
entrepreneurial transitions and persistence in founding’, Journal of Business Venturing, 
25 (1), 41–53.
Humphrey, S.E. and F. Aime (2014), ‘Team microdynamics: Toward an organizing 
approach to teamwork’, Academy of Management Annals, 8 (1), 443–503.
Huybrechts, B., S. Mertens and J. Rijpens (2014), ‘Explaining stakeholder involvement 
in social enterprise governance through resources and legitimacy’, in J. Defourny, 
L. Hulgård and V. Pestoff (eds), Social Enterprise and the Third Sector: Changing European 
Landscapes in a Comparative Perspective, New York: Routledge, pp. 157–76.
Johnson, V. (2007), ‘What is organizational imprinting? Cultural entrepreneurship in the 
founding of the Paris Opera’, American Journal of Sociology, 113 (1), 97–127.
Klotz, A.C., K.M. Hmieleski, B.H. Bradley and L.W. Busenitz (2014), ‘New venture teams: 
A review of the literature and roadmap for future research’, Journal of Management, 
40 (1), 226–55.
Lechler, T. (2001), ‘Social interaction: A determinant of entrepreneurial team venture 
success’, Small Business Economics, 16 (4), 263–78.
Lee, M. (2014), ‘Mission and markets? The viability of hybrid social ventures’, paper, 
accessed 28 January 2014 at http://www.rotman.utoronto.ca/-­/media/Files/Programs-­
and-­Areas/Strategy/papers/The%20Viability%20of%20Hybrid%20Social%20Ventures_
Matthew%20Lee.pdf.
Lee, M. and J. Battilana (2013), ‘How the zebra got its stripes: Imprinting of individuals and 
hybrid social ventures’, Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 14-­005, accessed 9 
September 2013 at http://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/download.aspx?name=14–005.pdf.
Mangen, C. and M. Brivot (2015), ‘The challenge of sustaining organizational hybridity: The 
role of power and agency’, Human Relations, 68 (4), 659–84.
Marquis, C. and M. Lounsbury (2007), ‘Vive la résistance: Competing logics and the con-
solidation of U.S. community banking’, Academy of Management Journal, 50 (4), 799–820.
McPherson, M., L. Smith-­Lovin and J.M. Cook (2001), ‘Birds of a feather: Homophily in 
social networks’, Annual Review of Sociology, 27 (1), 415–44.
Meyer, J.W. and B. Rowan (1977), ‘Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as 
myth and ceremony’, American Journal of Sociology, 83 (2), 340–63.
Mohr, J.W. and H.C. White (2008), ‘How to model an institution’, Theory and Society, 
37 (5), 485–512.
Morrison, E.W. (2002), ‘Newcomers’ relationships: The role of social network ties during 
socialization’, Academy of Management Journal, 45 (6), 1149–160.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

Entrepreneurial teams in social entrepreneurship    ­287
Nelson, T. (2003), ‘The persistence of founder influence: Management, ownership, and per-
formance effects at initial public offering’, Strategic Management Journal, 24 (8), 707–24.
Obstfeld, D. (2005), ‘Social networks, the Tertius Iungens orientation, and involvement in 
innovation’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 50 (1), 100–30.
Oliver, C. (1991), ‘Strategic responses to institutional processes’, Academy of Management 
Review, 16 (1), 145–79.
Pache, A.-­C. and I. Chowdhury (2012), ‘Social entrepreneurs as institutionally embedded 
entrepreneurs: Toward a new model of social entrepreneurship education’, Academy of 
Management Learning & Education, 11 (3), 494–510.
Pache, A.-­C. and F. Santos (2010), ‘When worlds collide: The internal dynamics of organi-
zational responses to conflicting institutional demands’, Academy of Management Review, 
35 (3), 455–76.
Pache, A.-­C. and F. Santos (2013), ‘Embedded in hybrid contexts: How individuals in organ-
izations respond to competing institutional logics’, in M. Lounsbury and E. Boxenbaum 
(eds), Institutional Logics in Action, Part B, Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing 
Limited, pp. 3–35.
Powell, W.W. and J.A. Colyvas (2008), ‘Microfoundations of institutional theory’, in 
R.  Greenwood, C. Oliver, R. Suddaby and K. Sahlin-­Andersson (eds), The Sage 
Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism, London: Sage, pp. 276–98.
Ruef, M., H.E. Aldrich and N.M. Carter (2003), ‘The structure of founding teams: 
Homophily, strong ties, and isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs’, American Sociological 
Review, 68 (2), 195–222.
Schieb-­Bienfait, N., B. Charles-­Pauvers and C. Urbain (2009), ‘Emergence entrepreneuriale 
et innovation sociale dans l’économie sociale et solidaire: Acteurs, projets et logiques 
d’action’ [Entrepreneurial emergence and social innovation in the social and solidarity 
economy: Actors, projects and logics of action], Innovations, 2009/2 (30), 13–39.
Shaw, E. and S. Carter (2007), ‘Social entrepreneurship: Theoretical antecedents and empiri-
cal analysis of entrepreneurial processes and outcomes’, Journal of Small Business and 
Enterprise Development, 14 (3), 418–34.
Slotte-­Kock, S. and N. Coviello (2010), ‘Entrepreneurship research on network processes: A 
review and ways forward’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34 (1), 31–57.
Somech, A. (2006), ‘The effects of leadership style and team process on performance and 
innovation in functionally heterogeneous teams’, Journal of Management, 32 (1), 132–57.
Spear, R. (2006), ‘Social entrepreneurship: A different model?’, International Journal of 
Social Economics, 33 (5/6), 399–410.
Steffens, P., S. Terjesen and P. Davidsson (2012), ‘Birds of a feather get lost together: New 
venture team composition and performance’, Small Business Economics, 39 (3), 727–43.
Thornton, P.H. and W. Ocasio (2008), ‘Institutional logics’, in R. Greenwood, C. Oliver, 
R. Suddaby and K. Sahlin-­Andersson (eds), The Sage Handbook of Organizational 
Institutionalism, London: Sage, pp. 99–129.
Thornton, P.H., W. Ocasio and M. Lounsbury (2012), ‘The institutional logics perspective: 
A new approach to culture, structure, and process’, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tortoriello, M. and D. Krackhardt (2010), ‘Activating cross-­boundary knowledge: The role 
of Simmelian ties in the generation of innovations’, Academy of Management Journal, 
53 (1), 167–81.
Vigoda-­Gadot, E. and D.R. Vashdi (2012), ‘Politics in and around teams: Toward a ­team-­level 
conceptualization of organizational politics’, in G.R. Ferris and D.C. Treadway (eds), 
Politics in Organizations: Theory and Research Considerations, New York: Routledge, 
Taylor & Francis Group, pp. 287–322.
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

289
Index
academic spin-offs 15, 21, 34
Belbin team roles see roles
Big Five personality types 55, 166
business opportunity 31, 146
cognition 20, 33, 165
cognitive biases 15, 55
cohesion 77, 110, 256
collective entrepreneurship 11, 12, 37, 
221
communication 2, 21, 130
community 221
complementarity 50, 53
conflict 21, 22, 24, 33, 61, 130, 146
contexts 5, 22, 34–6, 49, 158–9, 246, 
252, 254–5
co-preneurship 35, 48, 62
creativity 19, 164, 237, 246
cultural values 209, 216, 223, 237
culture shock 33, 231, 237
decision-making 49
deep-level diversity see diversity, 
personality
diversity 18, 20, 32, 51, 121, 123, 166, 
168, 231, 274
education 18, 158
effectuation 31
emergent state 22, 33, 165
empathy 138
employees 14, 100, 115, 201
entrepreneurial team
composition of  20, 46, 56, 99, 121, 
166, 193, 209, 220, 282
definition of 12–14, 98, 112, 121, 
144, 164, 190, 213, 259, 276
development of 14, 97
formation of 15, 29–30, 73, 85, 193, 
208
prevalence of 2, 11
size of 27, 144, 158
environment 18, 23
equity 16, 17, 31
ethnicity 15, 18, 54, 233
see also context
experience 17–19, 21, 23, 25, 47, 51, 
55–6, 61, 194, 196
fairness 17, 25, 27
family entrepreneurship 3, 5, 34, 58, 
73, 85, 187, 202, 211
family capital 75, 85
family cohesion 75–7, 197
financial capital 79, 87, 112
founder 12, 14
founding team 48
see also entrepreneurial team
friendship 58
gender 5, 35, 252
group concept mapping 97, 102–6
growth 1, 11, 114, 145, 147, 158
high technology 32, 144
homophily 15, 30, 53, 148, 194, 274
human capital 26, 75, 79, 100, 148,  
216
human resource management 110
hybridity 273, 279
see also social entrepreneurship
identity 76, 234
IMOI 22, 26, 27, 165
indigenous entrepreneurship 5, 208, 
213, 215, 224
innovation 16, 147
input–mediator–output–input see 
IMOI
input–process–output 21, 134, 164
see also IMOI
institutional logics 6, 274, 278
interaction 195
International Personality Item Pool  
134
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool
www.ebook3000.com

290    Research handbook on entrepreneurial teams
leadership 16, 22, 111, 165
shared leadership 4, 22, 164, 170
learning 33
Māori 208, 216
mediators 21, 25, 32, 33
methodology 7, 37, 80, 97, 124, 149, 
171, 229–30, 235, 259
motivation 22, 30, 75, 234
networks 16, 24, 34, 52, 56, 78, 276
new venture team see entrepreneurial 
team
norms 16, 22, 30, 76, 101, 112, 189,  
202
opportunity 31, 146, 277
owner 12, 144
performance 11, 17, 19, 23, 24, 27, 147
see also success
personality 3, 20–21, 25, 32, 122, 124, 
164, 166, 170
portfolio entrepreneurship 190, 197, 
200
practitioners 1, 15, 21, 46, 138, 159, 
179, 270–71
resources 18, 76, 90, 100, 115, 146
risk-taking 16
roles 16, 31, 61, 134, 282
social capital 32, 75, 78, 194
social entrepreneurship 6, 34, 273
stewardship 193, 213
strategic behaviour 15, 30, 76
see also resources
strategy 17, 18
structuring 96
students 75, 125
success 3, 15, 121, 131, 136–7, 256
see also performance
top management team 1, 13, 26, 121
traits see personality
trust 15, 46, 58, 76, 189, 195, 200, 241, 
264
turnover 25–6, 196
upper echelons theory 18,  121
venture capitalist 24, 25, 27, 29, 32, 
101, 121, 122, 127, 135, 138,  
139
vision 52, 102
Cyrine Ben-Hafaïedh and Thomas M. Cooney - 9781784713195
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 03/28/2017 06:05:01PM
via University of Liverpool

