
Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning

The GeoJournal Library
Volume 106
Managing Editor:
Daniel Z. Sui, College Station, USA
Founding Series Editor:
Wolf Tietze, Helmstedt, Germany
Editorial Board: Paul Claval, France
Yehuda Gradus, Israel
Sam Ock Park, South Korea
Herman van der Wusten, The Netherlands
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/6007

 Ayda  Eraydin •  Tuna  Taşan-Kok 
 Editors 
 Resilience Thinking 
in Urban Planning 

 Editors 
Ayda Eraydin
 Department of City and Regional Planning 
 Middle East Technical University (METU) 
 Ankara ,  Turkey 
 Tuna  Taşan-Kok 
 OTB Research Institute for the Built 
Environment 
 Delft University of Technology 
 Delft, The Netherlands 
ISSN 0924-5499
 ISBN 978-94-007-5475-1     ISBN 978-94-007-5476-8 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8 
 Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg New York London 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2012951123 
 © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht  2013 
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of 
the material is concerned, speci ﬁ cally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on micro ﬁ lms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection 
with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speci ﬁ cally for the purpose of being entered and 
executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this 
publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s 
location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions 
for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to 
prosecution under the respective Copyright Law. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speci ﬁ c statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
 While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for 
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with 
respect to the material contained herein. 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com) 

v
 This book was born out of the frustrations of a group of urban planners and researchers 
who have increasingly felt the inadequacy of the planning systems and policies 
 introduced to prepare cities for the future in an increasingly neoliberalising world. 
As this shortfall was becoming more evident among urban policymakers, planners 
and researchers in different parts of the world, a group of discontent researchers 
sought new approaches to cope with the increasing vulnerabilities of urban systems 
in the wake of growing socio-economic and ecological problems, privatisation of 
infrastructure services, fear and distrust in society and a loss of ecological services 
on the one hand; and decreases in welfare services and quality of urban environments, 
which have been shed by the appealing business and commercial centres, of ﬁ ce spaces 
and the luxurious residential areas on the other. Our main intention in this book was 
 ﬁ rst to identify how far existing planning systems and practices are able to support 
the sustained development of urban areas and prepare them to withstand both fore-
seen and unforeseen changes; while a secondary aim was to discuss the alternative 
perspectives, systems and principles of a new planning approach. Our combined 
enthusiasm brought us together in a research project supported by the URBAN-
NET funding scheme under the Eranet Programme of the EU. 
 This book is a result of a research project entitled “Sustainable Land Use Policies 
for Resilient Cities,” which took 2 years to complete, with additional work after the 
completion of the project reports. The project aimed to discuss and de ﬁ ne sustainable 
land-use policies for the creation of resilient cities, which has become increasingly 
important in recent years since urban systems must accommodate different global 
in ﬂ uences in diverse forms and be ready to address potential uncertainties and unex-
pected changes. The research framework embraced the importance of “resilience 
thinking” in urban polices in the contexts of urban decline, socio-economic vulner-
ability, urban landscape degradation and institutional fragmentation. 
 The team was composed of four research groups from four countries, namely 
Portugal, Sweden, the Netherlands and Turkey, whose combined focus on the 
resilience concept was applied to urban planning and methods to assess resilience, 
especially by resorting to the de ﬁ nition of comparable attributes and indicators in 
different cities, being Istanbul, Oporto, Lisbon, Rotterdam and Stockholm. 
 Preface and Acknowledgements 

vi
 The composition of the group of researchers, who were able to offer different 
perspectives and experiences from the four distinct countries of Europe, as well as 
a broad and in-depth knowledge of the case study cities, made the studies a real 
learning process for all the contributors to the project. From the very beginning this 
book was planned to be more than just a collection of papers, with the intention 
being to bring together chapters that followed a complementary approach. To achieve 
this, the research method to be followed by the individual researchers from different 
countries and cities was clearly de ﬁ ned, which made a comparison of the outcomes 
of the different studies easier. Meetings and  ﬁ eld trips were organised in each of the 
case study cities, with special attention paid to the areas in which the research was 
to be focused. These meetings not only allowed us to understand each other’s case 
better, but also brought us closer together as a team, working together towards a 
common goal. This book bene ﬁ ted a great deal from the respect and understanding 
created by this friendship. We, as the editors of the book, wish to emphasise the 
importance of this positive atmosphere on the quality of work. Thanks to this real 
team feeling, discussions were fruitful, attempts to understand and re ﬂ ect the 
 different perspectives were effective, and the completed work was detailed. We 
regret that we were not able to fully re ﬂ ect the richness of the individual research 
outcomes within this book due to limitations of space, and would like to thank all of 
those that contributed to this book for their patience and cooperation when decreasing 
the  several hundreds of pages to chapters of limited size, which was obviously tiring 
and tedious work. 
 We hope that the outcome will satisfy not only the contributors to the book, but 
also readers from different disciplines, origins and countries. 
 Were we successful in easing our initial frustration at the end of this research? 
Not exactly; however we believe that light has been thrown on possible alternative 
ways and means of overcoming existing and future problems, and we are con ﬁ dent 
in our belief that an alternative path exists that is based upon resilient thinking. 
We hope that this new perspective that we have attempted to elaborate will  ﬁ nd 
reverberations in the  ﬁ elds of urban planning and urban research. 
 We would like to thank not only the colleagues that contributed to this book, but 
also our research assistants Deniz Altay Kaya, Melih Gürçay and Çiğdem Özonat 
from the Department of City and Regional Planning of the Middle East Technical 
University for their contributions to the preparation of this book; and to Peiwen Lu 
for supporting the Dutch team. Special thanks go to Dr. Dominic Stead, who initially 
came up with the idea to make a research proposal and put the team together. 
We also express our gratitude to the Urban-Net scheme for providing funding and 
support for our research. Many thanks also to Colin Sutcliffe for the great job he did 
for editing the language of the manuscript. Last, but not least, we wish to thank 
Evelien Bakker and Bernadette Deelen of Springer for their continuous support and 
 ﬂ exibility during the process of creating this publication. 
 This book is devoted to young urban planners who will soon discover the 
potentials of resilience thinking for the future of our cities! 
 October 2012 
 Ayda Eraydin 
 Tuna Taşan-Kok 
Preface and Acknowledgements

vii
 1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning ........................ 
1 
 Ayda  Eraydin and  Tuna  Taşan-Kok 
 2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning ...................................................... 
17 
 Ayda  Eraydin 
 3 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History and Context .................. 
39 
 Tuna  Taşan-Kok ,  Dominic  Stead , and  Peiwen  Lu 
 4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics ............................................... 
53 
 Sara  Santos  Cruz ,  João  Pedro  T. A.  Costa , 
 Silvia  Ávila  de  Sousa , and  Paulo  Pinho 
 5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers 
of Globalisation in Lisbon, Oporto, Istanbul, 
Stockholm and Rotterdam ..................................................................... 
71 
 Tuna  Taşan-Kok and  Dominic  Stead 
 6 Systems, Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, 
Turkey, Sweden and the Netherlands .................................................... 
93 
 So ﬁ a  Morgado and  Luís  F.  Dias 
 7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban 
Agglomerations: Key Policy Documents 
and Institutional Frameworks ............................................................... 109 
 Peter  Schmitt 
 8 Evaluating Resilience in Planning ......................................................... 131 
 Paulo  Pinho ,  Vítor  Oliveira , and  Ana  Martins 
 9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan 
Area of Lisbon: The Case of Alcântara ................................................ 145 
 Luís  F.  Dias ,  So ﬁ a  Morgado , and  João  Pedro  T. A.  Costa 
 Contents 

viii
Contents
 10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective: 
The Case of Oporto ................................................................................. 161 
 Vítor  Oliveira ,  Ana  Martins , and  Sara  Santos  Cruz 
 11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial 
Development from a Resilience Perspective in Istanbul ...................... 179 
 Ayda  Eraydin ,  Ali  Türel , and  Deniz  Altay  Kaya 
 12 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case 
of the Stockholm Urban Agglomeration ............................................... 197 
 Peter  Schmitt ,  Lisbeth  Greve  Harbo ,  Asli  Tepecik  Diş , 
and  Anu  Henriksson 
 13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change 
and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam .................................................. 211 
 Dominic  Stead and  Tuna  Taşan-Kok 
 14 The Evaluation of Findings and Future of Resilience 
Thinking in Planning .............................................................................. 229 
 Ayda  Eraydin and  Tuna  Taşan-Kok 
 About the Authors ........................................................................................... 241 
 Index ................................................................................................................. 245 

ix
 João  Pedro  T. A.  Costa   Faculty of Architecture ,  Technical University of Lisbon , 
 Lisbon ,  Portugal 
 Sara  Santos  Cruz   Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Centre for Territory, 
Transports and Environment ,  University of Oporto ,  Oporto ,  Portugal 
 Sílvia  Ávila  de  Sousa   Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Centre for Territory, 
Transports and Environment ,  University of Oporto ,  Oporto ,  Portugal 
 Luís  F.  Dias   Faculty of Architecture ,  Technical University of Lisbon ,  Lisbon , 
 Portugal 
 Asli  Tepecik  Diş   Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial Development ,  Stockholm , 
 Sweden 
 Ayda  Eraydin   Department of City and Regional Planning, Faculty of Architecture , 
 Middle East Technical University ,  Ankara ,  Turkey 
 Lisbeth  Greve  Harbo   Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial Development ,  Stockholm , 
 Sweden 
 Anu  Henriksson   The University of Tampere, School of Management ,  Tampere , 
 Finland 
 Deniz  Altay  Kaya   Department of City and Regional Planning ,  Middle East Technical 
University ,  Ankara ,  Turkey 
 Peiwen  Lu   Faculty of Architecture ,  Delft University of Technology ,  Delft ,  The 
Netherlands 
 Ana  Martins   Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Centre for Territory, 
Transports and Environment ,  University of Oporto ,  Oporto ,  Portugal 
 So ﬁ a  Morgado   Faculty of Architecture ,  Technical University of Lisbon ,  Lisbon , 
 Portugal 
 Contributors 

x
Contributors
 Vitor  Oliveira    Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Centre for Territory, 
Transports and Environment ,  University of Oporto ,  Oporto ,  Portugal 
 Paulo  Pinho   Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Centre for Territory, 
Transports and Environment ,  University of Oporto ,  Oporto ,  Portugal 
 Peter  Schmitt   Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial Development ,  Stockholm , 
 Sweden 
 Dominic  Stead   OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft University 
of Technology ,  Delft ,  The Netherlands 
 Tuna  Taşan-Kok   OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft 
University of Technology ,  Delft ,  The Netherlands 
 Ali  Türel   Department of City and Regional Planning ,  Middle East Technical 
University ,  Ankara ,  Turkey 

xi
 Fig. 1.1 
The framework ............................................................................... 
10 
 Fig. 6.1 
Styles of planning and national planning systems: 
Portugal, Turkey, Sweden, and the Netherlands ............................ 
97 
 Fig. 9.1 
Metropolitan Area of Lisbon and case study location ................... 148 
 Fig. 9.2 
Time travel to Alcântara. Present, solution I and solution II ......... 151 
 Fig. 9.3 
Changes in building areas in Alcântara ......................................... 154 
 Fig. 10.1 
Critical Area of Urban Recovery and Rehabilitation 
(ACCRU), Priority Intervention Zone (ZIP) and historical 
centre – World Heritage Site .......................................................... 165 
 Fig. 10.2 
Identi ﬁ cation of critical areas within the Priority Zone 
of Intervention (ZIP). Critical areas due to building 
conservation, population density and vacant buildings ................. 168 
 Fig. 10.3 
Map of Oporto: location of the Priority Intervention 
Areas (AIP), urban blocks with/without strategic 
documents (DE) ............................................................................. 171 
 Fig. 11.1 
Case study areas ............................................................................. 180 
 Fig. 11.2 
Zones with different characteristics and transformation 
potential in the Büyükdere-Maslak axis ........................................ 182 
 Fig. 11.3 
Bahçeşehir Housing Estate and its surroundings ........................... 183 
 Fig. 12.1 
A rough sketch of Stockholm’s urban fabric 1945, 
1975 and 2004 ................................................................................ 199 
 Fig. 12.2 
The intended polycentric territorial layout in Stockholm 
County: one ‘central’ and eight ‘regional’ urban cores ................. 201 
 List of Figures 

                   

xiii
 Table 2.1 
The resilience planning paradigm and its major 
characteristics in comparison to rational and communicative 
planning paradigms ....................................................................... 
30 
 Table 5.1 
Impact of economic restructuring in different 
periods in the case study areas ....................................................... 
74 
 Table 5.2 
Dominant urban growth dynamics in four countries 
in different periods ......................................................................... 
75 
 Table 5.3 
Current urban growth dynamics in the case study cities ............... 
80 
 Table 6.1 
Planning systems’ review applied to the four national 
planning systems (most representative styles 
according to this study) ................................................................. 
96 
 Table 7.1 
Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches 
in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon ............................................... 115 
 Table 7.2 
Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches 
in the urban agglomeration of Oporto ........................................... 118 
 Table 7.3 
Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches 
in the urban agglomeration of Istanbul .......................................... 120 
 Table 7.4 
Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches 
in the urban agglomeration of Stockholm ..................................... 122 
 Table 7.5 
Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches 
in the urban agglomeration of Rotterdam ...................................... 125 
 Table 9.1 
Indicators used to evaluate the connectivity attribute 
in the social dimension and under centrality/polycentricity 
policy/measures ............................................................................. 152 
 Table 9.2 
Possible outcomes of increasing connectivity under 
centrality/polycentricity policy/measure ....................................... 152 
 Table 9.3 
Indicators used to evaluate adaptability attribute 
in the environmental dimension and under 
rehousing policy/measure .............................................................. 153 
 List of Tables 

xiv
 Table 9.4 
Indicators used to evaluate adaptability attribute 
in the economic dimension and under urban 
reconversion policy/measure ....................................................... 155 
 Table 9.5 
Indicators used to evaluate adaptability attribute 
in the social dimension and under urban 
reconversion policy/measure ....................................................... 156 
 Table 10.1 
Attribute recovery and indicators for the formulation 
and implementation phase ........................................................... 169 
 Table 10.2 
Coverage degree of the programmes, policies, 
plans or/and projects .................................................................... 170 
 Table 10.3 
Annual average numbers of rehabilitated buildings .................... 171 
 Table 10.4 
Rehabilitation rate of progress .................................................... 172 
 Table 10.5 
Attribute social capital building and indicators 
for the formulation and implementation phase............................ 173 
 Table 11.1 
The land-use pattern and transformation areas 
in the Büyükdere-Maslak axis case study area ............................ 185 
 Table 11.2 
The impact of external dynamics on urban systems 
and the indicators used to verify them ......................................... 186 
 Table 11.3 
The land-use patterns in Bahçeşehir and its surroundings .......... 190 
 Table 11.4 
The indicators used to verify the impact of different 
dynamics on urban systems ......................................................... 191 
 Table 13.1 
Development options for climate change adaptation 
from Rotterdam Sustainability Guide ......................................... 223 
List of Tables

1
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_1, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 1.1  Main Novelties and Contributions of the Book 
 This book has two main objectives. First, the intention is to discuss how well 
equipped contemporary planning theory and practice is in preparing urban areas to 
face the new conditions that have resulted from the neoliberal spatial agenda in an 
increasingly borderless world and its ability to address the escalating numbers of 
hazards, most of which are triggered by rising levels of consumption. Second, it 
aims to discuss the characteristics of a new theoretical approach to planning that 
may assist in the creation of resilient cities that are able to adapt to both slow changes 
and major pressures. 
 There is consensus in literature that urban areas have become increasingly 
 vulnerable to the outcomes of economic restructuring under the neoliberal political 
economic ideologies of recent decades. The increased frequency and widening 
diversity of problems have made it evident that the socio-economic and spatial 
 policies and practices introduced under the neoliberal agenda can no longer be 
 sustained. Moreover, increasing ecological problems resulting from the overuse of 
resources and pollution as a result of uncontrolled market-oriented production and 
consumption patterns have made cities and regions more prone to such disasters as 
 ﬂ oods and droughts. 
 A.  Eraydin (*)
 Department of City and Regional Planning, Faculty of Architecture ,  Middle East Technical 
University ,  Universiteler Mah. Dumlupinar Bulv. No: 1 ,  06800  Ankara ,  Turkey 
e-mail:  ayda@metu.edu.tr 
 T.  Taşan-Kok 
 OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft University of Technology ,
 2628 BX  Delft ,  The Netherlands     
e-mail:  m.t.tasan-kok@tudelft.nl 
 Chapter 1 
 Introduction: Resilience Thinking 
in Urban Planning 
 Ayda  Eraydin and  Tuna  Taşan-Kok  

2
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
 In attempting to address some of the emerging problems, recent literature has 
identi ﬁ ed changes in the nature of neoliberalism that have obviously not been 
 systemic, being rather a set of changes leading to variety within neoliberalism (Peck 
et al.  2009 ) . This new character of neoliberalism has been de ﬁ ned in different 
 quarters as ‘roll-out’ neoliberalism (Peck and Tickell  2002 ) , ‘roiling neoliberalism ’ 
(Peck  2005 ) and ‘deepening neoliberalism’ (Brenner et al.  2010 ) . Birch and 
Mykhnenko  ( 2009 ) identify varieties of neoliberalism across Europe that are based 
on regional restructuring and economic growth trajectories, while Peck et al.  ( 2009 ) 
point out the  contextual embeddedness and  path dependency of neoliberal restruc-
turing projects that have played an important role in the divergent reactions of states 
to neoliberalisation . McGuirk  ( 2005 ) speci ﬁ es the different forms of neoliberalism 
and argues that it is not a uni ﬁ ed coherent project but rather a series of complex and 
overlapping strategies that produce a hybrid form of governance in which state 
capacity endures rather than dissolves. 
 According to these debates, in the 1990s and 2000s, neoliberalism became a 
form of governance with an extended repertoire of neoliberal policy, which  ﬁ nds 
state intervention and public spending acceptable, although market-centred forces 
are dominant. The negative externalities of the economic system, however, are 
compensated for with the creation of certain institutions and additional mechanisms. 
As is to be expected, these changes affected the policies of cities and regions, leading 
to new forms of governance and the institutionalisation of governance and planning. 
Institutional changes are clearly observable in urban governance, especially in 
metropolitan regions (Brenner  2009 ; Matkin and Frederickson  2009 ; Feiock  2009 ) , 
new legislation on urban governance (Allmendinger  2009 ; Fuller and Geddes  2008 ) 
and planning systems (Eraydin  2011 ; Taşan-Kok and Beaten  2011 ; Gunder  2010 ) ; 
however, they have not been supported by a new planning perspective. 
 Following a period of postmodern planning, neo-pragmatism, and collaborative 
and communicative planning appeared on the postpositivist landscape (Allmendinger 
and Tewdwr-Jones  2002 ) . As discussed in detail in Chap.   2 , there have been many 
criticisms of these theories emphasising the need for a new planning theory . 
Criticisms of existing planning theories have concentrated primarily on the lack of 
substance and end state (Taylor  1998 ) and, secondly, on power blindness (Hoch 
 1996 ) . There are several debates claiming that instead of an ‘end state’ in the posi-
tivist approach and ‘contentlessness’ in neoliberal theories, the new paradigm 
should focus on alternate means of addressing the need for a more adaptive and 
reorganisational capacity in urban systems   . In other words, there is near consensus 
on the need to change not only the focus, but also the way of thinking in planning. 
 In this book, it is argued that resilience thinking can form the basis of an alter-
native planning approach, calling for a reconsideration of the ‘substance’ of 
planning within a process that will focus on ‘value systems and power relations’ 
in decision making. In the theoretical chapters in Part I, the conceptual  background 
of resilience and resilience planning    is introduced, alongside a description of the 
links between spatial dynamics and resilience. Consequently, a new perspective 
for planning, referred to as ‘resilience planning’ throughout the book (see Chaps.   2–4  ), 
is introduced. 

3
1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning
 The need for a new perspective is made apparent with the evaluation of the  spatial 
dynamics as well as policies and plans of metropolitan areas from different parts of 
Europe, namely, the Netherlands, Portugal , Sweden and Turkey . The studies in the 
 ﬁ rst part of the book focus on the changing dynamics of different city regions in an 
increasingly globalising world and offer an evaluation of their level of preparedness 
to cope with uncertainties: in other words, their attempts to cope with contemporary 
conditions . In Chaps.   5–7 , an evaluation of the existing policies, plans, projects and 
policy instruments , in which external dynamics are becoming increasingly prominent, 
is provided, together with an analysis of the endogenous dynamics that are triggered 
by external pressures. These three chapters present how existing planning systems 
have changed in recent years in the four countries and how far the new systems 
introduced have been able to empower the cities, not only in sustaining their existing 
functions but also in adapting successfully to expected or unexpected conditions. 
 In the  ﬁ nal section of the book, case studies from  ﬁ ve cities in the  above-mentioned 
countries are introduced to show how resilience thinking can be used in an analysis 
of the plans and their outcomes. The book introduces a new and novel methodology 
(Chap.   8 ) for the studies in this book, and it is this methodology and its method of 
application that constitute one of the contributions of this book to the  ﬁ elds of urban 
studies and planning. The case studies (Chaps.   9–13  ) show clearly that although the 
planning systems are attempting to adapt to the changing conditions, what is actually 
being achieved is far from satisfactory in the creation of resilient cities. 
 1.2  Why is it the Right Time to Discuss ‘Resilience’ 
Within the Context of Planning Practice ? 
 Increasing economic, social and spatial vulnerabilities in cities; the rapid depletion 
of natural resources, necessitating resource management; and the increasing 
 frequency of ecological events and other causes of environmental degradation mean 
that the time is right to open discussions on the term resilience and to adopt resil-
ience thinking in planning. 
 The above problems have highlighted a need for change in how the economy    and 
society are regulated according to consumption-based market principles, namely, the 
current ‘economic regime ’. The 2009 economic crisis was clear evidence that one of 
the main sources of these problems was the neoliberalisation of the economic regime, 
which is an open-ended process with path-dependent strategies for adjustment and 
reconstruction in response to ‘endogenous disruptions, dysfunctions and crisis 
tendencies’ (Peck et al.  2009 : 55). Cities have naturally been affected by the increasing 
numbers of upheavals, since their development has become increasingly dependent 
on the neoliberal debt-oriented economy and on individuals or organisations that 
share the responsibilities and risks of pursuing decentralised goals through individu-
alism and entrepreneurialism. As the expanding role of governance    engenders more 
participatory practices and a further democratisation of urban society, some public 
responsibilities are decentralised to semi-dependent public bodies, while others are 

4
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
transferred to private organisations or public-private enterprises (Taşan-Kok  2011 ) . 
The stakeholders of neoliberal urban and regional governance    (policy makers, 
planners, mayors, decision makers, municipal commission  members, NGOs, civil 
society organisations, neighbourhood committees, urban residents, etc.) all take part 
in planning, either directly or indirectly, and this complex system has accelerated 
the growth of entrepreneurialism, consumerism and property-led development in 
cities, limiting the opportunities for disadvantaged groups in urban society. 
 The last three decades witnessed rapid growth and urban expansion,  accompanied 
by different opportunities and problems for diverse social groups. The neoliberal 
economic conditions accelerated poverty and exclusion, which resulted not only in 
social, but also spatial, vulnerabilities. 
 The structural adjustment programmes that began in the 1980s brought an end to 
Keynesian welfare state policies, to the detriment of the disadvantaged groups. Poor 
migrants living in inappropriately built housing in the peripheral areas and low-
income groups who could only afford to live in high-risk locations, such as areas 
prone to landslides or earthquakes, faced several hazards (Pelling  2003 ; Riddell 
 1997 ) , culminating in a vicious circle of poverty, vulnerability , disasters/hazards 
and economic loss. Within this vicious circle, besides the deregulation of the state 
and the diminishing role of the welfare state , the erosion of social capital and inap-
propriate planning and legislation that failed to provide equal opportunities for the 
disadvantaged groups also played important roles. The increasing privatisation and 
growing reliance on market forces in the cities have resulted in the development of 
particular land uses and spatial patterns. The ‘changes in the physical forms of the 
urban landscapes as a result of increased perceptions of crime, terrorism, and exter-
nal attack’ (Coaffee  2009 : 13) are all too visible. In certain cities, one can even 
observe forti ﬁ ed landscapes in the form of gated communities, indicating the 
increasing fear and vulnerability to social and economic change in urban societies. 
As discussed earlier, there has been growing criticism of the current planning 
 systems and practices, despite the tremendous change they have undergone in recent 
decades. While neoliberalisation and market-friendly policies have been affecting 
the way cities develop and function since the late 1970s, the neoliberalisation 
of social, economic and political processes permeated into urban development, 
planning and governance discourses and pushed planning practice s in a market-
oriented direction. As urban planning became increasingly market-oriented and 
entrepreneurial, planning became less capable of decreasing the vulnerability of 
cities. Short- or medium-term planning gradually replaced long-range, end-state 
planning (Healey and Williams  1993 ; Taşan-Kok  2008 ) , and the focus of planning 
practice s shifted to projects (Albrechts  2004 ; Healey and Williams  1993 ; Motte 
 1994 ; Taşan-Kok  2008 ) and land-use regulations. All around the world, urban 
development has become increasingly fragmented and piecemeal in character, with 
opportunity-led planning practice s taking root everywhere in reaction to the rapid 
and complex change (Taşan-Kok  2004 ; Webster  2002 ) . Most importantly, it has 
become  impossible to control the system only through the regulation of endogenous 
factors, which makes it impossible to apply a system for the planning of cities, even 
in  countries with a strong planning tradition. 

5
1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning
 The way in which a planning system transforms may differ depending on the 
national planning culture (see Chap.   6 ). In recent years, however, one common 
 tendency has been for governments to become more interventionist, with the 
 objective being to solve the problems created within the market mechanism; to 
rede ﬁ ne the power relations and operations of the market; and to protect the 
 neoliberal economic system by making improvements in the problem areas in which 
political support has been reduced. In this book, it is claimed that the ‘reforms’ 
related to planning systems are unable to increase the resilience of urban areas, 
since the neoliberal ideology is sustained and the changes taking place are unable to 
change the market-driven nature of planning (Eraydin  2011 ) and even increase the 
contradictions in planning (Harvey  2005 ; Taşan-Kok  2011 ) . 
 1.3  Why did the Concept of Resilience Become Attractive? 
 In recent years, the resilience concept has become quite visible in planning 
 literature, which may be due to the lack of new perspectives in planning. In only 
three decades since its introduction by Holling  ( 1973 ) , resilience has emerged as a 
conceptual framework to describe models of change in the structure and function 
of ecological systems    (see Chap.   3 ). Although grounded in the ecological sciences, 
the resilience concept has found popularity among natural and social scientists in 
attempts to examine the links between social-ecological systems (Berkes and Folke 
 1998 ; Berkes et al.  2003 ; Armitage and Johnson  2006 ; Walker et al.  2006 ) and 
institutional and organisational arrangements (Gunderson and Holling  2002 ; 
Anderies et al.  2004 ) . 
 One of the charms of this notion is its ef ﬁ cacy for understanding, managing and 
governing complex linked systems of people and nature (Folke et al.  2004 ) . Today, 
resilience is not only con ﬁ ned to academic discourses, having become prevalent in 
urban policy documents across the globe, since in practical terms, an understanding 
of resilience enables analysts and decision makers to identify the likelihood of shifts 
or transitions among different system con ﬁ gurations (Peterson  2000 ) . 
 That said, substantially different de ﬁ nitions of resilience exist, even in ecological 
science (Brand and Jax  2007 ) . Some ecologists consider resilience to be a measure 
of how fast a system returns to a state of equilibrium after a disturbance; however, 
Holling  (  1973 ) de ﬁ ned it as a measure of how a system could be perturbed without 
shifting to a different regime. Walker et al.  (  2002 ) describe resilience as the potential 
of a system to remain in a particular con ﬁ guration and maintain feedbacks, functions 
and an ability to reorganise following disturbance-driven change. It is the capacity of 
a system to experience shocks while retaining essentially the same  function, struc-
ture, feedback and, therefore, identity (Walker et al.  2006  ) . Brand and Jax  (  2007 ) add 
to this list systemic-heuristic de ﬁ nition, which introduced the term panarchy. After 
conducting an analysis of the concept of resilience in social and political sciences, 
Pendall et al.  (  2010  )  reported that the resilience concept indicates considerable 
 fuzziness, and indeed, the numerous interpretations and de ﬁ nitions of urban  resilience 

6
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
do make it rather fuzzy; however, as Lagendijk  ( 2003 ) notes, this may simply be a 
symptom of the immaturity of the concept that will decrease over time. 
 The de ﬁ nition of ecological resilience used in this book depends upon three 
 central features of resilience (Berkes et al.  2003 : 6): (1) the ability of a system to 
absorb or buffer disturbances and still maintain its core attributes , (2) the ability of 
the system to self-organise and (3) the capacity for learning and adaptation in the 
context of change. 
 In this book, it is argued that diverse bene ﬁ ts may be drawn from the resilience 
approach through a shift in policies – from those that aspire to  control the change to 
those that increase the  adaptive capacity     of the system to cope with, adapt to or shape 
the change. This way of thinking is helpful in understanding and analysing contempo-
rary urban systems , de ﬁ ning a new approach and priorities and setting new principles 
in urban planning. Moreover, instead of pragmatism, it makes a focus on  substance 
possible, allowing growth in an adaptive capacity that is based on principles rather than 
a de ﬁ nite end state. These characteristics, it is argued, are very important in bringing 
substance back to the planning agenda. The contribution of resilience thinking on 
planning can be summarised under the headings below. Resilience thinking:
 
 – Facilitates the understanding of the co-evolution of socio-economic and ecological 
systems 
 Social and ecological systems are characterised by co-evolutionary, nonlinear 
interactions, and efforts to understand such processes have led to the emergence 
of resilience as a way in which linked social-ecological systems with different 
perspectives can be understood (see Folke and Gunderson  2006 ) . 
 The concept of resilience enables the introduction of a framework that illus-
trates the way in which certain variables interact to reinforce one another and 
build structure or organisation. It also highlights the adaptive cycles, which con-
sists of two forms of change: the slow and incremental processes of growth and 
accumulation, and the rapid and sudden processes of destruction and reorganisa-
tion in response to disturbance. The distinction between slow and incremental 
processes and sudden processes shaped under a disturbance is important, since it 
allows the consideration of co-evolutionary changes at different levels, which is 
an area in which contemporary urban planning perspectives that are based on the 
communicative rationality are lacking. According to Armitage and Johnson 
 ( 2006 : 3), ‘an important construct of resilience is the identi ﬁ cation and preserva-
tion of those slow variables that enable linked social ecological systems to renew 
and reorganise along a desirable trajectory, from a human perspective, in the 
wake of a major disturbance’. Therefore, resilience allows one to analyse the 
dynamics of social and ecological systems and to de ﬁ ne how those evolutionary 
cycles enable urban systems to reorganise themselves. 
 
 – Helps to underline the adaptive capacity  of social-ecological systems 
 In previous literature, emphasis has often been on being prepared and taking 
effective action after a disturbance occurs. However, urban land-use planning 
is traditionally more concerned with doing things to minimise the effects of 
the disturbance (e.g. avoiding ‘bad neighbour’ nuisances through the separation 
of certain land uses, implementing planning policies that minimise energy 

7
1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning
 consumption and CO 2 emissions) and reducing the risks and negative effects of a 
possible disturbance (e.g. locating developments away from ecologically sensitive 
areas or areas liable to  ﬂ ooding). 
 Adaptive capacity provides the opportunity for self-organisation   , which is a 
 process of attraction and repulsion in which the internal organisation of a system is 
not guided or managed by an external source (Heylighen  2002 ; Holling  1992  ) . The 
self-organisation of ecological systems establishes the arena for evolutionary 
change; however, self-organisation is not always possible, and systems have had to 
undergo thorough change. Transformation, in such cases, is inevitable and is 
de ﬁ ned as the capacity to create a fundamentally new system when ecological, 
economic or social (including political) conditions make the existing system unten-
able (Walker et al.  2004  ) . Planning may play a vital role within this process.  
 
 – Highlights external and nonsystemic factors and disturbances that are important 
in shaping the individual urban systems 
 The resilience of a system is determined from the interactions of certain exter-
nal and nonsystemic factors and variables that operate at different scales, but 
which in ﬂ uence the overall dynamics of the system (Walker et al.  2006 ) . The 
growth in interest in resilience is considered to be a response to a contemporary 
sense of complexity , uncertainty and insecurity  and is part of the search for for-
mulae to ensure adaptation and survival (Christopherson et al.  2010 ) . In this way, 
it is possible to describe to what extent the urban system is vulnerable and 
whether the urban system has the capacity to adapt. In addition, it may provide 
clues to understanding how disturbances modify the urban system and can help 
in the development of scenarios in order to estimate the impacts of disturbances 
upon it. It enables one to understand just how well a system that has been subjected 
to a disturbance may recover from its effects. 
 
 – Provides a basis for the systemic analysis of cities and their vulnerabilities 
 The term vulnerability , which is an essential component of resilience thinking , 
refers to the propensity of social and ecological system    to suffer harm from 
exposure to external stresses and shocks (Dalziell and McManus  2004 ; Folke 
and Carpenter  2000 ) . Research into vulnerability can, for example, assess how 
the disturbances will affect people and ecosystem   s and how sensitive urban 
communities and ecosystems will be to such changes in cities. 
 
 – Increases the understanding of the dynamics of ecosystem  services  that improve 
human well-being 
 Urban areas have always been dependent on their hinterlands for ecosystem 
goods and services (Folke et al.  1997 ; Rees  2003 ) . The capacity of a city to 
 provide these services, however, depends on the con ﬁ guration of its ecosystems 
and cannot be taken for granted. Urban systems provide their inhabitants with a 
number of ecosystem services, some of which are essential for human well-
being; however, they are not evenly distributed in space. Accordingly, urban 
landscapes must be planned to ensure the public has access to all important 
 services, including those providing support (e.g. increased biodiversity, habitat, 
soil formation, ecological memory, seed dispersal, pollination and storage and 

8
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
cycling of nutrients), culture (recreation, enhancement of property value, 
 community cohesion, source of knowledge), basic needs (e.g. food, water, fuel) 
and regulation (noise reduction, modulation of temperature, removal of air 
pollution, protection of water quality, etc.). 
 It is also vital to ensure that the  ﬂ ow and access to ecosystem services is not 
interrupted. Andersson  ( 2006 ) explains that by their very nature, many ecosys-
tem services are highly subjective and likely to change and considers this as the 
main reason why resilient cityscapes with an ability to adapt to future needs 
should be maintained. Resilience thinking allows one to understand the  dynamics 
of ecosystem services, since it involves the integration of ecosystem functions 
with social dynamics. 
 
 – Concentrates on building capacity to deal with changes in the wake of different 
types of disturbances 
 Resilience thinking seems to be extending the remit of planning to include 
activities in the wake of disturbances (e.g. coping/dealing with change when a 
disturbance has occurred). The basic idea is to accept the fact that the changes will 
take place, and while trying to reduce the risks, urban systems should be prepared 
to absorb these changes, reorganise themselves and develop new adaptive strate-
gies to manage and cope with the change while sustaining their main functions. 
As mentioned above, these changes can be both slow transformations as well as 
major events, such as natural disaster s, economic crises    or social/political unrest.  
 
 – Helps to link physical (spatial) and ecological aspects in a systematic way 
 Resilience thinking helps to interlink the spatial dynamics that lead to different 
urban forms with respect to the vulnerabilities of urban systems . The concept of 
resilience (and sustainable development some years earlier) has given rise to 
questions related to the contribution and role of certain land uses and urban forms 
in creating cities that are more resilient (see Chap.   4 ). These questions have 
addressed a number of different spatial scales, from regional and metropolitan 
levels to the city level (e.g. Jenks et al.  2000 ; Gibbs  1997 ; Roseland  1997 ; Gordon 
and Richardson  1997 ) . It is recognised that many of the debates about ideal or 
desirable urban forms are not new and often long predate discussions of sustainable 
development; some can even be traced back to the end of the nineteenth century 
at the outset of the garden city movement (Breheny     1997 ) . However, following 
the resilience approach, sustainable urban development should also take into 
account patterns that provide capacity to the system to absorb disturbances and 
reorganise itself (Chap.   4 ). 
 1.4  The Structure and Basic Arguments of the Book 
 How can the above advantages of resilience thinking make the most effective 
 contribution to urban planning? This book attempts to decipher the concept of resil-
ience in urban policies and planning and attempts to develop typologies of cities and 

9
1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning
their developmental trajectories based on their social, economic and ecological 
resilience. In doing so, the aim is to help decision makers avoid some of the more 
common traps/pitfalls. Considering the most common problems currently being 
faced in urban areas, promoting changes in policies and planning through resilience 
thinking is extremely important, and this is the main objective of this book. In order 
to achieve this, the intention is:
 To discuss the need for change in planning theory and practice and introduce the 
• 
theoretical foundations of a resilience planning discourse 
 To evaluate how far the existing models of planning and governance are able to 
• 
deal with both slow and sudden changes and the increase in the numbers of crises 
with detrimental repercussions 
 To explore how far the resilience concept has been re ﬂ ected in urban policies and 
• 
plans in different countries 
 To introduce a methodology for the evaluation of how far existing plans and 
• 
planning practices are able to create resilient urban areas 
 To use this methodology to evaluate existing planning outcomes in different cities 
• 
with the help of detailed case studies 
 Considering the current problems being faced in urban areas, learning from 
experience is extremely important; but what is even more important is promoting 
change in the policies and planning paradigm. 
 In this book, it is claimed that there is an urgent need to introduce a new planning 
paradigm since existing planning systems have experienced dif ﬁ culties in preparing 
urban areas to cope with increasing economic, social and ecological pressures and 
disturbances. There has never been a better time for the introduction of the term 
‘resilience’ and the adoption of ‘resilience thinking ’ into planning. 
 Resilience thinking has very important merits that may be integrated into  planning 
in two different ways (see Fig.  1.1 ):  ﬁ rst, in the evaluation of existing plans, 
 programmes and planning measures (post-appraisal approach) in order to identify 
shortfalls and, second, in the identi ﬁ cation of critical issues in the urban system and 
the de ﬁ nition of key areas and issues in planning decisions prior to the setting of 
priorities and constraints (pre-appraisal). 
 In the post-appraisal type of approach, existing policies, plans and planning 
instruments can be examined for indicators of resilience – whether the plans and 
their instruments have been able to create resilient cities that are not only able to 
adapt to volatile conditions but also have the capacity for self-organisation and 
transformation. The indicators should be de ﬁ ned according to both the attributes of 
resilience relevant to the urban areas to be studied and the vulnerability of the urban 
subsystems. In this regard, the case studies of Lisbon , Oporto , Istanbul , Stockholm 
and Rotterdam presented in the book concentrated on how to use resilience thinking 
in the analysis of the plans and their outcomes with the help of the methodology 
introduced in Chap.   8 . 
 We suggest that a similar way of thinking can be integrated into the planning 
process. In this approach, plans can be designed to enhance the resilience of the 
urban system, taking the attributes of resilience as the focal points and setting 

10
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
 priorities accordingly. The crucial point, however, is to identify the constraints and red 
tape that exist in the planning process, considering the long-term and co-evolutionary 
perspectives that integrate ecosystem functions with socio-economic and spatial 
dynamics . 
 In both approaches, there is clear need to consider the response of the urban 
system and its different attributes to the slow changes induced by endogenous 
processes but also to external pressures and disturbances that lead to slow changes 
as well as sudden impacts. As Fig.  1.1 clearly shows, the de ﬁ nition of vulnerabilities 
is a key step in this analysis. 
 The book contains case studies from  ﬁ ve different European cities, namely, 
Istanbul , Lisbon , Porto, Rotterdam and Stockholm , all of which have their own 
unique dynamics and problems. These cities are from four different countries 
(Portugal, Turkey, the Netherlands and Sweden) that have important differences in 
planning systems. The different historical, cultural and geographical backgrounds 
of these countries offer a view of different planning practices that are rooted in more 
than one planning style. Sweden and the Netherlands share north-western European 
planning origins. The Swedish planning system incorporates two planning styles, 
both of which are considered as central to their approach: the  regional economic 
planning approach and the  comprehensive integrated approach . Comprehensive 
integrated approach dominates the planning systems at different levels in Sweden: 
from cross border plans to comprehensive municipal plans. In the Netherlands , 
 Fig. 1.1   The framework 
Endogenous factors that 
enforce the change in 
the urban systems
External pressures 
leading to changes in 
urban systems
External pressures 
leading to sudden 
changes in urban 
systems 
THE ATTRIBUTES OF 
THE URBAN SYSTEM 
Attributes of 
resilience 
Redundancy
Diversity
Efficiency
Autonomy
Connectivity
Capital building
Adaptive capacity
Robustness
Flexibility
Enhancement of 
attributes of  
resilience of the 
urban system
PLANNING
Setting priorities 
and 
constraints/red 
tapes
EVALUATION OF 
PLANS
Indicators of 
resilience
CHANGE IN ORDER TO RESPOND DISTURBANCE
Adaptation
Self-organisation
Transformation
Decline
Defining most 
vulnerable 
urban systems
THE 
VUNERABILITIES OF 
THE URBAN 
SUB-SYSTEMS

11
1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning
similarly  comprehensive integrated approach is quite important besides the ele-
ments of  regional economic planning approach. In fact, Dutch planning system is 
one of the most elaborate examples of the  comprehensive integrated approach to 
planning, in which plans are more concerned with the coordination of spatial than 
economic developments. Portugal and Turkey are southern European countries but 
present important differences in their planning systems. The Portuguese planning 
system seems to have a strong  urbanism tradition, while in Turkey the two styles are 
most evident:  comprehensive planning, with emphasis on  land-use management, 
and the  regional economic planning (see Chap.   6 for detailed elaboration of differ-
ent  planning systems). 
 The use of case studies from countries with different planning systems and  practice 
is very important, since the existing debates on urban policies, urban form    and resil-
ient urban systems are still far from being well developed, and empirical studies that 
discuss the relations of these three issues are few and far between. Therefore, the 
evaluation of planning practice of the case studies from resilience perspective is 
important to see how different planning systems respond to this issue. 
 The 14 chapters in this book are divided under three main topics, namely: Part I. 
Resilience, changing spatial dynamics and planning; Part II. Managing urban 
change : Current policies and instruments ; and Part III. Evaluation of existing policy 
instruments for resilience in the case study cities. 
 Part I, containing three chapters, presents the theoretical debates on planning, 
resilience and urban form introduced in the book. In Chap.   2 , ‘Resilience thinking 
for planning’, Eraydin emphasises the need for resilience thinking in planning and 
elaborates how this thinking may re ﬂ ect on planning theory and practice. She high-
lights the need to de ﬁ ne ‘substance’ together with the process and ‘value systems ’ 
that de ﬁ ne the basis of reaction to change resulting from external and internal 
dynamics. In Chap.   3 , ‘Conceptual overview of resilience: History and context’, 
Taşan-Kok, Stead and Lu introduce the concept of resilience and provide a history 
of the conceptual development of the term, while showing how it has evolved within 
the framework of urban research. In Chap.   4 , ‘Urban resilience and spatial dynam-
ics   ’, Santos Cruz, Costa, Sousa and Pinho explore the relation between urban 
resilience and different spatial dynamics, concentrating on four types of spatial 
dynamics – compactness , shrinkage , polycentrism and sprawl. The relationship 
between each type and the concept of urban resilience is de ﬁ ned, pointing out the 
main attribute s in ﬂ uencing the resilience of urban systems . 
 Part II is devoted to an analysis of the changes in urban policies and instruments 
in four countries (Portugal   , Turkey   , Sweden    and the Netherlands) and contains an 
evaluation of the experiences of the  ﬁ ve city regions in these countries on which this 
book is based. The three chapters in this section provide information on the coun-
tries and cities from which the case study areas are selected. In Chap.   5 , ‘Analysing 
socio-spatial vulnerability to changing drivers of globalisation in Lisbon , Oporto , 
Istanbul , Stockholm and Rotterdam ’, Taşan-Kok and Stead focus on the  vulnerability 
of spatial systems under the effects of global change, focusing on  ﬁ ve prominent 
cities in Europe that are undergoing neoliberal economic restructuring and 
 socio-demographic transformations. The chapter presents the different responses to 

12
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
the spatial vulnerabilities that have been created in the  ﬁ ve cities. In Chap.   6 , 
‘Systems, cultures, styles: Spatial planning in Portugal, Sweden, The Netherlands 
and Turkey’, Morgado and Dias explore the cultures of planning and their back-
grounds, acknowledging style, tradition or model. The study of the planning styles 
of four countries provides an understanding of the links between European and 
national policies, especially with regard to the emergence of resilience thinking in 
planning. In Chap.   7 , ‘Managing urban change in  ﬁ ve European urban agglomera-
tions: Key policy documents and institutional frameworks’, Schmitt introduces the 
approaches to urban and, in part, regional policy in the  ﬁ ve case study cities of 
Lisbon, Oporto, Istanbul, Stockholm and Rotterdam, drawing upon information 
contained within several key documents aimed at the management of urban change. 
Schmitt claims that the current operating institutional frameworks as regards policy 
delivery in the  ﬁ eld of spatial planning in general, and land-use management in 
particular, differ enormously across these urban agglomerations. This complex situ-
ation, according to Schmitt, makes comparison dif ﬁ cult but also allows one to view 
a wide spectrum of policy contexts. 
 Part III comprises the case studies conducted in the  ﬁ ve city regions. In Chap.   8 , 
‘Evaluating resilience thinking in planning’, Pinho, Oliveira and Martins provide a 
theoretical and methodological framework for the assessment of resilience from 
different perspectives, which is used in the following chapters. They describe in 
considerable detail each step of the assessment procedure and present a critical 
appraisal of the applicability and usefulness of the resilience concept. The empirical 
chapters (Chaps.   9–13 ) utilise the method introduced in this chapter with certain 
modi ﬁ cations, using different attribute s of resilience. In these chapters, the selected 
attributes differentiate considerably, since the case studies presented in each of them 
are based upon arguments re ﬂ ecting the diverse nature of the case study areas. 
 Chapter   9 , ‘Assessing urban resilience in the metropolitan area of Lisbon : The 
case of Alcântara’, by Dias, Morgado and Costa, is a case study of an ongoing urban 
project in Alcântara, where the social fabric has undergone a shrinking process and 
where a metropolitan centrality is envisaged. It contains an assessment of the exist-
ing plans and policy documents with respect to urban resilience, with emphasis on 
the attributes of  connectivity and  adaptability . The main  ﬁ ndings, supported by vari-
ous indicators, show that, should the plans be implemented, they will help change 
the existing trend of shrinkage into a process of urban reconversion, with positive 
impacts on the built environment and the social fabric. 
 Chapter   10  , ‘Evaluating urban policies from a resilience perspective: The case of 
Oporto ’, by Oliveira, Martins and Santos Cruz, presents the results of an application 
of a methodological evaluation of land-use policies from a resilient perspective 
from a case study of the  Baixa  District, located in an urban heritage area in the 
 centre of Oporto. In the study of such a vulnerable area,  recovery  and capital 
 building is given due consideration in the light of the area’s socio-economic 
s tructure. The  ﬁ ndings indicate that the existing problems, rather than being 
restricted to the physical dimension, are very much integrated with social issues. 
The implication is that social problems can only be tackled when all dimensions are 

13
1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning
considered; and only when all the different dimensions are taken into account the 
regeneration of the area can be sustained, thus promoting urban resilience. 
 Chapter   11  , ‘The evaluation    of different processes of spatial development from 
resilience perspective in Istanbul   ’, introduces two case studies from the Istanbul 
Metropolitan Area, where two different urban processes are taking place simultane-
ously, namely, the intensi ﬁ cation of the inner core and the formation of new urban 
nodes on the periphery. These two projects are evaluated using the related indicators of 
the  ﬁ ve attributes of resilience, being  transformability , adaptability , recovery ,  ﬂ exibility 
and  self-organisation    . The  ﬁ ndings indicate that while the urban economic system and 
spatial system were able to respond to major disturbances, the new conditions also trig-
gered changes in the built environment and in the social and economic structures that 
have made the metropolitan area even more vulnerable to major pressures. 
 Chapter   12  , ‘Polycentricity and urban resilience: The case of the Stockholm urban 
agglomeration’, makes an assessment of the practical implementation of a polycentric 
strategy in the Stockholm urban agglomeration using the notion of urban resilience as 
the empirical framework. Schmitt, Greve Harbo, Tepecik Diş and Henriksson illustrate 
the need to broaden the current understanding of resilience in actual land-use planning 
to one that views the governance system as a resilient structure that is  ﬂ exible and  adapt-
able to rapid changes. The experiences and learning processes of local and regional 
planners in their attempts to apply and following up the concept of polycentricity    in the 
Stockholm region since the idea was  ﬁ rst introduced in 2001 are discussed. 
 In Chap.   13 , ‘Urban resilience, climate change    and land-use planning in Rotterdam ’, 
Stead and Taşan-Kok investigate the ways in which  mitigation  and  adaptation  activi-
ties form part of the planning policy in Rotterdam, a city that faces signi ﬁ cant threats 
to its long-term resilience, particularly due to its vulnerability    to the impacts of cli-
mate change. The high risk of  ﬂ ooding in Rotterdam has resulted in the relatively 
rapid introduction of the term into Dutch special policy and the creation of urban plans 
and strategies. However, urban resilience still remains as a fuzzy concept in the 
Netherlands, and as the Rotterdam experience shows, the concept is still too vague to 
be of practical use. Chapter   14     is devoted to the conclusions and evaluations of the 
outcomes of the book. In this  ﬁ nal chapter, the contributions of the debates and case 
studies    are introduced under the three headings: contributions with respect to the 
 conceptual framework, methodological contributions and contextual contributions.  
 References 
  Albrechts, L. (2004). Strategic (spatial) planning re-examined.  Environment and Planning B: 
Planning and Design, 31 (5), 743–758. 
 Allmendinger, P. (2009). Soft spaces, fuzzy boundaries, and metagovernance: The new spatial 
planning in the Thames Gateway.  Environment and Planning A, 41 (3), 617–633. 
 Allmendinger, P., & Tewdwr-Jones, M. (Eds.). (2002).  Planning futures: New directions in 
 planning theory . London: Taylor & Francis. 
 Anderies, J. M., Janssen, M. A., & Ostrom, E. (2004). A framework to analyze the robustness of 
social-ecological systems from an institutional perspective.  Ecology and Society ,  9 (1), article 
18, [online accessed on June 12, 2011] URL:   www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss1/art18  

14
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
 Andersson, E. (2006). Urban landscapes and sustainable cities.  Ecology and Society ,  11 (1), article 34, 
[online accessed on July 20, 2011] URL:   http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art34/   
 Armitage, D. R., & Johnson, D. (2006). Can resilience be reconciled with globalization and 
the increasingly complex conditions of resource degradation in Asian coastal regions? 
 Ecology and Society ,  11 (1), article 2, [online accessed on March 06, 2010] URL:  http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art2/  
 Berkes, F., & Folke, C. (Eds.). (1998).  Linking social and ecological systems: Management prac-
tices and social mechanisms for building resilience . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Berkes, F., Colding, J., & Folke, C. (Eds.). (2003).  Navigating social–ecological systems. Building 
resilience for complexity and change . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Birch, K., & Mykhnenko, V. (2009). Varieties of capitalism? Restructuring in large industrially depen-
dent regions across Western and Eastern Europe.  Journal of Economic Geography, 9 (3), 355–380.  
 Brand, F. S., & Jax, K. (2007). Focusing the meaning(s) of resilience: Resilience as a descriptive 
concept and a boundary object.  Ecology and Society ,  12 (1), 23–38. [online] URL:   http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss1/art23/  
 Breheny, M. (1997). Urban compaction: Feasible and acceptable?  Cities, 14 (4), 209–217. 
 Brenner, N. (2009). Urban governance and the production of new state spaces in Western Europe, 
1960–2000. In B. J. M. Arts, A. Lagendijk, & H. J. van Houtum (Eds.),  Shifts in governmental-
ity, territoriality and governance (pp. 447–488). Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Brenner, N., Peck, J., & Theodore, T. (2010). After neoliberalization?  Globalizations, 7 (3), 327–345.  
 Christopherson, S., Michie, J., & Tyler, P. (2010). Regional resilience: Theoretical and empirical 
perspectives.  Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3 (1), 3–10. 
 Coaffee, J. (2009).  Terrorism, risk and the society: Towards urban resilience . Surrey: Ashgate. 
 Dalziell, E. P., & McManus, S. T. (2004, December 5–8).  Resilience, vulnerability, and adaptive 
capacity: Implications for system performance (17 p). Stoos: 1st International Forum for 
Engineering Decision Making (Ifed), 2004. 
 Eraydin, A. (2011). Changing Istanbul city region dynamics: Re-regulations to challenge the conse-
quences of uneven development and inequality.  European Planning Studies, 19 (5), 813–837.  
 Feiock, R. C. (2009). Metropolitan governance and institutional collective action.  Urban Affairs 
Review, 44 (3), 356–377. 
 Folke, C., & Carpenter, S. (2000).  Resilience and sustainable development: Building adaptive 
capacity in a world of transformations . Stockholm: Edita Norstedts Tryckeri Ab. 
 Folke, C., & Gunderson, L. (2006). Facing global change through social-ecological research. 
 Ecology and Society ,  11 (2), article 43, [online accessed on July 29, 2011] URL:   http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss2/art43/  
 Folke, C., Berkes, F., & Colding, J. (1997). Ecological practices and social mechanisms for build-
ing resilience and sustainability. In F. Berkes & C. Folke (Eds.),  Linking social and ecological 
systems: Management practices and social mechanisms for building resilience . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Folke, C., Carpenter, S. R., Walker, B. H., Scheffer, M., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L. H., & Holling, 
C. S. (2004). Regime shifts, resilience and biodiversity in ecosystem management.  Annual 
Review of Ecology and Systematics, 35 (1), 557–581. 
 Fuller, C., & Geddes, M. (2008). Urban governance under neoliberalism: New labour and the 
restructuring of state-space.  Antipode, 40 (2), 252–282. 
 Gibbs, D. (1997). Urban sustainability and economic development in the United Kingdom: 
Exploring the contradictions.  Cities, 14 (4), 203–208. 
 Gordon, P., & Richardson, H. W. (1997). Are compact cities a desirable planning goal?  Journal of 
the American Planning Association, 63 (1), 95–106. 
 Gunder, M. (2010). Planning as the ideology of (neoliberal) space.  Planning Theory, 9 (4), 298–314. 
 Gunderson, L., & Holling, C. S. (2002).  Panarchy: Understanding transformation in human and 
natural systems . Washington, DC: Island Press. 
 Harvey, D. (2005).  A brief history of neoliberalism . Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Healey, P., & Williams, R. (1993). European urban planning systems: Diversity and convergence. 
 Urban Studies, 30 (4/5), 701–720. 

15
1 Introduction: Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning
 Heylighen, F. (2002).  The science of self-organization and adaptivity . Brussels: Center “Leo 
Apostel”, Free University of Brussels. 
 Hoch, C. (1996). A pragmatic inquiry about planning and power. In S. Mandelbaum, L. Mazza, & 
R. Burchell (Eds.),  Explorations in planning theory . Clifton: CUPR. 
 Holling, C. S. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems.  Annual Review of Ecology 
and Systematics, 4 (1), 1–23. 
 Holling, C. S. (1992). Cross-scale morphology, geometry and dynamics of ecosystems.  Ecological 
Monographs, 62 (4), 447–502. 
 Jenks, M., Burton, E., & Williams, K. (2000).  The compact city: A sustainable urban form? 
London/New York: Taylor & Francis. 
 Lagendijk, A. (2003). Towards conceptual quality in regional studies: The need for subtle cri-
tique—a response to Markusen.  Regional Studies, 37 (6–7), 719–727. 
 Matkin, D. S. T., & Frederickson, H. G. (2009). Metropolitan governance: Institutional roles and 
interjurisdictional cooperation.  Journal of Urban Affairs, 31 (1), 45–66. 
 McGuirk, P. M. (2005). Planning the Sydney metropolitan region: Neoliberalism and after-neolib-
eralism in practice?  Geographical Research, 43 (1), 59–70. 
 Motte, A. (1994). Innovation in development plan-making in France 1967–1993. In P. Healey 
(Ed.),  Trends in development-plan making in European planning systems (pp. 90–103). 
Newcastle upon Tyne: University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Department of Town and Country 
Planning.  
 Peck, J. (2005). Struggling with the creative class.  International Journal of Urban and Regional 
Research, 29 (4), 740–770. 
  Peck, J., & Tickell, A. (2002). Local modes of social regulation? Regulation theory, thatcherism 
and uneven development.  Geoforum, 23 (3), 347–364. 
 Peck, J., Theodore, N., & Brenner, N. (2009). Neoliberal urbanism: Models, moments, mutations. 
 SAIS Review, 29 (1), 49–66. 
 Pelling, M. (2003).  The vulnerability of cities: Natural disasters and social resilience . London: 
Earthscan Publications. 
 Pendall, R., Foster, K. A., & Cowell, M. (2010). Resilience and regions: Building understanding 
of the metaphor.  Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3 (1), 71–84. 
 Peterson, G. (2000). Political ecology and ecological resilience: An integration of human and 
ecological dynamics.  Ecological Economics, 35 (3), 323–336. 
 Rees, W. E. (2003). Understanding urban ecosystems: An ecological economics perspective. In A. 
R. Berkowitz, C. H. Nilon, & K. S. Hollweg (Eds.),  Understanding urban ecosystems. A new 
frontier for science and education (pp. 115–136). New York: Springer. 
 Riddell, B. (1997). Structural adjustment programs and the city in tropical Africa.  Urban Studies, 
13 (8), 1297–1307. 
 Roseland, D. (1997). Dimensions of the eco-city.  Cities, 14 (4), 197–202. 
 Taşan-Kok, T. (2004).  Budapest, Istanbul, and Warsaw: Institutional and spatial change . Delft: 
Eburon. 
 Taşan-Kok, T. (2008). Changing interpretations of ‘ ﬂ exibility’ in the planning literature: From 
opportunism to creativity?  International Planning Studies, 13 (3), 183–195. 
 Taşan-Kok, T. (2011). Introduction: Contradictions of neoliberal urban planning. In T. Taşan-Kok & 
G. Beaten (Eds.),  Contradictions of neoliberal planning: Cities, policies, politics (pp. 1–12). 
Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Taşan-Kok, T., & Beaten, G. (Eds.). (2011).  Contradictions of neoliberal planning: Cities, poli-
cies, politics (The geojournal library series). Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Taylor, N. (1998). Mistaken interests and the discourse model of planning.  Journal of the American 
Planning Association, 64 (1), 64–75. 
 Walker, B. S., Carpenter, J., Anderies, N., Abel, G., Cumming, M., Janssen, L., Lebel, J., et al. 
(2002). Resilience management in social-ecological systems: A working hypothesis for a 
 participatory approach.  Conservation Ecology ,  6 (1), article 14, [online accessed on August 03, 
2011] URL:   http://www.consecol.org/vol6/iss1/art14  

16
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
 Walker, B., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R., & Kinzig, A. P. (2004). Resilience, adaptability and 
transformability in social–ecological systems.  Ecology and Society ,  9 (2), article 5 [online 
accessed on June 04, 2011] URL:   http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/  
 Walker, B. H., Anderies, J. M., Kinzig, A. P., & Ryan, P. (2006). Exploring resilience in 
 social-ecological systems through comparative studies and theory development: introduction to 
the special issue.  Ecology and Society ,  11 (1), article 12 [online accessed on July 07, 2011] 
URL: URL:   http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art12/  
 Webster, C. J. (2002). Property rights and the public realm: Gates, green-belts and Gemeinshaft. 
 Environment and Planning B, 29 (3), 397. 

17
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_2, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 2.1  Introduction 
 Since the late 1970s, neoliberalisation and market-friendly policies have been 
affecting the way cities develop and function. Neoliberal principles based on market 
reliance seem to take over or manipulate the decision-making powers in urban 
development and create uncoordinated state interventions (Peck et al.  2009 ) . 
Increasing neoliberalisation and entrepreneurialisation cause serious problems in 
the governance of cities, while the responsibilities, tasks and developments of the 
public sector are decentralised or privatised; economic activities are deregulated, 
and welfare services are replaced by workfarist social policies that favour  innovative 
and competitive economic development (Purcell  2009 ; Leitner et al.  2007 ; Harvey 
 2005 ; Jessop  1993 ) . In this new system of sensitive balances, entrepreneurialism, 
consumerism and property-led development have been accelerated, turning actors 
in the urban land and property market into key players in urban development. 
 It is clear that the neoliberalisation    of social, economic and political processes 
affects not only urban development and governance but also planning    discourses and 
practice s, which are pushed in more market-oriented directions. This leads to a 
 fragmentation of the variety of planning approaches to the neoliberalisation of 
 dominant economic policies in urban areas (Purcell  2009  ) , and the forces of 
 neoliberalisation slowly take over each planning sub ﬁ eld. Since the 1980s, it has 
been possible to observe uncoordinated and even chaotic actions of fragmented public 
policies, programmes and projects, as well as plans. Increasingly  opportunity-led 
 A.  Eraydin (*)
 Department of City and Regional Planning, Faculty of Architecture , 
 Middle East Technical University ,  Universiteler Mah. Dumlupinar Bulv. No: 1 ,
 06800  Ankara ,  Turkey 
e-mail:  ayda@metu.edu.tr 
 Chapter 2 
 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning 
 Ayda  Eraydin  

18
A. Eraydin
approaches of planning institutions and an unequal redistribution of bene ﬁ ts and 
welfare as a result of the deregulation of the property and land markets became the 
main facets of the contemporary period. This situation came about mainly due to the 
blurred boundaries between the public sector and private markets, and the resulting 
vague position of planning institutions (Alexander  2008 ) . 
 There has been an increase in the number of disturbances that put signi ﬁ cant 
 pressure on urban systems . As urban systems become more open to global pressures, 
urban ecological systems are affected more by global growth dynamics. This not 
only increases their exposure to ecological pressures but also hinders the sustainabil-
ity    of economic and social development. The concurrent economic and environmen-
tal crises    experienced in recent decades have enhanced the perceived sense of 
vulnerability    and have “increased [the] sense of risk and the perception that pro-
cesses associated with globalisation make places more permeable to the effects of 
what were once thought to be external processes” (Christopherson et al.  2010 : 3). 
 Unfortunately, planning practice has been unable to satisfy the needs, and exist-
ing planning theories have failed to come up with a framework to deal with the 
increasing vulnerabilities of urban areas and cities and the insecurities of the public. 
There has been increasing criticism of the communicative planning approach, which 
is rooted in a Habermasian ideal of communicative action (Albrechts  2010 ; Fainstein 
 2000,  2005 ; Purcell  2009 ; Harris  2002 ; Young  1996,  1999 ; Mouffe  1999 ) , with 
criticisms focused on the priority given to processes instead of substance and the 
limited attention to power relations and the underlying causes of inequalities. 1 It has 
also been suggested that communicative action tends, in the long term, to reinforce 
the current status quo and is “more likely to support the neoliberal agenda than to 
resist it” (Purcell  2009 : 141), because it seeks to resolve con ﬂ ict, eliminate exclu-
sion and neutralise power relations, rather than embrace them as the very terrain of 
social mobilisation (p. 155). 
 These criticisms are not related to the essence of the theory but to how it has been 
put into practice and used. The very recent combination of environmental, eco-
nomic and social crises , however, indicate the need for a rethinking and questioning 
of the basic assumptions of contemporary planning theories, since it has become 
increasingly evident that in order to tackle economic, social and ecological risks 
that increase the vulnerability of the urban systems , a new theoretical perspective in 
planning is a necessity. 
 Such a new planning perspective needs to consider the increasing weakness of 
cities with respect to economic, social and ecological pressures and threats; to pay 
attention to the growing concerns on risks in the globalised economic system; and 
to bear in mind the processes that misguided development under the hegemony of 
 1  Some of the criticisms have been responded to by Healey ( 2003 ), who indicates that substance and 
process are not separate spheres, but rather are co-constituted. Forester  ( 1999 : 263) also indicated 
that the inclusiveness of the process may balance the power differences.  

19
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
capitalism, which increased the vulnerabilities of urban spaces and communities 
and caused urban areas to be increasingly under the risk of losing adaptive capacity 
to deal with necessary changes. 
 Resilience thinking constitutes an alternative approach. “Planning for resilience” 
can  ﬁ nd a home in planning theory as an analysis of the external dynamics that 
accelerate urban economic, social and spatial vulnerability and as an approach that 
helps to link social and economic processes with ecological processes, calling for a 
reconsideration of the “substance” of planning so as to enhance capacity to deal 
with slow and sudden changes of different forms. This can occur within a process 
that focuses on “building a self-organisation    capacity” alongside a change in the 
value system that can overcome the unequal power relations. 
 This chapter opens a discussion on the contemporary dynamics of urban systems    in 
the wake of different disturbances, with the aim being to evaluate the existing planning 
approaches and to discuss to what extent they are able to prepare urban systems    to 
weather unforeseen disturbances . The major hypothesis of the chapter is that neoliber-
alisation accelerates the vulnerability of the urban systems and existing planning dis-
courses and practice are not able to solve emerging problems. Therefore, there is need 
of a shift in planning paradigm, if we are seeking for more resilient cities. The main 
part of the chapter, however, offers a description of resilience planning and its princi-
ples in changing environments where the future is unpredictable and surprise is likely. 
 2.2  How do Global Economic Changes Affect the Vulnerability 
of Urban Systems? 
 In recent decades, cities and regions have endured signi ﬁ cant changes under the 
 dominance of the neoliberal agenda, which has eroded their resilience (Hudson  2009 ) . 
Changes in production structures and labour processes under the pressures of globali-
sation   , the rise of new technologies and the increasing role of knowledge and learning 
processes have brought about substantial changes in the built environment, lifestyles 
and patterns of consumption. This has affected cities and regions both directly and 
indirectly, while deregulation in different  ﬁ elds has eroded their self-regulatory capac-
ities (Albrechts  2010  ) . Increased incorporation into the new global economy has 
brought vulnerabilities that are ampli ﬁ ed by the structural problems of cities, thus 
opening the door to external pressures. 
 While economic and social vulnerability have been the subject of broad 
 discussions with reference to  ﬁ nancial and economic crises and the domino effect 
among cities and regions all over the world, democratic de ﬁ cit s and vulnerability in 
governance have been widely disputed, with reference to the transfer of power from 
democratic citizens to corporations and the privatisation of the state (Albrechts 
 2010 ) . In particular, the transfer of decision-making powers to the actors in the 
market has been the subject of much disparagement. 
 Moreover, ecological/environmental vulnerabilities have escalated with the 
movements of pollutants and hazardous wastes, as well as increasing numbers of 

20
A. Eraydin
disaster s accelerated by the overuse or misuse of natural resources, besides the 
unforeseen effects of climate change . 
 Urban areas have responded to these issues in an awkward manner since they 
lack experience and preparedness. For this reason, it is not known if the responses 
of the recent past have enabled cities to endure under the new conditions, or whether 
they have provided and motivated them to create new opportunities. There is a clear 
need to discuss the ways in which different stakeholders have reacted to these 
changes and to assess the outcome of their responses, which is what this book sets 
out to achieve through an analysis of  ﬁ ve case studies . 
 2.2.1  Increasing Economic and Social Vulnerabilities 
in the Neoliberal Era 
 Since the 1980s, major metropolitan areas in the world have seen a signi ﬁ cant 
restructuring of their economies in order to adapt and compete in the newly emerg-
ing conditions and risks in the global economy . While the deregulation of the  ﬂ ow 
of goods, capital and people decreased the level of protection of local economies to 
external affects, the volatility of the global economy intensi ﬁ ed the vulnerability of 
urban systems . Today, major cities all over the world are facing pressures that are 
forcing them to rethink the impacts of policies aimed at competitiveness and inte-
gration into global economy on their socio-spatial structures, following a period of 
entrepreneurial policies shaped by the notions of globalisation and competition 
(Fainstein  2001 ; Boddy  2002 ; Boddy and Parkinson  2004 ; Buck et al.  2002 ) . 
 Competitiveness is expected to contribute to the economic performance and 
 welfare of cities,  ﬁ rstly by enhancing attractivity for international capital; secondly, 
to enable local agents to export their products and services all over the world and 
join global value chains; and thirdly to acquire global functions that will allow them 
to bene ﬁ t from the spillover effects of the global circulation of knowledge, informa-
tion and technology. Previous literature offers a very broad list of the bene ﬁ ts of 
competitiveness that are grouped under several headings: increasing human capital 
(Porter  1990 ; Lever and Turok  1999 ; Huggins  2003 ) , improving quality of technical 
infrastructure and the standard of living (Kresl  1995 ; Storper  1997 ; Begg  1999 ; 
Malecki  2002 ; Camagni  2002 ; Turok  2004 ) and boosting local institutional and 
social assets, including effective governance (Kresl  1995 ; Krugman  1996 ; Deas and 
Giordano  2001 ) . Competitiveness can be attained through the use of different assets 
that de ﬁ ne to what extent a particular city is able to integrate into the global econ-
omy . However, the existing assets of competitiveness can quickly be eroded, since 
their effects may differ from place to place. More importantly, the reliance on global 
conditions and the dominance of deregulatory measures make cities and regions 
vulnerable in economic terms. The  ﬁ nancial crisis of the recent past has led to deep 
economic problems in many countries, which is just one example of how problems 
in local economies can easily disseminate within the global economy and can cause 
complications even in countries with relatively stable economies. 

21
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
 Moreover, the dependence on global markets and the conditions imposed by 
global capital has also very important implications on social resilience through the 
labour markets. Recent literature has underlined the importance of the characteris-
tics of the labour market and consequently the social and institutional relations of 
different social groups, which de ﬁ ne the social resilience of cities (Gordon  2005 ; 
Fainstein  2001 ; Turok  2005 ) . 
 The labour force is an important competitive asset, as its size, characteristics and 
quality determine the level of competitiveness of a certain city and its integration 
into the global economy . Competitiveness, thereby, theoretically means demand for 
labour and increasing job opportunities; however, an increase in employment 
 opportunities does not necessarily mean that all groups will bene ﬁ t equally. The 
characteristics of the labour markets are important in the transfer of the positive 
outcomes of competitiveness to different social groups. Several issues that shape 
labour markets, such as education, gender division of labour and the social organi-
sation of work, are important in rede ﬁ ning the impacts of competitiveness on differ-
ent labour segments, since the skills and occupational composition of the new labour 
market de ﬁ ne which groups will have an access to new job opportunities. Increasing 
competitiveness may support inclusionary processes with increasing social cohe-
sion, but at the same time, it may encourage a widening of inequalities (Turok  2005 ) . 
 In general, there is near consensus in the belief that neoliberal economic restructur-
ing has increasingly shaped policies to bene ﬁ t capitalists rather than citizens. This 
has led to an increase in social vulnerabilities, exempli ﬁ ed by decreasing social 
cohesion and socio-spatial segregation in urban areas. 
 2.2.2  Increasing Environmental and Spatial Vulnerabilities 
Due to Changes in Property Markets 
 Similar to the effects of restructuring, the last three decades have also witnessed 
important changes in regulations de ﬁ ning the transfer of rights to private  property 
(Newman and Thornley  1997  ) . Beginning in the 1980s, during the systematic 
restructuring of the economic infrastructure    of major urban regions in an increas-
ingly neoliberal tradition, local governments began to mobilise new strategies of 
endogenous economic development to cope with place-speci ﬁ c socio-economic 
problems, to adjust to newly imposed  ﬁ scal constraints and to attract new sources 
of external capital investment (Brenner  2006 , ref. Eisenschitz and Gough  1993 ) . 
Territorial competitiveness    becomes a new priority in metropolitan governance , 
resulting in the formation of new forms of governance with spatial interventions 
(project- or property-led development), such as policy instruments for social and 
economic development and redevelopment. As many studies explain (Swyngedouw 
et al.  2002 ; Salet and Guallini  2006 ; Salet and Majoor  2005 ; Albrechts  2006 ; Taşan-
Kok  2008 ) , the new modes of governance introduced into the property markets 
have brought substantial changes to the political, economic and social power 
relations in the city. 

22
A. Eraydin
 After a period of heightened entrepreneurialism in the 1990s, the dualistic nature 
of property rights regimes became more obvious, with the  entrepreneurial mode of 
governance focusing on the transfer of land rents for productive purposes (new 
forms of capitalist development, commercial property development, etc.) and the 
 social mode of governance endorsing property development for reproductive pur-
poses (for households), and the clash of these two regimes, which have different 
socio-economic logics (Jager  2003 ) , helped to increase fragmentation within urban 
areas. There are a number of studies that re ﬂ ect upon the interaction between the 
social and entrepreneurial forms of governance via the land and property markets, 
as well as the socio-spatial fragmentation, as an outcome of the interplay among 
them (see Webster  2002 ; Edwards  2002 ; Delladetsima  2006 ) . Webster  ( 2002 ) claims 
that the property market reproduces more visible “clubs” in this respect when 
 compared to the social forms of governance that constantly establish new sets of 
relations and dynamics in cities. These institutional relations and the dynamic 
 interactions between the property market and urban government actors (public and 
private) de ﬁ ne their new roles in the property markets through negotiations, written-
unwritten or of ﬁ cial-unof ﬁ cial deals and agreements and strategies. This entrepre-
neurial logic, however, decreases the opportunity for public concerns and long-term 
strategies for the sustainable use of resources to be addressed, and without doubt 
degrades the resilience of cities. 
 2.2.3  Democratic De ﬁ cits and Vulnerability in Governance 
 In the neoliberal era, one of the most dominant changes has been the privatisation of the 
state through the transfer of its functions to semipublic or private bodies. Services have 
been contracted out to volunteer organisations, community associations, non-pro ﬁ t 
corporations, foundations and private  ﬁ rms and through the creation of different types 
of quasi-public bodies and public-private partnerships (Albrechts  2010 ) . The growth in 
the number of organisations taking part in the decision-making mechanism has created 
the illusion of equal opportunities in decision-making processes, but only when the 
power relations are not considered in the analysis. However, there is increasing  evidence 
of unequal power relations and transfers of power from the public to corporations, lead-
ing to criticisms that “what is introduced is only for the legitimation of the existing 
system and managing economic stability” (Albrechts  2010 : 1115). There are also many 
arguments indicating that neoliberalisation produces important democratic de ﬁ cits . 
According to Purcell  ( 2009 : 141), “the system introduced easily can turn to more 
authoritarian, although they use democratic rhetoric and practice and use them to legiti-
mate neoliberalism ”. This crisis in democracy is also mentioned by other scholars 
when focusing on the effects of politics and government on society. Innes    and Booher 
( 2010 : 29) discuss the “the problems of the current practices and institutions that lead 
to disengagement and apathy of the society on democratic participation ”. 
 The above debates are very important, since beginning from the 1980s onwards, 
the participatory practices and the new quasi-public bodies have been cited as key 

23
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
agents in increasing the level of democracy . However, in practice, the achievements 
have been far less than expected. In particular, the limited opportunities to resist the 
outcomes of the restructuring imposed by globalisation have received broad atten-
tion in the recent past, which has been indicated as the reason for the increasing 
vulnerability of the existing decision-making systems and institutions. 
 As can be seen in the case studies from four different countries featured later in 
the book, cities and countries with institutions that are not prepared to handle differ-
ent forms of crisis are disproportionately vulnerable to external shocks, threats and 
disturbances. The World Bank Report 2011 emphasises the importance of 
i nstitutional strength , together with the dif ﬁ culties faced in transforming the exist-
ing institutions to allow them to cope with the global changes and economic crisis 
conditions. In this context, an institutional transformation that results in security, 
justice and jobs is suggested. Moreover, there is emphasis on the role of regional 
and international activities to reduce external stresses and specialised external sup-
port (World Bank  2011 ). It is obvious from recent global ecological events that 
institutional capacities are lacking, con ﬁ rmed by the poor institutional performances 
in the wake of Hurricane Katrina in the USA in 2005 and the earthquake and subse-
quent tsunami in Japan in 2011. 
 Unequal power relations and the privatisation of the state through the transfer of 
functions to semipublic and private bodies make proactive measures to unexpected 
crisis and hazards dif ﬁ cult. Only in certain countries, where the threats are more 
obvious, such as the Netherlands, is it possible to initiate governance practices 
towards achieving resilient cities. 
 2.2.4  The Impact of Changes on Increasingly Vulnerable Urban 
Ecosystem s and the Sustainable Use of Urban Land 
 The changes de ﬁ ned above clearly impose pressures on urban ecosystems by 
 creating new demands for land and more ecological services. The different implica-
tions of the growth of cities and the growing demand for land are discussed under 
different headings. Air pollution that exceeds the carbon uptake levels of forests, the 
appropriation of green areas for development and traf ﬁ c congestion are some of the 
issues that have received growing concern. Most empirical studies concentrate on 
the costs of sprawl, which are grouped by Ewing  ( 1997 ) as more vehicle miles 
 travelled, high energy consumption, air pollution, higher costs of infrastructure and 
public service provision and the loss of resource lands. In this respect, protecting the 
ecological balance (Wheeler  2007 ) and the ef ﬁ cient and sustainable use of land 
have become the main points of concern on the urban environment agenda, besides 
other environmental issues. That said, sustainable urban development and the sus-
tainable use of land are not a new issue, having become a topic of interest when the 
appropriation of agricultural land for urban use began to be a problem for the 
 sprawling cities. Sustainable urban development is used within the framework of 
preventing low residential densities, sprawl, leapfrog fragmentation of urbanisation, 

24
A. Eraydin
suburbanisation and rapid development at the urban edge, while compactness and 
urban intensi ﬁ cation , high density living, mixed land uses, recycling of urban land 
and brown ﬁ eld regeneration began to be seen as more sustainable ways of land use 
development in the cities (Dixon  et al.  2007 ; Thornton et al.  2007 ). Literature on 
sustainable land development at the beginning of 2000s emphasised new land 
 planning and management methods to minimise the impacts of agricultural land 
loss through sustainable land allocation (Yeh and Li  2002 ; Ligmann-Zielinska et al. 
 2008 ; Enemark  2004 ) . Urban form is a widely discussed issue in literature. 
Theoretically, one urban form can be more sustainable than another, though empiri-
cal  ﬁ ndings show that there is no complete agreement on which forms are more 
sustainable. 
 In recent years, the recycling of urban land (especially in brown ﬁ eld zones) 
received strong emphasis in the attempts to reduce the urban sprawl that was accel-
erating to address the increasing demand for land in competitive urban areas (Dixon 
et al.  2007 ) . In fact, brown ﬁ eld regeneration (Thornton et al.  2007 ), the recycling or 
reuse of the urban vacant land, became the primary means of sustainable urban land 
use in literature around the world 2 (Greenstein and Sungu-Eryilmaz  2004 ; Bowman 
and Pagano  2004 ; Brachman  2004 ; Shutkin  2004 ) , alongside policies favouring 
compact cities. 
 The Compact City form was one of the recommendations of the Brundtland 
Commission Report, dated 1987, and a proposal of the UNCED Agenda 21 (UNCED 
 1993  ) . In the European Charter II, which was adopted on 29 May 2008 by the 
Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, the Compact 
City was de ﬁ ned as an important international goal for the sustainable development 
of urban areas. 
 Recently, discussions on sustainability have been connected to those on global 
warming and climate change , with the growth of energy consumption of different 
forms and emissions, and their association with climate change, becoming a widely 
debated issue in urban environment literature. The new urban forms shaped under 
market dynamics have been considered inef ﬁ cient and unsustainable due to their 
high energy consumption. In many cities, the increasing built-up areas in water 
basins, urban growth towards environmentally sensitive areas and the loss of areas 
with rich biodiversity are some of the consequences of neoliberal urban policies and 
their emphasis on prioritising entrepreneurial concerns. 
 The vulnerability and impact of already-foreseen threats to ecosystems are an 
indication of the seriousness of recent environmental problems. The impact of high 
rates of growth in land demand and urban sprawl on freshwater ecosystem /water 
resources are discussed with reference to uncontrolled built-up areas in protection 
zones of water basins, which leads to a loss of drinking water resources. Natural 
 2  Governments adopted targets for the proportion of housing development on reused urban sites. 
For example, in 1995, the UK Government decided that 50% of all new residential development 
should take place on reused urban land by the year 2005, and this target was further raised to 60% 
in 1996 in a more radical move towards a tough compaction policy (Breheny  1997 : 210). 

25
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
hazards, especially  ﬂ oods, and earthquake risk areas are under the pressure of 
 property development, similar to forests and agroecosystems in many cities. 
 2.3  Urban Planning and Policy in the Era of Globalisation : 
How Far are they Able to Prepare the Urban Systems 
to Unforeseen Disturbances ? 
 How do planning systems respond to increasing economic, social and ecological 
vulnerabilities intensi ﬁ ed within the period of the neoliberalising economic system? 
In order to answer this question,  ﬁ rst there is need to discuss the interconnections 
between the dominant mode of regulation and planning discourse in different eco-
nomic regime s. 
 While the contemporary idea of planning is rooted in the  Enlightenment tradition 
of modernity , in the twentieth century,  Mannheim’s ideas on planning that attached 
systematised social scienti ﬁ c knowledge and techniques to the management of 
 collective affairs in a democratic society became the source of inspiration for the 
 Chicago school of rational decision making. Later, the attempts to systematise core 
areas of knowledge in urban development led to the  rational planning model , which 
became a guide in the planning profession and an approach to problem solving in 
the public sphere, beginning in the 1950s.  Instrumental rationality dominated plan-
ning theory for more than 20 years. By drawing on Keynesian economics and policy 
studies in political science, it highlighted planning’s role as being to correct market 
failures related to externalities, public goods, inequity, transaction costs and market 
power (Shiftel  2000 ) . In this period, the rules were set out for welfarist redistribu-
tion, and governance mechanisms emerged to legitimise the distribution of welfare 
services among different social groups. Most of the existing literature has de ﬁ ned 
the governance practices of the  Keynesian period as idealised forms that obscured 
the different mechanisms that have been used by the system to work under the pres-
sures of different interest groups. 
 The  Keynesian economic model , supported by the strong state and modernist 
ideas and rational decision making, faced important criticisms from the 1960s 
onwards. Literature on urban movements from the 1970s and early 1980s provides 
a clear indication that not everything was acceptable in the urban areas of the wel-
fare states of the Western world (Castells  1983 ) . Social movements were important 
in calls for participation , protest and the demand for a structural transformation of 
the urban system (Castells  1977 ) . Due to con ﬂ icting interests and efforts to bene ﬁ t 
more from the welfare delivery and transfer of rights in the property market ,  tensions 
and struggles grew among different groups. Struggles around  collective  consumption 
(i.e. the consumption of services produced, managed and distributed on a public 
basis) played a major role in shaping new planning theories, and were important in 
driving so-called  reforms in planning systems. 
 Fainstein  ( 2005 : 124) explains that, “The reform movement was attacking the 
prevailing rational or quasi-rational model on two grounds:  ﬁ rst, it was a misguided 

26
A. Eraydin
process; and second, it produced a city that no one wanted”. The  reformers ’  emphasis 
was on the roots of urban inequality and they sought ways to achieve democratic 
participation in urban planning. According to Outhwaite  ( 1994 : 6), the underlying 
theory of  communicative rationality was the preoccupation with the idea that instru-
mental rationality , seen as a liberating force at the time of the Enlightenment, 
became a source of enslavement in the 1970s. 
 Problems in the Keynesian mode of regulation necessitated a change in the 
 rationality on which planning was based. The  Habermasian communicative 
action  theory was explicitly intended as an alternative to the instrumental or stra-
tegic rationality of capitalism (Habermas  2001 : 102 cited in Purcell  2009 ) . 
 Communicative action  aims at creating “the ideal speech situation”, which con-
stitutes “undistorted communication”, in which all participants affected by the 
decision participate in it meaningfully, and everyone has an equal chance to par-
ticipate in achieving the good for all rather than their own particular self-interest 
(Habermas  1990,  1993 ) . He claims that it may be possible to achieve the desired 
end because through mechanisms of interaction, which theoretically include all 
partners (Purcell  2009 : 149). 
 There appeared different schools of thought under  communicative rationality , 
varying between  advocacy planning (Davidoff  1965 ) ;  participatory planning with 
emphasis on negotiation (Susskind and Cruikshank  1987 ) ;  communicative  planning , 
rooted in communicative action    and decision-making practice based on communi-
cation and consensus building (Susskind et al.  1999 ; Forester  1999 ; Innes  1995 ) ; 
 transactive planning (Friedmann  2008 ) ; and  collaborative planning (Healey  1997 ) . 
All are based on consensus building among people with con ﬂ icting interests, and 
can be accepted as variegated forms of planning based upon a communicative 
rationality. 
 Today, the ideas of both  communicative and  collaborative planning occupy an 
extremely hegemonic position in planning theory (Purcell  2009 ; Tewdwr-Jones and 
Allmendinger  1998 ) ; however, there have been growing criticisms in recent years 
that can be grouped under three main headings:  ﬁ rst, theories that are based upon a 
 communicative rationality are focused more on the process but less on outcome, and 
fail to acknowledge and account for the in ﬂ uence that external forces have in  shaping 
decisions and outcomes; second, in  communicative planning , scienti ﬁ c information 
may be marginalised in collaborative decision-making processes as individual 
 participants often lack technical expertise, and thus it depends upon socially con-
structed decisions that are not necessarily made for rational reasons (Hillier  2003 ); 
and third, they neglect the power problems in the communication process and fall 
short of adequately accounting for the role that power inequities play in shaping 
outcomes (Fainstein  2005 ; Murray  2005 ). According to Purcell  ( 2009 : 141),  com-
municative action reinforces existing power relations rather than transforming 
them, and he claims that communicative action and planning is embedded with the 
problems of power, indicating that those with stronger power relations have the 
opportunity to look after their own interests. 
 At present, the criticisms on theories on communicative action are not against what it 
stands for but rather its position concerning the neoliberal political-economic agenda. 

27
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
Recent debates on the contemporary theory represent different positions. Firstly, 
 communicative action planning is useful in harnessing the impacts of  neoliberalism , 
and secondly although  communicative action theory was not intended to serve 
the interests of the power, it provides a good ground for neoliberal practices to be 
legitimised. 
 Purcell  ( 2009 : 147) claims that “communicative planning offers an extremely 
attractive way for neoliberals to secure the democratic legitimacy they require, 
because it tends to reinforce the political-economic status quo while producing 
democratically legitimate decisions”. Comments have been made indicating 
that  communicative action     tends in the long term to reinforce the current status 
quo and suppresses the radical and transformative edge in practice (Harris 
 2002 ) , favouring some social groups and not others (Young  1996,  1999 ; Fainstein 
 2000 ; Albrechts  2010 ) . Flyvbjerg  ( 1998 : 209) also expressed “scepticism about 
the non-politicised processes of mediation and building consensus”, and further 
limitations of  collaborative planning are de ﬁ ned by Gunton, Peter and Day  ( 2006 ) , 
such as the limited applicability to only those cases where all relevant stakeholders 
are motivated to participate and/or management agencies that are willing to delegate 
power. They claim that inequality in power gives some stakeholders an unfair advan-
tage and a propensity to develop “ second best” or vague outcomes in order to 
achieve consensus. 
 Some changes have been introduced to counter this argument in the recent 
past. Healey  (  1997 ) argued persuasively that the challenges of urban develop-
ment in the neoliberal era could no longer be handled effectively by government 
alone, but required the participation of all sectors of society in a form of plan-
ning that involved dialogue and negotiations among stakeholders to achieve an 
actionable consensus. She emphasises that communicative action    aims not only 
at creating a cohesive “we” but also to generate an inclusive system in which 
nobody affected by a decision should be excluded from the decision-making 
process (Healey  1997 ) . The problem with this ideal, critics argue, is that such 
inclusiveness can never be total, as every group that includes must always also 
exclude. However, there are yet newer discussions that favour  communicative 
planning and governance   , with claims that it can enhance the resilience of cities 
(Innes and Booher  2010 ). 
 A careful examination of the problems of urban areas in the contemporary 
period and the criticisms of dominant planning theories lead to a realisation of 
the need for a new mode of thinking in planning. While the problems of plan-
ning theory  in terms of its use in the neoliberal era is one of the  ﬁ rst points in 
the new thinking, decreasing the power of planning to harness unexpected eco-
nomic, social and ecological problems constitute the latter. Christopherson, 
Michie and Tyler argue  (  2010 : 3) that the “resilience debate can shake up our 
thinking and make us question some of our basic assumptions and measures of 
success and failure”. It can also can take “decision makers, planners, institu-
tions, and citizens out of their comfort zones, and compel them to confront their 
key beliefs, to challenge conventional wisdom and to examine the prospects of 
 breaking out of the box ” (Albrechts  2010 : 1115).  

28
A. Eraydin
 2.4  Resilience Thinking as the Basis of a New Paradigm 
in Planning Practice 
 In this book, it is claimed that it is possible to introduce a new planning paradigm 
based upon the concept of resilience. This section of the chapter attempts to identify 
the basic characteristics of resilience planning . 
 As discussed in Sect.  2.2 , increasing economic, social and spatial vulnerabilities 
due to incorporation of urban areas into the new global economy and opening the 
door to external pressures necessitate building resilient urban systems. The entre-
preneurial logic in property markets decreases the opportunity for public concerns, 
and unequal power relations and the privatisation of the state make proactive 
measures to unexpected crisis and hazards dif ﬁ cult. Moreover, increasing ecological 
vulnerabilities require connecting planning and science of ecology and enhancing 
ecological resilience of urban systems, and considering the impact of already-foreseen 
or unforeseen threats to ecosystems. 
 A resilient system is de ﬁ ned by its two main features: its ability to absorb change 
and disturbance, and the persistence of systems while retaining its basic functions 
and structure (Walker et al.  2006 ) ; together with the ability to survive, adapt and 
transform itself (Ludwig et al.  1997 ) . The attributes above de ﬁ ne a possible choice 
in building a planning framework: whether to follow conservative or radical con-
structs of resilience (Raco and Street  2012 ) . The former view of resilience allows a 
return to the steady state that existed before the external shock threatened to bring 
radical and fundamental change, while in contrast the latter interpretation sees 
resilience as a dynamic process involving the rejection of the status quo, as there can 
be no return to the circumstances that actually caused the problem in the  ﬁ rst place 
(Raco and Street  2012 ). 
 The latter de ﬁ nition, accepted here as the core of the resilience planning  paradigm, 
can be de ﬁ ned with respect to three dynamic assets of the urban systems : adaptive 
capacity , self-organisation and transformability , rather than characteristics connected 
to the steady-state condition. 
 The adaptive capacity , which is at the core of a new paradigm for planning practice, 
aims explicitly at equipping urban systems to deal effectively with slow and radical 
changes. Its application so far has been limited since it should cover responses to 
multidimensional issues that vary from ongoing environmental/ecological concerns, 
changes to the urban built environment , movements of people, evolving socio-
economic regimes and the interplay of political ideologies and collective imaginaries. 
The enhancement of adaptive capacity is a necessary condition for reducing 
vulnerability , and sustaining ecosystem services is vital for many urban areas, 
which are under threat of signi ﬁ cant upheavals from a variety of different hazards 
and problems induced by climate change   . Self-organisation, which is a  process of 
internal organisation within a system without being guidance or management by 
an outside source (Heylighen  2002 ; Holling  1992 ) , establishes the arena for evolu-
tionary change. However, self-organisation is not always possible, and  systems have 
had to undergo thorough change. Transformability in such cases is inevitable, being 

29
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
the capacity to create a fundamentally new system when ecological,  economic or 
social (including political) conditions make the existing system untenable (Walker 
et al.  2004 ) ; and planning may play a vital role within this process. 
 Evaluating urban systems with respect to these assets enables one to determine 
the critical issues for resilience planning. First, it has to be dynamic, not seeking to 
return to stable equilibrium under external disturbances and changes due to local 
dynamics, but adapting and adjusting to changing internal or external processes. 
Secondly, it has to consider economic, social and ecological heterogeneity by con-
centrating on not only the form but also function and process of urban systems 
(Pickett et al.  2004 ) . Thirdly, resilience planning needs to be based systems  analysis, 
which will enable to de ﬁ ne the points and issues of vulnerability of urban systems 
and to be focused on key issues, being those related to the adaptive and transforma-
tive capacities of urban areas in terms of determining strengths and weaknesses in 
the context of opportunities and threats. 
 What would be the main features of such a planning system? The basic 
 characteristics of resilience planning can be de ﬁ ned in comparison to the two domi-
nating planning paradigms   , namely, rational comprehensive planning, which had been 
the basis of planning practice from the 1950s up to 1980s, and communicative plan-
ning , which has dominated new planning practices since the 1980s (see Table  2.1 ). 
 One of the critical issues to be addressed when de ﬁ ning a possible frame-
work for integrating resilience thinking into planning practice is its rationality. 
Rationality in planning can be de ﬁ ned as the guiding principle of the human 
mind in the process of thinking and the application of reason to collective deci-
sion making (Faludi  1987 ). Planning literature argues that different planning 
paradigms are based on different rationalities and that  ﬁ nding a variant of plan-
ning practice is way of integrating the various types of planning paradigms 
associated with different forms of rationality (Alexander  2000 ) . Alexander 
( 2006 ) proposes a system of classi ﬁ cation of rationality associated with  different 
planning paradigms. Brie ﬂ y, he de ﬁ nes instrumental rationality, corresponding 
to the logic of choosing the best means to achieve a particular goal; substantive 
rationality, demanding consideration of the goals themselves, selecting between 
objectives and assigning priorities; bounded rationality, providing a context to 
decision making; strategic rationality, making the decision maker and other 
actors interdependent; and communicative rationality, shifting focus from deci-
sion making to social interaction. 
 Resilience planning, as discussed earlier, needs a systems approach, de ﬁ ning 
means but not ends and  ﬂ exibility that enables urban systems not only to adapt to 
but also can bene ﬁ t from expected and unexpected disturbances. Therefore, the 
instrumental rationality, which is the basis of comprehensive planning, or commu-
nicative rationality that leads to communicative planning based on socially con-
structed values and social interaction do not offer a sound basis for resilience 
planning. Neither the bounded and strategic rationality that are mainly focused on 
planning as frame setting is able to serve the needs for resilience planning that aims 
not to provide means for clear ends, instead means for unde ﬁ ned ends to make sure 
the loss from unexpected event is minimal. 

30
A. Eraydin
 Therefore, planning based upon resilience thinking has to have an integrative 
framework that combines rational and communicative planning (see Table  2.1 ); with 
rational planning based upon instrumental rationality and communicative planning 
resting upon communicative rationality. As Alexander summarises  ( 2000 : 247), 
an integrated rationality is “a complex construct, a recursive process deploying 
different forms of rationality at successive stages by various actors in changing 
roles”. Different than the two main planning systems, resilience planning that uses 
integrative rationality obviously necessitates not only actors as individuals but also 
individuals in interactive groups, in addition to interdisciplinary teams with  technical 
 Table 2.1   The resilience planning paradigm and its major characteristics in comparison to  rational 
and communicative planning paradigms 
 Rational comprehen-
sive planning 
 Communicative/
collaborative planning 
 Resilience planning 
 Rationality 
 Instrumental 
rationality 
 Communicative 
rationality 
 Integrative rationality 
 A framework that 
combines instrumental 
and communicative 
rationality 
 Actors 
 Individuals/
technicians 
 Individuals in 
interactive 
groups 
 Interdisciplinary groups 
with technical 
expertise 
 Social groups as learning 
agents of change 
 Relations between 
actors/issue of 
power 
 De ﬁ ning goals 
for all 
 Consensus 
generation 
 Commitment 
 Time perspective 
 Medium to 
long term 
 Short term 
 Long-term perspective, 
systems approach and 
immediate action 
 Concern 
 Problem solving 
 Collective agreement/
decision 
 Issues raised under the 
instrumental rational-
ity act as constraints 
 Aim 
 De ﬁ ning the most 
effective actions/to 
achieve goals 
 Consensus, mutual 
understanding 
 De ﬁ ning priorities for a 
no-regret situation 
 Preparedness for both 
slow and major 
disturbances 
 Output 
 Decisions: based 
on technical 
knowledge 
 Collective decision 
based on socially 
constructed values 
 Flexible solutions 
depending upon 
spatial heterogeneity, 
function and temporal 
change 
 Context/substance 
 Comprehensive 
decisions 
 Context as an 
outcome of process 
 Red tape and priorities 
 Value systems 
 Individual values 
 Socially constructed 
values 
 Universal values for 
common bene ﬁ ts  
 Bases of evaluation 
of outputs 
 Ef ﬁ ciency 
 Consensus-based 
values 
 Resilience attribute s 

31
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
experience, to be involved within the different stages of planning practice. 
While the interdisciplinary teams engage in the planning practice to analyse urban 
 subsystems and de ﬁ ne the key vulnerabilities of the systems, the involvement of 
social groups as learning agents of change, however, needs to be based upon a  com-
mitment to prepare urban areas for long-term changes and disturbances. This point 
is quite important in resilience thinking since most of the consensus generation 
processes in communicative actions of the contemporary era are based upon short-
term expectations and socially constructed values   , disregarding long-term horizons 
and long-term commitments. 
 The concern of resilience planning should not be merely about problem solving, 
as the classical planning approaches are already focused on, or reaching collective 
agreement/decisions, just as communicative planning does. What resilience plan-
ning targets is de ﬁ ning  no-regret situations under uncertain conditions, in which the 
outcomes of the speci ﬁ c models that links structures and processes in urban systems 
de ﬁ ned within the instrumental rationality can be used as constraints in the process 
of decision making. In this framework, the de ﬁ nition of the critical issues and an 
analysis of these issues using different methods of analysis, and problem solving 
de ﬁ ned under the instrumental rationality should act as inputs when de ﬁ ning the 
problem areas in the collective decision-making process. 
 In this regard, the aim of resilience planning    is not to de ﬁ ne the most effective 
actions to achieve goals within a comprehensive framework but rather to de ﬁ ne 
priorities that ensure a no-regret situation and create a system that is not only 
adaptive to slow changes (mostly de ﬁ ned by endogenous dynamics) but also 
to major expected and unexpected disturbances. Such a system has to follow a 
co-evolutionary path in de ﬁ ning the impacts of disturbances or endogenous changes 
to its different components, as well as the secondary and tertiary effects of the 
changes taking place on each other, by integrating the ecosystem functions and 
socio-economic dynamics of the urban systems . This issue is at the very core of the 
resilience approach. 
 This way of formulating the aim of planning necessitates the use of speci ﬁ c 
 models to determine how to measure resilience and knowledge to specify linking 
processes between social, economic and ecological structures in searching for mutual 
agreement, which should not only lead to binding decisions in certain priority areas, 
but also readiness to adapt to any slow changes or sudden pressures. Obviously, it is 
the content or the substance that becomes the main issue in this approach. 
 In fact, the resilience planning paradigm calls for a reconsideration of the 
“  substance ” of planning within a process, after several years of neglect.  Bringing 
back substance and context  based upon the vulnerabilities and adaptive capacities of 
urban areas, as the key goal of planning, is an important feature of resilience  planning   . 
It requires a de ﬁ nition of the substance and capacity (not end form and structure) 
de ﬁ ned with the help of red tapes and priorities as the bases for dealing with change. 
However, the wide variety of issues makes setting constraints and identifying red 
tape quite dif ﬁ cult, necessitating a critical analysis of the main processes and 
 structural constraints shaping the urban areas, which obviously requires the use of 
methods of instrumental rationality . Moreover, de ﬁ ning  substance  and  end-capacity 

32
A. Eraydin
also necessitates a process of inclusive decision making that covers different groups – in 
other words, not only interactive communication but also deliberation. 
 The priority areas within this context have to serve for the enhancement of local 
creativity , innovation and risk taking, taking into consideration both proactive as 
well as transformative assets. In building resilient cities, proactive issues are impor-
tant. According to Hudson  ( 2009 : 17), emphasis should be on moving to a proactive 
approach and learning how to anticipate and cope with a range of externally gener-
ated shocks and disturbances. However, a proactive perspective alone is not enough, 
as capacities for transformation and self-organisation are also needed if one is to 
reach the envisaged end state, which should include “the way resources are used, 
(re)distributed, and allocated, and the way regulatory powers are exercised” 
(Albrechts  2010 : 1117). 
 The second issue is related to the value system, which is at the core of planning 
paradigms. Planning involves making choices in contexts characterised by  complexity 
and uncertainty, and these choices are connected to value systems and ethical issues. 
Since the 1980s, while rational comprehensive planning became increasingly discred-
ited and replaced by communicative planning, socially constructed value systems 
became important. As Campbell ( 2012 : 2) argued, “the technocratic premise was 
replaced by widespread acceptance of the ‘political’ and therefore value-based 
 character of the activities with which planners engage”. Today, there are increasing 
criticisms on “the highly politicized nature of professional ethical frameworks and 
their tendency to support the status quo” as Marcuse ( 1976 ) pinpointed several decades 
ago. Interestingly, given the increasing market reliance of planning and hence the 
importance of judgement rather than technique, the debates on value systems and 
planning ethics are limited in the literature. 
 The use and redistribution of resources is not only a technical issue, in that it is 
directly related to the value system in which acknowledging the materiality of the 
economy and consumption, production and the division of labour are especially 
important. Moreover, establishing a new balance between private property rights 
and human responsibilities is the key issue in building a new value system in urban 
planning (Wheeler  2007 ) . The critical issues are primarily the principles of sharing 
both burdens and bene ﬁ ts, and the problems in the provision of equal opportunities 
in circumstances characterised by competing interests and priorities. These issues 
are related to the major ethical concerns of planning, namely, equality, justice and 
public interest. 
 In recent sustainability literature, there is emphasis on de ﬁ ning planning  principles 
for the more ef ﬁ cient use of urban land (Stallworthy  2002 ; Brachman  2004 ; Wheeler 
 2007  )  and calls for land-use control in both built-up areas and in the peripheral zones 
to help preserve farm land, ecological habitats and open spaces near cities, emphasis-
ing that the relations between people and the land should be altered. This type of 
individual calls for principles and many others and measures should be backed with 
clear ethical framework based upon the value systems not only socially constructed 
but also values that re ﬂ ect more than normative concerns. 
 This shift is obviously not easy, in a period where market forces are the  determining 
factors in urban change and transformation in a world of diversity and contested truths. 

33
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
However, thinking of resilience of the urban systems and increasing evidence and 
problems on the planning based upon short-sighted visions and normative indicate 
that the importance of technocratic premises and universal values built upon the tech-
nical and scienti ﬁ c knowledge. The resilience planning paradigm proposed in this 
chapter suggests the need for a consensus on certain principles and values at the global 
level, which can be over the power struggles at different levels of governance.  
 2.5  Concluding Remarks 
 This chapter offers a summary of thoughts on a new planning paradigm to be based 
upon resilience thinking . The key principles at the heart of resilience planning are 
introduced, highlighting a need for a radical shift in existing planning practice and 
de ﬁ nitely a new perspective. 
 How can these principles be formulated with respect to global economic  relations? 
There are different perspectives providing different answers to this question, such as 
“greater intra-regional closure of the economy and greater self-reliance”, as Hudson 
 ( 2009 : 17) has suggested, or “relying on endogenous capacities”, as claimed by 
Simmie and Martin  ( 2010 : 45–58). However, how far it is possible to “create more 
self-contained regional economies, while securing successful transition to ecologi-
cally sustainable and socially just forms of regional organisation, economy and 
society ” (Hudson  2009 : 17) is still an important question. 
 Although the above proposals can be evaluated as re ﬂ ecting a radical  perspective, 
there is no doubt that resilience planning necessitates an approach that begins with 
ethical considerations, which should be more than a mere discourse on the “com-
mon good” (Purcell  2009 : 153). Besides advocating equity, empowerment and envi-
ronmentally sensitive economic development, there is need to encourage a new 
ethics that is based upon the responsibility of everyone to protect him/herself, with 
the right to protest those who do not comply with the basic ethical standards (Hudson 
 2009 : 19), which is a crucial factor in the way urban land and urban services, includ-
ing ecosystem services, are used or provided. 
 Moreover, building a value system is very important if antagonism and  hegemony 
of power on urban systems is to be reduced. If there is no value system de ﬁ ning the 
expectations for the future, then every agreement will silence some and not others, 
and every decision will favour some over others (Hillier  2002 ; McGuirk  2001 ; 
Tewdwr-Jones and Allmendinger  1998 ; Purcell  2009 ) . As discussed earlier, without 
value systems , consensus or agreement stabilises power (Mouffe  2000 : 104), which 
may have very negative consequences in the long term for different resources and 
the way urban areas are used. 
 While mainstream planning theory has focused on the procedural side of 
 planning, recent problems and external developments on the substantive side are 
increasingly pushing the profession in new directions and demanding responses. It is 
claimed that planning practice should be clear about not only the processes but also 
the substance if resilient cities are to be created. Moreover, planning practice has to 

34
A. Eraydin
 ﬁ nd a balance between the rights and responsibilities of the different actors in order 
to create resilient cities for the future. Each actor, especially planners, has to con-
front their key priorities, beliefs and value systems carefully. 
 In this integrative framework, while a planning process that follows  communicative 
rationality is to be used in shaping the planning process, the methods de ﬁ ned within 
the context of instrumental decision making can be used to de ﬁ ne baselines or 
remove red tape so as to achieve no-regret conditions in the long term. The issues 
de ﬁ ned in the chapter necessitate a radical change in the approach to planning and 
in the principles not based upon problem solving or consensus building. The key 
task is to de ﬁ ne the musts and the main attribute s that the urban system has to 
achieve, which may be dif ﬁ cult, but is certainly not impossible. 
 References 
    Albrechts, L. (2006). Bridge the gap: From spatial planning to strategic projects.  European 
Planning Studies, 14 (10), 1487–1500. 
 Albrechts, L. (2010). More of the same is not enough! How could strategic spatial planning be 
instrumental in dealing with the challenges ahead?  Environment and Planning B: Planning and 
Design, 37 (6), 1115–1127. 
 Alexander, E. R. (2000). Rationality revisited: Planning paradigms in a post-modernist perspec-
tive.  Journal of Planning Education and Research, 19 (3), 242–256. 
    Alexander, E. R. (2006). Evaluations and rationalities: Reasoning with values in planning. In 
E. R. Alexander (Ed.),  Evaluation in planning: Evolution and prospects (pp. 39–52). 
Aldershot: Ashgate.  
 Alexander, E. R. (2008). Between state and market: A third way of planning.  International 
Planning Studies, 13 (2), 119–132. 
 Begg, I. (1999). Cities and competitiveness.  Urban Studies, 36 (5–6), 795–809. 
 Boddy, M. (2002). Linking competitiveness and cohesion. In I. Begg (Ed.),  Urban competitive-
ness: Policies for dynamic cities (pp. 33–54). Bristol: Policy Press. 
 Boddy, M., & Parkinson, M. (Eds.). (2004).  City matters . Bristol: Policy Press. 
    Bowman, A. O. M., & Pagano, M. A. (2004).  Terra incognita: Vacant land and urban strategies . 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
 Brachman, L. (2004). Turning brown ﬁ elds into community assets: Barriers to redevelopment. In 
R. Greenstein & Y. Sungu-Eryilmaz (Eds.),  Recycling the city: The use and reuse of urban land 
(pp. 67–88). Cambridge: Lincoln Institute for Land Policy. 
 Breheny, M. (1997). Urban compaction: Feasible and acceptable.  Cities, 14 (4), 209–217. 
 Brenner, N. (2006). Global cities, ‘Glocal states’: Global city formation and state territorial 
restructuring in contemporary Europe. In N. Brenner & R. Keil (Eds.),  The global cities 
reader (pp. 259–267). Oxon: Routledge.  
 Buck, N., Gordon, I., Hall, P., et al. (2002).  Working capital: Life and labour in contemporary 
London . London: Routledge. 
 Camagni, R. (2002). Territorial competitiveness, globalisation and local milieux.  European Spatial 
Research and Policy, 9 (2), 63–90. 
 Campbell, H. (2012). Planning ethics and rediscovering the idea of planning.  Planning Theory , 
doi:10.1177/1473095212442159. 
 Castells, M. (1977).  The urban question . London: Arnold. 
 Castells, M. (1983).  The city and the grassroots . London: Arnold. 
 Christopherson, S., Michie, J., & Tyler, P. (2010). Regional resilience: Theoretical and empirical 
perspectives.  Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3 (1), 3–10. 

35
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
 Davidoff, P. (1965). Advocacy and pluralism in planning.  Journal of the American Institute of 
Planners, 31 (4), 331–338. 
 Deas, I., & Giordano, B. (2001). Conceptualising and measuring urban competitiveness in major 
English cities: An exploratory approach.  Environment and Planning A, 33 (8), 1411–1429. 
 Delladetsima, P. M. (2006). The emerging property development pattern in Greece and impacts on 
spatial development.  European Urban and Regional Studies, 13 (3), 245–278. 
 Dixon, T., Raco, M., Catney, P., & Lerner, D. N. (Eds.). (2007).  Sustainable brown ﬁ eld regenera-
tion: Liveable places from problem spaces . Oxford/Malden/Carlton: Blackwell Publishing. 
 Edwards, M. (2002). Wealth creation and poverty creation: Global-local interactions in the econ-
omy of London.  City, 6 (1), 25–42. 
 Eisenschitz, A., & Gough, J. (1993).  The politics of local economic policy: The problems and pos-
sibilities of local initiative . London: Macmillan. 
 Enemark, S. (2004, October 26–27). Integrated land-use management for sustainable develop-
ment. In  Proceedings of Special Forum on Building Land Information Policies in the Americas 
2004, Aguascalientes. 
 Ewing, R. (1997). Is Los Angeles-style sprawl desirable?  Journal of the American Planning 
Association, 63 (1), 107–126. 
 Fainstein, S. S. (2000). New directions in planning theory.  Urban Affairs Review, 35 (4), 451–478. 
   Fainstein, S. S. (2001).  Competitiveness, cohesion and governance: A review of the literature . New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University.   http://cwis.livjm.ac.uk/cities/conference/sf.pdf  . Accessed 12 
Apr 2006. 
 Fainstein, S. S. (2005). Planning theory and the city.  Journal of Planning Education and Research, 
25 (2), 121–130. 
 Faludi, A. (1987).  A decision-centred view of environmental planning . Oxford: Pergamon. 
 Flyvbjerg, B. (1998).  Rationality and power: Democracy in practice . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
 Forester, J. (1999). Dealing with deep value differences. In L. Susskind, S. McKearnan, & J. Thomas-
Larmer (Eds.),  The consensus building handbook (pp. 463–493). Thousand Oaks: Sage.  
 Friedmann, J. (2008). The uses of planning theory: A bibliographic essay.  Journal of Planning 
Education and Research, 28 (2), 247–257. 
 Gordon, I. (2005, October 13–14). Labour market integration to enhance social cohesion. In OECD 
International Conference “Sustainable cities: Linking competitiveness with social cohesion,” 
2005, Montreal. 
 Greenstein, R., & Sungu-Eryilmaz, Y. (Eds.). (2004).  Recycling the city: The use and reuse of 
urban land . Cambridge: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. 
 Gunton, T. I., Peter, T., & Day, J. C. (2006). Evaluating collaborative planning: A case study of a 
land and resource management planning process.  Environments, 34 (3), 5–12. 
 Habermas, J. (1990).  Moral consciousness and communicative action . Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 Habermas, J. (1993).  Justi ﬁ cation and application: Remarks on discourse ethics . Cambridge: MIT 
Press. 
 Habermas, J. (2001).  On the pragmatics of social interaction . Boston: MIT Press. 
 Harris, N. (2002). Collaborative planning. In P. Allmendinger & M. Tewdwr-Jones (Eds.),  Planning 
futures: New directions for planning theory (pp. 21–43). London: Routledge. 
 Harvey, D. (2005).  A brief history of neoliberalism . Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Healey, P. (1997).  Collaborative planning: Shaping places in fragmented societies . London: 
Macmillan. 
 Healey, P. (2003) Collaborative planning in perspective.  Planning Theory, 2 (2), 101–123. 
 Heylighen, F. (2002).  The science of self-organization and adaptivity . Belgium: Free University of 
Brussels, Center “Leo Apostel”. 
 Hillier, J. (2002). Direct action and agonism in democratic planning practice. In P. Allmendinger & 
M. Tewdwr-Jones (Eds.),  Planning futures: New directions for planning theory (pp. 110–135). 
New York: Routledge.  
 Hillier, J. (2003). ‘Agon’izing over consensus: Why Habermasian ideals cannot be ‘real’.  Planning 
Theory, 2 (1), 37–59.  

36
A. Eraydin
 Holling, C. S. (1992). Cross-scale morphology, geometry and dynamics of ecosystems.  Ecological 
Monographs, 62 (4), 447–502. 
 Hudson, R. (2009). Resilient regions in an uncertain world: Wishful thinking or a practical reality? 
 Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3 (1), 11–25. 
 Huggins, R. (2003). Creating a UK competitiveness index: Regional and local benchmarking, 
debates and surveys.  Regional Studies, 37 (1), 89–96. 
 Innes, J. E. (1995). Planning theory’s emerging paradigm: Communicative action and interactive 
practice.  Journal of Planning Education and Research, 14 (3), 183–189. 
 Innes, J. E., & Booher, D. E. (2010).  Planning with complexity: An introduction to collaborative 
rationality for public policy . Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Jager, J. (2003). Urban land rent theory.  International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 
27 (2), 233–249. 
 Jessop, B. (1993). Towards a Schumpeterian workfare state? Preliminary remarks on post-fordist 
political economy.  Studies in Political Economy, 40 (1), 7–40. 
 Kresl, P. K. (1995). The determinants of urban competitiveness: A survey. In G. Gappert & P. K. 
Kresl (Eds.),  North American cities and the global economy (pp. 45–68). Thousand Oaks: Sage. 
 Krugman, P. (1996). Making sense of the competitiveness debate.  Oxford Review of Economic 
Policy, 12 (1), 17–25. 
 Leitner, H., Sheppard, E. S., Sziarto, K., & Maringanyi, A. (2007). Contesting urban futures: 
Decentering neoliberalism. In H. Leitner, J. Peck, & E. S. Sheppard (Eds.),  Contesting neolib-
eralism: Urban frontiers (pp. 1–26). New York: The Guilford Press. 
 Lever, W. F., & Turok, I. (1999). Competitive cities: Introduction to the review issue.  Urban 
Studies, 36 (5–6), 791–793. 
 Ligmann-Zielinska, A., Church, R., & Jankowski, P. (2008). Spatial optimization as a generative 
technique for sustainable multiobjective land-use allocation.  International Journal of 
Geographical Information Science, 22 (6), 601–622. 
 Ludwig, D., Walker, B., & Holling, C. S. (1997). Sustainability, stability, and resilience. 
 Conservation Ecology [Online] Url:   http://www.consecol.org/vol1/iss1/art7/  . (Accessed Date) 
 Malecki, E. J. (2002). Hard and soft networks for urban competitiveness.  Urban Studies, 39 (5–6), 
929–945. 
  Marcuse, P. (1976) Professional ethics and beyond: Values in planning.  Journal of the American 
Institute of Planners, 42 (3), 264–274. 
 McGuirk, P. (2001). Situating communicative planning theory: Context, power, and knowledge. 
 Environment and Planning A, 33 (2), 195–217. 
 Mouffe, C. (1999). Deliberative democracy or agonistic pluralism?  Social Research, 66 (3), 745–758. 
 Mouffe, C. (2000).  The democratic paradox . London: Verso. 
 Murray, D. (2005). A critical analysis of communicative rationality as a theoretical underpinning 
for collaborative approaches to integrated resource and environmental management. 
 Environments Journal,   33 (2), 17–34. 
 Newman, P., & Thornley, A. (1997). Fragmentation and centralisation in the governance of 
London: In ﬂ uencing the urban policy and planning agenda.  Urban Studies, 34 (7), 967–988. 
 Outhwaite, W. (1994).  Habermas: A critical introduction . Cambridge: Polity Press. 
 Peck, J., Theodore, N., & Brenner, N. (2009). Neoliberal urbanism: Models, moments, mutations. 
 SAIS Review, 29 (1), 49–66. 
 Pickett, S. T. A., Cadenasso, M. L., & Grove, J. M. (2004). Resilient cities: Meaning, models, and 
metaphor for integrating the ecological, socio-economic and planning realms.  Landscape and 
Urban Planning, 69 (1), 369–384. 
 Porter, M. E. (1990).  The competitive advantage of nations . New York: Free Press. 
 Purcell, M. (2009). Resisting neoliberalization: Communicative planning or counter-hegemonic 
movements?  Planning Theory, 8 (2), 140–165. 
 Raco, M., & Street, E. (2012).  Resilience planning, economic change and the politics of post-
recession development in London and Hong Kong .  URBAN STUDIES,  49 (5), 1065–1087. 
 Salet, W., & Guallini, E. (2006).  Framing strategic urban projects: Learning from current experi-
ences in European urban regions . Oxon: Routledge. 

37
2 “Resilience Thinking” for Planning
    Salet, W., & Majoor, S. (2005). Reshaping the urbanity in Amsterdam region. In W. Salet & S. Majoor 
(Eds.),  Amsterdam Zuidas: European space (pp. 19–24). Rotterdam: 010 Publishers. 
 Shiftel, B. (2000). Planning theory. In R. Palayesed (Ed.),  The national AICP examination prepa-
ration course guidebook (pp. 4–16). Washington: American Institute Certi ﬁ cate Planners. 
 Shutkin, W. (2004). Once upon a brown ﬁ eld: Toward a vision of sustainable development in 
Boston’s South Bay. In R. Greenstein & Y. Sungu-Eryilmaz (Eds.),  Recycling the city: The use 
and reuse of urban land (pp. 219–236). Cambridge: Lincoln Institute for Land Policy. 
 Simmie, J., & Martin, R. (2010). The economic resilience of regions: Towards an evolutionary 
approach.  Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3 (1), 27–43. 
  Stallworthy, M. (2002).  Sustainability, land use and environment: A legal analysis . London/
Sydney: Cavendish Publishing Limited. 
 Storper, M. (1997).  The regional world: Territorial development in a global economy . New York: 
Guilford Press. 
 Susskind, L., & Cruikshank, J. (1987).  Breaking the impasse: Consensual approaches to resolving 
public disputes . New York: Basic Books. 
 Susskind, L., McKearnen, S., & Thomas-Lamar, J. (Eds.). (1999).  The consensus building handbook: 
A comprehensive guide to reaching agreement . Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 Swyngedouw, E., Moulaert, F., & Rodriguez, A. (2002). Neoliberal urbanization in Europe: 
Large-scale urban development projects and the new urban policy.  Antipode, 34 (3), 542–575. 
 Taşan-Kok, T. (2008). Urban regeneration via large-scale public-led strategic projects: Complex 
but necessary? In M. Sitar (Ed.),  Urban futures (pp. 181–194). Maribor: University of Maribor 
Publications. 
    Tewdwr-Jones, M., & Allmendinger, P. (1998). Deconstructing communicative rationality: A  critique 
of Habermasian collaborative planning.  Environment and Planning A, 30 (11), 1975–1989.  
 Thornton, G., Franz, M., Edwards, D., Pahlen, G., & Nathanail, P. (2007). The challenge of sustain-
ability: Incentives for brown ﬁ eld regeneration in Europe.  Environmental Science and Policy, 
 10 (2), 116–134.  
 Turok, I. (2004). Cities, regions and competitiveness.  Regional Studies, 38 (9), 1069–1093. 
 Turok, I. (2005, October 13–14).  Social cohesion as a factor of competitiveness and regional 
growth . In OECD International Conference “Sustainable Cities: Linking Competitiveness with 
Social Cohesion”, Montreal. 
 UNCED. (1993).  Earth summit and Agenda 21: The UN program of action from Rio . New York: 
United Nations. 
 Walker, B., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R., & Kinzig, A. P. (2004). Resilience, adaptability and 
transformability in social–ecological systems.  Ecology and Society ,  9 (2), 5. [Online] URL: 
  http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/  
 Walker, B., Salt, D., & Reid, W. (2006).  Resilience thinking: Sustaining ecosystems and people in 
a changing world . Washington, DC: Island Press. 
 Webster, C. J. (2002). Property rights and the public realm: Gates, green-belts and Gemeinshaft. 
 Environment and Planning B, 29 (3), 397–412. 
 Wheeler, S. (2007). Planning sustainable and liveable cities. In R. T. LeGates & F. Stout (Eds.), 
 The city reader (pp. 499–509). New York: Routledge. 
 World Bank. (2011).  World Bank Development report 2011: Con ﬂ ict, security and development. 
New York: World Bank.  
 Yeh, G. A., & Li, X. (Eds.). (2002). Decision support for sustainable land development: A case study 
in Dongguan. In G. E. Kersten, Z. Mikolajuk & A. G. Yeh (Eds.),  Decision support systems for 
sustainable development: A resource book of method and applications . Dordrecht: Springer.  
 Young, I. (1996). Communication and the other: Beyond deliberative democracy. In S. Benhabib 
(Ed.),  Democracy and difference (pp. 120–136). Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
  Young, I. (1999). Difference as a resource for democratic communication. In J. Bohman & W. Rehg 
(Eds.),  Deliberative democracy  (pp. 383–406). Boston: MIT Press.  

39
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_3, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 3.1  Introduction 
 This chapter explores the historical roots of the concept of resilience in the context of 
urban planning. The simplest de ﬁ nition of resilience in this case is the capacity of a 
system to undergo change and still retain its basic function and  structure after facing 
an external disturbance. This basic de ﬁ nition has its roots in applied sciences. In 
engineering, for instance, resilience refers to the capacity of a structure to withstand 
an impact without being  permanently deformed (Callister  2000 ) while, in ecology , 
resilience is de ﬁ ned as the amount of disturbance that an ecosystem can withstand 
without changing its self-organised processes and structures (Holling  1973 ) . 
Resilience has been used in wide range of areas, such as ecology, environmental and 
social sustainability   , environmental sciences, hazard    planning, ecosystem manage-
ment, and even in supply chain risk research. 
 T.  Taşan-Kok (*) •  D.  Stead  
 OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft University 
of Technology ,  Jaffalaan 9 ,  2628 BX  Delft ,  The Netherlands 
e-mail:  m.t.tasan-kok@tudelft.nl ;  d.stead@tudelft.nl 
 P.  Lu 
 Faculty of Architecture ,  Delft University of Technology ,
 2628 BL  Delft ,  The Netherlands 
e-mail:  peiwen.lu@tudelft.nl 
 Chapter 3 
 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History 
and Context 
 Tuna  Taşan -Kok ,  Dominic  Stead, and  Peiwen  Lu  

40
T. Taşan-Kok et al.
 Using the concept of resilience, some scholars have highlighted the  characteristics 
of resilient systems as being able to cope with external shocks and surprises 
(e.g. Folke et al.  2002 ) . The resilience of some systems it is argued, increases when 
a disturbance is experienced over and over again. Each time a system faces a 
 disturbance, it gains more resistance and functions better when facing further distur-
bances. Thus, resilience is not just concerned with preventing disturbances: it is also 
concerned with adaptation to change. In the literature, emphasis has often been on 
preparation for and effective action after a disturbance occurs. However, urban land 
use planning is traditionally more concerned with taking action to minimise distur-
bances (e.g. avoiding “bad neighbour” nuisances through the separation of certain 
land uses; implementing planning policies that minimise energy consumption and 
CO 2 emissions) and reducing the risks and negative effects of any possible distur-
bances (e.g. locating developments away from ecologically sensitive areas or areas 
liable to  ﬂ ooding). Resilience thinking, in this regard, seems to be extending the 
remit of planning to include activities after disturbances (e.g. coping/dealing with 
change once a disturbance has occurred). The most basic idea is to accept the fact 
that changes will take place, and while trying to reduce the risks, urban systems 
should be prepared to absorb those changes, reorganise themselves, and develop 
new adaptive strategies to manage and cope with the change while sustaining their 
main functions. 
 In doing this, bene ﬁ t may be drawn from the resilience approach in urban 
 planning through a shift in policies, from those that aspire to  control  the change, to 
those that increase the  capacity of the system to cope with, adapt to, and shape 
change. Following the theoretical elaboration of resilience thinking for urban plan-
ning in Chap.   2 , this chapter provides an overview of how the concept has developed 
and how its ongoing evolution may change the context of spatial planning. A further 
elaboration of the concept of resilience with respect to spatial dynamics is intro-
duced in Chap.   4 . 
 3.2  Framing Resilience: Evolution of Resilience, 
from Ecological Sciences to Urban Planning 
 De ﬁ nitions of the concept of resilience have undergone considerable  amendment 
in recent years after becoming integrated into social sciences and planning 
 literature following a four-stage path. First, resilience appeared as an  ecological 
concept in the literature. Second,  system resilience emerged as a concept in 
social sciences. Third, the  resilience of  cities as urban (ecological, social, and 
economic) systems came under scrutiny. In this  ﬁ eld, a wide body of literature 
on social, economic, and ecological resilience of urban systems accumulated. 
Fourth, urban planning literature began to seek  principles  for  resilient  cities , 
with a shift in emphasis from coping with environmental hazards    towards a 
more comprehensive approach that looks at the resilience of the urban system as 
a whole. 

41
3 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History…
 3.2.1  Entry Points of Resilience in Ecology 
 Resilience has a variety of disciplinary origins, with references found in the  ﬁ elds 
of biology and ecology, business studies, engineering and materials science, and 
psychology (see, e.g. Gunderson  2000 ; Holling  1973 ; Hyslop  2007 ) . In terms of 
ecological stability theory, the concept of resilience was used for studying the inter-
acting populations and their functional responses (Holling  1973 ; Folke  2006 ) . 
Holling  ( 1973 : 33) took resilience as “the system to absorb the disturbances between 
ef ﬁ ciency and persistence, constancy and change, predictability and unpredictabil-
ity, in order to keep equilibrium continuously”. Pimm  ( 1984 ) highlighted resilience 
as a measure of the “speed of return”, which was developed later by Holling  ( 1996 ) 
into “engineering resilience” (Pimm  1991 ; Ludwig et al.  1997 ) . Resilience  ﬁ nds its 
most precise meaning in physics and material sciences (Shaikh and Kauppi  2010 ; 
Tarter and Vanyukov  1999 ) , in which it refers to the elasticity of materials. A resil-
ient material is able to resume its original shape or position after being bent, stretched 
or compressed (Callister  2000 ) . As a material deforms past its yield point, plastic 
deformations will result. The yield point marks the transition from essentially elas-
tic behaviour to plastic behaviour. After passing the yield point, the process is not 
reversible. Resilience means, thus, the capacity of a structure to withstand an impact 
load without being permanently deformed. In each applied scienti ﬁ c  ﬁ eld, resilience 
refers to a similar characteristic of a physical property (of a material, surface, struc-
ture, or system) that can return to its original shape or position after an impact that 
causes deformation before exceeding its elastic limit (Callister  2000 ) . With this 
simple principle in mind, a number of social scientists have begun to use the term 
resilience in studies of self-organising systems (whether a person, society, or eco-
logical system , like a forest or a city) and their ability to withstand impacts (like a 
disaster , crisis, trauma, hazard , or threat) without being permanently deformed. 
 3.2.2  Entry Points of Resilience in Social Systems 
 Timmerman  ( 1981 ) was one of the  ﬁ rst authors to make the link between the 
 resilience of society and climate change . Resilience, from this point of view, is 
de ﬁ ned as “the capacity of the system to absorb disturbance” (Wardekker et al.  2010 
refer to this as the ability tolerate disturbance) and reorganise while retaining the 
same function, structure, identity, and feedbacks (Walker et al.  2004 ) . Thus, the 
system is impacted but is able to reorganise and reform. 
 Across the many de ﬁ nitions, however, system resilience is commonly  understood 
to entail both robustness or strength (i.e. the ability to withstand external shocks) 
and rapidity or  ﬂ exibility , in response (i.e. the ability to bounce back). External 
shocks are usually de ﬁ ned as “disturbances” and are usually associated with haz-
ards, disaster s, or threats in literature. Pelling  ( 2003 ) , based on Mitchel  ( 2001 ) , 
clari ﬁ es that hazards, as human ecological interactions, can generate  disasters. 
Hazards may harm individuals or human systems and can be everyday (e.g. scarcity 

42
T. Taşan-Kok et al.
of clean drinking water) or episodic (e.g. volcanic eruption). Disaster , as de ﬁ ned by 
Pelling  ( 2003 ) , is a state of disruption to systemic functions. In this respect, eco-
nomic or political crises can also be considered as disasters. Coaffee et al.  ( 2009 ) 
de ﬁ ne such disturbance factors as a “push for resilience”, which exists as a response 
to “existential and material vulnerability , insecurity , and change”. Moreover, risk is 
another factor that plays an important role in de ﬁ ning the resilience of a system. 
Although risks are mainly associated with environmental disasters and natural haz-
ards (earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes, etc.), for urban systems , it is political, 
social, and economic disturbances ( ﬁ nancial crises , political turbulence, or public 
unrest) that can be the main source of risks and vulnerabilities. For this reason, 
economic and social resilience has also appeared as an important dimension in the 
sustainability of cities. Social resilience is about building institutions for social reor-
ganisation and collective action, robust governance    systems, and a diversity    of live-
lihood choices (Adger et al.  2005 ) ; while economic resilience is connected to coping 
with the slow and radical changes induced by the interaction of endogenous and 
exogenous  economic and other related processes. 
 The increase in the number of disasters has enhanced the necessity of resilience 
in social studies. Ecologists also adopted studies of resilience in relation to social 
and economic development. Walker and Salt  ( 2006 ) generated the concept of resil-
ience to understand social-ecological systems following two approaches: the ability 
to cross the threshold and move into a different regime; and the metaphor of  adaptive 
cycles. The former argues that social-ecological systems would cross a threshold 
and move into a different regime (Holling  2001 ; Walker et al.  2004 ; Folke  2006 ; 
Gunderson  2000 ) , while the concept of adaptive cycles highlights that stable states 
would move variously according to the phase in which the system lies (Folke et al. 
 2004 ; Folke  2006 ; Walker and Salt  2006 ) . In a large number of empirical studies on 
ecology , scholars argue that human societies today are “vulnerable” because they 
are too concentrated with managing the “fore loop” while neglecting to prepare the 
“back loop” for once it crosses the thresholds. 
 Tobin  ( 1999 : 13) de ﬁ nes sustainable, resilient communities as “societies which 
are structurally organised to minimise the effects of disasters, and, at the same 
time, have the ability to recover quickly by restoring the socio-economic vitality of 
the community”. Vayda and McCay  (1975)  argue that culture would be seen as an 
equilibrium-based system. Subsequently, Lamson  ( 1986 ) argued that coastal set-
tlements in Canada, though small, were able to recover from disasters, while many 
planned communities, with modern infrastructure   s and large populations, were not 
self-suf ﬁ cient once a disaster occurs. Zimmerer  ( 1994  )  highlights that the concept 
of resilience (known as “the new ecology ”) has been deployed in human geography 
studies to de ﬁ ne the carrying relations of capacity, diversity   , and stability in human 
societies. In general, socioeconomic studies have adopted the concept of resilience 
mainly for cultural anthropology and environmental psychology   . From this 
 perspective, the main principle of a robust social system is seen as the capacity of 
society to rapidly recover from disasters. It is argued that “the longer it takes a 
community to ‘bounce forward’ after a natural or man-made hazard   , the greater the 
risk of damage to the social fabric that holds a community or organisation together” 

43
3 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History…
(Sapirstein  2006 : 2). For this reason, some characteristics of urban communities, 
like social consensus and social capital building   , which would help society to 
 rapidly  recuperate, are important. Linking particular forms of social capital to 
adaptive capacity in the case of dealing with risks of climate change, Adger  ( 2003 : 
388) argues that inherent capacities of societies are bound up in their ability to act 
collectively. As also elaborated in Chap.   5    , loss of collective action may increase 
the vulnerability in cities and thus may be a thread for system resilience.  
 3.2.3  Entry Points of Resilience in Urban Systems 
 A resilient system, according to Hudson  ( 2010 : 12), can be described as “an  adaptive 
system that adjusts and responds in ways that do not damage or jeopardise effective 
functioning, remaining on an existing developmental trajectory or making the tran-
sition to a new one”. Wardekker et al.  ( 2010 : 988) argued that resilient systems “can 
tolerate disturbances (events and trends) through characteristics or measures that 
limit their impacts, by reducing or counteracting damage and disruption, and allow 
the system to respond, recover, and adapt quickly to such disturbances”. Just as 
there are many general de ﬁ nitions of  system resilience (e.g. ecosystems,  individuals, 
organisations or materials), there are also various de ﬁ nitions of  urban resilience . 
Alberti et al.  ( 2003 : 1170) provide one such de ﬁ nition, describing resilience in cities 
(which might also be considered as urban resilience) as “the degree to which cities 
are able to tolerate alteration before reorganising around a new set of structures and 
processes”. In common with the general de ﬁ nitions of system resilience (illustrated 
above), this de ﬁ nition seems to contain references both to robustness (or strength ) 
and the rapidity of response to disruption. In Alberti et al.’s de ﬁ nition, tolerance to 
alteration refers primarily to the robustness of the city to cope with a shock, while 
reorganisation refers to the rapidity of response (and adaptation). 
 According to Godschalk  ( 2003 : 136), a resilient city is “capable of withstanding 
severe shock without either immediate chaos or permanent harm”. This view clearly 
places more emphasis on the robustness of the city (and the mitigation of hazards) 
rather than the rapidity of response (and mitigation). Nevertheless, the reference to 
withstanding “permanent harm” indicates some consideration of the nature and tim-
escale of change. 
 When considering any de ﬁ nition of urban resilience, it is important to  distinguish 
between system equilibrium and resilience, which are not synonymous (as Holling 
was careful to point out in his account of ecological resilience in  1973 ) . A resilient 
system may experience  ﬂ uctuations or changes in conditions or structures, and these 
 ﬂ uctuations or changes may provide the very basis for an urban system’s persistence 
over time (Dudley  2010 ) . In addition, urban resilience does not necessarily concern 
the ability of a system to return to a previous path of equilibrium after disruption or 
stress. Previous equilibrium paths may disappear for any number of reasons after a 
disturbance, and alternative paths may appear, all of which can change the trajectory 
or path of a system (Christopherson et al.  2010 ) . 

44
T. Taşan-Kok et al.
 In common with a number of other policy concepts that have been applied 
to  cities, such as sustainability    or  ﬂ exibility   , urban resilience can be regarded 
as a  guiding principle rather than an end state. Arguing that cities are complex 
social ecological system s that are constantly undergoing change and evolution, 
Gleeson  ( 2008 ) contends that urban resilience provides a way of conceptualising 
and guiding this urban change and evolution. In his opinion, there is no single 
optimal state or de ﬁ nitive blueprint of urban resilience: the structure or form of 
a resilient city is a function of its particular path of evolution and its own capacity 
for adaptation. For Hudson  ( 2010 ) , the concept of resilience has found its way 
into policy literature as a normative goal of environment al management and a 
key component of sustainable development. While the term resilience is some-
times used interchangeably with sustainability, and they may be closely related 
in practice, they are arguably semantically and theoretically quite distinct 
(Dudley  2010 ) . 
 The growth in interest in the concept of resilience is considered by some to be 
a response to a contemporary sense of complexity , uncertainty and insecurity , 
and a search for formulas for adaptation and survival (see Christopherson et al. 
 2010 ) . In this respect, the fashionable use of the concept may originate both from 
an increased sense of risk (economic and political as well as environmental) and 
from the perception that processes associated with globalisation have made 
places and regions more permeable to the effects of what were once thought to 
be external processes.  
 3.2.4  Entry Points of Resilience in Urban Planning 
 In relation to spatial planning, resilient thinking was initially adopted to create “a 
place with resilience” at a local level in the late 1990s. Resilient communities meant 
to be compatible with diverse value systems , have a high adaptive ability, and be 
able to adjust  ﬂ exibly in social and institutional networks once disasters occurred 
(Tobin  1999 ; Mileti  1999 ) . Compared with relevant concepts like landscape ecology 
and socioeconomic coherence, resilient communities were expected to detract from 
the vulnerability and recover from disasters within a short period of time. In other 
words, they would be stronger and more variable than non-resilient ones in dealing 
with disasters in many aspects. 
 It is widely acknowledged that spatial planning has an important role in  promoting 
urban resilience (see, e.g. Fleischhauer  2008 ; Gleeson  2008 ; Davoudi  2012 ) . This 
interest has stemmed from different standpoints. First, there is widespread recogni-
tion that the spatial con ﬁ guration of cities and towns, and the way in which land is 
used and developed, has signi ﬁ cant implications for both adaptation to the adverse 
impacts of climate change and the reduction of emissions that cause the change 
(i.e. mitigation). There is no consensus on this ecological perspective and whether 
planning should be concerned with adaptation, mitigation, or both, as different 
views can be found. 

45
3 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History…
 Some argue that mitigation is the principle task in planning. Fleischhauer 
 (  2008  ) , for example, asserts that the most important role of planning is in 
 mitigation –  preventing and reducing damage to people, property, and resources 
before a disaster    occurs. McEvoy et al.  (  2006  )  identify two key planning strate-
gies for climate mitigation: (1) reducing the amount of energy required by end 
users (e.g. by improving the energy ef ﬁ ciency    of buildings and transport     systems) 
and (2) reducing the carbon intensity of the energy supplied (e.g. by increasing 
the use of alternative fuels). 
 Others argue that the key role for urban planning is in promoting adaptation. De 
Vries  ( 2006 : 225), for example, contends that “while spatial planning has  something 
to contribute to the mitigation of climate change   , the main challenge for planning is 
to help prepare for the impacts of climate change” (i.e. adaptation). Similarly, 
Gleeson  ( 2008 : 2653) argues that “new urban scienti ﬁ c evidence suggests that 
 planning’s principal role in the  ﬁ ght against warming will be one of adaptation not 
mitigation”. Biesbroek et al.  ( 2009 : 234) primarily see “a prominent role for spatial 
planning in adaptive measures, such as water management”. 
 What is clear is that efforts of adaptation and mitigation are not necessarily 
 integrated or complementary, as they do not always work in the same direction. For 
example, policies for high-density mixed-use settlements (compact cities) have 
been developed across much of Europe (see, e.g. Williams  1999 ) . Although urban 
consolidation can reduce energy demand and transport emissions, it can also be in 
con ﬂ ict with the adaptation agenda by intensifying the urban heat island effect and 
posing problems for urban drainage (McEvoy et al.  2006 ; Boyko and Cooper  2011 ) . 
Furthermore, cities that are poorly designed for hotter conditions and that inhibit 
natural indoor and outdoor ventilation (e.g. due to insuf ﬁ cient space between 
 buildings) are likely to lead to a high demand for cooling and air-conditioning with 
additional impacts on climate change . There may also be indirect effects as a result 
of people escaping the uncomfortable conditions of the city, leading to increased 
transport emissions (McEvoy et al.  2006 ) . 
 Second, the engineering interpretation of resilience leads to the study of 
 disturbance events, and spatial heterogeneity comes subsequently as the  development 
of the theory of complex adaptive system within the context of urban settlements. 
In contrast, resilient studies were proposed under the complex contexts of renewal, 
regeneration, and reorganisation following disturbances. Because the system may 
look similar, but in fact is no longer the same, resilience studies began to focus on 
“regimes” and “attractors” rather than “stable states” or “equilibrium”, giving a 
sense of excluding dynamics (Folke  2006 ) . 
 The third perspective, which is rather new, tries to answer how the concept of 
resilience might bene ﬁ t urban research on the ground and how urban planning 
scholars, practitioners, and policymakers may integrate a perspective that 
 presupposes uncertainty , heterogeneity, and collective entanglement. As discussed in 
Chap.   2 , this new approach aims to develop answers to theoretical  problems, ongo-
ing environment al and ecological concerns, the changing urban built environment , 
evolving socioeconomic regimes, and the interplay of political ideologies, among 
various other things. 

46
T. Taşan-Kok et al.
 3.3  Attributes and Characteristics of Resilience: De ﬁ ning 
and Measuring the Capacity of Urban Systems 
 Social scientists have become interested in understanding the characteristics of the 
“process of preparing the system” for unexpected events so that the system can still 
function after a disruptive event without losing its main characteristics. Resilient 
systems aim to build capacity to deal with change and vulnerabilities to different 
types of disturbances, whether they are environmental, ecological, social, economic, 
or related to governance . Like Godschalk  ( 2003 ) , other scholars (Klein et al.  2003 ; 
Walker and Salt  2006 ) have also attempted to apply certain principles and charac-
teristics of resilient ecosystems to spatial and social systems in attempting to de ﬁ ne 
the measurable characteristics of resilient cities and the capacity of urban systems . 
In de ﬁ ning attributes , the term is quanti ﬁ ed by researchers as being able to tackle 
the capacity of urban systems . According to Godschalk  ( 2003 ) , these attributes 
include  redundancy ,  diversity ,  ef ﬁ ciency ,  autonomy ,  strength ,  interdependence , 
 adaptability , and  collaboration , and a resilient city is expected to be able to adapt to 
uncertainty in terms of the required combinations of these attributes (Godschalk 
 2003 ; Fleischhauer  2008 ) . Walker and Salt  ( 2006 ) refer to these characteristics as 
“qualities” and add to them a social dimension. In their opinion, some of the main 
qualities include diversity, ecological variability, modularity, acknowledging slow 
variables, tight feedbacks, social capital, innovation, overlap in governance , and 
ecosystem services. 
 The cases presented in this book (see Chaps.   9–13 ) illustrate that some of these 
qualities can actually increase the resilience of cities to diverse vulnerabilities. 
These qualities include recovery , connectivity, capital building, adaptability , robustness, 
 ﬂ exibility , and transformability . 
 Recovery is simply de ﬁ ned as the ability of the system to recover from a 
 disturbance (see Chaps.   10 and   11 ) and refers to the ability of a system to respond 
to an event. In an ever-changing environment, a system must change in response to 
that environment in order to retain its advantage (Dalziell and McManus  2004 ) . 
 Connectivity is the degree to which the nodes of a network are directly linked 
with each other (see Chaps.   10 and   12 ). In terms of resilience, connectivity embraces 
more than just the physical dimension, as it includes also the relationships between 
people and organisations. There are different opinions on the resilience of highly 
connected systems. Some authors argue that connectivity eases communication 
between systems as it ensures the exchange of information, capital, and goods 
(Cumming et al.  2005 ) , while others claim that isolated systems may be more 
 protected against epidemic catastrophes, economic shocks, and other systemic risks, 
as their isolation enables the development of local capacity, diversity , and innova-
tion oriented towards daily needs (Cumming et al.  2005 ; Andersson  2006 ) . 
 Social capital refers to the quality and quantity of a society’s social interactions 
that are shaped by institutions, relationships, and societal norms. On the basis of 
trust, norms, and networks, according to Putnam  ( 1993 : 167), collaborative action 
can be facilitated, which will not only result in better economic performance but 

47
3 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History…
also in the creation of civic infrastructure (Warner  2001 ) . Thus, process of  social 
capital  building , (e.g. access to information and communication networks in times 
of dif ﬁ culty), can help the  recovery from socioeconomic or environmental change 
(see Chap.   10 ). Moreover, capital building supports formal and informal processes 
of decision making and public involvement (Warner  2001 ; Potapchuck et al.  1997 ) , 
which can increase the  capacity for social interaction and enhance the capacity of 
society to deal with adversities through the sharing of information when attempting 
to resolve con ﬂ icts and by building a more equitable society. 
 Adaptability is the ability of society in a social-ecological system    to cope and 
respond to novel situations and change without losing options for the future (Folke 
et al.  2002 ) . Thus,  adaptability can increase the rapidity of recovery (see Chaps.   9 , 
  11–13  ). Carpenter et al.  ( 2001  )  explain this as the ability of systems to self-organise, 
learn, and adapt. The “adaptive capacity ” of governance regimes at a local and regional 
level is analysed in Chaps.   12  and   13  . An adaptive governance    system can be achieved 
by equipping actors to deal effectively with sudden shocks, surprises, and risks in such 
a way that after the disaster   , the system can return to its original function and structure 
(Baud and Hordijk  2009 ) . An adaptive system should be  robust and  ﬂ exible . 
 Robustness refers to “the ability to withstand a given level of stress without 
 suffering degradation or loss of function” (MCEER  2005 : 19; McDaniels et al.  2008 : 
312) while  ﬂ exibility is the ability or capacity that an organisation possesses to 
change or react (Golden and Powell  2000 ) . The capacity of an ecological system or 
material to withstand an impact load without being permanently deformed also depends 
on its  ﬂ exibility (i.e. its ability to bounce back). Gunderson  ( 1999 ) argues that the 
adaptive management of a system during and after unexpected events depends on 
the  ﬂ exibility among the stakeholders in the social system. A lack of  ﬂ exibility in 
the management bureaucracy, according to Gunderson  ( 1999 ) ,  challenges the adaptive 
policy implementation process. As with the concept of resilience, both adaptation 
and mitigation are relatively new arrivals to the urban planning agenda, although 
these issues did not appear simultaneously. While mitigation has featured in planning 
for the last two decades (not always explicitly), adaptation has only appeared recently 
and was closely followed by the concept of resilience. Mitigation can primarily 
increase the robustness of the system, while adaptation can increase the rapidity 
of recovery . 
 Transformability refers to “the capacity to learn and create a fundamentally 
new and different socio-ecological system , one that hopefully would possess the 
 attribute s of adaptability and resilience” (Hudson  2010 ) . It is the capacity to 
create a new system when ecological, economic, political, or social conditions 
make the existing system untenable (Walker et al.  2004 ) . Learning capacity is 
an important attribute for the transformation of a system without damaging or 
jeopardising its effective functioning. Hudson  ( 2010 ) calls this a process of 
social learning, through the use of human capacities and knowledge to reduce 
vulnerability and risk in the face of the unknown and unexpected. Thus, systems 
with a high social learning capacity will be more innovative, less vulnerable, 
and resilient (see Chap.   12 ).  

48
T. Taşan-Kok et al.
 3.4  Concluding Remarks: Towards Urban Resilience 
 This chapter has demonstrated that the concept of resilience has been in ﬂ uenced by 
its ecological research base and has been applied in socioeconomic studies such as 
environment al psychology, cultural anthropology, and human geography. In terms 
of empirical studies, the resilient approach is a concept for  coping with new demands 
and uncertainties by “embracing changes”. Urban  resilience began to be addressed 
in spatial planning in the 1990s in the search for solutions of how functions under 
extreme stress in disasters could be maintained in resilient communities and later, 
resilient cities. Urban resilience studies today emphasise the adaptive ability of gov-
ernance  and considers not only the vertical linkages in existing planning systems 
but also the need to strengthen the horizontal networks in order to formalise cities 
to mitigate and adapt to increasing changes (Baud and Hordijk  2009 ) . 
 Resilience is important in cities for two reasons: (1) it accommodates change 
without catastrophic failure; and (2) it allows people to adapt and live in places 
without exposure to uncommon stresses. The theoretical debate of resilience has 
been developed over four decades, while studies of urban resilience in spatial 
 planning have started more recently. Planning today is still looking for strategies to 
strengthen physical and social networks, to not only mitigate but also to be able to 
adapt with  ﬂ exibility . 
 The general concept of resilience and the more speci ﬁ c concept of urban 
 resilience are both becoming increasingly prevalent in academic and policy 
 discourses. This re ﬂ ects an increasing sense of complexity , uncertainty , and insecu-
rity about cities and a desire to identify strategies and new attitudes in planning. 
De ﬁ nitions and interpretations of resilience vary, and the concept needs to be clearly 
addressed with the help of case studies from different cities. It is also  becoming 
increasingly prevalent in urban policy documents across the globe. However, as 
discussed throughout this book, there is no single optimal state or de ﬁ nitive blue-
print for urban resilience, as the structure or form of a resilient city is a function of 
its particular evolutionary path and its own  capacity for  adaptation . 
 References 
 Adger, W. N. (2003). Social capital, collective action, and adaptation to climate change.  Economic 
Geography, 79 (4), 387–404. 
 Adger, W. N., Hughes, T. P., Folke, K., Carpenter, S. R., & Rockström, J. (2005). Social-ecological 
resilience to coastal disasters.  Science, 309 (5737), 1036–1039. 
 Alberti, M., Marzluff, J. M., Shulenberger, E., Bradley, G., Ryan, C., & Zumbrunnen, C. (2003). 
Integrating humans into ecology: Opportunities and challenges for studying urban ecosystems. 
 Bioscience, 53 (12), 1169–1179. 
 Andersson, E. (2006). Urban landscapes and sustainable cities.  Ecology and  Society ,  11 (1), 34. 
[online] URL   http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art34/  
 Baud, I. S. A., & Hordijk, M. A. (2009).  Dealing with risks in urban governance: What can we 
learn from ‘resilience thinking’ . In The 4th International Conference of the International 

49
3 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History…
Forum on Urbanism (IFoU) (The New Urban Question-Urbanism beyond Neoliberalism), 
Amsterdam/Delft.  
 Biesbroek, G. R., Swart, R. J., & van der Knaap, W. G. M. (2009). The mitigation-adaption dichtomy 
and the role of spatial planning.  Habitat International, 33 (3), 230–237.  
 Boyko, C. T., & Cooper, R. (2011). Clarifying and re-conceptualising density.  Progress in Planning, 
76 (1), 1–61. 
 Callister, W. D. (2000).  Materials science and engineering (5th ed.). New York: Wiley. 
 Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Anderies, J. M., & Abel, N. (2001). From metaphor to measurement: 
Resilience of what to what?  Ecosystems, 4 (8), 765–781. 
 Christopherson, S., Michie, J., & Tyler, P. (2010). Regional resilience: Theoretical and empirical 
perspectives.  Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3 (1), 3–10. 
 Coaffee, J., Wood, D. M., & Rogers, P. (Eds.). (2009).  The everyday resilience of the city: How 
cities respond to terrorism and disaster . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Cumming, G. S., Barnes, G., Binford, M., Holt, R. D., Perez, S., Schmink, M., Sieving, K. E., & 
Southworth, J. (2005). An exploratory framework for the empirical measurement of resilience. 
 Ecosystems, 8 (8), 975–987. 
 Dalziell, E., & McManus, S. (2004).  Resilience, vulnerability and adaptive capacity: Implications 
for systems performance, international forum for engineering decision making , Switzerland. 
  http://www.ifed.ethz.ch/events/Forum04/Erica_paper.pdf  . Accessed 18 Nov 2009. 
 Davoudi, S. (2012). Climate risk, resilience and security: New ways of seeing ‘the environment’ in 
the English planning system.  European Planning Studies, 20 (1), 49–69. 
 de Vries, J. (2006). Climate change and spatial planning below sea-level: Water, water and more 
water.  Planning Theory and Practice, 7 (2), 223–227. 
 Dudley, M. (2010). Resilience. In N. Cohen (Ed.),  Green cities: An A to Z guide (pp. 320–321). 
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Fleischhauer, M. (2008). The role of spatial planning in strengthening urban resilience. In H. J. Pasman 
& I. A. Kirillov (Eds.),  Resilience of cities to terrorist and other threats. Learning from 9/11 and 
further research issues (pp. 273–298). Dordrecht: Springer.  
 Folke, C. (2006). Resilience: The emergence of a perspective for social–ecological systems analyses. 
 Global Environmental Change, 16 (3), 253–267.  
   Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L., Holling, C. S., Walker, B., Bengtsson, J. et al. 
(2002).  Resilience and sustainable development: Building adaptive capacity in a world of trans-
formations.  Scienti ﬁ c background paper on resilience for the process of the world summit on 
sustainable development. Stockholm, Environmental Advisory Council to the Swedish 
Government.  Ambio ,  31 (5), 437–440.  
 Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L., & Holling, C. S. 
(2004). Regime shifts, resilience, and biodiversity in ecosystem management.  Annual Review 
of Ecology, Evolution and Sytematics, 35 , 557–581. 
 Gleeson, B. (2008). Critical commentary. Waking from the dream: An Australian perspective on 
urban resilience.  Urban Studies, 45 (13), 2653–2668. 
 Godschalk, D. R. (2003). Urban hazard mitigation: Creating resilient cities.  Natural Hazards 
Review, 4 (3), 136–143. 
 Golden, W., & Powell, P. (2000). Towards a de ﬁ nition of  ﬂ exibility: In search of the holy grail? 
 Omega, 28 (4), 373–384. 
 Gunderson, L. (1999). Resilience,  ﬂ exibility and adaptive management – antidotes for spurious 
 certitude?  Conservation Ecology ,  3 (1), 7. [online] URL:   http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art7/   
 Gunderson, L. H. (2000). Ecological resilience-in theory and application.  Annual Review of 
Ecology and Systematics, 31 , 425–439. 
 Holling, C. S. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems.  Annual Review of Ecology 
and Systematics, 4 , 1–23. 
 Holling, C. S. (1996). Engineering resilience versus ecological resilience. In P. Schulze (Ed.), 
 Engineering within ecological constraints (pp. 31–44). Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press. 

50
T. Taşan-Kok et al.
 Holling, C. S. (2001). Understanding the complexity of economic, ecological, and social systems. 
 Ecosystems, 4 (5), 390–405. 
 Hudson, R. (2010). Resilient regions in an uncertain world: Wishful thinking or a practical reality? 
 Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3 (1), 11–25. 
 Hyslop, M. (2007).  Critical information infrastructures: Resilience and protection . New York: 
Springer. 
 Klein, R. J. T., Nicholls, R. J., & Frank, T. (2003). Resilience to natural hazards: How useful is the 
concept?  Environmental Hazards, 5 (1/2), 35–45. 
 Lamson, C. (1986). Planning for resilient coastal communities: Lessons from ecological systems 
theory.  Coastal Management, 13 , 265–280. 
 Ludwig, D., Walker, B. H., & Holling, C. S. (1997). Sustainability, stability, and resilience. 
 Conservation Ecology ,  1 , 7 [online] URL   http://www.consecol.org/vol1/iss1/art7  
 McDaniels, T., Chang, S., Cole, D., Mikawoz, J., & Longstaff, H. (2008). Fostering resilience to 
extreme events within infrastructure systems: Characterizing decision contexts for mitigation 
and adaptation.  Global Environmental Change, 18 , 310–318. 
 MCEER. (2005).  White paper on the SDR grand challenges for disaster reduction . Buffalo: 
MCEER. 
 McEvoy, D., Lindley, S., & Handley, J. (2006). Adaptation and mitigation in urban areas: Synergies 
and con ﬂ icts.  Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Municipal Engineer, 159 (4), 
185–191. 
 Mileti, D. (1999).  Disasters by design: A reassessment of natural hazards in the United States . 
Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press. 
 Mitchel, J. K. (2001). What’s in a name? Issues of terminology and language in hazards research. 
 Environmental Hazards, 2 , 87–88. 
 Pelling, M. (2003).  The vulnerability of cities . London: James & James Earthscan. 
 Pimm, S. L. (1984, January). The complexity and stability of ecosystems.  Nature, 307 , 321–326. 
 Pimm, S. L. (1991).  The balance of nature? Ecological issues in the conservation of species and 
communities . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Potapchuck, W., Crocker, J., Schechter, W., & Boogaard, D. (1997).  Building community: Exploring 
the role of social capital and local government . Washington, DC: Program for Community 
Problem Solving. 
 Putnam, R. D. (1993).  Making democracy work: Civic traditions in modern Italy . Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Sapirstein, G. (2006).  Social resilience. The forgotten element in disaster reduction .   http://www.
oriconsulting.com/social_resilience.pdf  . Accessed 8 June 2011. 
 Shaikh, A., & Kauppi, C. (2010). Deconstructing resilience: Myriad conceptualizations and inter-
pretations.  International Journal of Arts and Sciences, 3 (15), 155–176. 
 Tarter, R. E., & Vanyukov, M. (1999). Re-visiting the validity of the construct of resilience. In M. D. 
Glantz & J. L. Johnson (Eds.),  Resilience and development: Positive life adaptations (pp. 17–83). 
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.  
 Timmerman, P. (1981).  Vulnerability, resilience and the collapse of society . Environmental 
Monograph 1, Institute for Environmental Studies, Toronto University, Toronto. 
 Tobin, G. A. (1999). Sustainability and community resilience: The holy grail of hazards planning? 
 Environmental Hazards, 1 (1), 13–25. 
 Vayda, A. P., & McCay, B. J. (October 1975). New directions in the ecology and ecological 
anthropology.  Annual Review of Anthropology, 4 , 293–306.  
    Walker, B., & Salt, D. (2006).  Resilience thinking: Sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing 
world . Washington, DC: Island Press.  
 Walker, B., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R., & Kinzig, A. (2004). Resilience, adaptability and 
transformability in social-ecological systems.  Ecology and Society ,  9 (2) [online] URL   http://
www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/  . 

51
3 Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History…
 Wardekker, J. A., de Jong, A., Knoop, J. M., & van der Sluijs, J. P. (2010). Operationalising the 
resilience approach to adapting an urban delta to uncertain climate changes.  Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 77 (7), 987–998. 
 Warner, M. (2001). Building social capital: The role of local government.  The Journal of 
 Socio-Economics, 30 (2), 187–192. 
 Williams, K. (1999). Urban intensi ﬁ cation policies in England: Problems and contradictions.  Land 
Use Policy, 16 (3), 167–178. 
 Zimmerer, K. S. (1994). Human geography and the ‘new ecology’: The prospect and promise of 
integration.  Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 84 (1), 108–125. 

53
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_4, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 4.1  Introduction 
 Cities, as complex systems, present different urban patterns and spatial dynamics 
with diverse and multiple characteristics. Urban systems    change and reorganise 
according to the diverse outcomes of economic globalisation , based primarily on 
population data, but with secondary reference to trends in economic growth and 
restructuring, and to the various roles played by governments in shaping the urbani-
sation process (Bourne  1995 ) . Thus, economic growth and restructuring resulting 
from globalisation creates certain population dynamics and mobility patterns that 
in ﬂ uence the reorganisation of urban spaces (drivers of the economic globalisation 
are discussed in detail in Chap.   5    for the case study areas introduced in this book). 
The reorganisation of urban space, which is strongly in ﬂ uenced by the adaptation 
strategies of cities to global processes and endogenous capacities, takes various 
forms. This chapter intends to explore these spatial forms and dynamics and their 
implications on the resilience of cities. It is argued in Chap.   1  that certain spatial pat-
terns may provide capacity to the system to absorb disturbances and reorganise itself. 
In this chapter, in order to understand the extent of the spatial dynamics    to address 
social and spatial challenges, both the inner city and peri-urbanised areas,  ﬁ rst of all, 
these spatial dynamics are identi ﬁ ed, and secondly, their relation to the attribute   s of 
resilience is clari ﬁ ed. In this respect this chapter aims to provide an umbrella concep-
tual framework for the relationship between spatial change and resilience. 
 S. S.  Cruz (*) •  S. Á.  de  Sousa •  P.  Pinho 
 Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Center for Territory, Transports and Environment , 
 University of Oporto ,  Rua Dr. Roberto Frias ,  4200-465  Oporto ,  Portugal 
e-mail:  scruz@fe.up.pt ;  silviavila@gmail.com ;  pcpinho@fe.up.pt 
 J. P. T. A.  Costa 
 Faculty of Architecture ,  TU Lisbon ,  1495-055  Lisbon ,  Portugal 
e-mail:  joao.pedro.costa@sapo.pt 
 Chapter 4 
 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics 
 Sara  Santos  Cruz ,  João  Pedro  T. A.  Costa ,  Silvia  Ávila de  Sousa, 
and  Paulo  Pinho  

54
S.S. Cruz et al.
 Urban ecosystems evolve through multiple and diverse processes based on the 
dynamic interaction of human and the ecological ecosystems. Social and environ-
ment al systems are, inevitably, highly complex (Berkes  2007 ), and this complexity 
is characterised by nonlinearity, which means multiple possible outcomes of dynam-
ics (Alberti and Marzluff  2004 ). The development of the urban system into different 
states over time is a rather complex and nonlinear one, depending on the agents, 
actors and forces at work. Research has revealed that it may be quite dif ﬁ cult, if 
not impossible, to study the whole system in one coherent model. The solution has 
been to change urban development from being a process that initiates a decline in 
ecosystem services and an increase in human services (Alberti and Marzluff  2004 ). 
The study of urban and metropolitan areas as urban ecosystems is a relatively 
new and promising  ﬁ eld (Pickett et al.  1997 ). According to Pickett et al. ( 1997 ), there 
are two main reasons:  ﬁ rst, urban areas are responsible for a considerable number of 
disturbances, stresses and changes in ecological systems , and second, the spread of 
urbanisation and its implications forced huge extensions of land-use conversion. 
Understanding the linkage between the two types of systems, ecological and human/
social, can prevent future problems and help in understanding their functioning and 
interactions. Thus, urbanisation processes imply that knowledge about previous 
ecological systems must also integrate knowledge about the functioning of human 
systems on those territories. 
 Besides complexity , urban systems are intrinsically associated to other concepts, 
such as diversity    and interconnection and interdependence . Diversity refers to the 
different functions performed within the system and the variety of groups that exist 
in that same system (Folke et al.  2002 ). Multiple components reinforce and protect 
the system against disturbances and external forces, and diversity facilitates redevel-
opment when the system is confronted with sudden changes or even disturbances, 
and is often used as a synonym of innovation. In this sense, urban patterns with 
multiple and diverse functions in multiple nodes/centres tend to be less vulnerable. 
Furthermore, the interconnections and interdependences between the different 
components, involving the exchange of knowledge, combining different ways of 
knowing and learning, facilitate support between the parts and contribute to a 
strengthening of the system. A stronger and more coherent system, in social as well 
as in physical terms, is more able to deal with external forces and threats. Collabo-
ration among the different stakeholders involved in the urban development process 
also plays an important role as integrated and  ﬂ exible approaches foster both oppor-
tunities and incentives. These attribute   s will enhance the system, making it able to 
deal with more or less disturbing uncertainties and to adapt to urban development 
forces. Thus, adaptability is also an essential quality of a resilient system, that is, 
adaptive systems tend to be more resilient (Folke et al.  2002 ). The learning process of 
adaptation to other states in the development process and a deeper knowledge of the 
behaviour of the components of the system promote the capacity for self-organisation 
(capacity to organise themselves in the event of change), which also leads to resilience. 
 In studying the relationship between resilience and urban land use/patterns, it is 
possible to identify two perspectives. The  ﬁ rst essentially analyses the linkage 
between resilience and socio-ecological ecosystems, focusing on the integration of 

55
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
the human and ecological functions (Alberti and Marzluff  2004 ; Berkes  2007 ; 
Holling and Gunderson  2002 ). From this perspective, the main concern is the study 
of the most resilient patterns to cope with natural disasters, risks and hazards and 
vulnerable areas. This is an increasingly important  ﬁ eld of research that is inte-
grated into wider research initiatives that encourage the incorporation of human and 
natural components of ecosystems, landscapes and regions (Pickett et al.  1997 ). 
 Another perspective, although still emerging, focuses on the linkage between 
resilience and spatial planning, identifying how planning can create more resilient 
cities. Godschalk  ( 2003 ) , for example, identi ﬁ ed a set of characteristics (or princi-
ples) of resilient systems that can be applied to physical and social systems to create 
more resilient cities. Besides some of the attributes already mentioned (diversity , 
strength , interdependence , adaptability and collaboration ), he adds three more: 
redundancy (systems designed with multiple nodes to ensure that failure of one 
component does not cause the entire system to fail), ef ﬁ ciency (positive ratio of 
energy supplied to energy delivered by a dynamic system) and autonomy (capabil-
ity to operate independently of outside control). Our approach follows closely this 
last perspective. 
 Drivers of change cause diverse transformations in peri-urbanised areas, mostly 
related to the expansion of the urban population and economic activities towards the 
periphery of cities, where population, activities and functions emerge in diverse 
forms (including sprawl, suburbanisation, leapfrog development, fringe develop-
ment, spatial fragmentation, rurbanisation 1  and polycentric development). However, 
when cities expand towards the periphery in one (or a combination of several) of 
these forms, the inner city areas also face certain challenges. In some cities, residents 
and activities have moved out of the central urban areas. Following the decline of 
inner city neighbourhoods, these functions are replaced with new ones (or new resi-
dents), resulting in the redevelopment, regeneration or gentri ﬁ cation of these areas. 
If it is a successful process, the inner city in particular and central urban areas in 
general begin to be intensi ﬁ ed with new functions and residents. However, in some 
cases, inner city areas cannot be able to attract new functions and residents, becom-
ing vacant and entering a period of decline in terms of population and business. 
 Keeping the different spatial dynamics in mind, this chapter focuses on two 
forms of spatial redistribution of population and economic activities, namely, urban 
sprawl and polycentrism , and two forms of inner city transformation, namely, 
shrinkage and compactness , as the most common processes in our case study areas. 
Urban sprawl had been on the agenda of the urban growth literature for more than a 
half century; polycentric development, being a relatively new phenomenon, intro-
duced in order to designate a new type of urban sprawl that can also enhance the 
competitiveness of cities and city regions; shrinkage , as a new spatial dynamic 
resulting from a loss of attractivity in the inner cities, which is also accelerated by 
the new policies that favour peripheral development; and lastly, the compactness of 
 1  Rurbanisation refers to the process of spatial transformation in rural areas at the immediate 
periphery of cities caused by economic, demographic and social transformations from rural 
functions towards more urban activities in previously rural areas. 

56
S.S. Cruz et al.
built-up areas, accelerated by both the increasing demand of the global core functions 
and policies designed to create more compact cities. These should not be under-
stood as single or deterministic models that have occurred in a particular city, but 
should rather be used as conceptual devices to support the different visions and 
strategies of policy makers. More than one type of spatial dynamic may be prevalent 
in any city, which means that a city may have shrinkage and sprawl at the same time 
in different sections of the city (such as Lisbon and Oporto ), compactness and 
sprawl (such as Istanbul ) or a city may experience both polycentric peripheral devel-
opment and intensi ﬁ cation in the inner core (such as Stockholm and Rotterdam ). 
 4.2  Spatial Dynamics of Urban Change  
 Urban change is a continuous process that is driven by several dynamics (social, 
economic, cultural, institutional, spatial and political). There is a three-way relation-
ship between urban change   , urban development dynamics and urban policies. Urban 
policies are a response to urban change and are aimed at improving or redirecting the 
outcomes of the process of change. However, they are also strongly in ﬂ uenced by the 
characteristics of spatial dynamics    and under what conditions they have been stimu-
lated. Although they are contingent to individual cases, they can still be evaluated in 
terms of their ability to generate resilient urban areas. This is especially important, 
since the built environment and infrastructure cannot be changed rapidly. 
 Urban policies have a direct in ﬂ uence on urban change , but the diverse charac-
teristics of urban dynamics may also in ﬂ uence the development of new urban policies. 
The same cyclic relationship also occurs between urban growth dynamics and urban 
policies. Policies (not only concerning spatial organisation and planning but also 
social, ecologic and economic policies concerning the well-being of urban citizens 
and the sustainability of urban development) re ﬂ ect certain economic, demographic 
and spatial growth dynamics in cities, while also being shaped by them. The more 
this three-way relationship is in balance in providing economic development and 
competitiveness and nourishing the social and ecological balances, the more sus-
tainable the urban policy becomes. 
 4.2.1  Urban Sprawl 
 Although urban sprawl has been attracting substantial attention for over 40 years, 
there is no consensus on the de ﬁ nition. That said, it is usually portrayed as inef ﬁ cient, 
being a resource wasteful land-use pattern that takes in almost every possible devel-
opment with negative impacts, and is judgementally compared against the compact 
city ideal. Sprawl is described as decentralisation with lower densities (Glaeser and 
Kahn  2003 ; Galster et al.  2001 ) and is de ﬁ ned as the excessive spatial growth of 
cities relative to what is socially desirable (Brueckner  2001 ) , with an assertion that 

57
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
jobs and development follow population to the fringe, and that businesses always 
pursues lower development costs and greater access to highways (Torrens  2008 ) . 
It has also been described as low-density, discontinuous, suburban-style develop-
ment, often characterised as being the result of rapid, unplanned and/or uncoordi-
nated growth (Carruthers and Ulfarsson  2003 ) . 
 Early literature on sprawl , which is mainly dominated by the US experience, 
emphasises that suburbanisation occurs due to changes in transport ation technolo-
gies and the consequent rapid increase in car ownership, enabling people, seeking 
for a new way of life, to move to the periphery of major cities. From the 1980s 
onwards, while new activities began to relocate to peripheral areas, the character of 
urban sprawl somewhat changed, and the spread of the working areas and central 
city functions, followed by the new residential areas, created new nodes far from the 
densely populated core cities the so-called edge cities. The negative impacts of 
sprawl on environment al resources begin to emerge, causing air pollution as well as 
inef ﬁ ciencies in the provision of public infrastructure s and services and other social 
activities. From the 1990s onwards, emphasis has been on urban decline as a result 
of central city functions moving towards the periphery. Urban regeneration and 
renewal emerged in reaction to the negative consequences of sprawl, and the cre-
ation of more compact cities became the central objective of the new urban policies. 
However, as Bae and Richardson  ( 2004 ) argue, the existing policies still fall far 
short of being able to change the dominant tendencies and make people return to the 
city centres, at least in the US context. 
 There appears to be broad consensus among planning and urban scholars that 
sprawl is a large and complex, not easily remedied, problem that is responsible for 
a number of negative consequences (Howell-Moroney  2008 ) . Most theoretical dis-
cussions and empirical studies on sprawl concentrate on its  costs (for a synthesis, 
see Ewing  1997 ) . Ewing  ( 1997 ) notes that no single archetype provides a complete 
de ﬁ nition, as all include several features large areas of low-density or single use, 
strip, scattered and leapfrog development. Couch et al.  ( 2005 ) highlight that sprawl 
exhibits low levels of the following eight dimensions: density, continuity, concen-
tration, clustering, centrality, nuclearity, mixed use and proximity (for key features, 
see Torrens  2008 ) . 
 While the negative aspects of sprawl dominate most debates, alternative urban 
growth processes and patterns with less negative impacts are presented under the 
headings of sustainable development, smart growth, slow growth, etc. Smart growth, 
as both a concept and a movement, emphasises the limitation of horizontal expan-
sion; costly sprawl; promotion of denser and mixed-use development; increases in 
pedestrian accessibility, thus reducing car usage; and preservation of agricultural 
lands and ecosystems, to name just some of its core principles and issues. 
 Angel et al.  ( 2005  )  argue that some of the claims regarding the negative impacts 
of sprawl should be disputed, giving actual examples. There are even claims that 
low-density sprawl may lead to more ef ﬁ cient and rapid economic development, to 
more rapid job creation, to more affordable and larger housing and lower levels of 
shelter deprivation, to higher rates of home ownership, to cheaper and better public 
services, to satisfactory levels of social interaction and to a better and higher quality 

58
S.S. Cruz et al.
of life. Arguments in favour of sprawl receive less support; however, there are 
important debates indicating that externalities are contingent to the characteristics 
of the city (Glaeser and Kahn  2001 ; Gordon and Richardson  1997a ) , such as speciali-
sation and city form. 
 To what extent may sprawled cities have capacity to absorb disturbances and 
reorganise themselves in the event of a disaster? Literature is divided on whether 
sprawl can actually be de ﬁ ned as a resilient urban pattern or not. Looking a little 
closer at the attribute s of resilience and the characteristics of sprawl, it is possible to 
 ﬁ nd interconnections. Low density and/or dispersed sprawl, besides for civil defence 
in case of attack, may be useful in the event of natural or environment al hazards, 
generally allowing more room for manoeuvre in any given situation, corresponding 
to adaptability and strength . The same applies to the decentralisation and polycen-
tricity characteristics of sprawl, which can also be seen as contributing to redun-
dancy and autonomy  , ensuring that the failure of one node or area does not cause the 
entire urban system to fail, and the ability to operate independently of outside con-
trol. Sprawl may allow for more integration between ecological and human systems 
below the capacity thresholds of ecosystems. Interdependence and collaboration 
depend more on the available support instruments than on the spatial dynamics at 
hand. Even the so-called inef ﬁ ciency of sprawl can to some extent be disputed 
(Angel et al.  2005 ; Gordon and Richardson  1997a ) . 
 4.2.2  Polycentric Development 
 The term  polycentric denotes that a spatial entity consists of multiple centres, 
regardless of what kind of centres are in the focus, or what type of relations they 
maintain. The concept of polycentric development entails, at least, four dimensions, 
which should be carefully distinguished. Firstly, it can be either understood as an 
analytical-descriptive tool to describe the current state of a spatial entity or, secondly, 
as a normative concept which should help, for instance, to reorganise the spatial 
con ﬁ guration of such an entity. Thirdly, when talking about spatial entities, one 
needs to clarify their spatial scope, being, in our case, the city and city region levels. 
Lastly, on closer inspection, the concept challenges our understanding of centres 
within, for example, a city region, as it can be related to either their functions/roles, 
and thus their functional tie, or their speci ﬁ c physical forms. One can argue, in line 
with Davoudi  ( 2003 ) , that polycentricity means different things to different people, 
as how it is perceived is by its very nature extremely fuzzy, given its many dimen-
sions and perspectives. When discussing the concept, it is thus almost impossible to 
clarify each time what dimension of human activity is in one’s mind and in what 
speci ﬁ c context it is being referred to, adding to the many uncertainties and conno-
tations that are related to the concept of polycentricity. 
 Regarding the city and city region spatial scales, different lines of research 
have been followed in the literature. Some authors (Ipenburg and Lambregts 
 2001 ; Meijers and Romein  2003 ) focus on polycentricity ’s relevance, perception, 

59
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
potential application/feasibility and policy design, applied to a number of selected 
regions. Meijers and Romein  ( 2003 ) , Knapp et al.  ( 2004  )  and Gabi et al.  (  2006 ) , 
on the other hand, speci ﬁ cally address the issue of institutional capacity building 
and governance in such city regions, while Batten  (  1995 ) , Capello  ( 2000 ) and 
Meijers  ( 2007 ) focus on the role and function of centres, their potentials for net-
working  , discussions about external economies and whether several centres 
within a city region can complement each other. Hall and Pain  (  2006 ) or Green 
 ( 2007  )  focuses on the discussion on how to measure – or just anticipate –  ﬂ ows 
within polycentric urban con ﬁ gurations in an attempt to say something about 
their real interactions. Finally, the morphologic dimension of polycentricity is 
studied by Champion  (  2001 ) and Mela  ( 2008 ) , referring to the debate on the 
concrete shape of the urban fabric, which is a kind of precondition for the more 
functional and relational aspects. It is this  ﬁ nal approach that is more in line with 
this book’s perspective. 
 Polycentricity integrates a broad range of concepts with consensual points, some 
with a long tradition, in the debates on the megalopolis; on the “urban  ﬁ eld”; on the 
regional city; on the garden city; in recent years, on edge cities; on the  Zwischenstadt ; 
on the network city; or even on (global) city networks. There is an enormous body 
of literature in which these and other related concepts of how cities and city regions 
develop can be found (for more, see Lahti  2004 ) . 
 Champion  ( 2001 ) explains the emergence of  polycentric urban con ﬁ gurations as 
being a result of the changing demographic regimes that have occurred over the past 
40 years with regard to attitudes, lifestyles , immigration to urban regions and the 
composition of the urban population. Based on such dynamics and the concrete 
morphological starting point, he derives three different development paths for such 
emerging polycentric urban con ﬁ gurations: (1) the  centrifugal mode , (2) the  incor-
poration mode and (3) the  fusion mode . His typology of evolutionary modes thus 
draws attention to the fact that today’s polycentric urban regions have developed 
from different morphological points of departure (Lambregts  2006 ) . 
 In recent years, the in ﬂ uence of Europe’s urban system on its economic competi-
tiveness , as well as the potential to ensure a balanced development of the European 
territory, has been extensively dealt with in both the academic and political realms. 
Key documents include the European Spatial Development Perspective (European 
Commission  1999 ) and the so-called European Territorial Agenda, adopted in May 
2007. Nowadays, the understanding of polycentricity has been extended to notions 
such as territorial cooperation, urban networking and territorial cohesion. Apparently, 
polycentricity is seen as a bridging concept that is used to overcome tensions 
between potentially contradictory policy objectives of the EU, namely, competitive-
ness and cohesion (Schön  2005 ) . 
 To what extent may polycentric urban regions have capacity to absorb distur-
bances and reorganise themselves in the event of a disaster? In order to asses these 
attribute s of resilience need to be observed in smaller scale typologies of polycen-
tric development, such as redundancy , diversity , critical mass, complexity ,  ﬂ exibility 
and adaptability , all of which can be associated with polycentrism , although they 
depend on the local polycentric system. 

60
S.S. Cruz et al.
 Meijers and Romein  ( 2003 ) refer to diversity and redundancy attributes, noticing 
that polycentric urban regions may entail certain competitive potentialities by relat-
ing to the pooling of resources, complementarities and spatial diversity. Several 
European countries are aware of these potentialities, often building on increasing 
functional relationships between their polycentric regional systems. Meijers  ( 2007 : 
98) relates these two attributes with critical mass when proposing three potentiali-
ties of regional coordination and action in polycentric urban regions: (1) pooling 
resources in order to share facilities and services and to achieve “critical mass” 
(2) developing and exploiting balanced complementarities and (3) optimising spatial 
diversity by improving the quality of open spaces. 
 Complexity is a resilience attribute that is also referred to in literature. Albrechts 
 (  2001 ) points out that polycentric city regions should be considered as open and 
multilayered complexes of nodes, networks,  ﬂ ows and interactions at global, regional 
and local scales. Meijers  (  2005  )  agrees, suggesting that these patterns are often asso-
ciated with the notion of synergy and explaining that the individual cities in these 
collections of distinct but closely located cities relate to each other in a synergetic 
way, making the whole networks of cities more than just the sum of their parts. 
 Adaptability and  ﬂ exibility could also be referred to as resilience attributes of 
polycentrism . Once in a system of several multifunctional nodes, each one might be less 
dependent from the system as a whole, having capacities to balance its activities when 
affected by a disturbance. Again, in practice the speci ﬁ c characteristics of each case 
should be considered, as polycentric systems might include more specialised nodes that 
could have minor in ﬂ uences on an evaluation of  ﬂ exibility and adaptability .  
 4.2.3  Shrinkage 
 The shrinking city concept is a relatively recent arrival to the urban planning debate. 
As one would expect, there are differences of opinion on what the concept actually 
means on a global scale. The causes and characteristics of shrinkage are as prevalent 
as the cases (Rieniets et al.  2006 ) , however shrinkage, in its most broad and common 
sense, means long-term population loss. All seem to acknowledge this demographic 
characteristic, but the richness of the concept goes way beyond that. Twenty- ﬁ rst 
century shrinkage is a global, structural and multidimensional phenomenon that is 
concomitant with a visibly declining population, possibly combined with a declining 
economy and national or international importance, affecting different territories and 
scales that may or may not have started to spatially shrink (Sousa  2010 ) . 
 In spatial terms, it manifests itself through doughnut patterns (in the centre) or its 
reverse (in the suburbs), or in mosaic or perforation patterns (mixed type) in sprawl ing, 
compact or polycentric areas. In other words, shrinkage might not be homogenous, 
as some parts can grow slightly, while the majority stagnate or decline. Shrinkage is 
usually accompanied by a projection of an image of decline and of a potential loss 
of the traditional notion of urbanity. From a wider urban and regional planning 
perspective, it signi ﬁ es (or should signify) a paradigm change to planning for shrinkage 
or planning for stagnation. 

61
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
 Over the last three centuries, as urban growth became the  ﬁ nal goal for most 
regions and cities and, apparently, the only way forwards for development, growth 
has come to dominate the international debate. In the meantime, shrinkage       has 
been neglected by decision makers and planners, as if it were a dysfunction in 
development cycle. Shrinkage is not a passing phase of urban development but a 
part of this development that has been uncared for, treated either as a taboo (Oswalt 
and Rieniets  2006 ) or at minimum a pathology (Leo and Brown  2000 ) . Nevertheless, 
decline is not a recent phenomenon, as it has always been an aspect of urban settle-
ment that is as foreseeable as growth. 
 Theoretical discussions on the topic of shrinking cities have focused on what de ﬁ nes 
shrinkage in a speci ﬁ c context, while there are also a number of attempts to put 
forwards typologies of shrinking cities. The relation between planning and shrinkage, 
on how planning is coping, innovating and renewing itself, has also been a subject 
of discussion (Jessen  2006 ) . Urban regeneration efforts and debates focus on the 
most visible aspect of spatial shrinkage – that of housing vacancies and vacant 
lots, alongside assessments of the roles of culture and creativity , knowledge, 
innovation, ICT, etc. (for a review, see Sousa  2010  ) . Moreover, some authors have 
also developed psychological perspectives of the phenomenon (Borries and Böttger 
 2004 ; Delken  2007 ) . 
 Maintaining a strategy of economic growth with the objective of restarting 
population growth is the most frequent reaction to shrinkage , but efforts in this 
regard have seldom led to success (Pallagst  2008 ) . Authors generally agree with 
Wiechmann’s  ( 2008  )  assertion that the challenge is to deal with the growth/shrinkage 
patchwork while accepting that the future remains uncertain and unpredictable 
and that it is a question of negotiating growth and decline rather than achieving 
equal growth (Tietjen  2007 ) . 
 To what extent may shrinking cities have capacity to absorb disturbances and 
reorganise themselves in the event of a disaster? Speci ﬁ cally, shrinkage implies (or 
can imply) a relief in pressure for growth. It may allow for regions and local munici-
palities to catch up with the demands for new infrastructure and social services 
and to address the need for environment al sustainability, improving the performance 
of resilience attribute s. Banzhaf et al.  ( 2006 ) refer to this as counter development, 
being an opportunity to minimise the amount of further land consumption, to develop 
a different inner structure of a shrinking city and to redevelop urban areas of resi-
dential vacancy and urban brown ﬁ elds, thus creating new open spaces or planning 
densi ﬁ cation projects. This can be referred to as adaptability and/or improvement 
of ef ﬁ ciency and clearly promotes a better relation between the urbanised and 
ecological systems . Sinking population densities and the resulting vacant dwellings 
and derelict lands denote signi ﬁ cant changes in circumstances and present opportu-
nities for the deconstruction of created situations that would otherwise be unthinkable 
(Sousa and Pinho  2009 ) . Diversity and collaboration may be increased through 
innovation and creativity in planning for shrinkage , which is a process that may also 
promote participation and capital building. 
 It should be noted, however, that shrinkage   cannot be associated to a speci ﬁ c urban 
pattern of development, as it can occur simultaneously with sprawl, in compact 

62
S.S. Cruz et al.
cities or together with polycentrism . For this reason, the debate about resilience and 
shrinkage should not be disassociated from other types of spatial dynamics . 
 4.2.4  Compactness 
 Compactness refers to the agglomeration of urban activities, functions and residents 
with the physical proximity and continuity of increasing density. It is taken to mean 
(1) a relatively high-density city at the neighbourhood, community, citywide or even 
metropolitan level and (2) a mixed-use city. The combination of proximity, continuity, 
density and mixed-use attributes is the basis for ef ﬁ ciency in, for example, (1) stim-
ulating social interaction, (2) allowing for an ef ﬁ cient public transport system, 
(3) encouraging walking and cycling, and (4) justifying public facilities and public 
services. A concentration of urban functions leads to a compact spatial structure, 
emphasising a spatial pattern that is oriented towards the downtown or the central 
city instead of a polycentric (or dispersed) spatial pattern (Burton  2000 ) . 
 The reviving interest in policies for compact urban form and intensi ﬁ cation can 
be related to the search for global sustainability on climate change and resource use 
since the late 1980s. Two concerns are particularly important:  ﬁ rst, environment al 
rationality in architecture, planning and urban design is fundamental, as there is 
now a much wider concern for the environmental and socio-economic consequences 
of energy production, and consumption associated to particular forms of urban 
development, while second is the recognition of a global rationale, as most of the 
environmental problems have global consequences (Burgess  2000 ) . Although 
intensi ﬁ cation appears to be a particular prescription of a compact urban form, 
it includes many other policy prescriptions for the attainment of a sustainably func-
tioning urban system. Spatial models and strategies have been developed to change 
the urban structure so as to achieve the desired sustainability bene ﬁ ts (Burgess 
 2000 ) , including such strategies as (1) high-rise and high-density development, 
(2) the creation of concentrated decentralisation in an attempt to shift from a mono-
centric to polycentric structure, (3) linear transit-oriented development models, and 
(4) traditional in ﬁ ll, densi ﬁ cation and intensi ﬁ cation strategies. 
 It should be noted that many scholars are sceptical about the bene ﬁ ts of compact 
cities. Gordon and Richardson  ( 1997b ) indicate that compact city policies are con-
trary to the market process that has produced the current urban settlement struc-
tures, claiming that (1) the expansion of urban areas has not caused any signi ﬁ cant 
decrease in the stock of prime agricultural land in the United States; (2) low-density 
settlement is the overwhelming choice for residential living; (3) suburbanisation has 
been the dominant mechanism for reducing congestion and trip lengths, with some 
success; (4) downtown renewal efforts have failed (in the US context), wasting tax-
payers’ money and misallocating scarce public sector resources; and (5) the equity 
case for compact cities is weak. The equity effects of compactness have been inves-
tigated in UK cities by Burton  ( 2000 ) , who concluded that social equity has a limited 

63
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
relationship with compactness and that social equity has to be broken down into its 
constituent elements to establish a meaningful relationship with compactness. 
 To what extent may compact cities have capacity to absorb disturbances and 
reorganise themselves in the event of a disaster? The attributes of resilience in  compact 
cities can be contradictory and should be observed in smaller scale typologies, or even 
on a case-by-case basis. In a  ﬁ rst approach, resilience attributes such as ef ﬁ ciency , 
diversity  , complexity , connectivity or capital building may be associated with compact 
urban patterns. 
 Ef ﬁ ciency is commonly referred to as an attribute of the compact city, being 
associated with social proximity, less wasteful use of resources, more energy 
ef ﬁ ciency and better provision of public services. Even the more sceptical authors 
accept this, referring to the urban sprawl/compact dilemma. For example, Gordon 
and Richardson  ( 1997b ) recognise the reduced energy dependence of individual 
mobility, the possibility to have high-capacity transit systems and the reduced costs 
of infrastructures and public facilities. 
 In the conclusion to his overview of contemporary urban design, Sonne  ( 2009 ) 
points out the diversity characteristics of intensi ﬁ cation in a compact urban form : 
“The movement for block reform must therefore be considered as highly creative. 
This kind of research patience may even have involved more creativity than devel-
oping simple slabs as a result of sanitary demands according to supposed scienti ﬁ c 
methods” (Sonne  2009 : 53). 
 Referring to the controversial relationship between  compactness and the envi-
ronment, De Roo  (  2000  )  emphasises complexity as a relevant attribute of the 
compact urban form and highly relevant for studies of the interrelations between 
environmental con ﬂ icts and their spatial dimension. Policies for compact cities/
intensi ﬁ cation face dif ﬁ culties in solving environment al con ﬂ icts, in that they maintain 
a signi ﬁ cant distance between intrusive sources and environmentally sensitive areas, 
functions and activities. 
 Connectivity can be conceived as a characteristic of compact cities due to physical 
proximity, although in practice it depends on the type of urban fabric. For example, 
conceptually, in a system with a tree pattern, the rupture of one connection can 
leave its subsidiary arms isolated, although in a matrix pattern the rupture of one 
connection can be supported by the entire system. Focusing on a speci ﬁ c case, in 
the Barcelona compact central area the connectivity of the medieval urban fabric 
cannot be compared to the Cerdá’s “ensanche” urban fabric. 
 Capital building might also be associated with compactness due to the increased 
capacity for social interaction, although compact cities or smaller territories within 
them might present different dynamics and cycles over time. 
 4.3  Spatial Dynamics and Urban Resilience 
 The different spatial dynamics occurring in urban development can be related to the 
concept of urban resilience, as indicated above. There is evidence that certain attribute s 
of resilience are related to particular urban patterns and dynamics, although the 

64
S.S. Cruz et al.
context and local speci ﬁ cities may play an important role. It should also be noted 
that most analyses on sustainable land use are also valid for the concept of resil-
ience; however, focus should be on the capacity to cope with disturbances, problems 
and adversities, introducing a new perspective on the traditional paradigm of 
sustainable development. 
 From the literature review, it can be seen that some urban patterns have been 
more associated with sustainable land-use patterns than others, such is the case of 
the compact city model. Compactness appears to go hand in hand with the goal of 
liveability and aims at reducing commuting. Ef ﬁ ciency is another important feature, 
referring not only to spatial organisation but also to the ef ﬁ cient involvement of the 
community, a balanced economy  of the land development process and land-use 
policies that combine the reuse of land in already built-up areas with a restrained use 
of land around the cities. Aspects such as urban containment, density, diversity and 
ef ﬁ ciency are the primary principles in most references to sustainable land use, and 
these may also be associated with urban resilience. There are a number of aspects or 
principles that are usually enumerated concerning land use but also resources, 
energy, transport  ation and social issues like social justice or the creation of a sense 
of place and community. 
 Urban development creates and changes existing landscapes, affecting the capacity 
of urban ecosystems to sustain urban quality of life (Resilience Alliance  2007 ) . There 
are two main factors to this: rapid changes that occur due to land-use transformations 
and the inevitable fragmentation of ecosystems as a result of urbanisation. Efforts 
towards sustainable land use aim to address both factors. Aiming at preventing spa-
tial deconcentration in the form of urban sprawl, spatial fragmentation or leapfrog 
development, sustainable land use in the inner city means the recycling of land in 
existing urban areas through the use of brown ﬁ eld sites for development and the 
ef ﬁ cient use of urban infrastructure   , and in the periphery it refers to the way of creat-
ing sustainable patterns of transformation from rural to urban land by discouraging 
green ﬁ eld development and minimising the consumption of agricultural land, thus 
enhancing the opportunities for environmental protection, improving economic and 
social conditions and improving human health and safety in cities (Turvani and Tonin 
 2008  )  and consequently, increasing local resilience. 
 The strategy of in ﬁ ll development helps create more compact and vibrant com-
munities through a diversity of mixed uses, well-connected street patterns and better 
provision of community services and facilities, rather than just increases in density. 
Thus, the recycling or reuse of vacant urban land became the primary means of 
sustainable urban land use in literature across the world (Greenstein and Sungu-
Eryilmaz  2004 ; Bowman and Pagano  2004 ; Brachman  2004 ) . This type of urban 
development has also been associated with the shrinking cities phenomenon, trans-
forming and adapting residential areas for other uses. 
 High-density mixed-use areas can supposedly contribute to pro ﬁ tability and eco-
nomic growth , lower energy consumption and greater distributive ef ﬁ ciency  (Jones 
and MacDonald  2004 ) ; however, some authors (Scoffham and Vale  1996 ) point out 
that what matters more than the degree of density is the spatial organisation of resi-
dential functions to provide long-term  ﬂ exibility and adaptability – both of which 

65
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
are attributes of resilience. The long-term consequences of higher density develop-
ment in the inner city areas to the sustainable use of urban resources are not yet 
known, as is the case for methods of how to measure density more appropriately, 
how to intensify the utilisation of urban areas acceptably and how to determine the 
limits of capacity of urban areas (Scoffham and Vale  1996 ) . 
 The debate on sustainable land use has highlighted several environmental issues 
(supporting nature conservation, biodiversity and climate change , mitigation and 
adaptation) without speci ﬁ cally or explicitly looking for the complex web of link-
ages between the social, human and ecological systems . The resilience approach, 
instead of focusing on the resources consumed by cities, deeper analyses the inter-
dependencies along the chain of supply and demand (Montenegro  2010 ) . This 
approach has been emerging more recently in the  ﬁ eld of ecology . It is recognised 
that urban development affects the patch structure by changing the size, shape, 
interconnectivity and composition of natural patches (Alberti  2005 ) , and this change 
occurs in a physical dimension, and so alternative urban patterns have different 
ecological consequences. These consequences are a result of transformations in 
land cover, the availability of nutrients and water and increases in impervious land 
area. Also, urbanised areas generate microclimate and air quality changes, such as 
is the case of the urban heat island. 
 Resilience theory, by considering urban systems as complex adaptive systems, 
introduces a new vision into the analysis of the urban structure of cities. Ef ﬁ ciency, 
for example, is a key issue that might have distinct perspectives in sustainability and 
resilience. Increasing ef ﬁ ciency is usually associated with an optimisation of the 
functioning of systems; however, eliminating redundancies so as to achieve more 
ef ﬁ ciency may lead to more vulnerable conditions when changes occur. Redundancy, 
combined with diversity and modularity, enhances the resilience of a system 
(Barnett, in Montenegro  2010 ) . This may be the case more in polycentric patterns 
than compact and monocentric patterns. 
 Elmqvist (in Montenegro  2010 ) argues that social equity and access to resources 
are important components of resilience from a human dimension. Social equity and 
cohesion contribute to capital building and enhance the capacity of society to deal 
with adversities through the sharing of information in the resolution of con ﬂ icts and 
by building a more equitable society. 
 Urban resilience highlights, in particular, the importance of ecosystem services 
within cities. Understanding the different functions of the ecological systems in an 
urban area will allow a reduction of vulnerability in that area. Green and blue struc-
tures perform important functions and are affected by patterns of urban develop-
ment. According to Alberti  ( 2005 ) , however, determining the desirable characteristics 
of urban development patterns requires further research. Thus, it is dif ﬁ cult to de ﬁ ne 
the most adequate degree of compactness , density, connectivity and heterogeneity, 
and moreover, there is evidence that the supporting ecological systems react differ-
ently in different contexts and scales. 

66
S.S. Cruz et al.
 4.4  Conclusions 
 Although most attributes of resilience have been inherited from the sustainability 
debate, some new features should be considered, and some may have different inter-
pretations and assumptions. The main paradigm shift from sustainability to resilience 
lies in the consideration of urban areas as complex adaptive systems. Furthermore, 
studying urban systems means bringing the linkage between ecology and planning 
into the spotlight and an investigation of the most adequate spatial patterns or forms 
for dealing with adversities. However, one should bear in mind that the complexity 
and variety in urban systems means that there are different stages of equilibrium, as 
what constitutes the best type of urban development or the best response to sudden 
environmental changes may evolve over time. A combination of multiple types of 
patterns may be the most appropriate form for the integration of urban and ecological 
systems . It is important that particular urban transformations should be taken advan-
tage of to enhance the attributes of resilience. 
 Thus, there seems to be a relationship between the spatial processes of urban 
transformation and resilience. Certain patterns may be better able to cope with 
disturbances occurring in urban areas, to better adapt to change and/or to better 
promote self-organisation   . While there are many uncertainties about the urban 
future, certain decisions may be more resilient than others may. A key challenge is 
to identify the decisions that appear to be most resilient across a range of possible 
futures through the identi ﬁ cation of land-use policies that promote resilience. 
 Policies for sustainable development, assuming that we must prepare and adapt 
our current development options, have often neglected the unpredictability and 
uncertainty of future development. Moreover, the three pillars of sustainability – 
environmental, social and economic – should be understood in an integrated way, as 
policies will interfere on social-ecological systems , characterised by complex inter-
connections between their assets. Understanding uncertainty is a crucial condition 
to reduce vulnerability and cope with changes occurring quickly and unexpectedly. 
Nowadays, development challenges are increasingly evolving and demanding, 
and strategies must be prepared for adapting to uncertainty, in contrast to more 
traditional oriented-driven management. An imminent threat may be caused by the 
increasing rhythm of events and rapid changes – planning may become reactive by 
adapting to those sudden changes. However, resilience embraces the anticipative 
dimension, by dealing with the unexpected through a learning process, which means 
planning should prepare, plan and anticipate how quickly future moves. 
 References 
 Alberti, M. (2005). The effects of urban patterns on ecosystem function.  International Regional 
Science Review, 28 (2), 168–192. 
 Alberti, M., Marzluff, J. M. (2004). Ecological resilience in urban ecosystems: Linking urban pat-
terns to human and ecological functions.  Urban Ecosystems 7 (3), 241–265. 

67
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
 Albrechts, L. (2001). How to proceed from image and discourse to action: As applied to the 
Flemish diamond.  Urban Studies, 38 (4), 733–745. 
 Angel, S., Sheppard, S. C., & Civco, D. L. (2005). The dynamics of global urban expansion . 
Department of Transport and Urban Development. The World Bank.   http://www.citiesalliance.
org/ca/sites/citiesalliance.org/ ﬁ les/CA_Docs/resources/upgrading/urban-expansion/1.pdf  . 
Accessed 2 Mar 2009. 
 Bae, C.-H. C., & Richardson, H. (2004). Introduction. In H. W. Richardson & C.-H. C. Bae (Eds.), 
 Urban sprawl in western Europe and United States (pp. 1–10). Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Banzhaf, E., Kindler, A., & Haase, D. (2006).  Monitoring and modelling indicators for urban 
shrinkage: The city of Leipzig, Germany . Paper in Center for Remote Sensing of Land Surfaces, 
Bonn.   http://www.z ﬂ .uni-bonn.de/earsel/papers/299-306_Banzhaf.pdf  . Accessed 21 Feb 2008.  
 Batten, D. F. (1995). Network cities: Creative urban agglomerations for the 21st century.  Urban 
Studies, 32 (2), 313–327. 
 Berkes, F. (2007). Understanding uncertainty and reducing vulnerability: Lessons from resilience 
thinking.  Natural Hazards 41 , 283–295. 
 Borries, F., & Böttger, M. (2004). BürgerMeister: New tactics for shrinking cities. Advances in art. 
 Urban Futures, 4 , 53–60. 
 Bourne, L. S. (1995). Urban growth and population redistribution in North America: A diverse and 
unequal landscape. Major report no: 32. Centre for Urban and Community Studies, University 
of Toronto. 
    Bowman, A. O. M., & Pagano, M. A. (2004).  Terra incognita: Vacant land and urban strategies . 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
 Brachman, L. (2004). Turning brown ﬁ elds into community assets: Barriers to redevelopment. 
In R. Greenstein & Y. Sungu-Eryilmaz (Eds.),  Recycling the city: The use and reuse of urban 
land (pp. 67–88). Cambridge: Lincoln Institute for Land Policy. 
 Brueckner, J. K. (2001). Urban sprawl: Lessons from urban economics.  Brookings-Wharton Papers 
on Urban Affairs , 65–97, [online] URL   http://www.jstor.org/pss/25058783  
 Burgess, R. (2000). The compact city debate: A global perspective. In M. Jenks & R. Burgess 
(Eds.),  Compact cities: Sustainable urban forms for developing countries (pp. 114–121). 
London/New York: Spon Press. 
 Burton, E. (2000). Compact city: Just or just compact? A preliminary analysis.  Urban Studies, 
37 (11), 1969–2001. 
  Capello, R. (2000). The city network paradigm: Measuring urban network externalities.  Urban 
Studies, 37 (11), 1925–1945. 
 Carruthers, J. I., & Ulfarsson, G. F. (2003). Urban sprawl and the cost of public services. 
 Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 30 (4), 503–522. 
 Champion, A. G. (2001). A changing demographic regime and evolving polycentric urban regions: 
Consequences for the size, composition and distribution of city populations.  Urban Studies, 
38 (4), 657–677. 
 Couch, C., Karecha, J., Nuissl, H., & Rink, D. (2005). Decline and sprawl: An evolving type of 
urban development – observed in Liverpool and Leipzig.  European Planning Studies, 13 (1), 
117–136. 
 Davoudi, S. (2003). Polycentricity in European spatial planning: from an analytical tool to a nor-
mative agenda.  European Planning Studies, 11 (8), 979–999. 
    De Roo, G. (2000). Environmental con ﬂ icts in compact cities: Complexity, decisionmaking, and 
policy approaches.  Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 27 (1), 151–162. 
 Delken, E. (2007). Happiness in shrinking cities in Germany: A research note.  Journal of Happiness 
Studies, 9 (2), 213–218. 
 European Commission. (1999).  European spatial development perspective: Towards balanced and 
sustainable development of the territory of the EU . Of ﬁ cial document. The Committee on 
Spatial Development.   http://ec.europa.eu  . Accessed 2 Mar 2009. 
 Ewing, R. (1997). Is Los Angeles-style sprawl desirable?  Journal of the American Planning 
Association, 63 (1), 107–126. 

68
S.S. Cruz et al.
 Folke, C., Carpenter, S. R., & Elmqvist, T. (2002). Resilience and sustainable development: 
Building adaptive capacity in a world of transformations.  Ambio 31 , 437–440. 
 Gabi, S., Glanzmann, L., Kruse, C., & Thierstein, A. (2006). Governance strategies for the Zürich-
Basel metropolitan region in Switzerland.  Built Environment, 32 (2), 157–171. 
 Galster, G., Hanson, R., Ratcliffe, M. R., Wolman, H., Coleman, S., & Freihage, J. (2001). 
Wrestling sprawl to the ground: De ﬁ ning and measuring an elusive concept.  Housing Policy 
Debate, 12 (4), 681–717. 
  Glaeser, E. L., & Kahn, M. E. (2001). Decentralized employment and the transformation of the 
American city.  Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 2 , 1–63. 
 Glaeser, E. L., & Kahn, M. E. (2003). Sprawl and urban growth. In V. Henderson & J. F. Thisse 
(Eds.),  Handbook of regional and urban economics cities and geography (pp. 2481–2527). 
Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
 Godschalk, D. R. (2003). Urban hazard mitigation: Creating resilient cities.  Natural Hazards 
Review, 4 (3.1), 136–143. 
 Gordon, P., & Richardson, H. (1997a). Are compact cities a desirable planning goal?  Journal of the 
American Planning Association, 63 (1), 95–106. 
 Gordon, P., & Richardson, H. (1997b). US population and employment trends and sprawl issues. 
In H. W. Richardson & C.-H. C. Bae (Eds.),  Urban sprawl in western Europe and United States 
(pp. 217–236). Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Green, N. (2007). Functional polycentricity: A formal de ﬁ nition in terms of social network analysis. 
 Urban Studies, 44 (11), 2077–2103. 
 Greenstein, R., & Sungu-Eryilmaz, Y. (Eds.). (2004).  Recycling the city: The use and re-use of 
urban land . Cambridge: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. 
 Hall, P., & Pain, K. (Eds.). (2006).  The polycentric metropolis. Learning from mega-city region in 
Europe . London: Earthscan. 
 Holling, C. S., & Gunderson L. H. (2002). Resilience and adaptive cycles. In L. H. Gunderson & 
C. S. Holling (Eds.), Panarchy:  Understanding transformations in human and natural systems  
(pp. 25–62). Washington, DC: Island Press. 
 Howell-Moroney, M. (2008). A description and exploration of recent state-led smart-growth 
efforts.  Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, 26 (4), 678–695. 
 Ipenburg, D., & Lambregts, B. (Eds.). (2001).  Polynuclear urban regions in North West Europe, a 
survey of key actor views . Delft: Delft University Press. 
 Jessen, J. (2006). Urban renewal: A look back to the future. The importance of models in renewing 
urban planning.  German Journal of Urban Studies ,  45 , 1,   http://www.difu.de/node/5993  
 Jones, C., & MacDonald, C. (2004, June 2–5).  Sustainable urban form and real estate markets . 
In European Real Estate Conference, Milan. 
 Knapp, W., Kunzmann, K. R., & Schmitt, P. (2004). A cooperative spatial future for RheinRuhr. 
 European Planning Studies, 12 (3), 323–349. 
 Lahti, P. (2004). Traditional and new models explaining urban and regional form and change. Case 
Helsinki. In A. Borsdorf & P. Zembri (Ed.),  European cities insights on outskirts: Structures 
(pp. 31–48). Cost action C10 report.   http://www.qub.ac.uk/ep/research/costc10/ ﬁ ndoc/dyn.pdf  . 
Accessed 25 Feb 2009. 
 Lambregts, B. (2006). Polycentrism: Boon or barrier to metropolitan competitiveness? The case of 
the Randstad Holland.  Built Environment, 32 (2), 114–123. 
 Leo, C., & Brown, W. (2000). Slow growth and urban development policy.  Journal of Urban 
Affairs, 22 (2), 193–213. 
 Meijers, E. (2005). Polycentric urban regions and the quest for synergy: Is a network of cities more 
than the sum of the parts?  Urban Studies, 42 (4), 765–781. 
 Meijers, E. (2007).  Synergy in polycentric urban regions. Complementarity, organising capacity 
and critical mass . Delft: Delft University Press. 
 Meijers, E., & Romein, A. (2003). Realizing potential: Building regional organizing capacity in 
polycentric urban regions.  European Urban and Regional Studies, 10 (2), 173–186. 
 Mela, A. (2008). The polycentric city and environmental resources. In G. Maciocco (Ed.),  The 
territorial future of the city. Urban and landscapes perspectives (pp. 71–86). Berlin/Heidelberg: 
Springer. 

69
4 Urban Resilience and Spatial Dynamics
 Montenegro, M. (2010). Urban resilience.  Seed Magazine .   http://www.seedmagazine.com  . 
Accessed 1 Feb 2011. 
 Oswalt, P., & Rieniets, T. (2006). Introduction. In P. Oswalt (Ed.),  Atlas of shrinking cities 
(pp. 6–7). Ost ﬁ ldern: Hatje Cantz. 
 Pallagst, K. (2008). Shrinking cities. Planning challenges from an international perspective. In S. Rugare 
& T. Schwarz (Eds.),  Cities growing smaller (pp. 5–16). Cleveland: Kent State University.  
 Pickett, S. T. A., Burch, W. R., Jr., Dalton, S. E., Foresman, T. W., Grove, J. M., & Rowntree, R. 
(1997). A conceptual framework for the study of human ecosystems in urban areas.  Urban 
Ecosystems 1 (4), 185–199. 
 Resiliance Alliance. (2007).  Urban resilience research prospectus, a resilience alliance initiative 
for transitioning urban systems towards sustainable futures . Australia/USA/Sweden: CSIRO/
Arizona State University/Stockholm University. 
 Rieniets, T., Beyer, E., et al. (2006).  Atlas of shrinking cities . Ost ﬁ ldern: Hatje Cantz. 
 Schön, P. (2005). Territorial cohesion in Europe?  Planning Theory and Practice, 6 (3), 389–400. 
 Scoffham, E., & Vale, B. (1996). How compact is sustainable-How sustainable is compact? 
In M. Jenks, E. Burton, & K. Williams (Eds.),  The compact city: A sustainable urban 
form? (pp. 66–73). London/Glasgow/Weinheim: E&FN Spon. 
 Sonne, W. (2009). Dwelling in the metropolis: Reformed urban blocks 1890–1940 as a model for 
the sustainable compact city.  Progress in Planning, 72 (2), 53–149. 
 Sousa, S. (2010).  Planning for shrinking cities in Portugal . Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Faculty of 
Engineering. University of Oporto, Oporto. 
 Sousa, S., & Pinho, P. (2009). Growth versus Shrinkage. In  Proceedings of the CITTA 2nd Annual 
Conference on Planning Research Planning in Times of Uncertainty , Faculty of Engineering of 
the University of Oporto, Oporto. 
 Tietjen, A. (2007).  Imagineering urban identity in a shrinking Danish region . Working paper. The 
“Modernization and regionalism. Re-inventing urban identity” Conference.   http://aarch.
dk/ ﬁ leadmin/grupper/institut_ii/PDF/working_paper_04_2007.pdf  . Accessed 2 Mar 2009. 
 Torrens, P. M. (2008). A toolkit for measuring sprawl.  Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy, 1 , 5–36. 
 Turvani, M., & Tonin, S. (2008). Brown ﬁ elds remediation and reuse: An opportunity for urban 
sustainable development. In C. Clini, I. Musu, & M. L. Gullino (Eds.),  Sustainable develop-
ment and environment management experiences and case studies (pp. 397–411). Dordrecht: 
Springer. 
 Wiechmann, T. (2008). Strategic  ﬂ exibility beyond growth and shrinkage. Lessons from Dresden, 
Germany. In S. Rugare & T. Schwarz (Eds.),  Cities growing smaller (pp. 17–30). Cleveland: 
Kent State University. 

71
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_5, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 5.1  Introduction 1 
 The spatial development of cities is in ﬂ uenced by a combination of economic, 
social, demographic and environmental factors, which cause certain vulnerabilities 
in cities. Vulnerability , in this respect, means “exposure to risk and an inability to 
avoid or absorb potential harm” (Pelling  2003 ) . Thus,  socio-spatial vulnerability 
can be de ﬁ ned as the openness of regions, territories, cities, parts of cities, urban-
built environment s, urban areas, neighbourhoods or places to the risks caused by 
diverse dynamics, events and impacts. These disturbances can be unexpected or 
expected, sudden shocks or slowly developing changes and can have different drivers 
(economic, social, political or ecological). Vulnerability refers to the limited capac-
ity of  spaces to avoid or absorb potential harm from diverse risks and includes 
complex socio-political characteristics attached to the spaces that accommodate 
them. This means that physical capacities as well as social processes attached to 
these spatial processes need to be addressed here. Socio-spatial vulnerabilities are 
de ﬁ ned not only in terms of path-dependent characteristics of space but also their 
exposure to major pressure/damaging phenomena and economic pressure, particu-
larly in periods of change in economic and political regimes, while also discussing 
modes of regulation. 
 In this chapter, it is claimed that the vulnerability    of cities has increased sub-
stantially over recent decades due to changes in the economic regime   , speci ﬁ cally 
from  a Keynesian    developmentalist model to a neoliberal approach. There is no 
 Chapter 5 
 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability 
to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon, 
Oporto, Istanbul, Stockholm and Rotterdam 
 Tuna  Taşan-Kok and  Dominic  Stead  
 T.  Taşan-Kok (*) •  D.  Stead  
 OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft University 
of Technology ,  2628 BX ,  Delft ,  The Netherlands 
e-mail:  m.t.tasan-kok@tudelft.nl ;  d.stead@tudelft.nl 
 1  The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of all the SUPER-Cities (Sustainable Land 
Use Policies for Resilient Cities) research project partners in preparing this chapter. 

72
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
doubt that globalisation has brought about important changes in cities, and some-
times even contradicting, spatial manifestations have taken place in cities in 
response to global challenges. Global challenges have had important implications 
for transformations in cities, including economic restructuring, the spatial redistri-
bution of the population and economic activities, and new divisions in the labour 
market . 
 Consequently, economic restructuring can be considered as one of the main 
sources of vulnerability . Previous literature has pointed out that the different forms 
of transformation are induced by the  redistribution of the population and economic 
activities in urban areas. Cities go through some spatial and functional transforma-
tions (as described  in Chap.   4 ) that are accelerated by the changing priorities in 
urban activities, while also facing spatial, social and economic inequalities and 
 socio-spatial segregation  due to labour processes that result in certain groups being 
favoured over others. 
 Socio-spatial segregation can be de ﬁ ned as spatialised social and economic 
inequality (in terms of access to housing, quality of space and locational advantage) 
among groups living under different social (employment and education) and eco-
nomic (income and property ownership) conditions (Taşan-Kok  2012 ) .  Socio-
economic segregation processes, like redistribution processes, are triggered by 
changing economic, social and political conditions, though in different forms 
depending on the path-dependent conjunctures in diverse countries. 
 The argument put forward is that  spatial and functional transformations  and the 
consequent redistribution of population and activities leading to  socio-spatial segre-
gation processes increase the vulnerability of cities. It is claimed that the intercon-
nections and interdependences between the different social groups facilitate support 
between the different segments of society and strengthen the urban system and its 
resilience. Accordingly, increasing  socio-spatial discontinuities and a loss of the 
medium of collective action are major sources of vulnerability in cities. 
 Social continuity plays an important role in the capacity of the system to cope 
with uncertainties, as it helps communities to communicate and organise them-
selves easily. Segregated communities have less chance to cooperate and coordi-
nate actions when needed. Socio-spatial segregation also limits the democratic 
participation of diverse groups in common actions and negatively affects the learn-
ing process of adaptation to unexpected or expected conditions in the development 
process, which are extremely important for the capacity for self-organisation and 
resilience. 
 This chapter focusses on the urban growth dynamics and the drivers of spatial 
change experienced in four countries (Portugal , Turkey , Sweden and the Netherlands ) 
and  ﬁ ve major cities of these countries (Lisbon , Oporto , Istanbul , Stockholm and 
Rotterdam ). It considers both the path-dependent characteristics and contextual 
dynamics of different periods. The aim is to de ﬁ ne how recent changes have affected 
socio-spatial vulnerability in the case study cities. In the  ﬁ rst section of this chapter, 
socio-spatial transformations in the global drivers of change are addressed brie ﬂ y 
in selected case cities, while the second part of this chapter is devoted to de ﬁ ning 
the socio-spatial segregation processes in each. 

73
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
 5.2  Determinants of Change: Neoliberal Economic 
Restructuring and Socio-Demographic Transformations 
in the Case Study Areas 
 Most countries experienced changes in their economic regimes in the 1970s under 
the conditions imposed by globalisation , mainly in the transition from the Keynesian 
to neoliberal model of development (see Table  5.1 ). The economic restructuring that 
took place to adapt to the global economic dynamics gave rise to new opportunities 
and constraints in different sectors, with some important implications for produc-
tion systems and labour market s (see Chap.   2  ). In some cases, economic restructuring 
was triggered by globalisation, while deregulatory measures were also supported by 
changes in political regimes (in the case of Portugal in 1970s and Turkey in 1980). 
In any case, economic restructuring processes, driven by the new neoliberal agenda, 
were obviously driven by the path-dependent trajectories of events and the institu-
tional context of each country (Table  5.1 ). 
 In all four countries, it is possible to identify a variegated form of welfare state 
economic regime    that dominated the policies and regulation regimes prior to the 1970s 
crisis, which has shifted to neoliberalism    with the help of deregulatory measures. 
These key transformations and trends in our study areas, such as increasing  privatisa-
tion  (Sweden    and the Netherlands   ),  deregulation  (Turkey   ) and increasing  entrepre-
neurialism  (Portugal ), make up the different components of the neoliberalist economic 
and state restructuring. Moreover, there are two common tendencies that are important 
in these countries: the  ﬁ rst is the restructuring of the cities, which causes the decline 
of certain activities, but growth on localised international functions and services, while 
the second is the ascent of the property market    in the urban economy   . 
 The restructuring and deindustrialisation processes and the growth in services 
brought about a change in sectoral priorities, employment opportunities and labour 
market dynamics, along with functions related to the internationalising service 
economy, which triggered socio-spatial transformations. Previous literature has 
illustrated the implications of restructuring the economic basis of cities during the 
shift from Keynesian welfare state policies to post-Keynesian neoliberal policies, 
emphasising the decreasing social cohesion and increasing socio-spatial segmenta-
tion (Fainstein  2001a,  b ) . These tendencies are accelerated by the massive popula-
tion movements, both within the countries and from abroad. As can be seen from 
Table  5.2 , there are other demographic factors that have played an important role in 
the segregation processes in the case study areas. In order to understand the important 
socio-spatial transformations taking place in these countries, there is, however, a 
need for an evolutionary analysis. 
 In Portugal , the major spatial transformations go back to the 1960s, when migra-
tion  ﬂ ows gave rise to both a dense urbanisation along the Atlantic coastline and 
the deserti ﬁ cation of inner areas following a strong rural exodus and a lack of suit-
able housing policies. Around the same time, outward emigration to other parts 
of Europe and the United States was high. The exceptional population growth in 
the most important cities and inef ﬁ cacy of planning tools and policies led to 

74
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
 Table 5.1  Impact of economic restructuring in different periods in the case study areas 
 Portugal 
 Turkey 
 Sweden 
 The Netherlands 
 Keynesian (1950s and 
1960s) 
 Development via industrialisation, 
economic investment and 
infrastructure development 
 Modernism-managerialism with 
limited resources 
 Social democratic model 
of welfare society with 
economic reconstruc-
tion and growth 
 Generous welfare state 
economy 
 Transition (1970s and 
1980s) 
 Economic crisis, decolonisation 
and emigration 
 From protectionist economic 
policies to increased reliance 
on market forces 
 Deregulation and 
decreasing welfare 
services 
 Transition of welfare 
state economy 
towards liberalism 
 Post-Keynesian 
(1990s and 2000s) 
 EU integration and increasing 
entrepreneurialism 
 State-assisted competitive 
entrepreneurialism and 
deregulation 
 Challenges to maintain 
the welfare system 
privatisation 
 Devolution and 
deregulation, besides 
privatisation 

75
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
 Table 5.2  Dominant urban growth dynamics in four countries in different periods 
 Portugal 
 Turkey 
 Sweden 
 The Netherlands 
 Keynesian period 
(1950s and 1960s) 
 Urbanisation along the Atlantic 
coastline and important cities 
and the deserti ﬁ cation of 
inner areas 
 Massive migration from 
rural to urban areas 
 Urban growth accelerated 
by investments in 
large-scale projects 
 Decentralisation, suburbani-
sation and sprawl 
 Increasing growth of 
metropolitan areas 
 Development of new towns 
 Transition period 
(1970s and 1980s) 
 Functional dispersion of urban 
fabric 
 Neoliberal forms of urban 
development, increasing 
importance of property 
markets 
 Market-oriented 
development 
 Increasing problems in the 
inner-city urban areas 
 Discontinuities in suburban and 
peri-urban areas 
 Market-oriented supply 
Construction of 
apartments of higher 
quality and price 
 Urban densi ﬁ cation, 
brown ﬁ eld development 
and controlled urban 
sprawl 
 Post-Keynesian 
period (1990s and 
2000s) 
 Loss of population in metropoli-
tan centres; shrinkage 
 Increasing importance of 
export centres, coastal 
areas and metropolitan 
areas. Increasing 
primacy of Istanbul 
 Both urban sprawl and 
densi ﬁ cation 
 Mixed growth tendencies: 
decentralisation and 
inner-city regeneration 
 Increasing migrations between 
municipalities 
 Large-scale inner-city 
regeneration projects, 
besides new town 
development out of cities 

76
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
large-scale suburban development. Driven by dense suburban housing, illegal 
urbanisation and slums with few urban facilities (health, educational, cultural) and 
commuting to industrial areas or traditional city cores (PNPOT  2007 ; Silva  1994 ) , 
cities sprawled independently of spatial planning laws during the 1960s. Democracy 
in 1974 marked a clear shift from the former totalitarian regime. Among other 
factors, this change brought colonial independence and, as a consequence, a 
dif ﬁ cult decolonisation process. This course of action, together with the interna-
tional economic crisis, brought a large number of returnees and foreigners to 
Portugal. Although some returned to their home towns in inner rural areas, most 
concentrated in the metropolitan areas of Lisbon    and Oporto    where jobs in indus-
tries and services were available. In this period, although the potentials of medium-
sized cities were recognised, functional dispersion and urban fabric discontinuities 
continued in suburban and peri-urban areas (PNPOT  2007  ) . Following accession to 
the European Community (and European funds) in 1995, substantial sums of 
money were invested in the development of road networks, especially motorways, 
and other urban infrastructure . The development of the transport    infrastructure 
network contributed to a functional polycentric shift, which would complement the 
earlier residential suburbanisation areas. This largely allowed not only a popula-
tion stabilisation in the Portuguese metropolitan areas but also an increase in the 
number of inner migrations between municipalities. It also promoted a loss of popu-
lation in metropolitan centres, such as in the cities of Lisbon and Oporto, and 
resulted in important shrinkage dynamics, which would become critical issues in 
urban design and planning. 
 In Turkey , large metropolitan areas also faced massive immigration from the 
surrounding regions, beginning in the 1950s, due to the concentration of industri-
alisation efforts in major cities and the decreasing number of jobs in rural areas as 
a result of mechanisation in agriculture. The massive migration created low-income 
immigrant communities in major cities, resulting in massive informal urban devel-
opment. Following the economic crisis and turbulence in the economy , social 
unrest and problems in the political regime during the late 1970s brought radical 
changes the economic policies that can be de ﬁ ned in terms of a shift from import 
substitution-protection to export-oriented liberal policies. After the 1980s, the 
country endured severe economic problems and, seeking immediate solutions, 
adopted new entrepreneurial policies to restructure the economy. The new policies 
favoured well-developed areas as well as coastal areas that were able to attract 
tourism or export-oriented production. As a result, large cities and coastal areas 
experienced very high rates of population growth, mainly coming from rural areas. 
The highest increase in the urban population took place in the late 1980s, where 
much of the growth was due to population movements from smaller settlements to 
metropolitan areas, especially to Istanbul . After the 1990s, there was a substantial 
decline in the natural rate of population increase. Despite these relatively lower 
 ﬁ gures, it still meant a population increase of around one million in urban areas 
between 1990 and 2000 and 1.2 million between 2000 and 2005. 
 In Sweden , the period from the 1950s to 1975 witnessed an economic boom, 
and urban policies were characterised by support for large-scale industrial zones, 

77
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
of ﬁ ces, residential areas and transport infrastructure   . Major projects included the 
redevelopment of the existing town centres, the construction of large shopping 
centres and enormous suburban developments in the so-called Million Homes 
Programme ( Miljonprogrammet ) between 1965 and 1974. As was the case else-
where in Europe, the economic crisis in the 1970s and stagnation in industrial 
development led to a deep economic recession and slowed the pace of urbanisation. 
The focus of urban policies and planning moved from the construction of housing 
and infrastructure to tackling segregation through the renewal of social and physical 
environments in existing housing areas, which continued into the 1980s (Granberg 
and von Sydow  1998  ) . In the 1990s, the framework conditions for urban develop-
ment were deeply affected by another economic crisis a process of deregulation by 
the nonsocialist coalition in 1991. A new wave of modest urbanisation was set in 
motion in the late 1990s that is still continuing today. The strongest growth took 
place in the larger urban areas of Stockholm , Göteborg and Malmö, followed by 
ongoing densi ﬁ cation processes in the centres and urban sprawl in their attached 
hinterlands (Schmitt and Dubois  2008 ) . 
 In the Netherlands   , prior to the 1970s, urban growth had been concentrated in 
urban agglomerations in the west of the country, known as Randstad. The rapid 
growth of the economy    and rising population  ﬁ gures led to growing fears of unbri-
dled urban expansion in the Randstad region (IDG  1997  ) . The policy of  concentrated 
deconcentration , introduced by the second memorandum on spatial planning in 
1966, promoted new urban growth outside existing urban areas in a number of des-
ignated overspill centres (Bontje  2003 ) . From the early 1960s to the early 1980s, a 
number of new towns were designated and built in an attempt to reduce pressure on 
the Randstad by encouraging the development of bordering areas (Bontje  2003 ; IDG 
 1997  ) . The late 1980s and 1990s witnessed an increased interest in strengthening the 
international position of the Randstad. The principle of concentrated decentralisation 
was dropped, and the compact city emerged (Hoppenbrouwer et al.  2003 ) . This 
principle was also triggered by increasing problems in the inner-city urban areas with 
the growing suburbanisation tendencies. The notion of the compact city suggested 
urban densi ﬁ cation, brown ﬁ eld development and extensions of existing urban areas. 
Between 1995 and 2005, the populations of the major cities had stabilised, and as far 
as residential development is concerned, urban sprawl was to a certain extent under 
control. However, at the end of 1990s, the rate of population growth in the rural part 
of Randstad was growing more rapidly than the rest of the country, although lower 
than during the 1970s (IDG  1997  ) . In the meantime, inner-city decline became a 
major issue due to the concentrated decentralisation policy, which fostered an unprec-
edented wave of suburbanisation and substantial income differences between city 
centres and the suburbs (Schwanen et al.  2004 ; Dieleman and Wallet  2003 ) . 
 The analysis of the dynamics of spatial development shows the importance of the 
changes in economic regimes and policies and, parallel to them, the changes in 
priorities in the development process, which de ﬁ nes the redistribution of population 
and population increases or decreases in cities affected by the immigration/emigra-
tion processes. In all four countries, the population movements have been key fac-
tors in de ﬁ ning the characteristics of urban development, although the nature of 

78
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
migration is substantially different in each. In the Netherlands , immigration from 
Turkey , the Middle East and North Africa was triggered by government policies to 
 ﬁ ll low-skilled jobs from the 1960s onwards. Similar processes were experienced in 
Sweden , although immigration was also driven by asylum and social security rea-
sons. In Turkey, people began to move from the poorer regions towards the large 
metropolitan cities to  ﬁ nd jobs from 1950s onwards. Similar processes were experi-
enced in Portugal in the 1960s, with low-income groups migrating to the more 
advanced Western European countries to  ﬁ nd work. However, immediately after the 
decolonisation process following the 1974 revolution, not only Portuguese citizens 
returned back to the country but also a signi ﬁ cant number of immigrants from 
Portuguese-speaking African countries. 
 5.3  Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to the Global Drivers 
of Change in Case Cities 
 This section aims to present the experiences of the case study cities (Istanbul , 
Rotterdam , Stockholm , Oporto and Lisbon ) in terms of the  spatial redistribution of 
population and economic activity and  socio-spatial segregation processes and to 
analyse the socio-spatial vulnerabilities created by these processes of transformation. 
It can be seen from these case studies that, in some cities such as Lisbon and Oporto, 
redistribution processes caused  spatial transformations in the peri-urbanised 
areas towards the edges in forms of suburbanisation and sprawl; the inner-city 
areas experienced  shrinkage in doughnut patterns (in the centre) or its reverse 
(in the suburbs) and mosaic or perforation patterns (mixed type). In contrast, redis-
tribution processes in other cities (e.g. Istanbul, Stockholm and Rotterdam) caused 
spatial transformations in the peri-urbanised areas; the inner-city areas began to be 
 intensi ﬁ ed through the recycling or redevelopment of existing sites, and new high-
density areas were also developed. 
 Socio-spatial segregation is a process that has been experienced in all of our case 
study cities as a result of diverse community processes. In Lisbon and Oporto , 
socio-spatial segregation processes have led to the exclusion of some groups from 
certain parts of the city. Similarly, in Istanbul   , socio-spatial segregation has been 
driven by rapid population growth and migration. In Stockholm , on top of the demo-
graphic changes and immigration processes, sectoral restructuring played a role in 
the segregation of different groups, while ethnic-based social exclusion processes 
have been the main drivers of socio-spatial segregation in Rotterdam . 
 Some cross-cutting processes, such as changing policy frameworks, property-led 
development and changing lifestyles , that are common to all of the case study areas 
(and elsewhere in the world) have also played an important role in the spatial trans-
formations of each city. As our detailed case study analysis also displays, some of 
these socio-spatial vulnerabilities were triggered by certain policy-driven processes: 
these are discussed later in the book (Chap.   7 ). 

79
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
 5.3.1  Increasing Vulnerability of Cities due to the Redistribution 
of Population and the New Dynamics of Urban Growth 
 Diverse spatial transformations have been experienced in all of the case study cities; 
with  sprawl, suburbanisation, spatial fragmentation, polycentric development or 
concentrated decentralisation resulting in different spatial patterns (see Table  5.3 ). 
 5.3.1.1  Portugal: Suburbanisation and Shrinkage due to Change of Regime, 
Rural Displacement and Immigration 
 The Metropolitan Area of Lisbon which includes the municipalities of Amadora, 
Cascais, Lisboa, Loures, Odivelas, Oeiras, Sintra and Vila Franca de Xira, was 
only recently legally acknowledged as an institutional and administrative body 
with its own authority. Nevertheless, plans for the area have been developing 
since the late nineteenth century, especially in transport infrastructure plans. 
However, in the absence of an effective Regional Spatial Plan, an intensive migration 
to Lisbon and adjoining municipalities began in areas served by suburban railways 
or near national railway stations, encouraging industrial development (PNPOT 
 2007 ; Silva  1994 ) . These circumstances led to large-scale urban sprawl, which 
included: (1) areas of dense collective housing buildings in suburban areas that were 
linked to railway stations but lacked urban collective facilities and public space 
(e.g. Agualva-Cacém); (2) low-density areas with detached houses near links to 
commercial areas, often illegal and lacking basic public infrastructures (e.g. Fernão 
Ferro); and (3) slums in derelict areas bordering infrastructures and industrial areas 
in the city cores (e.g. Chelas). These trends of development were a major concern in 
the 1980s and 1990s (Soares  and Jorge  1985 ; Salgueiro  2001 ) . 
 In the 1990s, new forms of centrality associated with the knowledge-economy 
started to evolve. While industrial and dock areas in the centre became obsolete due 
to changes in the productive and economic system the former radial structure 
developed into a network system of motorways, creating opportunities for new 
growth areas along the main axes previously served by the train. Sintra experienced 
the highest population increase in the metropolitan area (39%), while Lisbon lost 
15% and Amadora lost 3% of their populations. There was also a process of shrink-
age in the core areas, the most dramatic being in the old mediaeval core of Lisbon 
(Sé, Santa Justa, Socorro) and Oeiras (Algés), which also experienced severe decay 
of its building stock. This region is characterised by an ageing population and an 
associated loss of employed residents. Similar trends can be seen in the southern 
part of the city, for instance, in Barreiro, an important industrial site with connec-
tions to the national port and railway networks, which experienced a signi ﬁ cant loss 
of population by 8%. 
 The Oporto metropolitan region, which is characterised by dispersed urban set-
tlements with the highest densities in the municipalities of Oporto, Matosinhos and 

80
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
 Table 5.3  Current urban growth dynamics in the case study cities 
 Country 
 Dynamic 
 Dominant spatial tendencies 
 Changes in the periphery 
 Changes in the inner city 
 Portugal 
 Population decline 
 Shrinkage 
 Low-density new land 
development 
 Historic preservation, renewal and 
regeneration 
 Turkey 
 Rapid urban growth 
 Sprawl and intensi ﬁ cation 
 Fragmented new land develop-
ment outside the city 
 Reuse of inner-city land: renewal and 
regeneration (historical areas/legalised 
squatter areas) 
 Sweden 
 Moderate growth 
 Physical expansion and 
polycentricity at the 
regional scale 
 Planned land development and 
functional integration due to 
regional enlargement 
 Reuse of inner-city land: renewal and 
regeneration (reuse of social housing 
estates, renewal of declining 
neighbourhoods) 
 The Netherlands 
 Moderate growth 
 Controlled decentralisation 
and compact development 
 Controlled and limited new land 
development outside the city 
 Reuse of inner-city land: renewal and 
regeneration with large-scale top-down 
projects 

81
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
Vila Nova de Gaia, also experienced similar trends of shrinkage and sprawl. In the 
1960s and 1970s, the sprawl process led to the formation of suburban towns. A key 
element in this period was the Oporto Improvement Plan of 1956–1966. The plan 
enhanced the housing conditions in the centre, where the population lived in the so-
called ilhas (islands). The Municipality of Oporto became the biggest property 
owner in the country in this period (Cardoso  1996 ) . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s, sprawl processes and the growth of the outer ring of 
peripheral municipalities were more evident, and population and activities became 
further scattered around the city. By the 1980s and 1990s, there was a strong dis-
connect between the central area, primarily based on the tertiary sector, and a vast 
periphery that was dominated by processes of industrial dispersion (Günther and 
Tavares  1994 ) . Urban deconcentration trends have since been reinforced by 
investments in the metropolitan trunk road network and new radial and concentric 
axes and major junctions, creating new centralities and new mobility patterns. 
Residential deconcentration was accompanied by employment decentralisation, 
leading to the emergence of a new edge city on the outer ring of the metropolitan 
area. The superposition of these new patterns of territorial occupation on the 
traditional rural landscape is characterised by a dispersed type of settlement along 
the road network, generating a truly fragmented territory (Santos et al.  2009 ) . 
 Since around 2000, the urban agglomeration (metropolitan area) of Oporto has 
become more complex and heterogeneous, with clear differences from the tradi-
tional model of a European metropolis. The city of Oporto did not undergo 
signi ﬁ cant levels of polarisation, revealing various symptoms of economic and 
residential interdependence relative to the urban surroundings. The dispersed and 
centrifugal model of the Oporto Metropolitan Area has clear elements of polarisa-
tion, including the development of real estate and the expansion and diversi ﬁ cation 
of the  ﬁ nancial and hotel sectors.  
 5.3.1.2  Turkey : Sprawl Driven by Rapid Population Growth 
and Immigration and Property-Led Intensi ﬁ cation 
 In Istanbul , the rapidly increasing population due to immigration and the concentra-
tion of economic activities, including most of the prominent industries of Turkey , 
are important factors behind the city’s socio-spatial vulnerabilities. From the early 
1960s onwards, important structural transformations in rural areas generated an 
excess of labour that began to migrate to big cities, where they could  ﬁ nd employ-
ment often in marginal/informal service sector jobs and construction sectors (Tekeli 
and Erder  1978 ; Karpat  1976 ) . Istanbul has been the main node of immigration 
since the beginning of the population  ﬂ ows. Re ﬂ ecting this immigration process and 
the rapid population growth, Istanbul rapidly decentralised towards the periphery, 
while the inner-city areas were increasingly intensi ﬁ ed as a result of different factors, 
including squatter renewal projects or luxurious redevelopment projects (see Chap.   11 
for details) from the 1980s onwards. 

82
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
 The rapid growth of Istanbul ’s population created a new urban land and housing 
demand. From the 1980s onwards, new housing areas have been developed for dif-
ferent income groups, alongside the regularisation of the already built-up informal 
residential areas. The new schemes enforced changes in the administrative mecha-
nism and brought new regulations. Beginning in the 1980s, the comprehensive plan-
ning system was extended substantially, giving different planning rights to different 
authorities. The provision of different rights to different authorities made frag-
mented urban growth possible as well as urban sprawl. This trend was accelerated 
in the 1990s and 2000s, creating a disorganised planning system. 
 The continued attractiveness of the city is evident from the increasing share of 
its population in the total, which rose from 9% in 1970 to 15% in 2000. Population 
growth is still excess of  4%, which is double the natural rates of population 
growth, attracting population from different parts of Turkey as well as abroad. 
This high rate of population creates various problems related to the expansion of 
the already settled areas as well as the increasing sprawl of this city region. 
Furthermore, the internationalisation of services and the attractiveness of Istanbul 
for foreign producer services brought about pressures of intensi ﬁ cation and 
transformation of the inner-city areas. These two processes meant an increasing 
vulnerability of the Istanbul urban system. Firstly, the sprawl of the city created 
demand for land in the periphery in the watershed areas of the drinking water 
reserves, as well as in the forested areas to the north, which are crucial for the 
ecosystem . This residential and business growth is a signi ﬁ cant threat to ecologi-
cal sustainability . Second, the intensi ﬁ cation and transformation in the inner zones 
led to gentri ﬁ cation and accelerated socio-spatial segregation, besides increasing 
traf ﬁ c and pollution problems.  
 5.3.1.3  Sweden : Suburbanisation and Polycentric Development 
and Intensi ﬁ cation of the Inner City 
 Stockholm was one of the three cities (together with    Göteborg and Malmö) where a 
signi ﬁ cant population increase was experienced in the suburbs (compared to the city 
itself) during the 1950s. In all cases, transport policy has been important in the 
process of suburbanisation. A programme of urban renovation and clearance and 
the development of large-scale transport infrastructure began in the city centre of 
Stockholm in 1952 and continued until the 1970s, by which time it had reached 
into the suburbs. This development raised public criticism connected from the 
environment al movement, especially in the late 1960s. This period, referred to as 
the “Record Years”, characterised by extremely high development optimism, standardi-
sation, environmental damage, growth of suburbs, expanding car use and laissez-faire 
planning. Major projects included the redevelopment of the existing town centres, the 
construction of large shopping centres and large suburban developments. 
 At the beginning of the 1980s, a new urbanism ideology emerged that called 
for a reorientation of housing policy. In the southern parts of city centre (Södra 

83
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
stationsområdet), this resulted in the rebuilding and concentration of housing 
development (Gordan  2008 ) . Another controversial area was in the northern part of 
Stockholm along the E4 motorway and around the Stockholm airport and university 
where an important goal was to balance regional growth between the northern and 
the southern parts of the region (Stahre  2007 ) . 
 During the 1970–1980 period, people moved to the larger cities, while there was 
also an opposite movement from the bigger cities to neighbouring towns in search of 
a better quality of life (i.e. in terms of space, quality of housing and closeness to open 
spaces). During this period, population growth created problems for the highway 
system in Stockholm   , when car ownership accelerated enormously (Hall  1998 ) . 
 According to Nilsson  ( 2007 ) , the population increase in the suburbs was around 
three times as high as in the urban cores, which reduced the dominance of the three 
cities in their local labour market s so that almost 60% of the inhabitants in the met-
ropolitan regions now live outside the cities of Stockholm , Göteborg and Malmö. 
 In the 1990s, the main objective of spatial planning in the Stockholm    region 
was to improve the transport infrastructure. Thereafter, the old harbour and 
industrial areas were turned over for housing development as well as areas that 
had earlier been considered unsuitable for building or which were designated as 
green areas (Hall  2002 ) . The Million House Programme was renewed as a result 
of social, cultural and architectural incentives to respond to the ongoing socio-
spatial segregation processes, and new investments were made in the transport 
infrastructure with the aim of improving the public transport system. A new 
wave of modest urbanisation was set in motion in Stockholm in the late 1990s 
which is still continuing today. The strong urban growth in Stockholm has been 
followed by an ongoing intensi ﬁ cation processes in the centre, along with urban 
sprawl in the hinterland (Schmitt and Dubois  2008 ) .  
 5.3.1.4  The Netherlands: Polycentric Development Led by a Concentrated 
Decentralisation Policy and Intensi ﬁ cation of the Inner City Led by 
Urban Regeneration 
 Prior to the 1960s, urban growth in the Netherlands was concentrated in urban 
agglomerations in the west of the country in the Randstad – the economic heart of 
the country. From the early 1960s to the early 1980s, as a result of a national 
polycentricity policy, a number of new towns were designated and built in an attempt 
to reduce pressure on the Randstad, along with some spatial policy documents to 
encourage the development of areas in the north of Holland, in Flevoland and in the 
Delta area (Bontje  2003 ; IDG  1997 ) . However, due to population growth, increased 
car ownership and demand for lower-density residential areas, the number of people 
moving to towns and villages in the green central area (the Green Heart) increased 
throughout the 1960s (IDG  1997 ) , while migration from big cities towards the small 
towns and villages continued throughout the 1970s. Between 1970 and 1985, the 
population of the three largest cities (Amsterdam, the Hague and Rotterdam ) fell by 
an average of more than 18%. 

84
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
 In response to these dynamics, the national spatial policy went through a process 
of transformation. A number of cities bordering the Green Heart, namely, 
Amsterdam, Utrecht, the Hague and Rotterdam , became more connected and 
polycentric, while the inner-city urban areas saw an increase in suburbanisation 
tendencies. The notion of the compact city was introduced focussing on urban 
intensi ﬁ cation   , the regeneration of brown ﬁ eld areas and the extension of existing 
urban areas. During this period, the population of the Rotterdam stabilised, and as 
far as residential development was concerned, urban sprawl was brought under 
control. 
 At the end of 1990s, the rate of population growth of the Green Heart was higher. 
In the meantime, inner-city decline became a major issue as a result of the concen-
trated decentralisation policy, which fostered an unprecedented wave of suburbani-
sation and substantial income differences between the city centres and suburbs 
(Schwanen et al.  2004 ; Dieleman and Wallet  2003 ) . 
 In Rotterdam , the implementation of a polycentric urban development policy is 
evident in the inner-city and peri-urbanised areas of the city. After sustaining severe 
damage in the Second World War, the city was extensively redeveloped. In the 
1960s, old neighbourhoods were redeveloped and upgraded, mainly in large-scale 
projects along large boulevards. In the mid-1980s, metropolitan projects were initi-
ated that included the large waterfront project Kop van Zuid. From the early 1990s, 
urban development has taken place in the city and also in surrounding suburbs and 
other closely connected cities and villages. Under this programme, new housing 
areas in the north of the city were developed (e.g. Nesselande on the north eastern 
edge of the city). 
 5.3.2  Increasing Vulnerability of Cities due to Increasing 
Spatial, Social and Economic Inequalities 
and Socio-Spatial Segregation 
 The  socio-spatial segregation of diverse groups de ﬁ ned by social, ethnic, cultural 
or economic characteristics is a common phenomenon in cities that have experi-
enced large-scale immigration. In most cases, people with similar backgrounds 
prefer to live close to each other, for social networking reasons or simply afford-
ability reasons. Economic conditions were of course also a great incentive to 
 ﬁ nding the most affordable neighbourhoods. Various groups of immigrants tend to 
live close to each other either in social housing areas (in welfare states like Sweden    
or the Netherlands) or in squatter areas if the provision of affordable public hous-
ing is not available or limited (as in the case of Portugal    and Turkey   ). Moreover, as 
the case studies    show, the wealthy parts of society may prefer to live in isolated 
housing areas, sometimes in the form of gated communities and sometimes simply 
in neighbourhoods in which immigrants cannot afford to live. 

85
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
 5.3.2.1  Lisbon and Oporto : Socio-Spatial Segregation 
of Poor Immigrant Communities 
 Throughout the 1960s, there was a large wave of migration of people, mostly poor, 
from other areas of the country to the large urban agglomerations, where the govern-
ment was unable to ful ﬁ l housing needs. This resulted in the expansion of illegal 
neighbourhoods, slums and an overcrowding of available housing. With the decolo-
nisation and the return of emigrants during the period 1974–1976, this situation 
was aggravated, further increasing the suburbanisation. In 1974, as a response to the 
housing dif ﬁ culties, rents were frozen, and this meant that some landlords were 
unable to afford to maintain their properties. As a result, various rental properties fell 
into disrepair, and the rental market declined. In recent years, steps have been taken 
to ease the control of rents, but the owner-occupant market still prevails. For this 
reason, investments in historical and consolidated urban areas, urban renewal and a 
revitalisation of the central areas have become key issues on the urban agenda. 
 The most vulnerable spaces are the urban and semiurban areas, where approxi-
mately three quarters of the poor population are concentrated (MAOTDR  2008 ) . 
Poverty in Portugal    is concentrated among the elderly and young. The unemployed, 
self-employed and retired are particularly vulnerable to poverty in Portugal, as well 
as people with disabilities, the homeless and immigrants. 
 5.3.2.2  Istanbul : Inherited Socio-Spatial Segregation due to Rapid 
Population Growth, Migration and Growing Spatial Inequalities 
 In Istanbul , socio-spatial segregation has been an issue since the 1950s as an out-
come of immigration from the rural areas. During the 1960s and 1970s,  gecekondu 
(informal housing) areas became spaces of reproduction of informalities and acted 
as a buffer mechanism in the absence of a formal social security institutions and 
public services. Migrants coming from different parts of the country preferred to 
live in close proximity to their families, relatives and  hemşehri ’s (compatriots). 
Although the  gecekondu settlements were contrary to regulations, municipalities 
and central governments accepted that the emergence of such areas was inevitable 
and tolerable due to their limited demand for capital investment. As the informal 
housing areas grew, some municipal services were brought to these areas, although 
they were lower than the accepted of ﬁ cial standards. In time, it can be said that 
while  socio-spatial segregation did not increase, it did become more visible. 
 While the economy was growing as a result of strong privatisation and a market-
oriented transformations throughout the 1980s, two important dynamics brought 
new spatial inequalities to Istanbul . First, the spatial separation of social groups on 
the basis of income and social status became more apparent. Second, the regularisa-
tion of illegal housing areas under new legal arrangements, created a pro ﬁ t-making 
mechanism in the form of redevelopment projects. This process changed the pro ﬁ le 

86
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
of these neighbourhoods as the rural immigrants began to move out to other areas 
and other urban lower-income groups began to move in. Finally, a new group of 
entrepreneurial urban rich appeared with clear residential preferences and lots of 
money to spend. 
 A clear  socio-spatial segregation pattern existed throughout the 1980s that under-
went a slight change in the 2000s as the dynamics became more complicated in the 
wake of new housing and transformation projects by the Housing Development 
Authority and other local government agencies (Eraydin  2008a ) . Areas with a occu-
pied by high density of transformation projects were mainly occupied by high income 
white-collar workers (scienti ﬁ c and technical employees, managers, administrators 
and people working in  ﬁ nancial and commercial activities) according to the studies of 
Güvenç and Işık  ( 2002 ) and Eraydin  ( 2008b ) . The growing income disparities of the 
mid-1990s began to be re ﬂ ected in the creation of super luxurious residential develop-
ments and commercial property developments built with international capital, while 
local governments also became more open to property-led urban development proj-
ects. The development of  ﬁ rst-generation gated communities also contributed to a 
clear de ﬁ nition of the boundaries between the better- and worse-off parts of urban 
society. Increasing capital accumulation in the city, let to a growth in the popularity 
of gated communities gained in momentum in the mid-1980s in line with new con-
sumerist lifestyles (Kurtuluş  2005 ) . However, the real boom in such enclosed housing 
areas (not only in the form of villas with large gardens but also of gated residential 
towers) took place from the end of the 1990s onwards (Kurtuluş  2005 ) .  
 5.3.2.3  Stockholm : Socio-Spatial Segregation due to Demographic Change, 
Migration and Sectoral Restructuring 
 In Stockholm ,  socio-spatial segregation was caused by a combination of factors, such 
as government housing policies, demographic change related to increasing numbers 
of immigrants and decreasing natural population growth, growing income differ-
ences in terms of disposable incomes and new divisions of labour. 
 Government housing programmes have been an important trigger to socio-spatial 
polarisation. In addition, the increasing numbers of immigrants has created spaces of 
vulnerability in the city. In the  ﬁ rst decade of the twenty- ﬁ rst century, the population 
of the Stockholm  region increased relatively quickly. The 1970s and 1980s were 
marked by a period of both high inward and outward migration, when immigrants, 
many of them well educated, came from across the whole country but especially 
from neighbouring regions (Johansson and Persson  2004 : 112–118). The net migra-
tion between Stockholm and the rest of Sweden was negative in the period 1990–
1995, although the population in Stockholm increased by 200,000 between 1990 and 
2002, corresponding to a 13% growth rate (compared to 4% in the whole country) 
(Hermelin  2004 : 9). At the end of the 1990s, immigration was the main reason for 
growth, but after that time, it was a natural increase of population that accounted for 
much of the growth. At the same time, the relative share of the population over 
65 years of age increased. Between 1997 and 2007, the number of inhabitants rose by 

87
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
11% (compared with 2% in the rest of Sweden). Due to the current baby boom and 
the continuing in-migration, it is forecast that this trend will continue in the future. 
 The growing difference in disposable income is another important factor that has 
added to socio-spatial segregation. This situation became visible during the 1980s 
when the incomes of immigrants decreased more than those of the natives. Poverty 
among people born outside Europe rose and homelessness increased, although the 
number of people on social assistance decreased. From 2000 onwards, the amount 
of assistance per family increased despite a decrease in the number of people receiv-
ing social assistance. In this period, big differences in incomes and participation in 
the labour market between natives and foreigners became visible in the city. 
 Finally, the changing employment structure and economic restructuring 
in ﬂ uenced  socio-spatial segregation . During the 1960s and 1970s, three quarters of 
industrial jobs disappeared from central Stockholm (Sjöberg  2008 ) , which was 
partly compensated by the growing service sector, particularly during the 1980s. In 
the 1990s, growth was driven by the ICT in sector and other knowledge-intensive 
industries and services. Despite the burst of the high-tech bubble in 2000, the econ-
omy continued to grow (OECD  2006 ) . The rate of labour market participation 
among both women and men is high, but there is still strong gender segregation 
(RTK  2007 ) . Other current challenges are the late entry of young people into the 
labour market and the dif ﬁ culties faced by immigrants in  ﬁ nding employment. The 
latter is most notable in the city of Stockholm (OECD  2006 ) . Due to this combina-
tion of factors, a visible physical segregation of different social, ethnic and cultural 
groups in Stockholm and its surroundings has occurred. 
 5.3.2.4  Rotterdam : Ethnic-Based Socio-Spatial Segregation 
 In the Netherlands , it can be argued that the  socio-spatial segregation of ethnic 
immigrants of non-Western origin is an issue that was initially triggered by the cen-
trally planned social housing policy. Based on neighbourhood level data, Hartog 
and Zorlu  ( 2009 ) could  ﬁ nd no evidence of mono-ethnic neighbourhoods in the 
country, but they found a high concentration of immigrants of non-Western origin 
in certain inner-city neighbourhoods of the larger cities. Since housing provision 
is a centrally planned activity in the Netherlands, it is possible that the housing 
composition in neighbourhoods plays an important role in attracting immigrants 
with weak socio-economic positions, who are often from a variety of non-Western 
countries rather than a single origin (Hartog and Zorlu  2009 ) . 
 From the 1950s onwards, ethnic minorities (mainly Turks and Moroccans) 
moved in and replaced the residents of the inner city, who moved towards the edges 
of the city (and beyond) for more spacious and better quality housing. Later, other 
ethnic groups also moved into these neighbourhoods, renting cheap and low-quality 
housing. Both the increasing migration of unquali ﬁ ed labour to the city and the 
recession at the end of the 1970s and beginning of 1980s had an important in ﬂ uence 
on the social characteristics of the city. Unemployment , crime and social issues 
constituted the major characteristics of the social structure of the inner city. In the 

88
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
early 1980s, the municipality of Rotterdam    developed several programmes to 
modernise and broaden the city’s socio-economic base with projects like “New 
Rotterdam” and “Social Renewal of Rotterdam” (Miedema et al.  2002 ) . At the same 
time, education programmes (such as  Samenwerkingsverband “ Rotterdam Werkt ” – 
Rotterdam Works) were launched to help people with low levels of education  ﬁ nd 
employment in the newly developing economy ; however, the majority of unem-
ployed stayed unemployed (ibid). Towards the end of the 1980s, local job creation 
programmes were developed, but these mostly failed to increase the quali ﬁ cation 
levels of the unskilled unemployed. During the 1980s, urban regeneration    projects 
delivered improvements in the quality of housing although various social objectives 
(e.g. health, unemployment, education and crime) were not achieved (ibid). 
Moreover, these urban regeneration projects did little to change socio-spatial segre-
gation: the same people stayed in same neighbourhoods, albeit in better housing (but 
without mixing with higher-income groups through gentri ﬁ cation process) but at higher 
rents ibid. In the 1990s, some social renewal programmes were introduced to con-
nect social and employment policies. 
 5.4  Conclusions 
 Space is not merely a physical entity. As Soja  ( 1980: 209 ) observes, “Space and 
political organisation of space express social relationships but also react upon them”. 
Hence, spatial change re ﬂ ects not only spatial/ecological vulnerabilities but also 
social vulnerability areas. With this in mind, this chapter has attempted to de ﬁ ne the 
urban growth and transformation dynamics that have resulted in  socio-spatial vul-
nerabilities in the case study cities. We have argued in this chapter that spatial and 
functional transformations and redistribution of population and activities contrib-
uted to the socio-spatial segregation processes, which increase the vulnerability    of 
urban systems. As we illustrated in our case study cities, these weaknesses are cre-
ated by certain demographic (population and urban growth dynamics) and socio-
spatial transformations (spatial, social and economic inequalities and socio-spatial 
segregation), that affect the resilience of cities because they limit the  interconnec-
tions and  interdependences between the different social groups in these cities. With 
illustrated cases, we have linked the spatial fragmentation tendencies (caused by 
diverse urban growth tendencies) to increasing  social discontinuities and loss of 
 collective action . As introduced earlier (Chap.   1 ), three dynamic assets, namely , 
adaptive capacity , self-organisation and transformability, are needed for urban sys-
tems to be resilient. This chapter illustrated that  social discontinuities are increasing 
in cities due to certain urban growth dynamics created by transformation processes 
and these tendencies decrease the capacity of urban systems for adaptive actions, 
self-organisation and transformability. 
 The empirical sections of this book (namely, Chaps.   10–13  ) demonstrate how 
the resilience of selected urban systems is affected by these speci ﬁ c vulnerabili-
ties. This chapter has demonstrated that there are some important differences in 

89
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
structural characteristics as well as the policies that were adopted in the selected 
cities. In general, the cities have expanded towards the periphery, either in the 
form of planned suburban towns or simply as sprawling patterns. As a result, 
Istanbul , Stockholm and Rotterdam have experienced an intensi ﬁ cation  of the inner-
city areas through redevelopment and regeneration projects and a gentri ﬁ cation 
and socio-spatial segregation processes in the inner-city neighbourhoods. In con-
trast to this intensi ﬁ cation process, Lisbon and Oporto    have experienced decline 
and dereliction, while spatial transformations have taken place towards the periph-
ery of the urbanised areas. 
 In places where inner-city decline has occured, the mobility of people has been 
high. Some built-up areas or individual buildings emptied and began to decline, 
while others have been occupied by new residents, resulting in  social discontinu-
ity in the neighbourhoods concerned. Spatial processes related to the intensi ﬁ cation 
of inner-city areas, like gentri ﬁ cation and regeneration processes, which led to 
spatial segregation of different income groups, have also added to the  social 
discontinuity . This is also true for the dense elitist, property-led regeneration 
projects and gated communities, which have caused certain displacements in 
cities. As discussed in the introduction,  social discontinuity in cities is one of 
the basic sources of socio-spatial vulnerabilities that negatively affect certain 
attributes of resilience, namely, adaptability  , capital building and especially con-
nectivity (both physical and social) between different groups.      
 References 
 Bontje, M. (2003). A ‘planner’s paradise’ lost? Past, present and future of Dutch national urbanization 
policy.  European Urban and Regional Studies, 10 (2), 135–151. 
 Cardoso, A. (1996).  Do desenvolvimento do planeamento ao planeamento do desenvolvimento 
[From developing planning the planning development]. Porto: Afrontamento e Departamento 
de Engenharia Civil da FEUP. 
 Dieleman, F. M., & Wallet, C. (2003). Income differences between central cities and suburbs in 
the Dutch urban regions.  Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geogra ﬁ e (TESG), 94 , 
265–275. 
 Eraydin, A. (2008a). The conditional nature of relations between competitiveness, social cohesion 
and spatial inequalities: The evidence from Istanbul. In P. Ache, H. T. Andersen, T. Maloutas, 
M. Raco, & T. Taşan-Kok (Eds.),  Cities between competitiveness and cohesion (pp. 99–115). 
Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Eraydin, A. (2008b). Cohesion and spatial segregation in Istanbul. The impact of globalisation on 
different social groups: Competitiveness, social cohesion and spatial segregation in Istanbul. 
 Urban Studies, 45 , 1663–1691. 
 Fainstein, S. (2001a).  Competitiveness, cohesion and governance: A review of the literature, cities 
programme. UK economic and social research council . Swindon: ESRC. 
 Fainstein, S. (2001b). Competitiveness, cohesion, and governance: Their implications for social 
justice.  International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 25 (4), 884–888. 
 Gordan, R. (2008). För en blandad befolkning. Södra stationsområdet och vision om det goda 
stadslivet. In H. Forsell (Ed.),  Den kalla och varma staden. Migration och stadsförändring i 
Stockholm efter 1970 . Stockholm: Stockholmia Förlag. 

90
T. Taşan-Kok and D. Stead
 Granberg, M., & von Sydow, Å. (1998).  Vart tog den rationella planeringen vägen? Om planering-
stänkande i Sverige under tre årtionden . Örebro: Örebro University. 
 Günther, A., & Tavares, R. (1994–1996 ). Oporto. Atlas histórico da ciudades Europeas, Península 
Ibérica . Barcelona: Salvat. 
 Güvenç, M., & Işık, O. (2002). A metropolis at the crossroads: The changing social geography of 
Istanbul under the impact of globalization. In P. Marcuse & R. van Kempen (Eds.),  Of states 
and cities: The partitioning of urban space (pp. 203–220). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Hall, P. (1998).  Cities in civilization . London: Harper Collins. 
 Hall, P. (2002).  Cities of tomorrow. An intellectual history of urban planning and design in the 
twentieth century . Malden: Blackwell Publishers. 
 Hartog, J., & Zorlu, A. (2009). Ethnic segregation in The Netherlands: An analysis at neighbourhood 
level.  International Journal of Manpower, 30 (1/2), 15–25. 
 Hermelin, B. (2004).  Tillväxtens urbana geogra ﬁ . En studie av sysselsättningsförändringar i Sveriges 
storstadsregioner . Stockholm: Kulturgeogra ﬁ ska institutionen, Stockholms universitet.  
 Hoppenbrouwer, E., Meijers, E., & Romein, A. (2003). Randstad. In E. Meijers, A. Romein & 
E. Hoppenbrouwer (Eds.), Planning polycentric urban regions in North West Europe.  Housing 
and Urban Policy Studies ,  25 , 33–80. 
   IDG—Information and Documentation Center for Geography in the Netherlands. (1997).  IDG 
Newsletter 2–1997. Utrecht. 
 Johansson, M., & Persson, L. O. (2004).  Stockholms ﬂ yttare under hundra år. Stockholm . Stockholm: 
The Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning and Urban Transportation. 
 Karpat, K. (1976).  The gecekondu: Rural migration and urbanization . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Kurtuluş, H. (2005). Istanbul’da kapalı yerleşmeler ve Beykoz Konakları örneği (Gated communities 
in Istanbul and the case of Beykoz Konakları) In H. Kurtuluş (Ed.),  Istanbul’da Kentsel Ayrışma 
( Urban segregation in Istanbul ) (pp. 161–186). Istanbul: Baglam Yayinlari. 
 MAOTDR. (2008).  Quali ﬁ cações, Trabalho e Coesão Social (documento de trabalho), Lisboa. 
  www.dpp.pt/pages/ ﬁ les/DPP_Portugal  . Accessed 18 June 2009. 
 Miedema, F., Oude Engberink, G., & van der Aa, P. (2002).  Rotterdam, the Netherlands: Kop van 
Zuid, URSPIC (Urban development and social polarisation) research report . Retrieved July 
30, 2008, from   www.ifresi.univ-lille1.fr/SITE/URSPIC/URSPIC/Rotterdam/Rotterdam.html  
 Nilsson, J. E. (2007).  Sweden – the emergence of a national urban policy . Information retrieved 
June 21, 2009, from   http://www.bth.se/tks/ctup.nsf/bilagor/Urban%20Policy%20in%20Sweden_
pdf/$ ﬁ le/Urban%20Policy%20in%20Sweden.pdf  
 OECD. (2006).  Territorial reviews. Stockholm. Sweden . Paris: OECD. 
 Pelling, M. (2003).  The vulnerability of cities: Natural disasters and social resilience . London: 
Earthscan Publications Ltd. 
 PNPOT. (2007).  Programa Nacional da Política de Ordenamento do Território . Lisboa: Ministério 
do Ambiente, do Ordenamento do Território e do Desenvolvimento Regional, Jorge Gaspar 
(coord.). Of ﬁ cial Report retrieved April 23, 2009, from   http://www.territorioportugal.pt/pnpot  
 Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning and Urban Transportation, Stockholm County Council (RTK). (2007). 
 Vision, objectives and strategies for the regional development of Stockholm. Programme for a 
new Regional Development Plan (RUFS 2010). Report 16:2007. Stockholm: The Of ﬁ ce of 
Regional Planning and Urban Transportation. 
 Salgueiro, B. T. (2001).  Lisboa. Periferia e Centralidades . [ Lisbon. Periphery and centralities ]. 
Oeiras: Celta. 
 Santos, S., et al. (2009).  The impact of closed condominiums in the urban form – a methodological 
approach . Porto: FEUP. 
 Schmitt, P., & Dubois, A. (2008).  Exploring the baltic sea region: On territorial capital and  spatial 
integration . Nordregio Report: Stockholm, 2008: 3. 
    Schwanen, T., Dijst, M., & Dieleman, F. M. (2004). Policies for urban form and their impact on 
travel: The Netherlands experience.  Urban Studies, 41 , 579–603. 
 Silva, C. (1994).  Políticas Urbanas em Lisboa (1926–1974) [Urban policies in Lisbon (1926–
1974)] . Lisbon: Livros Horizonte. 

91
5 Analysing the Socio-Spatial Vulnerability to Drivers of Globalisation in Lisbon…
 Sjöberg, Ö. (2008). Stadsformande näringar? In H. Lindgren & T. Peterson (Eds.),  Tillväxt och 
tradition. perspektiv på stockholms moderna ekonomiska historia . Stockholm: Stockholmia 
Förlag. 
   Soares, B., & Jorge, L. (1985). Urbanização Clandestina da Área Metropolitana de Lisboa [Illegal 
urban developments in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon] in Metrópoles e Micrópoles. Sociedade 
e Território, Revista de estudos urbanos e regionais Porto, Edições Afrontamento, 3. 
  Soja, E. (1980). The socio-spatial dialectic.  Annals of the Association of Geographers, 70 (2), 
207–225. 
 Stahre, U. (2007).  Den globala staden. Stockholms nutida stadsomvandling och sociala rörelser . 
Stockholm: Bokförlaget Atlas. 
 Taşan-Kok, T. (2012). Changing dynamics of residential segregation in Istanbul. In T. Maloutas & 
K. Fujita (Eds.),  Residential segregation around the world: Why context matters . Farnham: 
Ashgate. 
 Tekeli, İ., & Erder, L. (1978).  Yerleşme yapısının uyum süreci olarak göçler (Migration as an 
adaptation process of settlement systems) . Ankara: Hacettepe Üniversitesi Yayınları. 

93
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_6, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 6.1  Introduction 
 Planning systems tend to adjust to the ever-changing urban conditions, though similar 
urban trends can be found in different spatial forms (e.g. sprawl, shrinkage and 
polycentricism ). The questions raised by these phenomena and dynamics are often 
answered differently, based on the individual planning systems, cultures and styles, 
and in reference to the planning tools inherited from earlier periods. 
 This chapter aims to show the different approaches of four European countries to 
urban conditions, which have become generalised in an urbanised world: Portugal , 
Sweden , the Netherlands and Turkey. 1 First of all, the role of each national system 
within the wider scope of policies and planning cultures in recent years are elabo-
rated, after which a comparison is made of the various planning systems. 
 6.2  European Planning Cultures in Recent Years 
 It is often argued that most of the European Union’s in ﬂ uence on spatial develop-
ment patterns is due to sectoral policies and legislation agreed by the member states 
and further implemented by the national systems. There is no actual EU competence 
 S.  Morgado  (*) •  L. F.  Dias 
 Faculty of Architecture ,  Technical University of Lisbon ,
 Rua Sá Nogueira ,  1349-055  Lisbon ,  Portugal 
e-mail:  smorgado@fa.utl.pt ;  luisdias@fa.utl.pt 
 Chapter 6 
 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning 
in Portugal, Turkey, Sweden and the Netherlands 
 So ﬁ a  Morgado and  Luís  F.  Dias  
 1  The chapter includes contributions from all partners that have participated in the research project 
 SUPER-Cities: Sustainable Land-Use Policies for Resilient C ities. 

94
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
for spatial planning; nevertheless, common sectoral policies in the  ﬁ elds of the 
environment , agriculture and transport, together with funding, joint spatial develop-
ment strategies and cooperation, have resulted in similarities in the national systems 
and laws of the member states (Dühr et al.  2010 ) . These policies and legislations 
have contributed not only to the design of spatial patterns in the European territory 
but in particular to the design of  change in each national system. 
 National planning systems have their roots in different laws and codes. With 
regard to current arguments on the development of a European model for spatial 
planning, recent literature offers an up-to-date perspective of the impact of different 
planning families and cultures (Knieling and Othengrafen  2009 ) . Not surprisingly, 
these approaches show an ever-increasing degree of articulation between each fam-
ily within Europe in terms of policies and legislation. 
 The current systems may be considered as being a product of the respective cul-
tures and legal families. According to Zweigert and Kötz  (  1977  ) , a theory of legal 
families would seek to de ﬁ ne the different aspects of comparative law. Such an 
approach would require a broad range of methodological tasks, ranging from assess-
ing how the vast number of legal systems can be categorised under a few larger 
groups to how the groups should be and, after de ﬁ ning that, deciding whether cer-
tain systems would  ﬁ t in one or another group. Obviously, if a system can be de ﬁ ned 
as being representative of a larger group, the overarching task of comparing differ-
ent families by resorting to a couple of systematised examples would then become 
more feasible. 2 That said, it is very dif ﬁ cult to  ﬁ nd a planning system that fully rep-
resents all planning cultures and legal families. Different authors may develop simi-
lar approaches by looking for stylistic features within each system; however, the 
fundamental factors to be considered when assessing the individual styles of legal 
families would be their history of development, the mode of thought in legal matters, 
distinctive institutions, legal sources and ideologies. 
 Regarding the distinctive modes of legal thinking, there has been a tendency to 
use abstract legal forms and to develop well-articulated systems in the Germanic 
and Romanistic families, whereas English common law resorts to empiricist 
approaches (Zweigert and Kötz  1977 ) . Thus, it may be accepted that English com-
mon law is rather distinct from the continental European systems, which stem, in 
different forms, from Roman and Germanic laws. This approach to de ﬁ ning the 
legal families in Europe has been followed in other comparative studies, such as one 
by Newman and Thornley 3  ( 1996 ) . However, these authors have raised a different 
debate that focuses on the relationship between the legal families and their coun-
tries. This new insight has exposed the need to discern between cultures of planning 
and actual proceedings and methods, i.e. at an institutional level (Newman and 
 2  Esmein (1905, cf. Zweigert and Kötz  1977 ) divided the legal world into the Romanistic, Germanic, 
Anglo-Saxon, Slavic and Islamic families. 
 3  From the national planning systems standpoint,  ﬁ ve families would be identi ﬁ ed: British, 
Napoleonic, Germanic, Scandinavian and Eastern European. 

95
6 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, Turkey…
Thornley  1996 ) . These various perceptions have provided a basis for the  EU 
Compendium of Spatial Planning Systems and Polices (1997), which has been further 
developed by Dühr et al. in 2010. According to this literature, there are four  ideal 
styles of planning that are embedded – with different shares and levels – in the various 
planning systems of Europe:  regional economic planning approach, comprehensive 
integrated approach, land-use management  and  urbanism tradition . As the de ﬁ nitions 
of these planning systems below suggest, they are not mutually exclusive, as there 
are some overlaps (see Table  6.1 ). 
 The  regional economic planning approach  follows a very broad understanding 
of spatial planning that is related to the pursuit of wide social and economic 
objectives, especially in relation to disparities in wealth, employment and social 
conditions between a country’s different regions. This approach relies on a strong 
central government, playing an important role in managing development across the 
country and in undertaking public sector investments. In contrast to the  regional 
economic planning approach , the  comprehensive integrated approach focuses 
speci ﬁ cally on spatial coordination rather than on economic development. The 
 comprehensive integrated  approach is characterised by an understanding of spatial 
planning, which is rooted in a systematic and formal hierarchy of plans from 
national to local levels, and the coordination of public sector activities across different 
sectors. Two sub-types of  comprehensive integrated approach have been identi ﬁ ed, 
one being related to federal systems and the other to strong local authorities 
that share responsibility with the central government. The tradition of  land-use 
management has an understanding of (spatial) planning that is focused on the narrower 
task of controlling changes in land use at strategic and local levels. Accordingly, it 
is regulation that is the main instrument in ensuring that development and growth 
are sustainable. The  urbanism tradition is strongly in ﬂ uenced by architectural aspects 
and concentrates mainly on issues of urban design, townscapes and building control. 
 This simple framework allows a characterisation of the national systems of 
Portugal , Sweden , the Netherlands and Turkey , backed by evidence from the broad 
range of methods adopted by the individual countries. Although all four styles of 
planning are present in different weights in each country, some may be more recog-
nisable for one or two of them, depending on its background and its contributions to 
other planning systems. 
 6.3  An Outline of the Various Planning Systems 
 National planning systems, their cultures and backgrounds, especially under the 
impact of common recommendations and policies, tend to have characteristics that 
are rooted in more than one of the above planning styles. The different historical and 
geographical backgrounds of these four countries offer a view of different planning 
cultures in this book (Knieling and Othengrafen  2009 ) . 

96
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
 Table 6.1  Planning systems’ review applied to the four national planning systems (most representative styles according to this study)  
 Legal families and planning cultures 
 Styles [models or traditions] of European spatial planning 
 Davies et al.
( 1989 ) 
 Zweigert and 
Kötz  (  1977 ) 
 Newman and 
Thornley 
 ( 1996 ) 
 EU compendium  ( 1997 ) 
 Spatial planning in Portugal , Turkey , Sweden and 
the Netherlands  
 Dühr et al.  ( 2010 ) 
 The Nordic 
legal family 
 Scandinavian 
 Comprehensive integrated approach 
 Sweden 
 The Netherlands 
 Vertical, horizontal and cross-border 
coordination of public policies’ spatial 
impacts 
 English common 
law 
 The Anglo-
American 
legal family 
 British 
 Land-use management approach 
 Turkey 
 Regulation of land-use change resorting to 
strategic and local plans 
 Napoleonic 
codes 
 The Germanic 
legal family 
 Germanic 
 Regional economic planning approach 
 Portugal 
 Sweden 
 The Netherlands 
 Turkey 
 The Romanistic 
legal family 
 Napoleonic 
 Regional economic approach: mitigation of 
regional economic and social disparities 
by inducing public intervention 
programmes 
 Urbanism tradition 
 Portugal 
 The Netherlands 
 Urban and landscape design, considering 
zoning , urban and building codes 

97
6 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, Turkey…
 With their own peculiarities, Sweden and the Netherlands share north-western 
European planning origins, with planning systems stemming from the Nordic or 
Scandinavian legal family, having facets of the  comprehensive integrated approach , 
whereas the  regional economic planning approach inherits aspects from both the 
Germanic and the Romanistic families, hereafter referred to as the Napoleonic codes. 
 Portugal    and Turkey are southern European countries, but present important 
differences in their planning systems. The Portuguese planning system seems to 
be based strongly on both branches of the Napoleonic codes, being Germanic 
(and partially the Romanistic, as well) in its approach to  regional economic plan-
ning and Romanistic in its  urbanism tradition style. As for Turkey, the two styles 
that are most evident are  comprehensive planning, with emphasis on  land-use man-
agement , and the  regional economic planning (see Fig.  6.1 ). 
 6.3.1  The Portuguese System, Culture and Style of Planning: 
A Strong Urbanism Tradition 
 The Portuguese national system combines two dominant models coming from the 
Napoleonic tradition: the  regional economic planning approach (Dühr et al.  2010 ) 
and the  urbanism tradition , with roots in the Mediterranean states. This combination 
allows the integration of a strategic dimension into the national system, particularly 
 Fig. 6.1    Styles of planning and national planning systems: Portugal, Turkey, Sweden and the 
Netherlands (Source: FA-UTL, LUOTP and adapted from Dühr et al.  2010 : 181; Nadin and Stead 
 2008 , based on the EU Compendium) 
 

98
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
at a regional level, which somehow softens the model and sometimes becomes too 
rigid to deal with the various levels of planning. This is common also to other south-
ern European countries, such as Spain and Italy, where the  urbanism tradition has 
an even more signi ﬁ cant role in urban development. 
 In the context of this group of four countries, the  urbanism tradition is speci ﬁ c 
to the Portuguese national system, especially since the recent advent of the so-called 
Polis XXI Programme. Urban design approaches with advanced architectural and 
landscape dimensions have been contributing to improvements in planning and 
design (Morgado et al.  2010 ) . 
 From an urban architectural perspective, the main goal of the  urbanism tradition 
is to design and create places. From a planning perspective, on the other hand, it 
resorts to tools that include zoning , design codes, building control and development 
plans, evolving into approaches, which may act at the level of a large-scale design. 
 The  urbanism tradition   ﬁ nds its preferential expression at the municipal level of 
planning, where the strategies de ﬁ ned at the higher levels of planning are imple-
mented. It may also be seen as a way of establishing the urban spatial organisation 
(Urban Development Plans) and the urban design for a speci ﬁ c area of the municipality 
(Detailed Plans). The other styles of planning intervene as well, with different shares 
and at different levels and with the  comprehensive integrated approach appearing to 
be important as an interface between national, regional 4 and local levels. 
 However, gaps between the levels of intervention in which there is scarce interest 
in strategic dimensions are apparent, even though environmental and societal 
relationships are acknowledged as fundamental (European Communities  1997 ) . 
As such, new policy updates may contribute to reinforcing the ties between levels of 
governance through institutional empowerment, inter-institutional cooperation and 
policy coordination (CCDRLVT  2007 ) . To date, local planning institutions have 
acted as the executioner of regional strategies, with no effective governance legiti-
macy and few participatory tools. A lesser ef ﬁ cient control in urban development 
becomes even more evident in the face of the sectoral policies induced by EU pro-
grammes, together with a still feeble multilevel capacity. 
 In Portugal , the  National Framework of Spatial Planning de ﬁ nes the different 
levels of national planning. At a national level, the policies follow the  National 
Spatial Development Policy Programme , with the guidelines of this national pro-
gramme transferred to the regional level through the Regional Spatial Plan docu-
ments, which are detailed with a stronger physical expression in the several 
Municipal Spatial Plans (Pinho et al.  2010 ) . Accordingly, the  regional economic 
planning approach may be mostly evident at the national and regional levels, widely 
linked to the governmental agendas for which the sectoral plans are especially rel-
evant. The  National Spatial Development Policy Programme (PNPOT) addresses 
particular concerns and strategies with regard to regional disparities. 
 Finally,  land-use management is more evident at the national and local levels. 
The Municipal Master Plans have a strong in ﬂ uence in the control of land-use 
adjustments. At the national level, the  National Agricultural Reserve regulates and 
 4  Portugal has no regional planning authority. 

99
6 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, Turkey…
classi ﬁ es the suitability of soil, and the  National Ecological Reserve is charged with 
protecting the coastal zones, river basins, interior water bodies (reservoirs, lakes), 
areas of maximum in ﬁ ltration and areas with steep topographies. These tools may 
be considered as forms of land-use management; however, they are not plans  per se 
but rather public utility easements that are dependent on sectoral plans, such as 
spatial plans for coastal areas. 
 Recent advances in national planning have been a result of new tools for inter-
vention at a local level and thus from an urbanistic perspective. The new procedures 
allow for urban rehabilitation and regeneration, 5 while also promoting urban con-
tainment by preventing the reclassi ﬁ cation of rural land as urban, aside from excep-
tional cases when an unavailability of urban land is demonstrated, such as in the 
event of an unexpected demographic rate. 6 An application of these measures is 
expected to allow for the consolidation and densi ﬁ cation of urban settlements. 
 These advances follow various EU recommendations aimed at promoting urban 
sustainability , such as the Aalborg Charter (1994) and Commitments (2004), the 
Leipzig Charter (2007) or the New Athens Charter (2003). The latter was introduced 
by the European Council of Spatial Planners (Pereira and Nunes da Silva  2008 ) , 
which is already considered as a promoter of resilience (see Newman et al.  2009 ) .  
 6.3.2  The Turkish System, Culture and Style of Planning: 
Different Styles at Different Planning Levels 
 The Turkish planning system is a combination of different styles and is in some 
ways similar to the Portuguese planning system. In the Turkish planning system, the 
 regional economic planning perspective holds an important role. Taking into account 
macroeconomic targets, social development and sectoral objectives and policies, the 
State Planning Organisation (SPO) de ﬁ nes the general principles and objectives in 
the  National Development Plan . The  National Development Plan publishes guide-
lines for resource management or sectoral plans and programmes at the national 
level, as well as some basic principles for regional development. Regional plans 
also come under the scope of the SPO and are prepared on an ad hoc basis. New 
institutions operating under the auspices of the SPO, such as Regional Development 
Agencies, have been recently established in several regional centres (since 2006) 
to coordinate public policies with the private sector, as well as to prepare regional 
plans to regulate development activities. 7 
 5  Decree-Law n.º 307/2009. 
 6  Regulatory Decree no: 11/2009, which de ﬁ nes criteria for the classi ﬁ cation and reclassi ﬁ cation of 
land use, as well as criteria and categories of urban and rural land use. 
 7  These plans are approved by the State Planning Organisation. In 2010 and 2011, each of the 
Regional Development Agencies (26 in number – see   http://www.dpt.gov.tr/bgyu/biid/ibbs.html  ) 
prepared their own Preliminary Regional Plans. 

100
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
 The regional plans, however, only provide general guidelines, and attempts to 
link these plans with the land-use management model have been through the 
Environmental Management Plans. The Ministry of Environment and Forestry pre-
pares and approves Environmental Management Plans, generally in close coopera-
tion with the local governor’s of ﬁ ce, while land-use master plans are set for areas 
within the boundaries of the greater city municipalities. Environmental Management 
Plans aim to coordinate land-use development plans prepared for the settlements 
within the designated subregions (usually covering more than one province) or 
greater city municipalities. 
 The  land-use management model is closely associated with the important task of 
controlling the use of land and land-use changes at strategic and local levels. In this 
model, the use of land and property are fundamental. In the Turkish model, different 
to the UK system, which tries to control the use of property and land through effec-
tive regulation, the control of urban development is through Urban Development 
Plans. While the planning system tries to control the urban spatial organisation 
through Urban Development Plans at different scales, the  comprehensive integrated 
approach appears to be important as an interface between the national, regional and 
local levels. In this regard, Turkey may be considered as a country in which  land-use 
management is important within the planning system, while urban design, however, 
is rather a new phenomenon in planning practice. 
 At the local level, the Turkish spatial planning system includes (1) the  urban 
master plan , prepared by the municipalities, and (2)  local implementation plans , 
designed by the municipalities. These plans de ﬁ ne local land uses, such as built 
areas, roads and the location of technical infrastructure (Eraydin et al.  2010 ) . The 
urbanism tradition, on the other hand, is a resource of municipalities and different 
central government authorities that is used in speci ﬁ cally designated areas. 
Municipalities prepare local plans that identify zoning regulations (Eraydin et al. 
 2010 ) , while urban design is limited to some designated public spaces or private 
sector initiatives. 
 Since the 1980s, Turkey has followed an increasingly neoliberalist economic 
agenda, contributing to the transformation of urban legislation. New amendments to 
the legislation are introduced with the aim being to attract large-scale international 
projects and to respond to the current demands of the property market , providing 
certain planning rights to different public bodies. The Ministries of Culture and 
Tourism, Industry and Trade and Environment and Forestry and also the Ministry of 
Public Works and Resettlement are empowered to prepare and approve land-use 
plans for their own areas of interest (Eraydin and Altay  2011 ) . Consultations with 
municipalities on plan preparations and approval are carried out; however, the min-
istries are not obliged to accept the municipalities’ decisions. 
 This situation, along with a growing compartmentalisation of planning, has 
brought negative impacts to the implementation of sustainable policies. A review of 
legislation and plan documents within the different periods shows that there have 
been no explicit intentions or measures to promote sustainable urban development 
or create ecologically resilient cities, and for this reason, steering market dynamics 
and private promoters towards resilient thinking in urban planning has been dif ﬁ cult 
in Turkey . 

101
6 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, Turkey…
 6.3.3  The Swedish System, Culture and Style of Planning: 
The Importance of a Comprehensive Integrated Approach 
 The Swedish national planning system incorporates two planning styles, both of 
which are considered as central to their approach: the  regional economic planning 
approach and the  comprehensive integrated approach , which are consistent with the 
Nordic tradition of planning. Despite the important contribution of this planning 
system in terms of the  regional economic planning approach , the  comprehensive 
integrated approach is often considered as evocative due to its representativeness 
and strong planning culture and its background in Europe. 
 The  regional economic planning approach  is distinctive (1) in Nordic countries 
where considerable reliance has been placed on a rational planning approach and pub-
lic sector investment. In this case, local authorities have played a dominant role, albeit 
sharing responsibility with central government, and (2) in Austria and Germany, where 
a similar systematic structure and process is followed under a federalised con ﬁ guration 
by “regional governments” ( Länder ), which play a relevant role, especially in Austria 
(EC  1997 ) . Public sector activities are also coordinated across different sectors. 
 The  comprehensive integrated approach  encompasses multilevel actions, usually 
with a sophisticated perception of spatial coordination. According to Dühr et al., it is 
wide ranging in scope, with its main goal being to allow for the integration of the 
spatial impacts of sectoral policies – horizontally (across sectors), vertically (between 
levels) and geographically (across borders)  ( 2010 ) . This model is also known for its 
strong public sector component, mature planning institutions and political commitment. 
In the case of Sweden   , its integration into the Baltic Sea Region (BSR) and the deve-
lopment of various transnational and cross-border plans and institutions 8 contribute, 
to some extent, to this  ﬂ exible and integrated view of planning (Schmitt et al.  2008 ) . 
 Besides the cross-border plans, for which the BSR is paradigmatic, the  compre-
hensive integrated approach is also applied vertically to the various levels of plan-
ning. With the aim of monitoring a region and providing basic planning data, the 
government may appoint a regional planning body should a common interest emerge 
among several municipalities (e.g. in the Stockholm region). The  Planning and 
Building Act , introduced in 1987, constitutes the main statutory guide for spatial 
planning in Sweden and has further strengthened the power – from a European per-
spective – of the very large municipalities in Sweden (which have decreased in 
number from more than 2,600 in 1952 to 290 today). Since then, comprehensive 
municipal plans , although not legally binding, have been mandatory and are used 
increasingly in municipal development programmes, with particular focus on areas 
of public interest, like housing, employment, the environment and even the well-
being of the public in the form of social welfare goals (Schmitt et al.  2010 ) . 
 Comprehensive municipal plans are to be adopted by the municipal council; how-
ever, if these override national or inter-municipal interests, the county administrative 
board may review the municipality’s decision (e.g. planning transport infrastructure   s, 
 ﬁ nanced for the most part by the state), thus acting as a kind of regional advisory body. 
 8  For instance, the Nordic Council. 

102
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
 The Comprehensive Plan constitutes also the framework for the development of 
detailed plans for smaller areas within the municipality, which are legally binding 
and must be adopted by the municipal council. This is a good illustration of an 
executive planning instrument, being a legal agreement between the municipality 
and either public or the private landowners. The Detailed Development Plan actu-
ally implements the Comprehensive Plan for a 5–15-year period following a more 
urbanistic approach, since it speci ﬁ es areas intended for public or private buildings 
and even requirements for the design and construction of buildings and protective 
measures for developed areas (Alfredsson and Wiman  1997 ; Larsson  2006 ) . 
 If several municipalities have a common interest in a plan, the government may 
appoint a regional planning body to monitor regional concerns and to provide basic plan-
ning data to the municipalities and government authorities. The greater Stockholm region 
is the only case to date in which such a body has been established, where its task is to 
develop informal and indicative but comprehensive regional plans. In addition, there are 
a number of other administrations at the national level that provide information and 
competence to spatial planning in Sweden and assure conformance with associated laws, 
such as the Swedish Board of Housing, Building and Planning ( Boverket ), the Central 
Board for National Antiquities and the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency. 
 The  Act on the Management of Natural Resources was launched alongside the 
Planning and Building Act (Guinchard  1997 ) ; however, it was replaced in 1998 by 
a more comprehensive environmental code covering all issues related to the protec-
tion of nature and environmental resources (air, water and soil) and offers guidance 
for environmental impact assessments and is thus integral to planning projects and 
land-use management issues. 
 According to Nilsson  ( 2007 ) , political interest has been more focused on regional 
rather than urban development, especially in the sparsely populated parts of the country. 
Regional development programmes at the county level and with an explicit economic 
focus (e.g. to strengthen clusters, entrepreneurship or the innovative climate) help to 
balance national regional disparities. Controlled and monitored by the national govern-
ment and corresponding institutions (e.g. Tillväxtverket), these programmes are not 
intended to intervene in explicit spatial planning or even land-use management issues. 
 In a way, planning in Sweden can be said to have reached a level of ef ﬁ ciency 
and adaptability to new situations that allows the system to adjust to new conditions 
by resorting to integrated and comprehensive approaches, ensuring a certain degree 
of resilience in planning. 
 6.3.4  The Dutch System, Culture and Style of Planning: 
The Comprehensive Integrated Approach, 
with Increasing Power of Local Authorities 
 In the Netherlands , the central government is the main source of funding for planning 
at all levels and thus retains great in ﬂ uence (Faludi  2005 ) . From this standpoint, 
besides the importance of the  comprehensive integrated approach (EC  1997 ) , it also 

103
6 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, Turkey…
has elements of a  regional economic planning approach (Dühr et al.  2010 ) . 
According to Alexander  (  1992  ) , spatial planning in the Netherlands relies on a passive 
regulatory system in which interventions follow a prior assessment and stakeholders 
are consulted at an early stage of the planning procedure. The EU Compendium 
describes the Dutch planning system as one of the most elaborate examples of the 
 comprehensive integrated approach to planning, in which “plans are more con-
cerned with the coordination of spatial than economic developments” (European 
Communities  1997 ) . National planning in the Netherlands is based on indicative 
national policy documents rather than master plans. Statutory plans are the respon-
sibility of the provinces and municipalities, but only the latter have the power to 
make plans that provide grounds for the refusal of planning permits (Faludi  2005 ) . 
Therefore, consultation and persuasion is needed if the policies of the top levels of 
government are to be integrated into the plans of the lower levels (Zonneveld  2006 ) . 
 The Dutch planning system is legally binding, and therefore developments must 
be in accordance with the local land-use plan. However, property developers can 
exert strong in ﬂ uences on the content of a plan, contributing to a development-led 
character as well (European Communities  1999 ) . Planning practice can be strongly 
in ﬂ uenced through the informal use of formal rules (administrative pragmatism) 
(Needham  2005 ) . The National Spatial Strategy ( Nota Ruimte ), approved by the 
Senate in January 2006, indicates a departure from the restrictive planning discourse 
(Spaans  2006 ) , making a radical break from the centralist tradition in which the 
national government should determine the built environment in detail. The National 
Spatial Strategy’s dictum is to “decentralise if possible, centralise if necessary”, in 
contrast to the centralist path followed by its predecessor, the Fifth Memorandum 
on Spatial Planning. This change constituted a signi ﬁ cant shift in governmental 
control (Vink and Van der Burg  2006 ) , and according to Zonneveld  ( 2005 ) , the 
National Spatial Strategy was an important withdrawal from traditional Dutch spatial 
policy, outlining a new division of responsibilities in a three-tiered government. 
 As a result, central government has taken a step back, allocating key powers in 
development control to local authorities, particularly in the provinces. Vink and van 
der Burg  ( 2006 ) contend that in this way, development is better supported and 
that the strategy “seeks to tie in with social trends, rather than combating them”. 
In doing so, the objectives, policy concepts and basic principles from previous strat-
egies are retained (Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment 
 2006 ) . The document also signals a pivotal shift “from planning to development”, 
which will lessen planning control (Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the 
Environment  2006 ) . 
 According to Vink and van der Burg  ( 2006 ) , the National Spatial Strategy 
strengthens the role of the provinces and reduces the number of rules and regula-
tions set by the central government while creating more scope for local and regional 
governments, social organisations, private actors and the public in the planning pro-
cess. However, the National Spatial Strategy also introduces stronger national and 
provincial powers by allowing national and provincial governments to intervene 
forcefully when national or international interests are at stake (e.g. biodiversity, 
national landscapes). In this sense, there may be room for resilience in the new 

104
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
approaches of the Dutch planning system, since it is becoming more  ﬂ exible, while 
still maintaining control in relevant areas such as the environment (Taşan-Kok and 
Stead  2010 ) . 
 6.4  Is  Resilience Thinking Embedded Within National 
Planning Systems? 
 The very nature of urban planning is to effectively adjust an ever-evolving reality – 
human activities in territory and time – to future goals. Therefore, it would be almost 
pleonastic to say that planning involves the main purpose of dealing with change, 
and by that it is acknowledged that a resilient thinking is already embedded per se 
in urban planning. While examining these four national systems in order to identify 
styles behind them, it was observed that some of the planning models tended to be 
more ef ﬁ cient, with regard to the increase of resilience, than others. And further, that 
resilience would be easier to be accomplished in mixed-style systems, when various 
factors were combined favouring a certain degree, for instance, of redundancy (e.g. 
in procedural actions and different levels of planning). 
 Although planning systems hold their own strengths and weaknesses, they are 
designed to deal with situations of crisis, risks and disturbances within their own 
 ﬁ elds of application. However, it is recognised that some approaches are more 
mature than others, which enables a more ef ﬁ cient response to unexpected occur-
rences, resulting in increasing degrees of resilience in urban planning. 
 Whenever supported by a well-adjusted governance system, the  comprehensive 
integrated approach may decisively promote an ef ﬁ cient response to any distur-
bance, since it is considered as the most  ﬂ exible (ESPON  2007 ) , still not in an 
exclusive way as  ﬂ exibility exists as well in the other styles of planning in different 
degrees of ef ﬁ ciency (Newman and Thornley  1996 ; ESPON  2007 ) . Its most inter-
esting characteristic consists of holding a structure based in lines of action and non-
abiding strategies, which ensures the implementation of wide-ranging guidance 
outlines onto local planning. These local plans tend to implicate different actors, 
including local communities and stakeholders, which allows a bottom-up approach 
while more classical top-down guidelines may be followed as well. 
 As an alternative, the  urbanism tradition , coherently allows implementing miti-
gation and adjustment strategies with great accuracy to the place. As in any other 
stylistic option, technical capacity, up-to-date and transdisciplinary skills, together 
with public participatory tools, would instigate a more pliable process (see, e.g. 
COM  2008 ) fostering for a stronger link between speci ﬁ c urban and landscape 
design and the community. This approach goes further in  ﬁ nding solutions than the 
typical vulnerability analysis approach.  Urbanism tradition might also be especially 
relevant in promoting polycentric structures, consolidating pre-existent urban centres 
or even in the dissemination of an urban green economy, by increasing the use of 
green infrastructures and social innovation (EU  2007 ; UNEP  2011 ) . 

105
6 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, Turkey…
 For territorial cohesion, one of the most important aims of the EU, the regional 
economic planning approach is certainly essential (COM  2008 ) . Since mitigating 
territorial disparities is one of its characteristics, actions under its scope contribute to 
equity in distribution of  ﬁ nancial, cultural and social resources. It also provides a posi-
tive input to local structures (Newman and Thornley  1996 ) . In fact, a well-prepared 
and resourceful community is more resilient (Adger  2003 ; Walker et al.  2004 ) . 
 Land-use management is less capable of responding to certain community chal-
lenges, since it is closely linked to the designation of land uses and their develop-
ment. However, should it be implemented in conjunction with clear governance 
guidelines and monitored by high standard of technical capacity, it may overcome 
dif ﬁ culties in preserving areas which are more vulnerable to risks, preventing pri-
vate interests to overlap public interests. 
 As implicit in these four examples (Portugal, Turkey, Sweden, the Netherlands), 
planning styles are mostly applied in combined forms. This integration results as a 
plus-value in the urban management towards the increase of resilience. Nevertheless, 
each system must be based in adjustable governance structures, closely supported 
by skills of transdisciplinary in their technical teams, strong enough to hold on to a 
holistic attitude both to the territory and to the planning and management options. 
 6.5  Final Remarks 
 Following a number of informal EU meetings between the ministers responsible for 
the spatial planning of each state, several agreements regarding urban planning have 
been signed. Among these are such documents such as the ESDP (EC  1999 ) and the 
 Leipzig Charter on Sustainable European Cities (EU  2007 ) , focusing on sustain-
ability , polycentricism and the development of knowledge infrastructures. As these 
concerns often lead to joint actions, as time goes by national planning tools tend to 
incorporate these features into their objectives and aims. 
 More recently,  Lisbon  Strategy ’s documents, e.g. the  Green paper on territorial 
cohesion (SEC  2008 ) , have been addressing topics such as competitiveness, which 
in a way may be seen as a precursor of a shift from a more strategic planning vision 
to a new variety of  territorialism, in which integrated systems are considered rele-
vant to the various levels. 
 Since planning is about space, a territorial body should be seen as pivotal, where 
planning actions should be multilevel,  ﬂ exible and provide for urban and environ-
mental  ﬂ exibility in the face of imminent change or risk. In this sense, Europe tends 
to develop planning skills that are able to cope and adjust to change and risk, con-
tributing to an increase of  resilience in policies and instruments . 
 In addition, sustainability concerns have resulted in calls for the sensible use of 
natural and cultural resources, and accordingly several dissuasive measures, such as 
the promotion of public transport networks and mixed land use or the reuse of obso-
lete urban areas, have been developed (European Communities  1999 ; EU  2007 ) . 

106
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
 These measures are correlated, with the intention being to achieve territorial 
cohesion, to foster diversity and to allow for the development of speci ﬁ c strategies. 
Approaches such as innovation centres, urban regeneration and strong investments 
in R&D lead progressively to strong connections with knowledge networks, which 
may reinforce the development of knowledge-based, and even creative, economies 
(SEC  2005,  2008 ) . 
 Furthermore,  resilience thinking may be considered as a means of overcoming 
previous concerns, as it focuses mostly on the capacity of adjustment to distur-
bances or, in a positive way,  change . This concept, when applied to urban planning 
and policies, combines various dimensions and issues, including governance , econ-
omy , the environment and society, which, either individually or all together, should lead 
to the development of speci ﬁ c forms of space production, territorial con ﬁ gurations 
and the development of cities. 
 References 
 Adger, W. N. (2003). Social capital, collective action, and adaptation to climate change.  Economic 
Geography, 79 (4), 387–404. 
 Alexander, E. R. (1992).  Approaches to planning: Introducing current planning theories, concepts 
and issues . Langhorne: Gordon and Breach. 
    Alfredsson, B., & Wiman, J. (1997). Planning in Sweden. In C. G. Guinchard (Ed.),  Swedish plan-
ning for sustainable development . Gävle: Swedish Society for Town and Country planning. 
 CCDRLVT. (2007).  Lisboa 2020, Uma estratégia de Lisboa para a Região de Lisboa [Lisbon 
2020, a Lisbon’s strategy for its Region]. Resource document. CCDRLVT.   http://www.ccdr-lvt.
pt/pt/documento-lisboa-2020/5093.htm  . Accessed 22 Jan 2011. 
 COM. (2008).  Green paper on territorial cohesion. Turning territorial diversity into strength . 
Brussels: Commission of the European communities. 
 Davies, H. W. E. (Ed.). (1989).  Planning control in Western Europe . London: HMSO. 
 Dühr, S., Colomb, C., & Nadin, V. (2010).  European spatial planning and territorial cooperation . 
London: Routledge. 
 Eraydin, A., & Altay, D. (2011). Kentsel arsa üretimini yönlendiren yeni düzenlemeler ve yönetişim 
biçimleri. Eleştirel değerlendirme. In  Konut Sempozyumu (pp. 221–250). Istanbul: TMMOB 
Istanbul Büyükkent Şubesi. 
  Eraydin, A., Türel, A., & Altay, D. (2010). Turkey, Istanbul Report, WP1. De ﬁ ning and categoriz-
ing the dynamics and regulations in city regions in different countries and de ﬁ ning the basis for 
frame of analysis. In: A. Eraydin (Coord.),  Sustainable land use policies for resilient cities 
( super-cities ) Urban Net Project. Unpublished Report. Ankara, Turkey: Department of City 
and Regional Planning, Middle East Technical University. 
 ESPON. (2007).  ESPON project 2.3.2 – Governance of territorial and urban policies from EU to 
local level . Department of Geography/Inter-University Institute of Local Development 
University of Valencia. 
 EU. (2007).  Leipzig charter on sustainable European cities . Leipzig, Initiative of the German EU 
Presidency, Informal Meeting of the Council of Ministers. 
 European Communities. (1997).  The EU compendium of spatial planning systems and polices 
(Resource Document). Luxembourg: Of ﬁ ce for Of ﬁ cial Publication of the European 
Communities.   http://www.espace-project.org/old/reading.htm  . Accessed 25 Sept 2010. 
 European Communities. (1999).  ESDP European spatial development perspective. Towards 
balanced and sustainable development of the territory of the European Union (Resource 
Document). Luxembourg: Of ﬁ ce for Of ﬁ cial Publication of the European Communities.  http://ec.
europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docof ﬁ c/of ﬁ cial/reports/som_en.htm . Accessed 25 Sept 2010.  

107
6 Systems , Cultures and Styles: Spatial Planning in Portugal, Turkey…
 Faludi, A. (2005). The Netherlands: A culture with a soft spot for planning. In B. Sanyal (Ed.), 
 Comparative planning cultures (pp. 285–307). London/New York: Routledge. 
 Guinchard, C. G. (1997). Swedish planning 1997: Towards sustainable development. In C. G. 
Guinchard (Ed.),  Swedish planning for sustainable development (pp. 7–10). Gävle: Swedish 
Society for Town and Country Planning. 
 Knieling, J., & Othengrafen, F. (Eds.). (2009).  Planning cultures in Europe. Decoding cultural 
phenomena in urban and regional planning (Urban and Regional Planning and Development 
Series). Farnham: Ashgate. 
 Larsson, G. (2006).  Spatial planning systems in Western Europe: An overview . Amsterdam: Ios 
Press. 
 Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment. (2006).  Nota Ruimte – National spatial 
strategy summary. Creating space for development . The Hague: Ministry of Housing, Spatial 
Planning and the Environment.  
 Morgado, S., Costa, J., & Dias, L. (2010). Portugal   , Lisbon Report, WP1. De ﬁ ning and categoriz-
ing the dynamics and regulations in city regions in different countries and de ﬁ ning the basis for 
frame of analysis. In: A. Eraydin (Coord.),  Sustainable land use policies for resilient cities 
( super-cities ). Urban Net Project. Unpublished Report. Department of City and Regional 
Planning, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey. 
 Nadin, V., & Stead, D. (2008). European spatial planning systems, social models and learning,  disP 
172 · 1/200835-47. Retrieved   www.nsl.ethz.ch/index.php/de/content/download/1570/9365/ ﬁ le.   
 Needham, B. (2005). The New Dutch spatial planning act: Continuity and change in the way in 
which the Dutch regulate the practice of spatial planning.  Planning Practice and Research, 
20 (3), 327–340. 
 Newman, P., & Thornley, A. (1996).  Urban planning in Europe: International competition, 
national systems & planning projects . London: Routledge. 
 Newman, P., Beatley, T., & Boyer, H. (2009).  Resilient cities: Responding to peak oil and climate 
change . Washington, DC: Island Press. 
 Nilsson, J. E. (2007).  Sweden – The emergence of a national urban policy (Resource Document). 
  http://www.bth.se/tks/ctup.nsf/bilagor/Urban%20Policy%20in%20Sweden_pdf/$ ﬁ le/
Urban%20Policy%20in%20Sweden.pdf  . Accessed 21 June 2009. 
 Pereira, M., & Nunes da Silva, F. (2008). Modelos de ordenamento em confronto na área metro-
politana de Lisboa: cidade alargada ou recentragem metropolitana? [Opposing Spatial planning 
models in the metropolitan area of Lisbon: enlarged city or metropolitan recentralization?]. 
 Cadernos Metrópole, 20 (2–2008), 107–123. 
 Pinho, P., Cruz, S., Oliveira, V., Sousa, S., & Martins, A. (2010). Portugal   , Oporto    Report, Wp1. 
De ﬁ ning and categorizing the dynamics and regulations in city regions in different countries 
and de ﬁ ning the basis for frame of analysis. In: A. Eraydin (Coord.),  Sustainable land use poli-
cies for resilient cities ( super-cities ) Urban Net Project. Unpublished Report. Department of 
City and Regional Planning, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey. Resource 
Document. CITTA, The Research Centre for Territory Transports and Environment – Oporto 
University, Faculty of Engineer, Portugal. 
 Schmitt, P., Dubois, A., Roto, J., Sterling, J., & Schürmann, C. (2008).  Exploring the baltic sea 
region: On territorial capital and spatial integration (Nordregio Report), 2008:3, Stockholm. 
 Schmitt, P., Henriksson, A., & Dubois, A. (2010). Sweden, Stockholm Report, WP1. De ﬁ ning and 
categorizing the dynamics and regulations in city regions in different countries and de ﬁ ning the 
basis for frame of analysis. In: A. Eraydin (Coord.),  Sustainable land use policies for resilient 
cities ( super-cities ). Urban Net Project. Unpublished Report. Department of City and Regional 
Planning, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey. 
 SEC. (2005). 193/194  Communication to the Spring European Council – Working together for 
growth and jobs – A new start for the Lisbon Strategy . Communication from President Barroso 
in agreement with Vice-President Verheugen. 
 SEC. (2008). 2550  Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, 
the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee . Green paper 
on territorial cohesion: turning territorial diversity into strength. 

108
S. Morgado and L.F. Dias
 Spaans, M. (2006). Recent changes in the Dutch planning system. Towards a new governance 
model?  Town Planning Review, 77 (2), 127–146. 
 Taşan-Kok, T., & Stead, D. (2010), Netherlands, Rotterdam report, WP1. De ﬁ ning and categorizing 
the dynamics and regulations in city regions in different countries and de ﬁ ning the basis for 
frame of analysis. In: A. Eraydin (Coord.),  Sustainable land use policies for resilient cities 
( super-cities ) Urban Net Project. Unpublished Report. Resource Document. Netherlands: OTB 
Research - Institute for Housing, Urban and Mobility Studies, Delft University of Technology. 
 UNEP. (2011).  Towards a green economy: Pathways to sustainable development and poverty erad-
ication . UNEP, UNEP. Resource Document,   www.unep.org/greeneconomy.  
 Vink, B., & Van der Burg, A. (2006). New Dutch spatial planning policy creates space for develop-
ment.  disP – The Planning Review, 164 (1–2006), 41–49. 
 Walker, B., Holling, C. S., et al. (2004). Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social–
ecological systems.  Ecology and Society 9(2): art 5. 
  Zonneveld, W. (2005). In search of conceptual modernization: The new Dutch National Spatial 
Strategy.  Journal of Housing and the Built Environment, 20 (4), 425–443. 
 Zonneveld, W. (2006).  Planning in retreat: The changing importance of Dutch national spatial 
planning . Paper presented at the Conference of the European Group of Public Administration, 
6–9 September 2006, Università Bocconi, Milan. 
 Zweigert, K., & Kötz, H. (1977).  An introduction to comparative law . New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

109
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_7, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 7.1  Introduction 
 This chapter focuses on the thematic scope and approaches to urban and regional 
policy in the  ﬁ ve case study cities of Lisbon , Oporto , Istanbul , Stockholm and 
Rotterdam , while the spatial dynamics and vulnerabilities of each case are explored 
in Chap.   5 . 1 For each of these large urban agglomerations, a number of key docu-
ments are introduced and evaluated to provide an understanding of their approach to 
managing urban change, and an examination is made of their operating institutional 
framework as regards planning and policy in urban management. These documents 
constitute key elements of the formal planning systems (e.g. municipal urban devel-
opment plans or regional comprehensive plans). In addition to spatial plans, a number 
of other strategic documents that have a clear impact on the management of urban 
change are identi ﬁ ed that complement the spatial plans in various ways. As the 
intention in this chapter is only to provide an overview, the analysis is restricted to 
the most important among them. 
 To start with the notion of urban resilience is not explicitly addressed in the 
assessed policy documents. As the synthesis presented below is based on a textual 
analysis, there is a lot of room for speculation on how and to what extent the  ﬁ ve 
urban agglomerations are prepared to follow a more “resilient sensitive” policy 
approach. In this respect, a more advanced assessment will be provided in the case 
studies (see Chaps.   9 – 13 ). 
 It is no surprise that in the  ﬁ ve urban agglomerations, the key policy documents 
and their intrinsic messages and intended interventions bear some similarities; however, 
 Chapter 7 
 Managing Urban Change in Five European 
Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy Documents 
and Institutional Frameworks 
 Peter  Schmitt  
 P.  Schmitt  (*)
 Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial Development ,  Box 1658 ,  SE-111 86 ,  Stockholm ,  Sweden 
e-mail:  peter.schmitt@nordregio.se 
 1  This chapter is based on contributions from all of the partners that participated in the research 
project: SUPER-Cities: Sustainable Land-Use Policies for Resilient Cities. 

110
P. Schmitt
upon closer inspection, signi ﬁ cant differences can be identi ﬁ ed, since they stem from 
countries with relatively different planning and governance systems/cultures. While 
this makes comparisons more complex, it also provides an opportunity to view across a 
wide spectrum of policy contexts. For this reason, at  ﬁ rst a brief overview is pre-
sented of the current operating institutional frameworks as regards policy delivery in 
the  ﬁ eld of spatial planning in general and land-use management in particular in the 
 ﬁ ve case study cities, which will help in contextualising the analysed policy docu-
ments and their main characteristics. The major strategic concerns, instruments    and 
approaches of these documents are highlighted and discussed in the last section of 
this chapter, followed by some concluding remarks on the major observations of the 
study, derived and contextualised in view of the general developments in Europe.  
 7.2  A Brief Overview of the Institutional Frameworks 
for Managing Urban Change 
 In recent years, the in ﬂ uences of “Europeanisation” have become easy to detect, not 
only on the policies and practices of spatial planning but also on the rules, ideas and 
emerging discourses (Böhme and Waterhout  2008 ; Dühr et al.  2010 ; Jensen and 
Richardson  2004 ) . Without discussing here the reasons and mechanisms behind the 
(at least to some extent) observable gradual adjustments, at the city-regional level, 
however, the strong differences and variations that exist become very tangible when 
looking at the institutional frameworks related to spatial planning and policies. 
These are obviously dependent upon national characteristics and trajectories but 
also by some local speci ﬁ cities, as outlined in the coming sections of this chapter. 
 7.2.1  Lisbon and Oporto 
 For the two Portuguese examples, the institutional frameworks for the management 
of urban change in the two urban regions comprise three distinct levels. At a national 
level, the Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning and Regional Development 
prepares the fundamental planning document, being the National Programme for 
Spatial Planning Policies (Programa Nacional da Política de Ordenamento do 
Território, PNPOT). This document de ﬁ nes the major policies for the national terri-
tory and sets out a framework for the preparation of lower-order plans, such as the 
regional spatial plan (plano regional de ordenamento do território, PROT) and the 
municipal master plan (plano director municipal, PDM). 
 The Coordination and Development Commission, such as the one for the 
Northern Region, prepares the regional spatial plan (PROT), de ﬁ ning a territorial 
strategy based on national planning guidelines, and provides a framework for the 
coordination of municipal strategies for local development. Consequently, the 
municipal spatial plans are developed according to the national and regional strategic 

111
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
guidelines but also take into account the speci ﬁ c requirements set out in the sectoral 
plans. This level of planning includes (a) the municipal master plan (PDM), de ﬁ ning 
the spatial structure for the municipal territory; (b) the urban development plan 
(plano de urbanização, PU), de ﬁ ning the spatial organisation for part of the municipal 
territory; and  ﬁ nally, (c) the detailed plan (plano de pormenor, PP), specifying the 
physical forms, the urban design proposals and the rules for infrastructure projects. 
Being mainly physical plans, the PDMs can be complemented by a strategic pro-
spective for the municipality territory, which was the case, for instance, for the 1992 
Lisbon Strategic Plan, the Lisbon Strategic Vision 2012 and the Strategic Chart for 
Lisbon 2010/2024. Both the Oporto and Lisbon metropolitan areas were established 
as new institutional layers in 1991 in response to the expanding urban fabric and its 
associated challenges. 
 The of ﬁ cially de ﬁ ned “Metropolitan Area of Oporto ” contained nine municipali-
ties in 2005 but has undergone recent enlargement to absorb seven further munici-
palities and has been renamed as the “Greater Metropolitan Area of Oporto”. 
However, a truly metropolitan government is still absent, and in practice the current 
informal metropolitan meetings bring together different and, sometimes, competing 
municipal strategies and interests, meaning that an integrated vision of the whole 
Greater Metropolitan Area of Oporto is still lacking. 
 The same can be stated for the Greater Lisbon Metropolitan Area, which can be 
also considered as a public collective body that is associative in nature, aimed at 
satisfying the common public interests in the  ﬁ eld of strategic spatial planning in the 
city’s 19 municipalities. This organisation has no direct democratic mandate, as its 
democratic legitimacy comes only from the local authority councillors delegated to 
the metropolitan council, making it highly responsive to regional development proj-
ects (Herschel and Newman  2002 : 85) but less involved in metropolitan governance 
due to the existing institutional labyrinth and overlapping competences that hamper 
planning processes at a territorial level (Crespo and Cabral  2010 : 650). 
 7.2.2  Istanbul 
 In Turkey , there is no a speci ﬁ c document directing spatial development at a national 
level, although there are different central government bodies responsible for plan-
ning. The major priorities and principles to be followed in spatial management are 
de ﬁ ned with respect to economic development in the National Development Plan 
( Ulusal Kalkınma Planı ), which is prepared for each 5-year period. The spatial 
planning system, however, is de ﬁ ned by the Spatial Planning Act of 1985, which 
sets out different layers of plans and de ﬁ nes which organisations are responsible for 
their preparation, as well as the rights and responsibilities of different public bodies 
as regards their implementation. According to this act, the regional plans ( bölge 
planları ) are the highest level of spatial plan and are prepared in coordination with 
the State Planning Organisation (and recently by the regional development agencies) 
and approved by the Regional Policies Directorate of the same institution. 

112
P. Schmitt
 In the Turkish spatial planning hierarchy, the second-layer plan is de ﬁ ned as an 
Environmental Management and Land-Use Plan, and is prepared and approved by 
the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, and under speci ﬁ c circumstances, accord-
ing to the legislation of the Ministry of Public Works. The third layer constitutes 
local plans, covering both strategic issues in urban development and land-use regu-
lations. These functions are divided between the metropolitan municipality and the 
lower-level municipalities – the former working with master plans at 1:25,000 and 
1:5,000 scales  (Nazım İmar Planı ) and the lower-level municipalities producing 
implementation plans at a 1:1,000 scale ( Uygulama Imar Plani) . 
 Istanbul has an exceptional status within the planning system. When the Istanbul 
Metropolitan boundary was expanded to coincide with the boundary of the 
province in 2004, the ministry transferred responsibility for the preparation of 
the Environmental Management and Land-Use Plan to the Istanbul Metropolitan 
Municipality. Currently, the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality is also responsible 
for the preparation of a master plan for the whole area and for approving the 
lower-level plans prepared by each “district” or “ ﬁ rst-level municipality”, besides 
the Environmental Management and Land-Use Plan. The Istanbul Metropolitan 
Municipality has a total of 73 lower-tier local authorities within its boundaries, 
made up of 32 districts and 41 “ ﬁ rst-level municipalities”. Implementation plans 
are required to conform to the master plan, and if an authority fails to prepare an 
implementation plan within a year following the approval of the master plan, the 
metropolitan municipality has the right to prepare and approve its own plan. 
The Istanbul Metropolitan Municipal Council is the  ﬁ nal decision-making body, 
made up of the metropolitan mayor and the mayors of the 73 districts and  ﬁ rst-level 
municipalities and 274 further council members from these authorities. 
 7.2.3  Stockholm 
 Sweden has a three-tiered administrative system with national, regional (counties) 
and municipal levels; in spatial planning, however, the municipalities take the 
leading role. As stated in Chap.   5 , there is no national spatial planning policy as 
such; however, the state has an important role to play in providing major infrastruc-
ture (roads, rail, university facilities, etc.) and setting the legal framework for spatial 
planning (according to the Planning and Building Act of 1987 and the Environmental 
Code of 1999). Also, at a regional level, there is no formalised legal base for all the 
counties throughout the country, which is why different regional planning practices    
exist, one of the most profound ones being in the Stockholm County (herein referred 
to as the Stockholm region). 
 In the early 1950s, regional planning became institutionalised in the Stockholm 
region, which is, due to its comprehensive and explicitly strategic character, an 
exception in Sweden . Its main instrument, the regional development plan 
 (regional utvecklingsplan ), has since that time been the guide for municipal plan-
ning and as such is rather process-oriented, allowing much room for informal 
coordination and networking . The Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment and 

113
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
Planning (up to January 2011 named the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning) has the 
mandate to develop nonbinding regional plans, which are based on several stages 
of negotiations and participation with all municipalities and other relevant stake-
holders in the Stockholm region. The Stockholm County Council is in this sense a 
designated “Regional Planning Authority”, with the “Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, 
Environment and Planning” being the main operational organ. The regional develop-
ment plan is developed in cooperation with the County Administrative Board, which 
is a state organ that examines, for instance, appeals against municipal planning 
decisions and building permits. It also retains certain rights of intervention and 
ensures that national interests and laws are taken into consideration. The regional 
development plan has to be adopted by the County Council, as the democratic 
counterweight to the County Administrative Board. 
 The municipalities – of which there are 26 in the Stockholm region – are obliged 
to make long-term municipal comprehensive plans ( översiktsplan ), which while not 
legally binding, form the basis of decisions on the use of land and water areas. 
It also serves as a guideline for the development of legally binding detailed develop-
ment plans ( detajlplan) and building permits. In summary, the municipalities carry 
the main responsibility for land-use planning in Sweden – which is normally termed 
as the municipal planning monopoly. Accordingly, no changes to the use of land can 
take place unless based on a municipal plan. In exceptional cases, the state can 
decide on changes in the use of land when decisions go against municipal plans 
(COMMIN  2007 ) . 
 7.2.4  Rotterdam 
 Until recently, the central government controlled spatial policy in the Netherlands ; 
however, this task has now been decentralised, allowing provinces to develop poli-
cies based on individual needs (Schiess  2007 ) . The publication of the National 
Spatial Strategy ( Nota Ruimte ) in 2006 shifted responsibility for the development of 
spatial development strategies to the provinces and municipalities. 
 The new Spatial Planning Act (Nieuwe WRO  2006 ) came into force on July 
2008, decentralising responsibilities in spatial planning procedures, decision-
making and implementation and conferring more responsibility to the provinces 
and municipalities in the elaboration and implementation of plans. According to the 
new act, the national government focuses only on the development of, for example, 
the Randstad and other urban networks; large natural areas of the ecological 
network (NEN); national parks; main roads and transportation hubs around Schiphol 
and the Port of Rotterdam; and green ports – regions with many bulbs,  ﬂ owers, 
trees, crops and greenhouses (Rijksoverheid  2011 ) . The new act also aims to make 
the planning procedure less complex and clari ﬁ es the responsibilities of the different 
parties, setting out the mutual relations between the different levels of governance in 
the process of spatial planning. The amendments that had accumulated in the former 
act are all integrated into the new act, resulting in a document that is easier to both 
read and understand. At a national level, the National Spatial Strategy ( Nota Ruimte ), 

114
P. Schmitt
prepared and issued by the central government, states the government’s views and 
most important objectives in the spatial development of the Netherlands (Nota 
Ruimte  2006 ) . The  implementation agenda for the strategy provides insights into 
the most important spatial investments and implementation activities with respect to 
the policy. The National Spatial Strategy sets out national spatial policy up until 
2020, with long-term aspects covering the 2020–2030 period (Nota Ruimte  2006 ) . 
 At a national level, a coalition of diverse organisations, including VROM 
(Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment), V&W (Ministry of 
Transport, Public Works and Water Management), LNV (Ministry of Agriculture, 
Nature and Food Quality) and EZ (Ministry of Economy), prepares and issues the 
National Spatial Strategy. In the new simpli ﬁ ed Spatial Planning Act, there are two 
main types of planning documents: a strategic plan and a legally binding plan. The 
strategic plan and its general policy are set out in a “structure vision” ( structuur-
visie ), whereas the legally binding policy is described in the land-use plan ( bestem-
mingsplan ). Both the municipalities ( gemeente structuurvisie ) and provinces 
( provinciale ruimtelijk structuurvisie ) issue their own “structure visions”, and in the 
case of smaller projects, a project decision ( projectbesluit ) can be made. The “struc-
ture vision” replaces the key decisions in spatial planning ( planologische kernbes-
lissing ,  PKB ) at a national level, in the regional plans at a provincial level ( streekplan ) 
and in “structure plans” at a municipal level ( bestemmingsplan ). 
 Local authorities in the Netherlands have extensive responsibilities in such areas 
as water, rail, road and public transport infrastructure as well as social and commu-
nity services. The city of Rotterdam itself is divided into 13 sub-city districts ( deel-
gemeenten ), each with its own administration. These sub-city districts have 
responsibilities mainly in the  ﬁ elds of administration, local spatial planning and the 
maintenance of public areas. 
 7.3  Key Policy Documents on Managing Urban 
Change and Their Main Characteristics 
 The key contemporary policy documents for the management of urban change are, 
 ﬁ rst of all, the municipal plans of the  ﬁ ve main cities, but also essential are those 
covering the larger metropolitan area – or the “urban agglomeration” – which vary 
widely in terms of their spatial scope and thematic focus in the  ﬁ ve case study cities. 
In particular, as regards the two Portuguese urban agglomerations, the interplay 
with the national level is crucial in this respect; therefore, the National Programme 
for Spatial Planning Policies has been integrated in the analysis too. 
 7.3.1  Lisbon 
 There are three recent spatial documents that de ﬁ ne the guidelines for the manage-
ment of urban change in Lisbon , operating at three different levels (see Table  7.1 ). 

 Table 7.1  Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon 
 Name of policy document 
 Major (strategic) 
concerns 
 Major decisions/objectives 
 Major instruments /approaches 
to implement these objectives 
 Selected speci ﬁ ed major projects 
 National Programme for 
Spatial Planning 
Policies (adopted in 
2007) 
 Territorial cohesion 
 National strategic orientations, 
for example, promotion of 
compact and polycentric 
cities, quali ﬁ cation of 
suburban areas, redevelop-
ment of brown ﬁ elds 
 Government and regional 
spatial plans, for example, 
public sector, regional 
spatial plans and municipal 
spatial plans 
 Construction of new international 
airport for Lisbon 
 Strengthening the national and 
international importance of the 
Lisbon port 
 Regional Spatial Plan 
(adopted in 2002, 
preliminary 
reviewed version 
2011) 
 Polycentric develop-
ment, social and 
territorial cohesion, 
regional competi-
tiveness, sustainabil-
ity and equity 
 Enhancing the metropolitan 
transport system, 
developing a polycentric 
and attractive European 
metropolis 
 Municipal government, 
municipal master plans 
 Multimodal and intersectoral 
coordination with logistic 
platforms, local concentration 
of functional diversity to 
decrease car use, consolidation 
of the ecologic metropolitan 
network 
 Lisbon 2020 
 International competi-
tiveness , challenges 
for territorial 
governance , social 
dynamics 
 Urban revitalisation and 
waterfront quali ﬁ cation, 
improving social inclusion 
 Regional Technological 
Development Agency, 
Regional Operational 
Programme of Lisbon , 
National urban policy 
programme (POLIS XXI), 
regional spatial plan 
 Socio-urban interventions in 
deprived areas, rehabilitation 
of urban heritage areas, 
implementation of plans for 
the coastal zone 
 The Lisbon Strategy 
(adopted in 2007) 

116
P. Schmitt
The National Programme for Spatial Planning Policies is the lead document in the 
spatial planning system in which Lisbon is embedded (MAOTDR  2007 ). This not 
only de ﬁ nes the main options for the national territory and the framework for the 
preparation of lower-order plans but also provides a platform for dialogue and coop-
eration with the different member states of the European Union. 
 The Regional Spatial Plan for Lisbon and Tagus Valley region de ﬁ nes the regional 
approach, operating in close articulation with the Lisbon 2020 Regional Strategy 
(CCDR-LVT  2007 ). The latter document provides guidance for the application of the 
EU structural and cohesion funds for the region in which the Metropolitan Area of 
Lisbon is included. The Lisbon 2020 Regional Strategy also suggests some new insti-
tutional solutions, in particular in view of local interventions; however, the recently 
revised Regional Plan for the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon (for which public discus-
sions ended in January 2011), prepared by the Coordination and Development 
Committee of Lisbon and Tagus Valley, is the leading document in the implementa-
tion of a metropolitan vision (see CCDR-LVT  2009 ). As is the case with many other 
regional plans in the EU, this is a strategic document that guides the further implemen-
tation of spatially relevant policies and projects contained in the municipal master 
plans. Since this revision occurred simultaneously with several others at a municipal 
level, the gap that existed between this level and the regional level was somehow 
overcome, which may be viewed as a positive sign of multilevel coordination. 
 The recently reviewed Regional Spatial Plan for Lisbon and Tagus Valley 
(preliminary version of 2011) aims to improve connectivity across the transnational 
networks (mainly by high-speed trains and a future new airport). This has necessi-
tated a rethinking of the spatial structure of the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon, which 
the municipalities within the area, but also some of the sectoral stakeholders, 
consider to be a good opportunity to create or reinforce the urban agglomeration’s 
polycentric territorial layout. Innovative approaches in planning will help to 
promote urban renewal projects and more mixed land use in speci ﬁ c areas, thus 
increasing their centralities (see the Alcântara Case Study in Chap.   9 ). 
 Currently, the reorganisation and development of the multimodal interfaces, the 
expansion of the underground network and the creation of an external light railway 
ring in the Lisbon    urban agglomeration indicate a growing level of connectivity that 
will allow for the development of alternative job centres. In this light, one can say that 
from the 1990s onwards, the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon has shifted from being a 
model based on the Fordist functional dichotomy between the centre and periphery to 
a knowledge-based model characterised by a relatively effective polycentric system. 
To this end, a number of spatial plans have addressed several concerns, ranging from 
sustainability to polycentricity   , and are thus very much aligned to the strategic spatial 
approaches advocated in several EU and other international policy documents   .  
 7.3.2  Oporto 
 Similar to Lisbon, in Oporto    one of the key policy documents is the National 
Programme for Spatial Planning Policies, as it sets out a polycentric perspective not 

117
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
only for the country as such but also for the larger urban agglomeration of Oporto 
(Table  7.2 ) (see also MAOTDR  2007 ). The regional spatial plan for the “North 
Region” (CCDR-N  2009 ) de ﬁ nes a territorial strategy for all 86 municipalities in the 
NUTS II area “Norte” by de ﬁ ning three different “planning areas”: (1) Minho-Lima; 
(2) Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro; and (3) Grande Porto, Cávado, Ave, Tâmega and 
Entre Douro e Vouga. The latter includes the Greater Metropolitan Area of Oporto, 
for which no explicit key policy document exists as regards the topic at hand.  
 One of the most relevant examples of strategic planning for this larger region in the 
north of Portugal is the “NORTE 2015” document: a public initiative that has been car-
ried out by the Coordination and Development Commission for the Northern Region in 
partnership with the Regional Council (see CCDR-N  2006 ). This key policy document 
from 2005 has been the basis for the elaboration of the regional plan of 2009, with the 
objective being to de ﬁ ne a new vision and strategy for the development of the region. 
This has resulted in a “regional proposal” for the principal priorities and public policy 
instruments for the 2007–2013 National Strategic Reference Framework. 
 As regards the urban agglomeration of Oporto , the National Programme for 
Spatial Planning Policies proposes a polycentric perspective for the northern part of 
the country to address the current scattered settlement pattern. The basic rationale is 
to reinforce the dynamics and autonomy of urban areas outside the urban agglom-
eration of Oporto in order to obtain a more structured land-use pattern. 
 The regional plan for Oporto translates the objective of this policy option as follows: 
(a) to strengthen central areas, (b) to promote functional polycentrism , (c) to estab-
lish the general principles and common rules for land-use change, (d) to support 
socio-economic development policies, (e) to provide a framework for the prepara-
tion of activity plans in the different municipalities, (f) to identify housing needs, 
(g) to provide guidance for the development of the main municipal spatial strate-
gies, (h) to articulate and integrate national investments and the different sector 
interventions and,  ﬁ nally, (i) to  ﬁ nd a balance between rural and urban areas. A central 
motive here is to overcome the weaknesses of the currently dispersed urban pattern 
by promoting a more polycentric development in order to guarantee better coher-
ence within the regional urban system. 
 Due to the absence of a spatial plan or a strategic vision for the area of the urban 
agglomeration of Oporto (referred to here as the Greater Metropolitan Area of 
Oporto), a thorough analysis can only be provided through an assessment of the 
land-use proposals of all 16 municipal master plans. It can be seen that the munici-
palities of the Greater Metropolitan Area of Oporto have de ﬁ ned that 35% of the 
territory is to be urbanised. To date, 64% of a total of 28,500 ha of urban land has 
been turned into consolidated urban areas, while the remaining 36% corresponds to 
urban areas that are still under development. These  ﬁ gures reveal that land that can 
in fact be urbanised seems to exceed the real needs of this area, which has been hit 
seriously by shrinkage . In the current preparation of a new wave of municipal mas-
ter plans, these areas are likely to be reduced, which may lead to a steady consolida-
tion of the existing urban areas (Pinho  2009 ) . 
 Within the urban agglomeration, different policies are applied at a local level to 
address speci ﬁ c problems. For example, there are indications that the centre of the 

118
P. Schmitt
 Table 7.2  Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches in the urban agglomeration of Oporto 
 Name of policy document 
 Major (strategic) 
concerns 
 Major decisions/objectives 
 Major instruments /approaches 
to implement these objectives 
 Selected speci ﬁ ed major 
projects 
 National Programme for 
Spatial Planning Policies 
(adopted in 2007) 
 Territorial cohesion 
 Promotion of compact and 
polycentric cities, 
quali ﬁ cation of 
suburban areas, 
redevelopment of 
brown ﬁ elds 
 Government and regional 
spatial plans, for example, 
public sector, regional 
spatial plans and municipal 
spatial plans 
 High-speed trains 
 Strategic Document NORTE 
2015 (adopted in 2005) 
 Sustainable growth, 
improving economic, 
social and territorial 
cohesion 
 Technological improve-
ments of the regional 
production base, 
regional competitiveness 
 “15 action plans” integrated in 
seven priority areas, 
establishing informal 
urban networks 
 Knowledge centres 
concentrating on 
universities, scienti ﬁ c 
and technological parks, 
centres of excellence 
 Regional Spatial Plan 
(adopted in 2009) 
 Social and territorial 
cohesion, regional 
competitiveness, 
sustainability and 
equity 
 Protection of areas of 
agricultural and 
ecological value, 
transformation of the 
Northern Region, 
developing a polycentric 
metropolitan area 
 Public actors, National 
Strategic Reference 
Framework (NSRF), 
municipal master plans 
 Improving the metro and 
rail network, 
quali ﬁ cation and 
development of coastal 
and river settlements, 
increasing intra-urban 
mobility 

119
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
city of Oporto is experiencing shrinkage , and thus the area has been the focus of 
local policies promoting urban regeneration and the rehabilitation of the urban fabric. 
In the more peripheral municipalities, on the other hand, the problems relate to an 
increasing loss of competitiveness , driven in particular by the recent economic crisis. 
The regional spatial plan for the North Region, highlighting high rates of unemploy-
ment and problematic social conditions in the rural areas, has led to the develop-
ment of policies focusing on the creation of urban facilities and infrastructures 
integrated into national and international networks, the comprehensive requali ﬁ cation 
in critical and peripheral neighbourhoods, the regeneration of abandoned or obso-
lete areas (usually industrial areas) and the articulation and integration of different 
interventions to support local socio-economic development. 
 7.3.3  Istanbul 
 The Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality was given the responsibility for the creation 
of the master plans following the Spatial Planning Act of 1985. The metropolitan 
master plan prepared in 1995 by the City Planning Directorate and approved by the 
Council of Greater Istanbul Municipality is still the main document, while a new 
one is currently being prepared. Besides preparing these plans, the Istanbul 
Metropolitan Municipality also approves the lower-level plans elaborated by each 
district or  ﬁ rst-level municipality. 
 Istanbul was assigned a different planning status in the 2000s due to its rapid growth 
in both economic and population terms. After a number of reforms, in 2004 the bound-
aries of the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality were redrawn to coincide with those of 
the province, with the former represented by local government and the latter by the 
special provincial administration. The territorial incorporation of the Istanbul 
Metropolitan Municipality and the province has made possible the preparation of a 
regional plan at this spatial scale. The regional plan for Istanbul, drawn up by the 
Istanbul Development Agency, was approved in 2010 (Istanbul Kalkınma Ajansı  2010 ) , 
a few years after the Environmental Management and Land-Use Plan (Istanbul 
Büyükşehir Belediyesi  2009  )  was adopted by the General Assembly of Istanbul 
Metropolitan Municipality in 2006. The latter underwent considerable revision in 2009 
in the wake of strong objections from different state-run institutions and NGOs. 
 The recently adopted regional plan considers Istanbul as an international service 
centre that is specialised in  ﬁ nancial activities (see Table  7.3 ). It envisions sustain-
able development by focusing on high-value-added services with a global competi-
tive capacity while enhancing the quality of life of the urban agglomeration’s 
inhabitants and protecting its considerable cultural heritage. 
 Additionally, the “Istanbul International Financial Centre Strategy Document 
and Action Plan”, developed by the State Planning Organisation and approved by 
the  Higher Planning Council of the central government in 2009, is expected to have 
a considerable impact on the spatial development of Istanbul in general and the 
central part in particular, where these  ﬁ nancial activities are to be clustered. 

120
P. Schmitt
 Table 7.3  Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches in the urban agglomeration of Istanbul 
 Name of policy document 
 Major (strategic) concerns 
 Major decisions/objectives 
 Major instruments to 
implement these objectives 
 Selected speci ﬁ ed major 
projects 
 Istanbul Regional Plan 
(adopted in 2010) 
 To enhance the economic 
structure and quality of 
life 
 Increasing competitive 
capacity of the urban 
economy 
 Preparation of action plans 
 Not clearly de ﬁ ned 
 Istanbul Master Plan 
(adopted in 1995) 
 Maintaining the current 
urban form , relocation 
of industry to the fringe, 
de ﬁ ning new areas to be 
developed 
 Retaining the existing CBD 
with expansion through 
transformation of former 
industrial sites to of ﬁ ce/
commercial functions 
 Public-private partnerships 
on real estate develop-
ment, privatisation of 
public enterprise with 
large plots 
 Two secondary centres are 
proposed at the far ends 
of both sides of the 
urban fabric 
 Environmental 
Management and 
Land-Use Plan 
(adopted in 2009) 
 Limitations on urban 
growth in order to 
protect water basins and 
forests 
 Linear but also compact urban 
form that extends along the 
south coast 
 Renewal and transforma-
tion projects, provision 
of funds to housing 
projects 
 48 sites or areas for speci ﬁ c 
projects 
 Istanbul International 
Financial Centre 
Strategy Document 
and Action Plan 
(adopted in 2009) 
 Enhancement of the 
 ﬁ nancial role of Istanbul 
 Preparing the  ﬁ nancial 
infrastructure and the 
metropolitan area to host 
international  ﬁ nancial 
 ﬁ rms 
 Developing of ﬁ ce space/
housing areas in 
non-earthquake risk 
areas, improving the 
transport systems 
 Allocating land for 
relocation of banks from 
Ankara to Istanbul 

121
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
 The regional plan does not propose any particular spatial development strategies 
but rather accepts the strategies de ﬁ ned by the Environmental Management and 
Land-Use Plan, approved in 2009. The existing Environmental Management and 
Land-Use Plan  (Çevre Düzeni Plani) strives to achieve a linear urban fabric, com-
prising a more compact urban pattern in general. While the existing CBD retains 
importance in this plan, the decentralisation of some of service activities to subcen-
tres are suggested due to the physical limitations in further expanding the CBD. 
This policy document also accepts that the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality can 
only accommodate a maximum of 16 million inhabitants, although the latest popu-
lation projections show a higher population growth rate (i.e. 22 million for 2020). 
Hence, it has been declared that several growth centres in the nearby provinces 
should be enhanced in order to attract some of the population from Istanbul. 
 In the existing master plan for the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality from 1995, a 
compact development is accentuated as regards locations for the service sector and 
industrial activities, also allowing the further expansion of residential areas towards the 
fringe, which has cleared the way for considerably more urban sprawl in recent years. 
 Recently, however, new amendments to existing legislations have designated 
certain areas, some of which are crucial for the metropolitan system, for which the 
planning and development rights have been assigned to different institutions in 
the central government (Eraydin  2011 ) . These new amendments to the planning 
legislation have led to piecemeal planning processes as well as to overlaps of plan-
ning decisions in the development and implementation of concrete interventions 
and projects. Over the last decade, the Istanbul    urban agglomeration has become 
the playground of different authorities and state actors with different interests, 
agendas and power, resulting in several con ﬂ icts between the central and local 
governments. 
 In the aforementioned spatial plans, there is strong emphasis on the creation of 
space for business, especially for  ﬁ nancial services. For instance, the “Istanbul 
International Financial Centre Strategy Document and Action Plan” is targeted to 
create stocks of of ﬁ ce buildings and housing in districts and connect them with dif-
ferent modes of transportation to different parts of the city and the airports. 
 What is also peculiar for the case of Istanbul is the fact that several central state 
departments have been increasingly involved in different projects, forming partner-
ships and taking part in collaborative actions in liaison with the local government. 
Recently, several projects have been undertaken by the Housing Development 
Administration, which is attached to the Prime Ministry and has considerable pow-
ers in the realisation and  ﬁ nancing of different housing projects (renewal, regenera-
tion, conservation, but also new buildings). 
 7.3.4  Stockholm 
 In the Stockholm    case, there are three key documents to be considered in the 
management of urban change (Table  7.4 ). First is the recently adopted regional 

122
P. Schmitt
 Table 7.4  Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches in the urban agglomeration of Stockholm 
 Name of policy 
document 
 Major (strategic) concerns 
 Major decisions/objectives 
 Major instruments /
approaches to implement 
these objectives 
 Selected speci ﬁ ed major 
projects 
 Regional Development 
Plan 2010 (adopted 
in 2010) 
 Growing population, maintain-
ing its international 
competitiveness, climate 
change , infrastructure 
capacity, social exclusion 
 Open and accessible region, 
good living environment, 
resource ef ﬁ ciency , 
promoting a more 
polycentric regional 
structure 
 Information and 
communication, 
cooperation with 
public and private 
actors 
 Strengthening eight regional 
urban cores, public 
transport and new rail 
lines, protection of green 
spaces 
 Municipal 
Comprehensive Plan 
2010 (adopted in 
2010) 
 Environmental and climate 
change issues, socio-eco-
nomic disparities among 
neighbourhoods, attractive 
urban environment 
 Densi ﬁ cation and develop-
ment (also of outer city 
nodes), better public 
transportation, invest-
ments in parks and public 
spaces 
 Information and 
communication, 
cooperation with 
public and private 
actors 
 Expanding the inner city 
beyond its historical 
borders, modernising the 
public transport system, 
buildings in existing 
neighbourhoods 
 Vision Stockholm 2030 
(adopted in 2007) 
 (a) A versatile and dynamic 
city,(b) hub of east central 
Sweden , (c) hub of a safe, 
accessible region without 
social or physical barriers 
 Achieve better consensus on 
current and future urban 
projects 
 Information and 
communication 
 Suggesting new trams and 
underground routes, as 
well as new road links/
bypasses 

123
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
development plan, which is a strategic vision that pinpoints some development 
goals for 2030. The plan is considered to be signi ﬁ cantly comprehensive since it 
covers numerous sectoral and development issues (e.g. energy, environment, trans-
port, economy ) (Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning  2010 ) . Due to the relatively monocen-
tric territorial layout of this urban agglomeration, the city of Stockholm plays a key 
role in managing urban change, with the key document being the new long-term 
comprehensive plan for the municipality of Stockholm (also adopted in 2010). 
Finally, a far-reaching programme for the city of Stockholm has to be assessed here 
too, the so-called Vision Stockholm 2030 (adopted in 2007), which comprises three 
different visions with regard to sustainable growth and development and will help to 
provide a frame of reference for urban projects that are either underway or currently 
only projected (City of Stockholm Executive Of ﬁ ce  2007 ) . 
 With regard to land-use policies, the new regional development plan for the 
Stockholm region underlines the approach of its forerunner, the regional develop-
ment plan of 2001, which introduced for the very  ﬁ rst time the concept of polycen-
tricity at a regional level. The proposed emerging polycentric shape will be formed 
out of the eight so-called regional urban cores located 15–40 km from the central 
core (the city of Stockholm). Such cores shall serve as “territorial anchors” for con-
centrations of land developments as well as some distinct urban functions in order 
to promote the intended gradual transformation of the rather monocentric urban 
con ﬁ guration into a polycentric one (see Chap.   12 ). 
 The major objective of the new Stockholm municipal comprehensive plan of 
2010 is to intensify the urban landscape in order to cope with the high demand for 
of ﬁ ce space, hotels and other facilities in the city centre and for housing in the 
nearby areas and suburbs. At the same time, urban quality and the attractiveness of 
the city is to be maintained. 
 The other strategic policy document in Vision Stockholm 2030 puts forward 
three visions that shall be approached through the application of 21 urban develop-
ment projects (in such areas as public transport, housing, new work places) that are 
partly under way in order to communicate a better base for understanding their 
potential (positive) impacts. Even though this policy document is elaborated by the 
executive of ﬁ ce of the city of Stockholm (and adopted by the city council), the 
entire document (i.e. the visions and the rather verifying projects) also includes a 
city-regional perspective, that is, going beyond the municipal boundaries. This is 
not surprising, since the city of Stockholm is the uncontested hub of this urban 
agglomeration and may consider the surrounding municipalities as its “natural hinter-
land”. In this respect, the spatial plan also indicates that attempts at further growth 
are only manageable through mutually consented city-regional projects. One example 
to illustrate this is the relocation of the harbour from the city of Stockholm to 
Nynäshamn (around 70 km south of Stockholm), which implies an extension of the 
current port in the municipality of Nynäshamn on the one hand, and at the same 
time the construction of attractive and high-end homes and workplaces in the old 
port areas of Stockholm (as it is the case with the “Norra Djurgårdsstaden” project, 
as an extension of city to the north-east). 

124
P. Schmitt
 In summary, the strong dynamics caused by urban growth and its potential 
consequences on land consumption are well re ﬂ ected in all three policy documents . 
It is obvious that the pace of growth in the urban agglomeration of Stockholm neces-
sitates a wide regional perspective of land-use development and cooperation beyond 
administrative borders in order to identify a robust response. 
 7.3.5  Rotterdam 
 The City Plan Rotterdam 1992 (Stadsplan Rotterdam  1992 ) , approved by the 
Rotterdam Municipality (see Table  7.5 for the detailed planning documents), pro-
vides an integrated picture of the vision for future sustainable development of the 
port and the city, with focus on the numerous adverse effects of post-war economic 
and urban development. A “compact city” objective was introduced with this plan, 
comprising development along the river and a “carpet metropolis” in the hinterland 
of the city with the production of parklike residential landscapes. The plan, how-
ever, ran into serious  ﬁ nancial dif ﬁ culties after the withdrawal of central govern-
ment support, meaning that more public/private partnerships and cooperation with 
adjoining municipalities were needed. 
 The Rotterdam    Spatial Plan 2010 ( Ruimtelijk Plan Rotterdam ) (approved in 2001) 
was initiated by an interdepartmental working group of the Rotterdam Municipality 
(spatial planning and urban development and housing departments), which was 
charged with making an inventory of 180 existing visions, plans or projects in 1999. 
According to de ﬁ nitions contained in the Spatial Planning Act ( Wet Ruimtelijke 
Ordening ), it is de ﬁ ned as a structure plan, that is, not statutory binding. The plan 
establishes diverse framework(s) for initiatives by other actors in the spatial develop-
ment of the city (governmental, non-governmental and private) (RPR  2010 ) . 
 The Spatial Plan for the Rotterdam Region 2020 was approved in 2005 by the 
Rotterdam city region ( Stads Regio Rotterdam ) and the Province of South Holland 
(see RR  2005 ). The plan has a “two in one” approach, combining the structure plan 
for the Rotterdam city region and the provincial spatial plan. 
 Finally, the Spatial Development Strategy 2030 (Gemeente Rotterdam  2007 ) 
was approved in 2007 by the city council. The spatial vision of the plan was of a 
shared framework, with the belief that such a system facilitates mutual adjustments 
and leads to a cooperative process in the management of planning as well as invest-
ments by the Rotterdam Municipality, adjoining municipalities in the “city region” 
and the private sector. It also aims at creating a strong post-industrial economy  and 
attractive qualities to bind highly educated and creative workers to the city. 
 Spatial plans for the urban agglomeration of Rotterdam target the development 
of a normative core to contribute to a strengthening of its international competitive-
ness . It places the city of Rotterdam in broader spatial frameworks – mostly as “a 
vital city within a strong, globally competitive Randstad” – but almost exclusively 
elaborates its planning in concrete measures (and investments) for locations (clusters, 
strategic areas, etc.) inside the city, paying little attention to the subject of urban 

125
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
 Table 7.5  Major strategic concerns, instruments and approaches in the urban agglomeration of Rotterdam 
 Name of policy document 
 Major (strategic) 
concerns 
 Major decisions/objectives 
 Major instruments /approaches 
to implement these objectives 
 Selected speci ﬁ ed major 
projects 
 Spatial Plan for the 
Rotterdam Region 2020 
(adopted in 2005) 
 Binding  ﬁ rms and 
inhabitants to the 
region. 
 Better spatial balance of 
urbanisation (blue-green 
structures), international 
competitiveness, high-quality 
living and working in the city 
 No explicit policies, leaves 
room for  ﬂ exible adjust-
ments, investment pro-
gramme for infrastructure, 
PPPs instead of national and 
local government 
investments 
 Six sectoral programmes 
(e.g. infrastructure, 
water) and seven area 
development projects 
 Rotterdam City Plan 
(adopted in 1992) 
 Adverse post-war 
effects 
 A “compact city” along the river 
and the “carpet metropolis” in 
the hinterland 
 New types of “concept plans”, 
call for more cooperation in 
the form of PPPs 
 New urban renewal 
projects (e.g. water-
front development and 
new housing sites) 
 Rotterdam Spatial Plan 
2010- RPR  2010 
(adopted in 2001) 
 Regional and 
international 
competitiveness 
 Multicultural and attractive city; 
major centre of employment, 
services and residence; 
European city with a global 
(sea)port 
 Set priorities on the local 
government investment 
agendas without own budget 
 Two strategic areas (SAs) 
 Spatial Development 
Strategy 2030 (adopted 
in 2007) 
 Strong post-indus-
trial economy 
and attractive 
city for quali ﬁ ed 
labour. 
 10 “core decisions” (e.g. strong 
economy , with more employ-
ment opportunities, attractive 
residential city with balanced 
composition of the population) 
 Spatial development strategy 
and an implementation 
strategy 
 Area development 
programmes in 13 
VIPs (very important 
projects) 

126
P. Schmitt
sprawl. Indirectly, it is only housing policy that has a regional perspective in the 
form of house building schemes and housing distribution systems. 
 The City Plan Rotterdam 1992 addresses nine integrated assignments, including 
new projects of urban renewal, with the river as decor (Kop van Zuid), and the 
development of new housing sites in the north of the city with connections to the 
river Rotte (including Nesselande – formerly named Achtkamp). 
 The Rotterdam  Spatial Plan 2010 aims in particular at strengthening the city’s 
regional and international competitiveness. In doing so, it focuses on three major 
ambitions: (a) creating a multicultural and attractive city (in terms of spatial quality) 
for as many different types of people as possible; (b) becoming a major centre for 
employment, services and residency in the South Wing; and (c) becoming a European 
city with a global seaport, as part of a strong Randstad. The plan also suggests two 
“strategic areas”, combining ideals in accessibility, recreation, residential quality, 
entrepreneurship and water control. Examples of this can be seen in the “City Centre 
on Two Banks” and the “North Fringe” extensions. In each strategic area, a few 
“additional guidelines” are emphasised to either new or already existing projects. 
 The Spatial Plan for the Rotterdam Region 2020 is concerned with the optimal 
spatial balance of urbanisation (vis-à-vis blue-green structures); international eco-
nomic development; and quality residential areas, working environments and urban 
atmosphere. In order to maintain the polycentric territorial layout, the plan de ﬁ nes 
urban nodes as locations with a high transport accessibility and functional value. 
The “transport value” is determined by the number of converging modalities (public 
transport in the form of train, metro, tram, (water) bus and car) as well interconnec-
tions between modes, including park-and-ride schemes. The presence of mobility-
generating functions, housing and of ﬁ ces determines the “functional value”. In an 
ideal situation, the transport value and the functional value should be in balance. 
 The Spatial Development Strategy 2030 for the city of Rotterdam explicitly 
regards the adjoining municipalities in the urban region of Rotterdam as potential 
sites for green residential areas. 
 In summary, in the urban agglomeration of Rotterdam , spatial planning is devel-
oping towards a new “mindset”, characterised (a) by a strategy of cooperation 
between municipal governments and market parties in which the government 
assesses opportunities and inspires and assists other parties to participate, providing 
frameworks for the assessment of the role of each participant through a review of 
their capabilities, and (b) by a shift from stand-alone projects to area development 
programmes (i.e. binding other parties sustainably to areas and making them 
co-responsible for the development and management of the programme). 
 7.4  Synthesis and Major Observations 
 A comparison of the  ﬁ ve urban agglomerations reveals that the assessed key policy 
documents in which interventions and policies are outlined for the management 
of urban change contain similarities in their general approaches but differ quite 

127
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
considerably in their concrete formulation. This can be explained by their different 
institutional frameworks (except, of course, in the cases of Oporto and Lisbon ), as 
brie ﬂ y touched upon in the former sections. 
 It is no surprise that a common feature of each urban agglomeration is the 
existence of formalised (often statutory) municipal plans with a rather  ﬁ rm under-
standing of land-use policies. Upon closer inspection, however, they seem to be 
quite different in terms of their rigidity to the rules. Moving up to the city-regional 
level, the differences among the  ﬁ ve cases become even more visible, which can be 
traced back to the fact that (recently also in Istanbul ) each of the regional planning 
regimes has developed rather strategic-indicative spatial plans, with consequently a 
relatively high degree of freedom as regards their content and the character of their 
intrinsic policies, instruments and organisational approaches. In addition, the four 
central national governments and their different levels of intervention into local and 
regional policies must also be taken into consideration, being very high in the case 
of Istanbul to almost non-existent in the case of Stockholm , while the other three 
examples (Rotterdam , Oporto and Lisbon ) lying between these two extremes. 
 What is noteworthy is the existence and variety of other non-compulsory strategic 
documents, which are either of somewhat visionary in character (e.g. Stockholm , 
Lisbon and Oporto ) or illustrate a more sectoral perspective with a rather limited 
spatial impact (such as focusing on the development of the port in the case of 
Rotterdam , a document that has not been assessed here due to the limited space, or 
on promoting activities to strengthen the city’s function as an international  ﬁ nancial 
centre, as in the case of Istanbul ). The authors of these documents, that is, those who 
have developed such strategies, are not necessarily from the public or political 
sphere of each city region’s governance regime, as they may also work for indepen-
dent organisations established for speci ﬁ c purposes (e.g. development agencies), 
although often initiated by the respective city council. These and other central (stra-
tegic) concerns, decisions and objectives, as well as speci ﬁ c major projects, will be 
further re ﬂ ected upon in the  ﬁ ve case studies (see Part IV, Chaps.   8 – 12 ). 
 Looking at these central (strategic) concerns, decisions more closely and objec-
tives, as well as speci ﬁ c major projects, it should be emphasised that the analysed 
content was (at least to some extent) selected in view of the particular case studies (cf. 
Chaps.  9 – 13 ). However, disregarding this, one can at least read the following trends. 
 Unsurprisingly, a common feature is that most of the key documents are not only 
concerned with land-use management in terms of zoning and protection (i.e. rather 
“preventive” in character) but also pinpoint options of how to boost the overall eco-
nomic competitiveness in some speci ﬁ c local hot spots (i.e. rather “developmental” 
in character). Some of the commonly used buzz words are, in this respect, centres 
or hubs of excellence/technology/innovation etc., with different sectoral variations. 
 A common feature of the planning goals of three of the urban agglomerations 
(Lisbon , Oporto and Stockholm ) is their quest for a recon ﬁ guration of their metropoli-
tan areas from a monocentric territorial layout to a “more” polycentric one, which is a 
trend that can be seen also in other European urban agglomerations (see Schmitt 
 2010 ) . The essential drivers of such a strategic spatial policy approach are intended 
improvements in the service and connectivity of the public transport system linked 

128
P. Schmitt
with functional and partly also an aesthetical upgrade of selected areas that shall in 
this sense become “mixed centres” or “regional urban cores”, respectively. In the case 
of Oporto, this objective is predominantly focused on reshaping the urban fabric to 
counteract the ongoing perforation of the urban fabric through selective shrinkage in 
some areas and continued expansion in others. In Stockholm and Lisbon, the idea is 
to create new centralities within the urban landscape; while in the larger urban agglom-
eration of Rotterdam   , which is considered as polycentric, the focus is rather to main-
tain the polycentric territorial layout, that is, to make better use of the existing 
polycentric structure. In this light, the intended improvement of the multimodal con-
nectivity to international transport systems in the Lisbon urban region is to be men-
tioned too, since it can be assumed that this will not be inconsequential with regard to 
land-use management and the efforts to create a more polycentric territorial layout. 
 In regard to the urban agglomeration of Oporto , issues like urban containment, 
the perforation of the urban landscape as well as brown ﬁ eld redevelopment and 
green zone protection are vital, since although the population has been declining for 
many years, land consumption is still increasing. In contrast to this, the urban region 
of Stockholm    has seen (and will continue to do so in the future) a continuous growth 
of population, and it is rather striking that no explicit policies have been introduced 
(neither at the municipal nor regional level) to improve the current model of land-
use management. The normative concepts of polycentricity (at the regional level) as 
well as the intensi ﬁ cation strategy (in particular at the municipal level) are two 
“implicit” approaches in this respect, without, however, de ﬁ nite land-use implica-
tions due to the nonbinding character of the concerned policy documents. 
 In the urban agglomeration of Istanbul , the subject of land-use management is 
covered in some policy documents ; these normative goals, suggesting a wise or 
even sustainable handling of the scarce land resources, are complemented by those 
that, for instance, promote large-scale projects or increase of ﬁ ce space and housing 
in risk-free areas. It remains to be seen just how far these objectives, which at  ﬁ rst 
glance may seem contradictory, can be integrated in a sensible manner within such 
a fast-growing urban agglomeration. 
 The urban agglomeration of Rotterdam is an example in which land management 
policies (such as striving to create a “compact city”) have become increasingly less 
important at the expense of policies to boost global competitiveness and the intended 
transformation of the city from being a space of production to a space of consump-
tion. More concretely, such policies are focused in particular on speci ﬁ c clusters, 
urban renewal projects or strategic economic areas, and their implementations 
follow inevitably a more loose coupled type of coordination (i.e. through speci ﬁ c 
policy instruments , projects and development programmes). It also appears that the 
spatial-functional integration into the larger Randstad has become less important 
than its own “city-regional” competitiveness . 
 As mentioned in the introduction, to what extent the policy documents presented 
and discussed above are related to the notion of urban resilience is rather dif ﬁ cult to 
assess, as none make any explicit reference to it. Hence, any further judgement 
in this respect shall be left to the chapters in which the case studies are presented 
(see Chaps.   9  – 13  ). The above-described widening of the thematic scope (from land-use 

129
7 Managing Urban Change in Five European Urban Agglomerations: Key Policy…
management to strategic and, to some extent, sustainable spatial development) and 
the increasing existence of other indicative strategic documents, however, can be 
assessed as a – perhaps unintentional – step towards a more “resilient sensitive” 
policy response in the  ﬁ ve case study urban agglomerations. 
 References 
 Böhme, K., & Waterhout, B. (2008). The Europeanisation of planning. In A. Faludi (Ed.),  European 
spatial research and planning (pp. 225–248). Cambridge: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. 
 CCDR-LVT. (2007).  Lisboa 2020 Uma estratégia de Lisboa para a Região de Lisboa . António 
Fonseca Ferreira (coord.). Lisboa: CCDR-LVT. Retrieved September 21, 2011, from   http://
www.ccdr-lvt.pt/pt/documento-lisboa-2020/5093.htm.  
 CCDR-LVT. (2009).  Alteração ao Plano Regional de Ordenamento do Território da Área 
Metropolitana de Lisboa [Amendment to the Regional Spatial Plan of Lisbon Metropolitan]. 
Documento de Trabalho, versão preliminar, Julho 2009, CCDR-LVT, Lisboa. Retrieved 
September 21, 2011, from   http://protaml.inescporto.pt/biblioteca/proposta-versao-preliminar-
integral-2009-07-23/view  . 
 CCDR-N. (2006).  NORTE 2015 Competitividade e Desenvolvimento – Uma Visão Estratégica (Versão 
de Trabalho), CCDR-N. Retrieved September 21, 2011, from   http://www.norte2015.com.pt.   
 CCDR-N. (2009).  Plano Regional de Ordenamento do Território da Região Norte (North Regional 
Spatial Plan), CCDR-N, Porto. Retrieved September 21, 2011, from   http://protn.inescporto.pt  
 City of Stockholm Executive Of ﬁ ce. (2007).  A world-class Stockholm – Vision 2030 . Stockholm. 
 COMMIN. (2007).  National planning systems: Sweden . Retrieved March 20, 2011, from   http://
commin.org/en/planning-systems/national-planning-systems/sweden/1.-planning-system-
in-general/1.1-history-of-the-planning-system.html  . 
 Crespo, J., & Cabral, J. (2010). The institutional dimension to urban governance and territorial 
management in the Lisbon metropolitan area.  Análise Social, XLV (197), 639–662. 
 Dühr, S., Colomb, C., & Nadin, V. (2010).  European spatial planning and territorial cooperation . 
New York: Routledge. 
 Eraydin, A. (2011). The outcome of neoliberal policies on Istanbul metropolitan area: Where neo-
liberal planning stands for? In T. Taşan-Kok & G. Beaten (Eds.),  Contradictions of neoliberal 
planning: Cities, policies, and politics (pp. 61–79). Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Gemeente Rotterdam. (2007).  Rotterdam spatial development strategy 2030: Rotterdam urban 
vision. Retrieved May 16, 2009, from   http://www.rotterdam.nl/stadsvisie  . 
 Herschel, T., & Newman, P. (2002).  Governance of Europe’s city regions. Planning, policy and 
politics . London: Routledge. 
 Istanbul Büyükşehir Belediyesi. (2009).  1/100.000 Ölçekli Istanbul çevre düzeni planı . Retrieved 
June 15, 2009, from   http://www.ibb.gov.tr/Documents/ISTANBUL_CDP_GENEL_BILGI.pdf.   
 Istanbul Kalkinma Ajansı. (2010).  Istanbul Bölge Planı 2010–2013 . Retrieved January 15, 2011, 
from   http://www.istka.org.tr/Portals/iska/images/1-B%C3%B6lge%20Plan%C4%B1.pdf  . 
 Jensen, O. B., & Richardson, T. (2004).  Making European space: Mobility, power and territorial 
identity . London: Routledge. 
 MAOTDR. (2007).  Programa Nacional da Política de Ordenamento do Território – PNPOT 
(National Programme for Spatial Planning Policies). Relatório, Lisboa, Ministério do Ambiente, 
do Ordenamento do Território e do Desenvolvimento Regional. Retrieved September 21, 2011, 
from   http://www.dgotdu.pt/pnpot/Storage/pdfs/PNPOT_RELATORIO.pdf.  
 Nieuwe WRO. (2006).  Nieuwe Wet van Ruimtelijke Ordening (the New Spatial Planning Act). 
Retrieved May 16, 2009, from   http://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/ruimtelijke-ordening/
wet-ruimtelijke-ordening  . 

130
P. Schmitt
 Nota Ruimte. (2006).  Interdepartementaal Project Nota Ruimte  [National Spatial Strategy, English 
Summary]. Ruimte voor Ontwikkeling (Creating space for development). Ministries VROM, 
LNV, V&W, en EZ, The Hague. 
 Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning (Regionplanekontoret). (2010).  RUFS 2010 – Regional Utvecklingsplan 
för Stockholmsregionen 2010 . Rapport 1:2010, Stockholm . 
 Pinho, P. (2009).  Atlas da Grande Área Metropolitana do Porto . Porto, FEUP/JMP. 
 Rijksoverheid. (2011).  Gemeenten en provincies ontwikkelen eigen region [Municipalities 
and provinces develop their own region]. Retrieved July 7, 2011, from   http://www.rijks-
overheid.nl/onderwerpen/ruimtelijke-ordening/nota-ruimte#anker-gemeenten-en-provincies-
ontwikkelen-eigen-regio  . 
 RPR. (2010).  Ruimtelijk Plan Rotterdam 2010 . Rotterdam: Gemeente Rotterdam. 
 RR. (2005).  The spatial plan for the Rotterdam  region [ Ruimtelijk Plan Regio Rotterdam ]. Retrieved 
July 7, 2011, from   http://www.rr2020.nl/#pagina=1021  . 
 Schiess, L. (2007).  A compact city and a better balance new  ﬂ exibility in Dutch planning provides 
a model for balanced development . NEURUS 2006–2007. University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. 
 Schmitt, P. (Ed.). (2010).  Intra-metropolitan polycentricity  in practice – Re ﬂ ections, challenges 
and conclusions from 12 European metropolitan areas . Final report of the METREX – Expert 
Group on Intra-Metropolitan Polycentricity. Retrieved November 28, 2010, from   www.eurometrex.
org/Docs/Expert_Groups/Polycentricity/METREX_IMP_ ﬁ nal_version.pdf  . 
 Stadsplan Rotterdam. (1992).  Een visie op de ruimtelijke ontwikkeling van Rotterdam tot 2005 . 
Rotterdam: B&W Rotterdam. 

131
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_8, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 8.1  The Evaluation of Planning 
 The  ﬁ rst part of this chapter introduces the theme of planning evaluation from three 
different perspectives: an assessment of different planning documents, such as poli-
cies, programmes, plans and projects (PPPP); an appraisal of planning processes 
and practices in the implementation of these documents; and  ﬁ nally, an analysis of 
the actual results of planning activity on territory and society. The second part 
 discusses how resilient thinking in planning can be evaluated by assessing to what 
extent planning is able to adapt to new conditions in coping with and managing 
change. This is a rather pertinent issue, in that despite the increasing presence of 
resilience on the planning agenda, evaluations of resilient-based planning in litera-
ture are notably absent. The  ﬁ nal part of this chapter proposes a method of evalua-
tion, identifying its main in ﬂ uences and describing in considerable detail each step 
in the assessment procedure. The method is applied to case studies in Lisbon , 
Oporto , Istanbul , Stockholm and Rotterdam in Chaps.   9 – 13 , presenting context-
based extensions of variegated forms of this methodology. 
 8.1.1  Evaluating Planning Documents 
 Planning evaluations  ﬁ rst came into use in the 1950s, when the rational paradigm 
was dominant in planning theory. In the beginning of the second half of the twentieth 
century, as is still the case today in many different contexts, evaluations of planning 
 P.  Pinho (*) •  V.  Oliveira •  A.  Martins 
 Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Centre for Territory, Transports and Environment , 
 University of Oporto ,  Rua Dr. Roberto Frias ,  4200-465  Oporto ,  Portugal 
e-mail:  pcpinho@fe.up.pt ;  vitorm@fe.up.pt ;  ana.jorge.martins@fe.up.pt 
 Chapter 8 
 Evaluating Resilience in Planning 
 Paulo  Pinho ,  Vítor  Oliveira , and  Ana  Martins   

132
P. Pinho et al.
took the form of ex ante assessments of planning documents. This focus on the prep-
aration stage is one of the most signi ﬁ cant differences between the evaluation    of 
planning and the evaluation of social programmes, where the ex ante stage is usually 
devaluated due to the supposed dif ﬁ culties within social sciences in providing a 
 reliable forecast (for more on this issue, see Lich ﬁ eld  (  2001 ) and Lich ﬁ eld and Prat 
 ( 1998 ) ). 
 Under the rational paradigm, the decision-maker would, when faced with a 
speci ﬁ c planning situation, assess all possible courses of action towards a number 
of established ends, identify and assess the consequences of each course of action 
adopted and then select the most preferable alternative. 
 Throughout the second half of the twentieth century, largely bounded by this 
rational paradigm, many different evaluation methods were proposed, including 
cost-bene ﬁ t analysis, planning balance sheet analysis, goals-achievement matrix, 
multi-criteria evaluation and environmental impact assessment , to name just a few. 
Comprehensive reviews and systems of classi ﬁ cation of ex ante methods of evalua-
tion can be found in Alexander  ( 2006 ) , Lich ﬁ eld  ( 1996 ) , McAllister  ( 1982 ) and 
Söderbaum  ( 1998 ) . 
 Alexander  ( 2006 ) proposes a system of classi ﬁ cation based on the type of ratio-
nality associated with each view of ex ante evaluation   : (1) instrumental rationality   , 
corresponding to the logic of choosing the best means to achieve a particular goal; (2) 
substantive rationality, demanding consideration of the goals themselves, selecting 
between objectives and assigning priorities; (3) bounded rationality, providing a 
 context for decision-making; (4) strategic rationality, making the decision-maker and 
other actors interdependent; and,  ﬁ nally, (5) communicative rationality, shifting the 
focus from decision-making to social interaction. Alexander  ( 2006 ) associates instru-
mental rationality with cost-bene ﬁ t analysis; substantive rationality with  planning 
balance sheet analysis, multi-criteria evaluation and environmental impact assess-
ment   ; and,  ﬁ nally, communicative rationality with some forms of multi- criteria 
 evaluation and environmental impact assessment. 
 Lich ﬁ eld  ( 1996 ) , in reviewing the “evaluation prior to plan implementation”, 
asserts the existence of four different types of methods. This typology is based on 
the following questions: (1) Does the method relate to inputs or outputs? (2) Are the 
inputs and outputs measured in quantity or money? (3) Are the criteria for choice 
expressed by a number, or by a number re ﬂ ecting a monetary value? and (4) Do they 
relate to single or multiple sectors of the community? The  ﬁ rst group, designated as 
“outputs only”, includes nine methods, such as checklist of criteria, goals/objective 
achievement, impact assessment and multi-criteria evaluation. The second group, 
denominated as “inputs only”, comprises three methods: unit cost, threshold analy-
sis and costs in use. The third group, designated as “both output and input”, includes 
methods such as cost-bene ﬁ t analysis/single objective, social cost-bene ﬁ t analysis/
multiple objectives and planning balance sheet analysis. Finally, the fourth group, 
denominated as “both input and output in greater width”, includes evaluation in 
structure planning, evaluation in inner cities and strategic choice. 
 McAllister  ( 1982  )  analyses a set of evaluation methods, namely, cost-bene ﬁ t 
 analysis, planning balance sheet analysis, goals-achievement matrix, energy analysis 

133
8 Evaluating Resilience in Planning
and land suitability analysis, identifying their main differences and similarities. He 
sustains that no single method can be claimed as superior, arguing that planners 
should have a solid understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of each method 
and should use them as mechanic uses his toolkit, selecting the most suitable set of 
techniques to address the problem at hand. 
 Söderbaum  ( 1998  )  uses the degree of aggregation to identify three different 
groups, being highly aggregated methods, intermediate methods and highly disag-
gregated methods. The highly aggregated methods intend to sum all impacts in 
terms of a single value. This implies the existence of consensus in society about 
speci ﬁ c valuation rules. Cost-bene ﬁ t analysis is a clear example of this group of 
methods – with focus on the quantitative ratio of bene ﬁ ts and costs. It is essentially 
a monetary method, even when nonmonetary impacts are considered. Intermediate 
methods also use a single quantitative indicator to express the overall utility of an 
alternative, but in this case, the indicator has a composite nature that re ﬂ ects differ-
ent dimensions. According to Khakee  ( 2003 ) , while these methods have been in 
regular use in recent years, they have come up against increasing criticism for not 
paying suf ﬁ cient attention to the con ﬂ icting values of individuals. Planning balance 
sheet analyses and certain multi-criteria evaluations can be classi ﬁ ed as intermedi-
ate methods. Highly disaggregated methods are intrinsically multidimensional; 
rather than showing the overall value of the plan, they make an assessment of the 
different impacts with the intention of stimulating interactive discourse, thus facili-
tating consensus building. The design of these methods adapts in line with the 
changing contexts, and so not only are the results important but also are the ways in 
which they arrived at. These methods combine inductive and deductive analysis and 
make use of quantitative and qualitative information (Khakee  2003 ) . This third set 
of methods also includes environmental impact assessment . 
 8.1.2  Evaluating the Implementation of Planning Documents 
and the Planning Processes 
 The focus of planning evaluation may not be con ﬁ ned to the content of the docu-
ment but may also look at what happens to this document throughout the planning 
process. This view corresponds to a performance view to evaluation. This view fol-
lows on from the de ﬁ nition of the planning document as a decision framework, and 
its performance in ful ﬁ lling this role de ﬁ nes its usefulness. It is important to under-
stand if, and under what conditions, the planning document was consulted before 
making subsequent decisions. 
 Based on the work of Fudge and Barrett  ( 1981 ) , the Dutch school of planning 
evaluation has been conducting a continuous research from this perspective (see, 
e.g. the set of papers gathered in Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 
24[6], introduced by Mastop  ( 1997 ) ). Faludi  ( 2000 ) and Mastop and Faludi  ( 1997 ) 
claim that strategic plans – as opposed to project plans – should provide a frame of 
reference for operational decisions and do not necessarily have to produce direct 

134
P. Pinho et al.
impacts on the physical development process. As such, the evaluation of strategic 
plans should correspond to a detailed analysis of the decisions and actions of a num-
ber of actors that are supposed to receive the plan messages. 
 Faludi  ( 2006 ) extends further the performance-based approach to the evaluation 
of the European Spatial Development Perspective (ESDP). Drawing on the distinc-
tion between planning as a technical exercise and as a learning process, the author 
contrasts the concept of the “application” of plan messages with the traditional 
 concept of plan implementation and presents a method for evaluating the success of 
the former. In the context of policy implementation analysis, Stame  ( 2008 ) proposes 
the concept of “promotion”, which is somewhat similar to Faludi’s concept of 
“application”. The purpose of applying ideas in such a document as the ESDP is to 
provide professionals involved in European spatial planning processes with a better 
knowledge of their working contexts and of the directions to follow. 
 Rivolin  ( 2008 ) builds upon the idea of “performance of plans”, coming up with 
the “performance of planning systems” concept. He sustains that the main question 
is not whether performing strategic plans are preferable to conforming regulative 
plans, but how the strategic and regulative functions of the planning activity should 
be differently correlated in a planning system aimed at performance rather than 
conformance. 
 8.1.3  Evaluating Planning Results on Territory and Society 
 Another approach to planning evaluation , the so-called conformance-based 
approach, considers that planning activity should be object-oriented and should 
focus on the actual results on the environment. From this standpoint, planning docu-
ments, and particularly plans, are considered as guides for future development. One 
major concern is the implementation of planning documents and, fundamentally, 
the link between planning documents and the outcomes on the ground. 
 Following on from the publication of a number of fundamental researches at the 
end of the 1970s (Alterman and Hill  1978 ; Calkins  1979 ) and in the second half of 
the 1990s (Baer  1997 ; Talen  1996,  1997 ) , a number of interesting studies on this 
topic have been produced over the last decade, mainly in the United States, some of 
which are presented in brief in the following paragraphs. 
 The Plan Implementation Evaluation (PIE) presented by Laurian et al.  (  2004 ) is 
a conformance-based methodology that relies on an analysis of plans and planning 
permits and offers a rigorous, quantitative and systematic way of assessing the 
degree to which land-use plans are implemented. Plan implementation is de ﬁ ned as 
the degree to which plan policies are implemented through the application of 
speci ﬁ ed development techniques in planning practice and is measured in two 
aspects: “breadth” and “depth”. The Plan Implementation Evaluation method has 
been applied to six New Zealand plans and to almost 400 land development permits, 
with particular focus on storm water and urban amenity management. Brody et al. 
 ( 2006a ) examined the spatial pattern of wetland development permits in Florida, 

135
8 Evaluating Resilience in Planning
verifying its conformance with the proposals of the local plans. The authors analy-
sed how and where wetlands have developed over a 10-year period, whether  wetland 
permits were clustered in areas designated for high-density development, whether 
they deviated from the plan’s original spatial designation, and whether the quality 
and content of the original plan related to its degree of implementation. In another 
paper, Brody et al.  ( 2006b ) used the same methodology in order to analyse the effec-
tive in ﬂ uence on the territory of  ﬁ ve sprawl-reduction planning policies included in 
local plans. 
 In 2008, Chapin, Deyle and Baker published two papers on the evaluation of 
planning policies to reduce exposure to hurricane  ﬂ ooding (Chapin et al.  2008 ; 
Deyle et al.  2008 ) . In the former article, a parcel-based GIS method for measuring 
land-use changes, as the basis for an assessment of the implementation of local 
land-use policies, is presented; while in the latter, Deyle et al.  ( 2008 ) explored the 
relationships between the process of implementation and the quality of the maps 
and policies of local plans. 
 8.1.4  Evaluating Planning Activity as a Whole 
 The evolution of planning theory and practice has been a complex process, comprising 
the successive proposal and coexistence of different approaches and paradigms – from 
the survey analysis plan to the rational comprehensive approach and from a decision-
centred view of planning to communicative planning . This type of evolutionary process 
seems to suggest that planning is too complex to be explained in a single paradigm. 
 In recognition of the complexity and uncertainty of both planning and planning 
evaluation , a number of integrated approaches have been proposed. Alexander and 
Faludi’s  (  1989 ) proposal integrates three views of the planning process with their 
associated criteria of plan quality – planning as control of the future, as a process of 
decision-making under conditions of uncertainty and as a middle ground view. These 
authors propose the policy-plan/programme-implementation-process (PPIP) model, 
providing  ﬁ ve criteria for comprehensive evaluation: conformity, rational process, 
optimality ex ante, optimality ex post and utilisation. Alexander  (  2000 ) proposes a 
“contingent framework”, integrating four different paradigms and various forms of 
rationality, with each of the complementary paradigms involving  different actors 
undertaking different actions in the various stages of the planning process. 
 Oliveira and Pinho  ( 2009,  2010a,  b ) propose the plan-process-results (PPR) as a 
methodology for evaluating plan implementation, also addressing the more compre-
hensive planning process in which each plan is incorporated and its contribution to 
city building. It seeks to provide a better understanding of the functioning of local 
planning practices , thus contributing to their development and improvement with 
the inclusion of a strong morphological dimension. It holds three generic dimen-
sions – rationality, conformance and performance – and nine speci ﬁ c criteria, 
namely, interpretation, relevance, internal coherence, external coherence, participa-
tion in plan making and plan implementation, effectiveness, commitment of 

136
P. Pinho et al.
resources, direction and plan utilisation. It uses a number of different techniques, 
such as impact matrices, SWOT analyses and morphogenetic analyses. This meth-
odology was applied to the municipal plans of Lisbon and Oporto . 
 Altes  ( 2006  )  compares the conformance-based and performance-based approaches 
in a case study of the Dutch national urban concentration policies. An application of 
the former concept reveals that the urban containment policies conform well to the 
plan. Nevertheless, in the context of the current stagnation in housing production, 
these policies have not been able to improve the decision-making process. In 
this sense, the author argues that plans with high conformance do not necessarily 
perform well. 
 Berke et al.  ( 2006 ) explored and compared these conceptions of success in plan-
ning in the same way, concluding that plan implementation in New Zealand is weak. 
If implementation is de ﬁ ned in terms of conformance, plans and planners have an 
important in ﬂ uence on the implementation success, but if it is de ﬁ ned in terms of 
performance, plans and planners can be considered as less in ﬂ uential. 
 8.2  The Evaluation of Resilience Thinking in Planning 
 Debates on the different dimensions of the resilience concept since its formulation 
and the main developments in ecology and socioecological systems (Holling  1973, 
 1996 ; Scheffer et al.  2001 ) , including the most recent developments in the planning 
 ﬁ eld, 1 have been assigned increasing importance in congresses, for example, the 
annual conference of the Association of European Schools of Planning, or in scienti ﬁ c 
journals such as Built Environment, European Planning Studies and Urban Studies, 
as presented in different parts of this book. This section focuses exclusively on the 
recent efforts to evaluate resilience, both from a narrow planning perspective to a 
wider point of view that brings together environmental, societal, economic and 
 governance issues. 
 In recent years the concept of sustainability has grown to attain a fundamental 
place in debates on planning evaluation through the steady incorporation of socio-
environmental principles into the  ﬁ eld (see, e.g. Dovlen and Hilding-Rydevick 
 2008 and Stenberg  2008  ) ; the development of evaluation theory, including 
 normative contexts (Girard  2006 ; Söderbaum  1998 ) ; and the design of methods, 
techniques and indicators (Lombardi  1998 ; Bauler et al.  2008 ) . In addition, sus-
tainability assessment has recently emerged as a speci ﬁ c tool in the attainment of 
sustainability, including a broad range of approaches, such as environmental impact 
assessment and strategic environmental assessments (see Pope et al.  2004 ) . In the 
United Kingdom,  sustainability appraisals, mandatory since 2004, have been used 
to promote sustainable development through the integration of social, environmental 
and economic considerations into the preparation of plan revisions. 
 1  The linkage between ecology and planning has been proposed and developed over the last four 
decades, from Holling and Goldberg  ( 1971 ) to Pickett et al.  ( 2008 ) . 

137
8 Evaluating Resilience in Planning
 The inclusion of resilience thinking in planning evaluation , on the other hand, 
has been far more modest. As such, the design of the evaluation methodology in this 
book, with a clear innovative character, required a search for frames of reference in 
a wider context. The following sections present a number of evaluation frameworks 
and methodologies, sourced from socio-environmental system literature and from 
planning literature. 
 8.2.1  Analysing Resilience in Socioecological Systems 
 Carpenter et al.  ( 2001 ) identify three different levels of meaning for resilience – as 
a metaphor related to sustainability , as a property of dynamic models and, most 
importantly, as a measurable quantity that can be assessed in  ﬁ eld studies of socio-
ecological systems . The authors highlight that the assessment of system resilience 
presupposes the identi ﬁ cation of the system con ﬁ guration and of the disturbances. 
In their study, the resilience properties of two contrasting systems – lake districts 
and rangelands – are compared in two case studies . 
 Walker et al.  (  2002 ) present an evolving approach to analysing resilience in 
socioecological systems , as a basis for resilience management. The authors propose 
a framework of four steps involving close coordination among the stakeholders of 
the systems: (1) a stakeholder-led development of a conceptual model of the system; 
(2) the identi ﬁ cation of the range of unpredictable and uncontrollable drivers, stake-
holder visions for the future and contrasting possible future policies, weaving these 
three factors into a limited set of future scenarios; (3) the exploration of the systems 
for resilience in an iterative way; and,  ﬁ nally, (4) the stakeholder evaluation of the 
process and outcomes in terms of policy and management implications. 
 Acknowledging the dif ﬁ culties faced in operationalising resilience theory and in 
developing and testing empirical hypotheses, Bennett et al.  (  2005 ) present a method 
in which simple system models are used as a framework for identifying resilience 
surrogates for case studies . The construction and analysis of simple system models 
provides a useful basis for guiding and directing the selection of surrogate variables, 
offering empirical measures of resilience. 
 In recent years, the Resilience Alliance has led researches on resilience in social-
ecological systems   . In 2007 this multidisciplinary group prepared two workbooks, 
one (more comprehensive) for practitioners and the other (more concise) for scien-
tists, to assist in the assessment    of resilience in social-ecological systems    (Resilience 
Alliance  2007a,  b   ) . These books offer guidelines for the undertaking of evaluations 
of the resilience of natural resource systems in  ﬁ ve parts: (1) a de ﬁ nition of the system 
under analysis (and of disturbances), (2) an identi ﬁ cation of alternate states and 
thresholds, (3) an evaluation    of dynamics based on system cycles, (4) an inquiry into 
the adaptability of the system and,  ﬁ nally, (5) a guidance for planning interventions. 
 Tanner et al.  ( 2009 ) propose an analytical framework that combines governance 
literature with rapid climate resilience assessments conducted in ten Asian cities. 
The authors argue that a number of key characteristics can be identi ﬁ ed to assess 

138
P. Pinho et al.
and build urban resilience to climate change in a way that reduces the vulnerability 
of citizens at risk from climate shocks and stresses. These characteristics form the 
basis of a climate-resilient urban governance assessment framework and include (1) 
decentralisation and autonomy , (2) accountability and transparency, (3) responsive-
ness and  ﬂ exibility , (4) participation and inclusion, and,  ﬁ nally, (5) experience and 
support. This framework can assist in planning, designing and implementing urban 
climate change resilience-building programmes for the future. 
 8.2.2  Methodologies for Evaluating Resilience in Planning 
 As mentioned above, methodologies for the evaluation of resilience in the planning 
 ﬁ eld are not as common as in socioecological systems . Drawing upon previous 
attempts to evaluate planning sustainability , Nijkamp and Finco  ( 2009 ) propose a 
framework, a multi-criteria evaluation method and a set of indicators for the assess-
ment of resilience strategies (considered as a basic condition for the achievement of 
urban sustainability). With the help of two case studies , the Italian city of Cremona 
and the Dutch city of Enkhuizen, a typological framework for classifying urban 
sustainability cases is provided. 
 Bonnet  ( 2010 ) proposes a methodology for evaluating the functional resilience 
of territories and, more particularly, the networks of local  ﬁ rms. The methodology 
involves the modelling of networks using graph theory, based on data collected from 
a statistical survey of a sample of  ﬁ rms and a list of shared patents pending. The 
application of the methodology to the Montpellier urban area in France revealed the 
existence of pivotal  ﬁ rms within the network that played an important role in the 
resilience and spatial organisation of the territory. 
 Stevens et al.  ( 2010 ) propose a framework for evaluating the ability of planning 
proposals to create disaster -resilient communities. The framework is applied, using 
methods such as multiple regression analysis, to a set of 33 developments, including 
conventional low-density and new urbanist high-density areas located on  ﬂ oodplains 
to assess which is incorporating a higher percentage of hazard    mitigation tech-
niques. The assessment revealed that new urbanist developments performed better, 
not due to the quality of the proposal but to increased local government technical 
assistance in the review. 
 8.3  A Methodology for Evaluating Resilience Thinking 
in Planning (RTP) 
 This section presents a new methodology to evaluate resilience thinking in planning 
(RTP), designed by the CITTA researchers Paulo Pinho, Vítor Oliveira, Sara Santos 
Cruz, Silvia Sousa and Ana Martins. This methodology draws on work both from 
the socio-environmental systems (particularly on the research developed by the 

139
8 Evaluating Resilience in Planning
Resilience Alliance) and from the  ﬁ eld of planning evaluation (particularly on the 
policy-plan/programme-implementation-process method designed by Alexander 
and Faludi  ( 1989 ) and on the plan-process-results methodology, conceived by 
Oliveira and Pinho  ( 2009 ) ). As the two former methodologies, RTP considers plan-
ning activity as a whole, focusing on planning documents, both at preparation and 
implementation stages, and on their effects on the territory and society. As such, it 
can be distinguished from the methods presented in Sect.  8.1 exclusively focused on 
the preparation of planning documents or on their implementation. 
 One main concern in the design of the methodology was to make it as simple as 
possible, easily applicable and open to future comparisons. This is particularly 
important, since the objects of analysis of the methodology, such as policies, pro-
grammes, plans and projects, may differ across different case studies . Chaps.   9 – 13 
present an application of the differentiated forms of methodology in  ﬁ ve different 
European cities. 
 8.3.1  The Assessment Procedure 
 The methodology for evaluating resilient thinking in planning (RTP) follows seven 
fundamental stages:
 Stage 1: Identi ﬁ cation of key territorial issues 
 Stage 2: Selection of relevant planning documents 
 Stage 3: Identi ﬁ cation of resilience-related policies and measures 
 Stage 4: Selection of appropriate resilience attribute s 
 Stage 5: Formulation of the evaluation questions 
 Stage 6: Selection of the dimensions of resilience and corresponding indicators 
 Stage 7: Synthesis and critical appraisal of the evaluation results 
 The  ﬁ rst stage comprises the identi ﬁ cation of the main territorial issues to be 
taken into consideration and the identi ﬁ cation of the changes and transformations 
that have occurred in the study area, be it the city, metropolitan area or city region. 
These shall be the key issues to be addressed in the evaluation exercise. These issues 
stand out from the normal trends of the urban system and as such can be referred to 
as changes or disturbances, as discussed in different parts of this book. The key 
issues affecting the territories under analysis can be, for example, declining city 
centres (see Chap.   9 for the Lisbon case and Chap.   10 for the Oporto case) and rapid 
urbanisation processes (see Chap.   11 for Istanbul ), to name just three. 
 The second stage of the assessment procedure involves the selection of the main 
planning documents focusing on the key issues identi ﬁ ed in the  ﬁ rst stage and, 
 particularly, the identi ﬁ cation of the fundamental concerns expressed in these plan-
ning documents. The policies and measures explored in the planning documents 
(selected in stage 2) correspond to the third stage. These policies and measures are 
the main object of analysis. 

140
P. Pinho et al.
 The fourth stage of the assessment    procedure involves the selection of the policies 
and measures that can be evaluated under the framework of the resilience  concept. 
Policies and measures are selected according to this concept, identifying how the 
objectives and the proposed actions might contribute to a more resilient city. 
 The  ﬁ fth stage corresponds to the identi ﬁ cation of the resilience attributes that 
are most suited to the speci ﬁ c case under analysis, and to the formulation of the 
evaluation    questions. The perspective of analysis of the resilience concept can be 
strengthened through the consideration of the most relevant attributes towards 
achieving sustainable land-use policies. The rationale for the selection of these attri-
butes considers that:
 The attribute must re ﬂ ect a positive quality (“the more the better”). 
• 
 The attribute should re ﬂ ect a dynamic perspective, so that gains and losses can 
• 
be easily identi ﬁ ed. 
  The attribute should be able to equally cross four selected dimensions (following 
• 
the Resilience Alliance  2007c ) : economic, social, environmental and governance . 
 The attribute should be de ﬁ ned so that overlaps are avoided as much as possible.    
• 
 In practice, the selected attributes can have different weights. For each case study, 
several attributes are to be considered through an evaluation    of selected planning 
documents (policies, programmes, plans and projects). These attributes, which are 
discussed in detail in Chap.   3    , are recovery   , connectivity, capital building, adaptabil-
ity , robustness,  ﬂ exibility and transformability . Each attribute should correspond to 
an evaluation question, with the intention being to explain how that particular  attribute 
will be considered. The corresponding evaluation questions are as follows:
 1.  Recovery: Are the policies, programmes, plans and projects promoting capacity 
in the territory to respond to and recover from disturbance? 
 2.  Connectivity: Are the policies, programmes, plans and projects enabling an 
 interrelated territory, in which the nodes of the network are effectively linked? 
 3.  Capital building :  Are the policies, programmes, plans and projects under analysis 
contributing to the build-up of capital (stock), reinforcing in this way the stability 
and cohesion of the territory? 
 4.  Adaptability: Are the policies, programmes, plans and projects enhancing the 
adaptability of the territory and its capacity to adjust to change in a reactive way?  
 5.  Robustness:  Are the policies, programmes, plans and projects increasing the 
robustness of the territory to unforeseen shocks and disturbances? 
 6.  Flexibility : Are the policies, programmes, plans and projects enhancing the 
 ﬂ exibility of the territory and its capacity to react to change in a proactive way? 
 7.  Transformability : Are the policies, programmes, plans and projects contributing 
to the transformability of the territory and to its ability to innovate and create a 
new system should the previous become no longer viable? 
 The sixth stage of the assessment procedure involves the selection of the relevant 
dimensions of resilience and the measurement of the corresponding indicators in 
both the formulation and implementation phases of the planning documents. 
An evaluation of the formulation of the planning documents should provide an 

141
8 Evaluating Resilience in Planning
 indication of the internal cohesion of the plan, as well as its consistency and coordi-
nation with other instruments . The evaluation of the implementation of the planning 
documents should be able to focus on the transformability of the territory and on 
planning practice, meaning that whenever possible, both the conformance and per-
formance of policies should be evaluated. Similar to the Resilience Alliance  ( 2007c ) , 
the RTP de ﬁ nes four fundamental dimensions: economic  (considering both macro 
and micro components), social (including cultural components), environmental (the 
natural and built environment) and governance (public and private). An assessment 
of these dimensions and components involves the use of different indicators at dif-
ferent scales – national, regional and local. Generally speaking, the indicators should 
be easily measurable and available, quantitative or qualitative, reduced in number 
and wisely chosen to ensure good representation. 
 The last stage of the assessment procedure should provide a critical appraisal of 
the applicability and usefulness of the resilience concept to the case study under 
analysis with the help of indicators. The evaluation framework should offer sound 
measurements for assessing whether the resilience concept is useful in understanding 
the policies, and supplying guidance to address economic, social and environmental 
changes to enhance sustainability . 
 8.4  Conclusions 
 This chapter has argued in favour of a systematic evaluation of resilient thinking in 
planning, which is an issue that as yet is not fully integrated into current debates in 
planning. It is suggested here that an evaluation should constitute a cyclical process 
with a balanced development over time, should focus on the different aspects of 
planning and should be able to provide principles and guidelines for promoting 
resilient urban areas. 
 The results of the application of the methodology – both in the more theoretical 
or more contextual forms, leading to different emphasis on the territory, the plan-
ning framework or the disturbance itself – to each case study should enhance its 
ability to endure future shocks and disturbances, regardless of the unexpected 
forms that they may take, and contribute to the theoretical and conceptual devel-
opment of urban resilience. The following chapters should validate these 
statements.  
 References 
 Alexander, E. (2000). Rationality revisited: Planning paradigms in a post-postmodernist perspec-
tive.  Journal of Planning Education and Research, 19 (3), 242–256. 
 Alexander, E. (2006). Evaluations and rationalities: Reasoning with values in planning. In E. Alexander 
(Ed.),  Evaluation in planning: Evolution and prospects (pp. 39–52). Aldershot: Ashgate.  

142
P. Pinho et al.
 Alexander, E., & Faludi, A. (1989). Planning and plan implementation: Notes on evaluation 
 criteria.  Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 16 (2), 127–140. 
 Alterman, R., & Hill, M. (1978). Implementation of urban land use plans.  Journal of the American 
Institute of Planners, 44 (3), 274–285. 
 Altes, W. (2006). Stagnation in housing production: Another success in the Dutch planner’s para-
dise?  Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 33 (1), 97–114. 
 Baer, W. (1997). General plan evaluation criteria.  Journal of the American Planning Association, 
63 (3), 329–344. 
 Bauler, T., Bonifazi, A., & Torre, C. (2008). Is there room for equity in European Commission 
policy-making? An evaluation of selected impact assessment reports. In A. Khakee, A. Hull, D. 
Miller, & J. Woltjer (Eds.),  New principles in planning evaluation (pp. 35–54). Aldershot: 
Ashgate. 
 Bennett, E., Cumming, G., & Peterson, G. (2005). A systems model approach to determining 
resilience surrogates for case studies.  Ecosystems, 8 (8), 945–957. 
 Berke, P., Backhurst, M., Day, M., Ericksen, N., Laurian, L., Crawford, J., & Dixon, J. (2006). What 
makes plan implementation successful? An evaluation    of local plans and implementation prac-
tices in New Zealand.  Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 33 (4), 581–600.  
 Bonnet, N. (2010). The functional resilience of an innovative cluster in the Montpellier Urban Area 
(South of France).  European Planning Studies, 18 (9), 1345–1363. 
 Brody, S., High ﬁ eld, W., & Thornton, S. (2006a). Planning at the urban fringe: An examination of 
the factors in ﬂ uencing nonconforming development patterns in Southern Florida.  Environment 
and Planning B: Planning and Design, 33 (1), 75–96. 
 Brody, S., Carrasco, V., & High ﬁ eld, W. (2006b). Measuring the adoption of local sprawl reduction 
planning policies in Florida.  Journal of Planning Education and Research, 25 (3), 294–310. 
 Calkins, H. (1979). The planning monitor: An accountability theory of plan evaluation.  Environment 
and Planning A, 11 (7), 745–758. 
 Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Anderies, J., & Abel, N. (2001). From metaphor to measurement: 
Resilience of what to what?  Ecosystems, 4 , 765–781. doi:  10.1007/s10021-001-0045-9 . 
 Chapin, T., Doyle, R., & Baker, E. (2008). A parcel-based GIS method for evaluating conformance 
of local land-use planning with a state mandate to reduce exposure to hurricane  ﬂ ooding. 
 Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 35 (2), 261–279. 
 Deyle, R., Chapin, T., & Baker, E. (2008). The proof of the planning is in the platting: An evalua-
tion of Florida’s hurricane exposure mitigation planning mandate.  Journal of the American 
Planning Association, 74 (3), 349–370. 
 Dovlen, S., & Hilding-Rydevick, T. (2008). Sustainable development in regional development 
practice: A socio-cultural view of evaluation. In A. Khakee, A. Hull, D. Miller, & J. Woltjer 
(Eds.),  New principles in planning evaluation (pp. 77–102). Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Faludi, A. (2000). The performance of spatial planning.  Planning Practice and Research, 15 (4), 
299–318. 
 Faludi, A. (2006). Evaluating plans: The application of the European spatial development perspec-
tive. In E. Alexander (Ed.),  Evaluation in planning: Evolution and prospects (pp. 119–143). 
Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Fudge, C., & Barrett, S. (1981). Reconstruction of the  ﬁ eld of analysis. In S. Barrett & C. Fudge 
(Eds.),  Policy and action: Essays on the implementation of public policy (pp. 249–278). 
London: Methuen. 
 Girard, L. (2006). Towards sustainable planning: Agenda 21, Habitat. In E. Alexander (Ed.), 
 Evaluation in planning: Evolution and prospects (pp. 85–100). Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Holling, C. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems.  Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics, 4 (1), 1–23. 
  Holling, C. (1996). Engineering resilience versus ecological resilience. In P. Schulze (Ed.),  Engineering 
within ecological constraints (pp. 31–44). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.  
 Holling, C., & Goldberg, M. (1971). Ecology and planning.  Journal of the American Planning 
Association, 37 (4), 221–230. 

143
8 Evaluating Resilience in Planning
 Khakee, A. (2003). The emerging gap between evaluation    research and practice.  Evaluation, 9 (3), 
340–352. 
 Laurian, L., Day, M., Berke, P., Ericksen, N., Backhurst, M., Crawford, J., & Dixon, J. (2004). 
Evaluating plan implementation. A conformance-based methodology.  Journal of the American 
Planning Association, 70 (4), 471–480. 
 Lich ﬁ eld, N. (1996).  Community impact evaluation . London: UCL Press. 
 Lich ﬁ eld, N. (2001). Where do we go from here? In H. Voogd (Ed.),  Recent developments in 
 evaluation (pp. 7–15). Groningen: Geopress. 
 Lich ﬁ eld, N., & Prat, A. (1998). Linking ex-ante and ex-post evaluation in British town planning. 
In N. Lich ﬁ eld, A. Barbanente, D. Borri, A. Khakee, & A. Prat (Eds.),  Evaluation in planning: 
Facing the challenge of complexity (pp. 283–298). Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
 Lombardi, P. (1998). Sustainability indicators in urban planning evaluation. A new classi ﬁ cation 
system based on multimodal thinking. In N. Lich ﬁ eld, A. Barbanente, D. Borri, A. Khakee, & 
A. Prat (Eds.),  Evaluation in planning: Facing the challenge of complexity (pp. 177–192). 
Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
 Mastop, H. (1997). Performance in Dutch spatial planning: An introduction.  Environment and 
Planning B: Planning and Design, 24 (6), 807–813. 
 Mastop, H., & Faludi, A. (1997). Evaluation of strategic plans: The performance principle. 
 Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 24 (6), 815–832. 
 McAllister, D. (1982).  Evaluation in environmental planning . Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 Nijkamp, P., & Finco, A. (2009).  Evaluation of complex resilience strategies for sustainable cities . 
Resource Document. Firenze University Press – Open Journal Systems.   http://ns357180.ovh.
net/index.php/ceset/article/viewFile/6911/6412  . Accessed 30 Sept 2010. 
 Oliveira, V., & Pinho, P. (2009). Evaluating plans, processes and results.  Planning Theory and 
Practice, 10 (1), 35–63. 
 Oliveira, V., & Pinho, P. (2010a). Evaluation in urban planning: Advances and prospects.  Journal 
of Planning Literature, 24 (4), 343–361. 
 Oliveira, V., & Pinho, P. (2010b). Measuring success in planning: Developing and testing a 
 methodology for planning-evaluation.  Town Planning Review, 81 (3), 307–332. 
 Pickett, S., Cadenasso, M., Grove, J., Nilon, C., Pouyat, R., Zipperer, W., & Costanza, R. (2008). 
Urban ecological systems: Linking terrestrial ecological, physical, and socioeconomic compo-
nents of metropolitan areas. In J. Marzluff, E. Shulenberger, W. Endlicher, M. Alberti, G. 
Bradley, C. Ryan, U. Simon, & C. Zumbrunnen (Eds.),  Urban ecology: An international 
 perspective on the interaction between humans and nature (pp. 99–122). New York: Springer. 
 Pope, J., Annandale, D., & Morrison-Saunders, A. (2004). Conceptualising sustainability assess-
ment.  Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 24 (6), 595–616. 
 Resilience Alliance. (2007a).  Assessing and managing resilience in social-ecological systems: 
A practitioners workbook , 1. Resource document. Resilience Alliance.   http://www.resalliance.
org/3871.php  . Accessed 30 Sept 2010. 
 Resilience Alliance. (2007b).  Assessing resilience in social-ecological systems: A scientists 
 workbook . Resource document. Resilience Alliance.   http://www.resalliance.org/3871.php  . 
Accessed 30 Sept 2010. 
 Resilience Alliance. (2007c).  Urban resilience research prospectus . Resource Document. 
Resilience Alliance.   http://www.resalliance.org/1610.php  . Accessed 30 Sept 2010. 
 Rivolin, U. (2008). Conforming and performing planning systems in Europe: An unbearable 
cohabitation.  Planning Practice and Research, 23 (2), 167–186. 
 Scheffer, M., Carpenter, S., Foley, J., Folke, C., & Walker, B. (2001). Catastrophic shifts in ecosys-
tems.  Nature, 413 , 591–596. doi:  10.1038/35098000  . 
 Söderbaum, P. (1998). Economics and ecological sustainability. An actor network approach to 
evaluation. In N. Lich ﬁ eld, A. Barbanente, D. Borri, A. Khakee, & A. Prat (Eds.),  Evaluation 
in planning: Facing the challenge of complexity (pp. 51–72). Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
 Stame, N. (2008, October 1–3).  Evaluation and policy implementation in multi-level governance . 
In European Evaluation Society Biennial Conference, Lisbon. 

144
P. Pinho et al.
 Stenberg, J. (2008). Multidimensional evaluation for sustainable development: Managing the 
intermix of mind, artifact, institution and nature. In A. Khakee, A. Hull, D. Miller, & J. Woltjer 
(Eds.),  New principles in planning evaluation (pp. 35–54). Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Stevens, M., Berke, P., & Song, Y. (2010). Creating disaster-resilient communities: Evaluating the 
promise and performance of new urbanism.  Landscape and Urban Planning, 94 (2), 105–115. 
 Talen, E. (1996). After the plans: Methods to evaluate the implementation success of plans.  Journal 
of Planning Education and Research, 16 (2), 79–91. 
    Talen, E. (1997). Success, failure and conformance: An alternative approach to planning evalua-
tion.  Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 24 (4), 573–587. 
 Tanner, T., Mitchell, T., Polack, E., & Guenther, B. (2009).  Urban governance for adaptation: 
Assessing climate change resilience in ten Asian cities, IDS working paper 315 . Brighton: IDS.  
 Walker, B., Carpenter, S., Anderies, J., Able, N., Cumming, G., Janssen, M., Lebel, L., Norberg J., 
Peterson, G., & Pritchard, R. (2002). Resilience management in social-ecological Systems: 
A working hypothesis for a participatory approach.  Conservation Ecology ,  6 (1), 14. [online] 
URL:   http://www.consecol.org/vol6/iss1/art14  

145
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_9, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 9.1  Introduction 
 This chapter evaluates the aspects of resilience in Alcântara, the selected case study 
area located on the western side of the city of Lisbon . Its urban fabrics, land uses 
and functional links to the city and the metropolitan area allow the area to be de ﬁ ned 
as a nodal zone amid an area of compact urban development. 
 The key objectives of this chapter are to assess urban resilience in speci ﬁ c contexts 
and to discuss the results in a broad perspective. The case study area was selected based 
on the strategies, land-use policies and key planning documents being applied in the 
metropolitan area, especially those in which  urban resilience could be relevant. 
 As it was not always possible to evaluate both the formulation and implementa-
tion phases of the plans, the formulation phase and the expected results were evalu-
ated instead or, in other words, the conditions of the site before and after the 
implementation of the plans. This strategy allowed an outlining of some prospective 
results and the assessment of multiple policies/measures. By weighing two attri-
butes –  connectivity and  adaptability – it was possible to deduce to what extent the 
plans and respective policies could potentially contribute to urban resilience in the 
case study. The choice of these attributes was made based upon the identi ﬁ ed distur-
bances, together with the policies/measures contained within the existing plans. The 
analysis adopts the evaluation framework de ﬁ ned in Chap.   8 , with adjustments to 
take into account local speci ﬁ cities when necessary. 
 The evaluation of the Alcântara case is expected to illustrate how improvements 
in infrastructural  connectivity and the promotion of Alcântara as a metropolitan 
centrality contributed to an increase in its socio-economic  adaptation through the 
introduction of land-use diversity and urban continuities. 
 L. F.  Dias (*) •  S.  Morgado •  J. P. T. A.  Costa 
 Faculty of Architecture ,  Technical University of Lisbon ,
 Rua Sá Nogueira ,  1495-055 ,  Lisbon ,  Portugal 
e-mail:  luisdias@fa.utl.pt ;  smorgado@fa.utl.pt ;  joao.pedro.costa@sapo.pt 
 Chapter 9 
 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan 
Area of Lisbon: The Case of Alcântara 
 Luís  F.  Dias ,  So ﬁ a  Morgado, and  João  Pedro  T. A.  Costa   

146
L.F. Dias et al.
 9.2  The Metropolitan Area of Lisbon 
 The Metropolitan Area of Lisbon    (AML) forms part of the  Lisbon and Tagus 
Valley Region  (RLVT), a medium-sized  metropolitan polarisation region within 
the European context (CCDR-LVT  2008  ) . The region contains  ﬁ ve NUTS 3 
regions 1 : Oeste, Médio Tejo, Lezíria do Tejo, Grande Lisboa and Peninsula de 
Setúbal, of which Grande Lisboa and Peninsula de Setúbal make up the 
Metropolitan Area of Lisbon. 
 As discussed in Chap.   5 , Lisbon experienced a process of urban sprawl begin-
ning in the 1980s, resulting in dense housing areas in the suburban areas served by 
the railway, low-density areas with detached houses close to links with employment 
centres, and slums in derelict areas bordering infrastructure and industrial areas in 
the city cores. From the 1990s onwards, however, the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon 
began to shift from a model based on the Fordist functional dichotomy between the 
centre and periphery to a knowledge-based model expressed through a polycentric 
system, which was clearly stated as an objective in several planning documents. 
Governance topics are also steadily referred in strategy documents (CCDR-LVT 
 2007 ) and gave rise to new institutional solutions for a number of local interven-
tions, as was the case in Alcântara. 
 In recent years, a consistent metropolitan structure has taken shape, combined with 
a renewal of land-use opportunities. While the industrial and port areas in the central 
districts became obsolete due to changes in the production and economic structures, 
new forms of centrality associated with a knowledge-based economy started to 
emerge. Likewise, the former radial structure started to evolve into a network system 
of motorways, creating opportunities for new growth areas along the main axes that 
had been served by the train in earlier periods. As a result, functional complementari-
ties started to develop, especially between different urban centres and the metropoli-
tan centre, which consists of the municipality of Lisbon and the Tagus Estuary. 
 Consequently, new land uses that had previously existed in the traditional centres 
began to emerge in the high-connectivity areas and external rings, together with new 
dense and specialised land uses, such as shopping centres and malls. With the advent 
of high mobility patterns, the dimmer urban fabrics began to gain central functions, 
competing with the city of Lisbon , thus shaping a polycentric metropolitan network 
that at the same time contributed to a shrinkage process in the metropolitan core, 
especially in the cities of Lisbon and Barreiro (Morgado  2009 ) . These areas have 
now acquired an outstanding status in the regeneration agendas of national and EU 
policies (Polis XXI, Urban Regeneration Agencies, NSRF – National Strategic 
Reference Framework), as well as in the current outlines regarding the revision of 
regional and municipal plans . 
 1  The  NUTS/Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics classi ﬁ cation is a hierarchical system 
for dividing up the economic territory of the EU for the purpose of the collection, development and 
harmonisation of EU regional statistics: socio-economic analyses of the regions. NUTS 1: major 
socio-economic regions. NUTS 2: basic regions for the application of regional policies. NUTS 3: 
as small regions for speci ﬁ c diagnoses,   http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/nuts_
nomenclature/introduction  . 

147
9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon…
 At a regional level, new strategic planning documents (Lisboa 2020 Regional 
Strategy) have proposed new institutional solutions, in particular, for local interven-
tions. The latest revision of the regional plan (PROT-AML), promoted with the 
participation of various municipalities and institutions, aims to address the previous 
shortage of multilevel actions, which in the past prevented the regional plan from 
acting ef ﬁ ciently through municipal planning tools. The current key topics addressed 
in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon (AML) planning and policy documents include 
(1) multilevel and cross-scale coordination, (2) an ecologic metropolitan network, 
(3) an effective metropolitan transport authority and (4) development of polycentri-
cism (CCDR-LVT  2007 ) . 
 Alcântara represents an important part of the AML as far as urban trends and 
population dynamics are concerned on the strength of its sensitive location in 
Lisbon . Throughout history, Lisbon has experienced great cultural diversity (Roman, 
Muslim and Christian since 1147) and has undergone several erudite urban develop-
ments, some of which have been internationally acknowledged (e.g. the eighteenth-
century  Baixa Pombalina ). Development began in a small core which is the current 
downtown area, and now the city has an urban radial outset, complemented by a 
rural belt that has been subjected to progressive urbanisation. The eastern side of the 
city, which was previously an industrial area, witnessed a process of regeneration as 
a result of the World Exhibition in 1998. The western side is mostly taken up by the 
Monsanto Forest Park and Belém, a waterfront area containing a number of monu-
mental structures (e.g. Jerónimos Monastery). 
 Alcântara is a pivotal area between the old downtown and Belém. Its status as a 
former industrial and port area with a particular social structure contributed to 
shrinkage , which is today being addressed through the “step-by-step” implementa-
tion of various projects detailed in the Alcântara Master Plan. Alcântara’s potential 
as a key node in the polycentric metropolitan network has always been acknowl-
edged, and this status has been reinforced with its consideration in the main polycen-
tric system de ﬁ ned in Lisbon ’s Municipal Master Plan (PDM, recent revision), 
which is focused around  ﬁ ve centralities along the city’s Ring railway line (C.M.L 
 2010 ) (Fig.  9.1 ). 
 In an assessment of this area in terms of resilience, it was hypothesised that by 
improving the infrastructural  connectivity  of the area, the socio-economic  adaptation 
of Alcântara would increase, introducing a new metropolitan centrality with the intro-
duction of land-use diversity , urban continuities and public transport alternatives.  
 9.3  Alcântara:  Connectivity and  Adaptability 
as the Promoters of Adjustment to Change 
 Alcântara can be considered as an area in which the deindustrialisation process has 
not yet been completed. The local population is in decline, due both to the ageing of 
the population and the relative inability of the area to attract newcomers. In addition, 
economic and social dynamics are stagnant, further contributing to the de ﬁ nition of 
the area as being under  shrinkage . 

148
L.F. Dias et al.
 Alcântara is located in a particularly steep valley along one of Lisbon ’s former 
mid-nineteenth-century boundaries (the  First Ring Road ). A canal, tunnelled below 
street level in the 1940s, used to  ﬂ ow along the valley ending in a muddy lagoon 
with a tidemill. The lagoon was  ﬁ lled in the late eighteenth century to accommodate 
one of the  ﬁ rst industrial settlements in the city close to the harbour and railway 
infrastructures. As a result, some of the areas along the river have become subject to 
 ﬂ ooding, leading to its de ﬁ nition as a  ﬂ ood and seismic risk area. 
 Functionally, there are several aspects contributing to the uniqueness of 
Alcântara as a centrality with regard both to the city and to the metropolitan area, 
particularly the harbour area and the Cascais suburban railway/Ring railway line 
junction. In recent decades, the last of the industrial units have been abandoned, and 
a large derelict area has emerged that is in dire need of urban regeneration (C.M.L. 
 2008 ) , for which several plans have been proposed. 
 Of these plans, the sectoral ones have seen partial implementation (REFER/
Railway and APL/Port Area Authorities); however, the Alcântara PU, a Development 
Plan, only recently is expected to be approved, already under the umbrella of the 
new Lisbon PDM. This plan comprises various proposals with implications on the 
urban area, including an important environmental and landscape project and 
“Alcântara XXI”, a large real-estate urban development project to be carried out by 
a public-private partnership (C.M.L.  2008 ; Manuel Fernandes de Sá. Lda  2010 ) . 
 Fig. 9.1   Metropolitan Area of Lisbon and case study location (Source: FA-UTL 2010) 
 

149
9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon…
 The territorial development model for Lisbon sets out three priorities: (1) to strengthen 
Lisbon’s role in the global and national networks, (2) to revitalise the consolidated 
city and to promote sustainability and (3) to develop urban quali ﬁ cation and public 
participation . The primary topics with regard to this case study are to rehabilitate 
heritage areas, to regenerate transitional areas by establishing new land uses and to 
consolidate small areas of expansion. 
 In this context, Alcântara has an important role to play at various levels, including 
(1) the ecological network and the Green Plan for Lisbon , (2) Lisbon’s strategy to 
revitalise its centrality within the metropolitan system and (3) the development of 
soft mobility (pedestrian and bicycle routes) and public transportation networks by 
reinforcing multimodality (railways, tramways, buses). 
 Considering its role in enhancing the connectivity of the Lisbon Metropolitan 
Area, the planning instruments and respective policies/measures applied to Alcântara 
are analysed considering an increase of  connectivity as pivotal in the  adaptive 
capacity that further urban interventions might bring to the area. 
 The  connectivity attribute was chosen in recognition of importance of improved 
accessibility for Alcântara, which demands an understanding of how the envisaged 
modi ﬁ cation will affect the plan area.  Adaptability , on the other hand, was seen as a 
key attribute in the transformation of the area that could lead to social and urban 
diversity . Its selection is illustrative of the conjugated processes between the social 
diversity, the multiplicity of urban fabrics dating from different periods and built for 
different purposes and the severe shrinkage dynamics. 
 9.3.1  Connectivity as a Goal from a Polycentric Perspective 
 Connectivity is not widely accepted in literature as an attribute of resilience, being 
considered by some authors as paradoxical. It has been argued that connectivity 
eases communications between systems and is a prerequisite to spatial resilience 
and ecologic memory (Andersson  2006 ) in allowing the exchange of information, 
capital and goods (Cumming et al.  2005 ) . Additionally, it has been argued that 
should a certain system remain isolated or with few links to other structures, it 
might be more protected against epidemic catastrophes, economic shocks or other 
systemic risks. At the same time, this isolation enables the development of local 
capacity, diversity and innovation oriented towards daily needs (Cumming et al. 
 2005 ; Andersson  2006 ) . Cumming et al.  ( 2005 ) developed a study based in the  con-
nectivity of an isolated area in the Amazon, where resilience increases whenever 
endogenous and exogenous factors reach equilibrium and, as a result, a medium 
level of infrastructural  connectivity . 
 However, other authors share a different viewpoint that is more favourable 
towards the increase of  connectivity in the context of resilience. Guevara and 
Laborde  (  2008 ) , for instance, propose a  connectivity model between biosphere 
reserves as a protection increase factor in the long term. Dale  ( 2007 ) and Brondizio 
et al.  ( 2009 ) share also this positive vision of  connectivity with an application to 

150
L.F. Dias et al.
adaptive governance . These authors consider  connectivity not only in its physical 
sense but also in the realm of social and institutional relationships. Such relation-
ships are fed by resources of knowledge related to the system’s dynamics, allowing 
for the mobilisation of social memory. This process facilitates access to previous 
experiences and responses to disturbances, easing the adaptation and innovation of 
solutions when facing dif ﬁ culties and allowing the creation of platforms that are 
able to deal with rapid and broad-scale change. 
 In this sense, taking into account the contribution of land-use policies to the 
increase of resilience in urban areas, which may also be seen as a  ﬁ nal goal of sus-
tainability , it would appear that an increase of  connectivity in an urban environment 
that is based on public transport networks implies an increase in urban resilience. 
 This argument can be deemed valid at various levels, such as in the case of net-
work redundancy , which is fundamental in the event of natural or technological 
disasters in reducing the possibility of compromise in key connections or even by 
decreasing the time proximity between institutions, people and goods networks, 
contributing to a larger diversity of these channels (CSIRO et al.  2007 ) . 
 In a globalisation context, whenever interventions into the system result from 
urban conurbations or contiguous urbanisation processes, diversity dynamics, inno-
vation and local capacities are associated with local functional specialisation. These 
circumstances require high levels of  connectivity – consistent knowledge networks 
with proper infrastructural support – to ensure maximum effect. 
 The evaluation of  connectivity in Alcântara takes into account the preliminary 
proposal of the Development Plan (Plano de Urbanização/PU) for the area, which 
de ﬁ nes a new link between the Cascais railway and the Ring railway lines, together 
with the planned Alvito Station on the Southern railway line across the Tagus. 
 Coming to underground connections, two alternatives were considered: an inter-
face of the Yellow Line with the Alcântara-Mar railway station or the creation of a 
new station between the Yellow and the Red Lines in Fonte Santa (between Campo 
de Ourique and Alcântara Valley) connected to the Southern railway line (Manuel 
Fernandes de Sá. Lda  2010 ) . 
 Both alternatives were considered in the application of the evaluation methodology. 
As a result, travel times of 10 min were analysed in three different settings: before 
the intervention (present time); according to solution (I), having the Yellow Line as 
its terminus in Alcântara-Mar; and to solution (II), at the junction of the Yellow and 
Red Lines in Fonte Santa. 
 The underground and railway stations located 10 and 20 min from Alcântara 
were identi ﬁ ed, with 500 m radius 2 buffers joined to the Information Reference 
Geographical Database (BGRI). 3  These analytic processes allowed for the 
 2  Value considered as acceptable for trips on foot to large-capacity transport stations. 
 3  INE – Instituto Nacional de Estatística/National Institute for Statistics. On this basis, the mini-
mum unit is the statistic subsection, which corresponds, most of the time, to an urban block. 
Statistic subsections hold alphanumeric information sourced from the 2001 Census. Whenever the 
stations’ in ﬂ uence area limits do not coincide with statistics subsections, the resulting values were 
weighted according to census results for that subsection. 

151
9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon…
quanti ﬁ cation of several socio-economic indicators regarding the populations 
located at a given time/distance from the centre of Alcântara from both before 
and after the intervention, whatever the chosen solution (I or II). Results related 
to the effects of  connectivity  in the  adaptive capacity     of the Alcântara Plan were 
obtained (Fig.  9.2 ).  
 Connectivity dynamics were assessed using two groups of indicators. These were 
taken only from the Development Plan perspective, since this is the one that best 
de ﬁ nes the mobility measures undertaken and the restructuring of the transport 
networks. 
 The  ﬁ rst group of indicators is based on the policy/measure “increase of centrality/
polycentricity” in the light of the social changes that may occur should the 
Development Plan be implemented. The indicator is de ﬁ ned as the resident popula-
tion by education level living less than 10 min from Alcântara using the under-
ground or train network within a 500 m radius from the stations. The analysis 
focused on the area before and after the hypothetical implementation of the plan, 
aiming to understand the increase of  connectivity of the educated population level 
living a certain time/distance from Alcântara. From the results, some positive 
changes in the demography of residents might be inferred as being a consequence 
of the expected changes (Table  9.1 ).  
 Following a similar strategy of examination, indicators of building functions 
(divided into residential and non-residential) were obtained for time/distances of 10 
and 20 min from Alcântara. The results allow deeper insight into the relationship 
between the changes of time/distance using public transport, verifying whether 
Alcântara, with an increased  connectivity , will have a stronger linkage with other 
tertiary centres. In this way, economic factors are also factored into the evaluation 
(Table  9.2 ).  
 Fig. 9.2   Time travel to Alcântara. Present, solution I and solution II (Source: FA-UTL 2010, with 
information from CML, INE, REFER, Metropolitano de Lisboa and PU Alcântara) 
 

152
L.F. Dias et al.
 9.3.2  Adaptability as an Outcome to Achieve 
 Despite witnessing a progressive decline, Alcântara can be considered as an urban 
centre with high potential, given its central location both in Lisbon and in its metro-
politan area, and its high level of infrastructure and services. 
 Throughout the last decade, different research and implementation projects were 
made in a bid to  ﬁ ght the loss of population and economic potential, with policies 
aimed at maximising its centrality capacity. This approach has actually become the 
main goal of the Alcântara Plan, according to the municipal plan of Lisbon    (PDM). 
 Table 9.1  Indicators used to evaluate the connectivity attribute in the social 
dimension and under centrality/polycentricity policy/measures 
 Indicators 
 Phases 
 Before the plan 
 Expected results 
 Present 
 Solution I 
 Solution II 
 Inhabitants per square km 
 5,311 
 7,098 
 8,084 
 Resident population with basic 
education 1st cycle (%) 
 34.8 
 29.9 
 29.0 
 Resident population with basic 
education 2nd cycle (%) 
 11.9 
 10.8 
 10.7 
 Resident population with basic 
education 3rd cycle (%) 
 17.9 
 18.3 
 18.6 
 Resident population with high 
school education (%) 
 17.4 
 19.5 
 19.9 
 Resident population with 
bachelor degree or above (%) 
 18.0 
 21.5 
 21.8 
 Sources : INE (Instituto Nacional de Estatística/National Institute for Statistics), 
PU Alcântara (Plano de Urbanizaçao de Alcântara/Alcântara Urban Plan) and 
FA-UTL (Faculdade de Arquitectura da Universidade Técnica de Lisboa/Faculty 
of Architecture – Lisbon Technical University) 
 Table 9.2   Possible outcomes of increasing connectivity under centrality/polycentricity policy/
measure 
 Indicators 
 Phases 
 Before the plan 
 Expected results 
 Present 
 Solution I 
 Solution II 
 Area at 10 min from Alcântara (km 2 ) 
 4.01 
 7.62 
 8.50 
 Exclusively residential buildings (per square km) 
 666 
 694 
 773 
 Mainly residential buildings (per square km) 
 173 
 249 
 226 
 Mainly non-residential buildings (per square km) 
 16 
 33 
 31 
 Area at 20 min from Alcântara (Km 2 ) 
 21.88 
 32.77 
 35.22 
 Exclusively residential buildings (per square km) 
 613 
 581 
 580 
 Mainly residential buildings (per square km) 
 231 
 216 
 212 
 Mainly non-residential buildings (per square km) 
 33 
 29 
 27 
 Sources : INE (Instituto Nacional de Estatística/National Institute for Statistics), PU Alcântara 
(Plano de Urbanização de Alcântara/Alcântara Urban Plan) and FA-UTL (Faculdade de Arquitectura 
da Universidade Técnica de Lisboa/Faculty of Architecture – Lisbon Technical University)  

153
9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon…
 With the aim of developing a comprehensive outline of the land-use policies that 
gave rise to the current con ﬁ guration of the area of the Alcântara Development Plan, 
other documents were studied, including the municipal Medium-Term Intervention 
Programme (PIMP) and the National Special Programme for Housing (PER). 
Despite their different territorial and intervention spheres of focus, both promoted 
the eradication of the shantytown areas and the respective rehousing of the local 
population, especially in the Casal Ventoso area. 
 Another relevant project worth considering is Alcântara XXI, approved in 2005 
by the municipal council and revoked in 2008, in which the public realm and hous-
ing were considered speci ﬁ cally under an urban regeneration strategy. Great consid-
eration was given to the reconversion of industrial plots in a bid to kick start an 
economic revitalisation of the area. 
 The application of the evaluation methodology with regard to resilience includes 
various programmes and projects (PIMP, PER, Alcântara XXI and the Development 
Plan) with policies/measures aimed at rehousing, urban regeneration , an increased 
centrality in the sphere of metropolitan polycentricism. 
 The evaluation of the attribute  adaptability is based on a de ﬁ nition of indicators, 
bearing in mind the policies/measures of urban reconversion and rehousing after the 
completion of PER, Alcântara XXI and the Development Plan (approved by munic-
ipal council in 2010), in which different dimensions and components of resilience 
are considered. 
 The  ﬁ rst group of indicators focus on policies/measures relating to rehousing, hav-
ing as a basis the implementation of the PER and PIMP Programmes and factors related 
to the built environment. The selected indicators from the period before the implemen-
tation of the programmes in Alcântara comprised the number of families and inhabit-
ants involved in the Casal Ventoso rehousing process. As for the implementation, 
consideration was given to the number of new dwellings and, consequently, the number 
of families and people rehoused under the scope of these programmes (Table  9.3 ).  
 The goal of the analysis is to verify the level of coverage of the rehousing 
programme and the population in the Urban/Urban II Programmes. 
 The second group of indicators is based on the policies/measure of urban recon-
version, seeking to assess the changes resulting from Alcântara XXI and the 
Development Plan, with consideration of the economic issues raised by the plans. 
 Table 9.3    Indicators used to evaluate adaptability attribute in 
the environmental dimension and under rehousing policy/
measure  
 Indicators 
 Phases 
 Formulation 
 Implementation 
 (1995) 
 (2004) 
 Families 
 » 1,200 
 1,152 
 Persons 
 » 4,500 
 3,916 
 Sources : CML (Câmara Municipal de Lisboa – Lisbon 
Municipality)/GEBALIS (Gestão dos Bairros Municipais de 
Lisboa/Management of Municipal Districts of Lisbon) 

154
L.F. Dias et al.
 In a way, Alcântara XXI has led to some of the issues covered in the Development 
Plan. With its approval, certain rights and duties were passed to private sector pro-
moters, which led other private investors with an interest in investing in their own 
urban plots to request of ﬁ cial information from the Municipality of Lisbon (C.M.L. 
 2006,  2008 ) (Fig.  9.3 ). 
 In this sense, it was important to verify the territorial impact of the expectations 
of the private sector during the binding period, in spite of the restrictions of Alcântara 
XXI. This examination aimed to evaluate the level of private sector interest, for 
which a simple indicator was established that enabled a comparison of the built area 
from before the project (1997) to near the end of its binding period (2007). Areas 
that had been subjected to broad demolitions were also quanti ﬁ ed in both periods. 
Within this second group of indicators, but only for the Development Plan, the exist-
ing and foreseen built areas were analysed. These areas were subdivided according 
to use – whether housing, of ﬁ ces, facilities or shopping – so as to allow an under-
standing of the plan’s effects upon the local economy and the prevention of shrink-
age (Fig.  9.3 ; Table  9.4 ).  
 The third group of indicators relates to the policies/measures aimed at urban 
reconversion, drawn from the impact of the Development Plan on the social fabric. 
The ongoing process of shrinkage can be blamed on various factors; however, the 
decrease in population can be considered as one of the most important (see Chap.   5 
for more details). The implementation of the Development Plan allows an anticipa-
tion of demographic change, and for this reason, indicators related to the available 
projections in the plan were also included (Table  9.5 ).  
 Fig. 9.3   Changes in building areas in Alcântara (Sources: FA-UTL 2010 (Faculdade de 
Arquitectura de la Universidad Técnica de Lisboa/Faculty of Architecture – Lisbon Technical 
University), with information from CML (Câmara Municipal de Lisboa – Lisbon Municipality)/
GEBALIS (Gestão dos Bairros Municipais de Lisboa/Management of Municipal Districts of 
Lisbon)   http://www.gebalis.pt/  , (Information obtained from   http://www.gebalis.pt/site/html/vale_
alcantara.html  in 15/07/2010) PU Alcântara (Plano de Urbanizaçao de Alcântara/Alcântara Urban 
Plan) and Alcântara XXI) 
 

155
9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon…
 Table 9.4  Indicators used to evaluate adaptability attribute in the economic dimension and under urban reconversion policy/measure 
 Phases 
 Indicators 
 Sources 
 Before the plan 
 Area of implementation in square metres (1997) 
 186,751 
 FA-UTL a \CML b 
 After the plan 
 Area of implementation in square metres (2007) 
 Maintained 
 127,850 
 Demolished 
 58,901 
 New constructions 
 16,764 
 Before the plan 
 Gross area of construction for non-residential uses (2010) 
 550,730.5 m 2 
 PU 
 Gross area of construction for housing (2010) 
 423,421.5 m 2 
 Alcântara c 
 Expected results 
 – 
 40% of new gross areas 
for habitation 
 60% of new gross areas 
for habitation 
 – 
 m 2 
 % 
 m 2 
 % 
 Gross areas of construction for non-residential uses  737,006.5 
 +33.8 
 702,665.5 
 +27.6 
 Gross areas of construction for housing 
 575,356.5 
 +35.88 
 609,697.5 
 +43.99 
 Sources : 
 a FA-UTL (Faculdade de Arquitectura de la Universidad Técnica de Lisboa/Faculty of Architecture – Lisbon Technical University) 
 b CML ( Câmara Municipal de Lisboa – Lisbon Municipality) 
 c PU Alcântara (Plano de Urbanizaçao de Alcântara/Alcântara Urban Plan) 

156
L.F. Dias et al.
 9.4  Main Findings 
 The redevelopment of the public transport system notably the underground and rail 
networks will change the connectivity and accessibility levels of Alcântara. Ridership 
from the underground and train stations located within a 10-min ride of Alcântara 
will increase as a result of the intervention. As a consequence, the in ﬂ uence area 4 of 
the stations will increase from 4.01 to 7.62 km 2 or 8.5 km 2 , depending on the selected 
solution. This reduction of time/distance means increased connectivity to Alcântara 
for the denser areas in the metropolitan realm, with impacts on the population den-
sity 5  in surrounding areas of stations within a time/distance of 10 min from Alcântara, 
which will increase from 5,311 inhab/km 2 to 7,098 inhab/km 2  or even 8,084 inhab/
km 2 , depending, once again, on the selected solution. 
 By effectively promoting Alcântara as a central location, and the future avail-
ability of services, facilities and shopping areas, a rise in the education levels of the 
resident population is also envisaged. This may be especially true in a distance/time 
range of 10 min after the introduction of changes to the public transport networks. 
Another positive synergy to consider corresponds to a stronger polarisation of ser-
vices and facilities. 
 As for the development in the surrounding areas of the stations (within the 10-min 
time/distance range), the density of buildings or parts of buildings for activities 
other than housing will increase signi ﬁ cantly. This effect corresponds to the reduc-
tion of the time needed to travel between Alcântara and the traditional business 
centre of Lisbon or other important areas, such as the Expo’ 98 site (Parque das 
Nações) or the International Airport. This close proximity and ease of travel between 
centres will increase the potential of the agglomeration economies. 
 Within the time range of 20 min to Alcântara, the analysis shows a rather relevant 
decrease of density following the decrease of activities resulting from a low density, 
or even lack of buildings, in close proximity to the stations. Future trends may 
include urban expansion or, oddly enough, urban dispersion. 
 Table 9.5   Indicators used to evaluate adaptability attribute in the social dimension and 
under urban reconversion policy/measure 
 Phases 
 Indicators 
 Sources 
 Before the plan 
 Inhabitants (2001) 
 8,755 
 INE a 
 Expected results 
 Inhabitants – hypotheses 1 (40% of 
new gross areas for habitation) 
 11,873 
 PU 
 Inhabitants – hypotheses 2 (60% of 
new gross areas for habitation) 
 12,480 
 Alcântara b 
 Sources : 
 a INE (Instituto Nacional de Estatística/National Institute for Statistics) 
 b PU Alcântara (Plano de Urbanizaçao de Alcântara/Alcântara Urban Plan) 
 4  Within a 500 m radius. 
 5  In Lisbon, the population density in 2001 was 6,673 inhab/km2 (INE  2001 ) . 

157
9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon…
 According to the available data, almost the entire population of Casal Ventoso 
was rehoused in Alcântara, corresponding to 30% of Alcântara’s population (C.M.L 
 1995 ) , which can be considered as highly relevant from a social perspective. This 
kind of project presents a considerable challenge in terms of the social insertion of 
this population, which was supported by the EU Programme Urban II. 
 At the same time, a strong private initiative was undertaken in the urban recon-
version process, which became evident particularly after the approval of Alcântara 
XXI. Over 58,000 m 2 of buildings were demolished, clearing an area of more than 
16,000 m 2 for the construction of new buildings, thus helping to sustain the private 
sector interest in the reconversion process. 
 The Development Plan for Alcântara strongly supports new built areas for non-
residential use, with two possibilities of occupancy rates (40 or 60% of total new 
buildings) for the total area. Regardless of the selected solution, both residential and 
non-residential areas may see a considerable increase in the near future. 
 In this regard, the growth in area of non-residential activities ranges from 27.6 to 
33.8%. Housing will increase from 35.8 to 44%, depending on the chosen solution, 
corresponding to a demographic estimation rate of 11,873 (+35%) or 12,480 (+42%) 
inhabitants respectively (Manuel Fernandes de Sá. Lda  2010 ) . 
 From this it can be deduced that by increasing housing, facilities, shopping cen-
tres or service areas, Alcantara’s centrality will see a marked increase, bringing 
together new production factors and inhabitants, allowing for the reversal of the cur-
rent shrinkage process and promoting intensi ﬁ cation within the area. 
 By providing modern housing, socio-economic diversity levels will also rise, 
which may have a positive impact both on Alcântara and its surrounding areas in 
promoting rehabilitation and reconversion processes. 
 9.5  Conclusions 
 The process of evaluating resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon follows a 
methodology in which the dimensions of resilience, policies and measures, and 
attribute  s were examined in a case study of Alcântara. This Alcântara area was cho-
sen due to its particular form of space production and due the existent plans and 
policies, considered as relevant in the global context of urban planning in Lisbon. 
 In Alcântara the  adaptive capacity was analysed for different dimensions of 
resilience (environment, economic and social) and for different phases of the plan-
ning process. The results of the analysis show that Alcântara is undergoing an infra-
structural redevelopment process and urban reconversion, with impacts on both the 
built environment and the social fabrics, both of which have consistently contrib-
uted to a shrinkage trend. 
 Drawing upon the adaptive cycles coined by Holling 6 and Gunderson  (   2002 ) , 
it can be said that Alcântara is in the middle of a “renewal or reorganisation” phase, 
 6  The adaptive cycles are the characterisation of a given system in a given time through four sequential 
states. These states are designated as (1) growth, (2) conservation, (3) release and (4) reorganisation.  

158
L.F. Dias et al.
and from this perspective, it would seem that the implementation of the Alcântara 
Development Plan will promote a shift to a phase of “rapid growth”. 
 Supported by a planning process based on previous experiences and solid know-
how, this will boost the area’s  adaptive capacity to cope with new challenges (Folke 
et al.  2002 ) , sustained and potentiated by the intensi ﬁ cation of  connectivity in 
Alcântara, which will encourage economic changes, social diversity and innovation 
trends. 
 References 
 Andersson, E. (2006). Urban landscapes and sustainable cities.  Ecology and Society ,  11 (1), 34. 
[online] URL:   http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art34/  
 Brondizio, E. S., Ostrom, E., & Young, O. R. (2009). Connectivity and the governance of multi-
level social-ecological systems: The role of social capital.  Annual Review of Environment and 
Resources, 34 (1), 253–278. 
 C.M.L. (1995). É Agora!  Casal Ventoso – Operação Integrada de Reconversão  [It’s Now! Casal 
Ventoso – Integrated Reconversion Operation] – Programa Urban. Lisboa: Gabinete do Presidente. 
 C.M.L. (2006).  Plano de Pormenor de Alcântara – Termos de Referência [Alcântara’s Detailed 
Plan – Terms of reference]. D. DMPU, DCIP. Lisboa, C.M.L.: 12. 
 C.M.L. (2008).  Plano de Urbanização de Alcântara – Termos de Referência [Alcântara’s Urban 
Development Plan – Terms of reference]. DMPU/DPU. Lisboa, C.M.L: 23. 
 C.M.L. (2010).  Proposta Preliminar de Revisão do PDM – Relatório da Proposta de Plano 
[Preliminary proposal for revision of Lisbon Municipal Master Plan – Report of the plan pro-
posal] 8: 338. 
 CCDR-LVT. (2007).  Lisboa 2020: Uma Estratégia de Lisboa para a Região de Lisboa. Lisboa 
[Lisbon 2020, a Lisbon’s strategy for its Region] Comissão de Coordenação e Desenvolvimento 
de Lisboa e Vale do Tejo. [Regional Coordination and Development Commission of Lisbon 
and Tagus Valley]. 
 CCDR-LVT. (2008).  A Região de Lisboa e Vale do Tejo em Números [Lisbon and Tagus Valley 
Region in Numbers]. Lisboa. 
 CSIRO, A., U. Arizona State University and S. Stockholm University. (2007).  Urban resilience – 
Research prospectus: A resilience alliance initiative for transitioning urban systems towards 
sustainable futures. 
 Cumming, G. S., Barnes, G., Perz, S., et al. (2005). An exploratory framework for the empirical 
measurement of resilience.  Ecosystems, 8 (8), 975–987. 
 Dale, A. (2007).  Bridging gaps: Building diversity, resilience and connectivity . Resource docu-
ment. Canadian Environmental Grantmakers Network, Thoughtleader Series.   http://www.cegn.
org/English/home/documents/Dale_Eng.pdf  
    Folke, C., Colding, J., & Berkes, F. (2002). Synthesis: Building resilience for adaptive capacity in 
social-ecological systems. In F. Berkes, J. Colding, & C. Folke (Eds.),  Navigating social-eco-
logical systems: Building resilience for complexity and change (pp. 352–387). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Guevara, S., & Laborde, J. (2008). The landscape approach: Designing new reserves for protection 
of biological and cultural diversity in Latin America.  Environmental Ethics, 30 (3), 251–262. 
 Holling, C. S., & Gunderson, L. H. (2002). Resilience and adaptive cycles. In L. H. Gunderson & 
C. S. Holling (Eds.),  Panarchy: Understanding transformations in human and natural systems 
(pp. 25–62). Washington, DC: Island Press. 
 I.N.E. 2001.  Censos 2001: resultados de ﬁ nitivos: XIV recenseamento geral da população: IV 
recenseamento geral da habitação [Census 2001 – Final results: XIV general population cen-
sus: IV Housing Census, National Institute of Statistics] (Vol. 8). Lisboa: I.N.E 

159
9 Assessing Urban Resilience in the Metropolitan Area of Lisbon…
 Manuel Fernandes de Sá. Lda. (2010).  Plano de Urbanização de Alcântara, Proposta de Plano 
[Alcântara’s Urban Development Plan – plan proposal], Lisboa, C.M.L. Volume I – II – III. 
 Morgado, S. (2009). Tendências e formas de ocupação do território metropolitano de Lisboa 
[Trends and patterns in the metropolitan territory of Lisbon ]. In C. Mendes (Coord.)  Dinâmicas 
de localização, transformação do território e novas centralidades na AML: Que papel para as 
políticas públicas? [Localization dynamics, territority transformations and new centralities in 
the AML [Metropolitan Area of Lisbon]: what role for public policies?] Unpublished research 
report. Lisboa, Colégio de Estudos Integrados, Technical University of Lisbon. 

161
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_10, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 10.1  Introduction 
 This chapter presents a case study of the  Baixa District, located in an urban heritage 
area in the centre of the city of Oporto in Northern Portugal . The city of Oporto is 
the centre of its metropolitan area (Metropolitan Area of Oporto – AMP 1 ) and the 
second-largest city in Portugal. It is closely connected to an extremely industrialised 
area (in the northwest) to which it provides the main services. Links with the eastern 
hinterland suffer from underdeveloped infrastructures and, for the moment, are 
mainly geared towards the wine industry. In recent decades, a number of important 
investments have been made in the metropolitan area with the intention of improv-
ing mobility and accessibility, including key infrastructure projects such as the 
enlargement of the light rail network, new bridges over the Douro River and 
improvements to the trunk road network. The economic structure of the metropoli-
tan area has evolved over the last half century, changing from “de-ruralisation” in 
the 1960s to “tertiarisation” starting in early 1980s. Initially, the development mod-
els avoided the centre of the metropolitan area, the focus being on the strongly 
industrialised outskirts. The tertiary sector revealed an accelerated process of growth 
in the centre of the Metropolitan Area of Oporto (AMP), which has become the 
centre of a regional productive base, involved simultaneously in both exports and 
 V.  Oliveira (*) •  A.  Martins •  S. S.  Cruz 
 Faculty of Engineering, CITTA Research Centre for Territory, 
Transports and Environment ,  University of Oporto ,  Rua Dr. Roberto Frias , 
 4200-465  Oporto ,  Portugal 
e-mail:  vitorm@fe.up.pt ;  ana.jorge.martins@fe.up.pt ;  scruz@fe.up.pt 
 Chapter 10 
 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience 
Perspective: The Case of Oporto 
 Vítor  Oliveira ,  Ana  Martins , and  Sara  Santos  Cruz  
 1  Until the year 2000, the Metropolitan Area of Oporto (AMP) encompassed the Oporto municipality 
as well as eight other municipalities. After a process of enlargement in 2005, this geographical area 
has become known as Greater Metropolitan Area of Oporto – GAMP. Since 2008, it is formed by 
a group of 16 municipalities. 

162
V. Oliveira et al.
imports. At the same time, the outskirts have become specialised in the supply of 
consumer products for the international market, being involved in an internationa-
lised system in which footwear and textile/clothing industrial sectors are dominant. 
Throughout the years, the productive structure of the metropolitan area has been 
reinforced by the tertiary sector, with the AMP being one of the subregions of the 
country in which the contributions of the tertiary sector to gross value added (GVA) 
and regional employment have been the most impressive. 
 The entire metropolitan area comprises approximately 1.3 million inhabitants, 
representing 12% of the country’s population; Oporto is a relatively medium-sized 
city, with 263,131 inhabitants according to the Census of 2001. It has a unique loca-
tion, facing the sea and the Douro River. The old part of the city centre was classi ﬁ ed 
by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site in 1996. Oporto also stands out as a cultural 
centre in the north of the country, being home to the largest university and the most 
visited museum of modern art in the country. Despite the reasonable infrastructures, 
including a good road network, a modern airport and a dynamic seaport, the urban 
development process has been somehow framed by a double peripheral context: 
 ﬁ rst, when comparing the city (and its metropolitan area) with the capital Lisbon ; 
and second, when comparing Portugal with the most developed countries in the 
European Union. 
 This chapter follows the evaluation methodology presented in Chap.   8 , begin-
ning by introducing the urban problems of the case study area and by analysing how 
the main planning documents approach these problems. The policies and measures 
in these documents are then identi ﬁ ed, in particular, those that are able to be evalu-
ated under the framework of the resilience concept. Some attributes were selected 
as the basis for the evaluation process, in both the formulation and implementation 
phases of policies/programmes/plans/projects (PPPP). A critical appraisal of the 
applicability and usefulness of the resilience concept has also been considered in 
the  ﬁ nal section of the chapter. 
 10.2  The Context: Identi ﬁ cation of the Main Urban Problems 
in the Study Area 
 Throughout the 1970s and mainly in the 1980s, a process of “tertiarisation” has led 
to an overall transformation of the city centre, accompanied by a signi ﬁ cant decrease 
in the resident population. In the 1990s, the population decline, the relocation of 
many services to other parts of the city and to the outskirts, the functional emptying 
of the historical centre, the degradation of the built heritage and the increasing 
number of vacant households have had a profound impact on the urban environ-
ment. Moreover, in the last decade, the attraction effect of the periphery on housing, 
business and services has increased, to the detriment of the city centre. 
 Recently, important demographic changes have been occurring, as the younger 
and active groups of the population with more economic opportunities search for 
housing in more attractive areas of the city and in new residential areas with more 
affordable housing, mainly in the outer areas of the city and in other municipalities. 

163
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
Those who tend to stay are the older members of the population, and consequently, 
statistics indicate an ageing of population and a decrease in birth rates. In the last 
three decades, the loss of population (a drop of approximately 13% from 1991 to 
2001) and the ageing process (an ageing index 2 of 1.5 in 2001) have led to an 
increasing number of vacant dwellings in the centre. Moreover, the old building 
stock, which in some cases is in a very poor condition (extreme degradation of the 
buildings), encourages the departure of households with suf ﬁ cient economic capacity. 
Low living standards, poverty and unemployment are the most common problems 
in the area, more speci ﬁ cally in the old historical centre. Under such conditions, 
urban insecurity and delinquency tend to emerge. 
 Although some general trends can be identi ﬁ ed in the city centre, some differ-
ences can still be distinguished between the historical core and the inner ring that 
constitute this central area. In the historical centre, there is a clear evidence of an 
ageing of population and lower levels of education and quali ﬁ cation. Families tend 
to live in rented dwellings that most of the times are overpopulated and below the 
minimum living standards. The inner ring, although being also characterised by an 
ageing population, presents better levels of education and quali ﬁ cation than the his-
torical nucleus. The levels of degradation and the abandonment of buildings are, 
however, signi ﬁ cant. In all, approximately half of the buildings are rented, while the 
other half are owner occupied (Breda-Vázquez et al.  2004 ) . 
 The  Baixa District of Oporto is characterised, in general, by a rather compact 
urban tissue. In fact, a city centre with relatively high densities may bene ﬁ t from 
some positive aspects of the compact model and support energy ef ﬁ ciency , mixed 
use and nonmotorised means of transport in selected streets. Nevertheless, a deeper 
look at the old core reveals a different scenario. The old medieval core is character-
ised by narrow streets with extremely dense urban blocks (some of which have 
historical and cultural signi ﬁ cance), adapted to an irregular topography. The high 
density of some urban blocks has resulted in an urban environment that somehow 
misses out the positive attributes of the compact model. 
 The economic decline has had low investment rates in the centre, the displace-
ment of services to other parts of the city and the low economic level of the inhabit-
ants with high unemployment rates have also contributed to a worsening of the 
situation. In all, it can be said that the recent urban dynamics re ﬂ ect a worrying 
phenomenon of urban shrinkage in the city of Oporto . 
 10.3  Main Land-Use Policies in the Study Area 
 The case study area is located in the city centre, corresponding to an area of around 
1,000 ha – including eight parishes – comprising the Oporto historical area (classi ﬁ ed 
as a World Heritage Site), the traditional downtown and the surrounding areas that 
 2  The ageing index is the number of individuals in the population aged over 65 divided by the 
number of individuals aged below 15. 

164
V. Oliveira et al.
emerged in the eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries. The  Baixa District was 
designated as a Critical Area of Urban Recovery and Rehabilitation (ACRRU) in 
the context of an urban regeneration programme. 
 The different public interventions/policies prepared and implemented over the 
years have tackled different issues and problems in the  Baixa  District. In general, 
the intension has been to promote the rehabilitation of the built environment and 
encourage urban regeneration, focusing not only on the physical environment but 
also on social problems, supporting local economic development and promoting 
the revitalisation of the city centre. At a local level, there are several tools directing 
planning practice and development control in the study area. The main document 
is the Municipal Plan (PDM) of 2006, which regulates the occupation and land use 
in Oporto   , as well as the rules for the rehabilitation and revitalisation of the histori-
cal centre and the most critical areas of the core of the city. The plan has  ﬁ ve main 
goals: the enhancement of the urban identity of Oporto, the rehabilitation of public 
spaces and the built environment, the rationalisation of the transport system, the 
reduction of urban disparities and the revitalisation of the historical centre and 
central areas. 
 Besides the traditional (and binding) planning document, being the Municipal 
Plan (PDM), a signi ﬁ cant number of programmes were launched in the 1990s, aim-
ing at reversing the process of demographic and economic decline and the urban 
deprivation of the area. Of these programmes, some had a stronger focus on the built 
environment, aiming at the rehabilitation and requali ﬁ cation of urban spaces; two 
others speci ﬁ cally envisioned a better environment through urban requali ﬁ cation; 
two more tackled social issues; one targeted commercial development; and another 
was oriented towards information and communication technologies. As mentioned 
above, the city of Oporto , and especially its central area, has been experiencing a 
strong urban decline, highlighting a desperate need for urban renewal and revitalisa-
tion projects. In the following sections of this chapter, particular attention is given 
to those projects that have fostered innovation and sustainability (by counteracting 
the urban decline), in particular those projects promoted by the urban regeneration 
company, known as  Porto Vivo SRU. 
 10.4  The Urban Regeneration Programme:  Porto Vivo SRU 
 In November 2004, the  Porto Vivo SRU, framed by an exceptional regulatory regime 
of urban rehabilitation (Law-Decree 104/2004, 7 May), was established as the  ﬁ rst 
Portuguese urban regeneration company (RSRU  2004 ) , with  ﬁ nancing sourced from 
the central government (60%, from the Housing and Urban Renewal Institute) and 
the local government (40%, from the city council of Oporto ). 
 In April 2005, the  Porto Vivo SRU presented its  master plan , which introduced 
the main strategy for the urban rehabilitation process and served as a guide for good 
practices that may evolve and improve upon annual plans, contributing in this way 
to the enhancement of the process. The main goals of the plan are the promotion of 

165
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
housing in the central area (by maintaining the existing inhabitants and attracting 
new residents); the development and promotion of economic activities/businesses; 
the revitalisation of retail areas; the promotion of tourism, culture and leisure activi-
ties; the quali ﬁ cation of public spaces and,  ﬁ nally, the development of certain areas 
with particular interests, known as Special Action Areas (AAE) (Porto Vivo  2005a ) . 
The plan proposes an operational model that encourages the establishment of part-
nerships through incentive mechanisms; while also de ﬁ ning a number of priority 
areas, with particular relevance for the Priority Intervention Zone (ZIP) (see 
Fig.  10.1 ). Within this zone of 500 ha, two types of areas have been de ﬁ ned, and the 
works are expected to be completed until 2013: Priority Intervention Areas (AIP), 
corresponding to different sets of contiguous urban blocks, and Special Action 
Areas, covering symbolic public spaces and buildings. 
 In addition, the  Porto Vivo  SRU, together with the city council and urban regen-
eration companies, is expected to encourage the central government to improve 
national policies that include legislation related to the improvement of the rental 
property market , in order to implement taxes that favour urban renewal and revitali-
sation processes, the regulation of criteria for acquiring derelict buildings, and to 
promote the dissemination of programmes for  ﬁ nancial support. 
 The urban regeneration process is initiated according to three different possible 
scenarios: the owner of the building undertakes the rehabilitation works; the owner 
of the building does not cooperate, and the SRU selects a private partner to substi-
tute him; or the SRU has to undertake the rehabilitation work due to the lack of 
cooperation of the building owner as well as motivation of the private sector. 
 After the selection of an urban block within a Priority Intervention Area, a 
detailed plan, called a Strategic Document, is prepared. The document is structured 
 Fig. 10.1   Critical Area of Urban Recovery and Rehabilitation (ACCRU), Priority Intervention 
Zone (ZIP) and historical centre – World Heritage Site (Source: Porto Vivo  2010 ) 
 

166
V. Oliveira et al.
in two fundamental parts: a description of the existing situation and a de ﬁ nition of 
a regeneration strategy. In all, 32 documents have already been approved. Each one 
estimates a budget and a time frame for the intervention and identi ﬁ es the main 
stakeholders from the private sector that may participate in the regeneration of that 
particular urban block. 
 The strategic documents contain detailed speci ﬁ cations for the rehabilitation of 
the buildings and blocks. Besides, the documents also act as dissemination tools, 
providing a description of all the aspects expected in any intervention into the urban 
block and gathering information for possible investors, indicating the advantages of 
investing in this speci ﬁ c area. It also constitutes a basis for public discussion of the 
proposals, as well as a tool to attract private partners interested in collaborating in 
the rehabilitation efforts and in partnering with the owners. 
 These partnerships can be considered as formal cooperation contracts; however, 
the acquisition of the buildings may be forced should the owner choose not to coop-
erate. Once the strategic document is ready for implementation, it is considered as 
representing the will and consensus of the involved parties. The  ﬁ nal two steps of a 
project are the obtaining of a licence from the municipality of Oporto and regular 
inspections to ensure the regulations outlined in the strategic documents are being 
followed (Porto Vivo  2005a ) . Cooperation among the owners of the buildings, the 
 Porto Vivo SRU and the investors is extremely important, in that rehabilitation 
incentives comprise the creation of partnerships with public and/or private entities, 
such as Partnership for the Technological Downtown, Partnership for Energy 
Downtown, Partnership for the Social and Economic Downtown, Partnership for the 
Mobility Downtown and Partnership for Physical Rehabilitation. The  ﬁ scal, 
 ﬁ nancial, public incentives and funding programmes are crucial for attracting new 
investors and to hold the owners’ interests. Incentives for rehabilitation include a 
number of different measures and tools, such as easier access to quali ﬁ ed profes-
sionals in the  ﬁ elds of architecture and engineering and to bank credits. Furthermore, 
 Porto Vivo  SRU and the Oporto Municipality are obliged to provide, in association 
with the central government, technical support for renewal and municipal or national 
tax support. 
 10.5  Evaluation of Policies from a Resilient Perspective 
 There are a number of relevant policies/measures related to the rehabilitation process 
that are able to stimulate investment and reinforce the social capital of the area. 
Some of these measures focus on general urban rehabilitation issues, while others 
are more associated with the social dimension. For the purpose of this chapter, how-
ever, it is the policies that are more closely associated to the resilience concept, that 
is, that constitute a potential to deal with the identi ﬁ ed problems in the study area, 
which merit particular attention. In this regard, four representative policy measures 
have been selected, two of which are related to  ﬁ nancial issues ( ﬁ nancial incentives, 

167
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
bene ﬁ cial credit lines), one that is more related to legal issues (facilitating the procedures 
for expropriation and subdivision, simpli ﬁ ed licensing procedures) and the  ﬁ nal one 
related to social issues promoting the attraction of new residents:
 1.  Income and corporate tax bene ﬁ ts for new renovation interventions – encouraging 
investment and modifying the behaviour of investors and promoters 
 2.  Reduction of municipal taxes on the purchase and renovation of housing – 
promoting investments for the regeneration of the study area 
 3.  Creation of a special legal regime of urban rehabilitation – shortening planning 
application procedures 
 4.  Development of new typologies of housing – promoting the attraction of new 
residents 
 In order to evaluate these policies from a resilient perspective, a set of attribute s 
have been de ﬁ ned, as described in previous chapters of this book. In this particular 
case study, based on the urban problems identi ﬁ ed, two attributes were selected for 
in-depth analysis. 
 The  ﬁ rst attribute –  recovery – deals with the physical dimension of the built 
environment of  Baixa . In the centre of Oporto ,  recovery is a pertinent concept as the 
study is focused upon a heritage site that is in urgent need of physical regeneration. 
As the de ﬁ nition emphasises, recovery is “… the ability of the system to respond 
and recover from an event. … In an ever changing environment, a system must also 
change in response to that environment in order to retain its advantage” (Dalziell 
and McManus  2004 :8). This event is, in the present context, considered a 
disturbance. 
 The second attribute selected is  capital building , relating to the social dimen-
sion of the urban problems.  Capital building is an attribute of resilience that may 
be explored to tackle the vulnerability caused by the main socio-economic issues 
already referred to above. The concept can be de ﬁ ned as “… those elements in a 
mature system which make the extended existence of that system possible within 
its larger context” (Resilience Alliance  2007 ). As introduced in Chap.   3  , social 
capital building is related to the capacity of the communities for collective action, 
which requires social continuity as argued in Chap.   5 . Robust and organised 
social relations are important for rapid decision-making and public involvement 
when needed (Potapchuck et al.  1997 ) . When the community is not able to pro-
duce social continuity and collective action, the system is vulnerable to disasters 
of any kind .  
 Thus, the purpose of the evaluation of the study area is to conclude whether the 
process of recovery of the World Heritage Site is able to counteract the social vul-
nerability of the territory, promoting effective sustainable development and thus 
leading to a resilient city. This statement comprises the main evaluation question of 
the analysis, and the following points present the evaluation process undertaken in 
terms of these two speci ﬁ c dimensions. For each dimension, and attribute, a set of 
indicators were identi ﬁ ed associated to both the formulation and the implementa-
tion phase of the programme/plan. 

168
V. Oliveira et al.
 10.5.1  The Physical Dimension: Evaluation 
of the Attribute – Recovery 
 The policies referred to above indicate an intention to provide favourable conditions 
in the study area for the promotion and undertaking of a rehabilitation process. As 
Fig.  10.2 shows, several blocks within the intervention area have been identi ﬁ ed as 
critical areas. The reduction of taxes within the study area aims to encourage invest-
ments in urban rehabilitation, either by the owners or by investors, thus increasing 
the number of buildings rehabilitated and diminishing the level of degradation and 
the number of vacant dwellings. 
 In order to evaluate the physical recovery proposed, and already accomplished in 
some cases, as a result of the interventions associated with the  Porto Vivo  SRU, six 
indicators were de ﬁ ned for both the formulation and the implementation phase of 
the programmes, policies, plans and/or projects (Table  10.1 ).  
 The study developed in 2004 in the Faculty of Engineering of the University of 
Oporto /FEUP (Breda-Vázquez et al.  2004 ) indicates that 45.3% of the buildings in 
Oporto are in need of rehabilitation, rising to 53.8% in the ACRRU (Critical Area 
of Urban Recovery and Rehabilitation). The strategic documents of the  Porto Vivo 
SRU have de ﬁ ned each of the blocks subjected to intervention, producing several 
maps with the level of degradation. 
 The goal of the SRU to rehabilitate all of the buildings highlighted in the ACRRU 
can be considered unrealistic; thus, the SRU  master plan has proposed a more real-
istic  ﬁ gure of 81% of the buildings to be rehabilitated in the Priority Zone of 
Intervention (ZIP) (Table  10.2 ). 
 Fig. 10.2  Identi ﬁ cation of critical areas within the Priority Zone of Intervention (ZIP). Critical areas 
due to building conservation, population density and vacant buildings (Source: Porto Vivo  2005a )  
 

169
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
 Table 10.1  Attribute recovery and indicators for the formulation and implementation phase 
 Attribute 
of resilience/criteria 
 Dimensions 
of resilience 
 Indicators 
 Sources 
 Recovery 
 Built environment 
 Formulation of PPPPs 
 Coverage degree of the PPPP a 
 SRU – master plan 
 Degree of rehabilitation b 
 SRU – strategic documents 
 Use of new versus existing materials 
 SRU – strategic documents 
 Implementation of PPPPs 
 Average number of rehabilitated 
buildings annually c 
 CMP, SRU 
 The share of buildings rehabilitated in 
the priority urban blocks versus 
the average in the city 
 SRU 
 Rehabilitation rate of progress d 
 SRU 
 a Number of proposed dwellings for rehabilitation versus total number of dwellings in need of rehabilitation in the city 
 b Super ﬁ cial (e.g. windows) or profound (e.g. structure, roof) 
 c Inside the intervention area, before and after SRU intervention 
 d Number of buildings rehabilitated per year versus total number of buildings in need of rehabilitation 

170
V. Oliveira et al.
 The high level of degradation in the intervention area necessitates profound 
rehabilitation in a signi ﬁ cant number of buildings, with almost half of the proposed 
buildings for rehabilitation in need of important structural works and less than a 
quarter requiring only super ﬁ cial rehabilitation, for example, facade rearrange-
ments. Around 53.8% of the 18,048 buildings in ACRRU need being rehabilitated, 
and almost 5,600 buildings (31%) need profound interventions. In ZIP (Priority 
Intervention Zone), the strategic documents of the Intervention Units indicate that 
47% of the buildings need profound rehabilitation. 
 The rehabilitation efforts should respect, as far as possible, a certain level of 
authenticity in building materials in interventions; however, most of those docu-
ments (81%) do not mention the materials that should be used. 
 Due to some inertia at the beginning of the process, the results of the implemen-
tation of the programme of SRU fell far short of what was expected in 2009 
(Fig.  10.3 ). Although the legislation dates from 2004, it was 2 years later that the 
process was actually initiated, following the preparation of the plans, and a period 
in which investors were sought and the rules and procedures for the interventions 
were established. 
 It should be noted that the SRU programme was not the  ﬁ rst attempt at rehabilita-
tion in the area. Between 1997 and 2001, focusing particularly on the historic centre 
of Oporto , the  Commission for the Urban Renovation of the Ribeira/Barredo Area 
(CRUARB) achieved a signi ﬁ cant number of rehabilitations in the area, as did the 
Foundation for the Development of the Historic Area of Porto (FDZHP), although 
the scope of the works of both institutions was never concluded. 
 Between 2001 and 2009, the number of buildings with low preservation levels 
decreased. In 2001, more than 50% of the buildings in some parishes that constitute 
the historic centre of Oporto were in a poor state of repair, but by 2009 this  ﬁ gure 
had been reduced (Silva  2010 ) . 
 Paradoxically, the annual average number of rehabilitated buildings has decreased 
after the establishment of SRU (Table  10.3 ). As already explained, this is associated 
with the dif ﬁ culties inherent in starting such a process, and in the near future, these 
 ﬁ gures are expected to rise. 
 The ratio of rehabilitation of buildings per year has been increasing (from 1.4% 
in 2008 to 2.2% in 2009). In 2009, the ratio of buildings rehabilitated per year in ZIP 
was higher when compared with the Oporto average; however, these percentages/
values can still be considered as extremely low. 
 The rehabilitation progress has been increasing, from 1.8% of buildings in need 
of rehabilitation in 2008 to 2.7 in 2009 (Table  10.4 ). It should be noticed, once 
again, that although the legislation dates from 2004, it took some time to initiate the 
 Table 10.2  Coverage degree of the programmes, policies, plans or/and projects 
 Reference 
area 
 Coverage degree 
of the PPPP 
in each 
 Number of proposed 
buildings for 
rehabilitation 
 Number of 
buildings in need 
of rehabilitation 
 Source 
 Oporto 
 100% 
 21,246 
 21,246 
 SRU 
 ACRRU 
 100% 
 9,716 
 9,716 
 SRU 
 ZIP 
 81% 
 677 
 832 
 Strategic documents 

171
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
 Fig. 10.3   Map of Oporto : location of the Priority Intervention Areas (AIP), urban blocks with/
without strategic documents (DE) (Source: Porto Vivo  2005a ) 
 Table 10.3  Annual average numbers of rehabilitated buildings 
 Reference area and year 
 Total number of rehabilitated 
buildings inside the intervention 
area, before and after SRU 
intervention 
 Annual average of rehabilitated 
buildings inside the intervention 
area, before and after SRU 
intervention 
 ZIP (1977–2001) 
 254 
 10 
 ZIP (2001–2004) 
 106 
 35 
 ZIP (1977–2004) – before 
 360 
 13 
 ZIP (2005–2009) – after 
 31 
 6 
process of rehabilitation due to the required formulation of the plan and documents 
and the time taken to complete the rehabilitation works. The only results worthy of 
reference appeared after 2008, but it is expected that in the near future, the process 
will start to show results that are more valuable. 
 In relation to the attribute of recovery applied to the built environment in the 
formulation phase, there has been a high percentage of coverage of the plan, a pro-
found level of rehabilitation, and the use of existing materials has not been a main 
 

172
V. Oliveira et al.
concern. In the implementation phase, the annual average number of rehabilitated 
buildings decreased after the establishment of SRU. However, the rate of buildings 
rehabilitated in the priority urban blocks seems to be increasing, as well as the rate 
of progress in rehabilitation. The historical core contains around 1% of newly avail-
able dwellings, but in the future this  ﬁ gure is expected to increase. 
 10.5.2  The Social Dimension: Evaluation 
of the Attribute – Social Capital Building 
 The analysis of social issues was a dif ﬁ cult task, because data on existing and new 
residents was not readily available. In order to evaluate the attribute of social capital 
building and to characterise the pro ﬁ le of the new residents, surveys had to be con-
ducted. The investigation was inconclusive, due to the low participation of the 
inhabitants, and so the following description is based mainly either on the area of 
intervention or in data from the city centre parishes. Through the inquiries, it was, 
however, possible to identify some social tendencies in the implementation of the 
policies, plans and policy instruments (Table  10.5 ).  
 Oporto has registered a signi ﬁ cant decrease in population, especially the  Baixa 
District (from 110,672 in 1991 to 84,380 in 2001). This change has mainly been a 
consequence of people, especially the younger, moving to other parts of the city or 
to the outskirts, resulting in an ageing of population in the district. 
 In 2001, around one-third of the resident population of the municipality of Oporto 
lived in the ACRRU. When analysing the change in population, in the 1991–2001 
period, half of the demographic losses in the municipality of Oporto were concen-
trated in the parishes included in ACRRU. 
 In the 1990s, there was a loss of 7,000 inhabitants from the historical nucleus 
(more than one-third of its population), and in the same period, almost 20,000 
inhabitants chose to leave the central areas (more than one- ﬁ fth of its population). 
This means that half of the demographic losses of the municipality of Oporto    were 
 Table 10.4  Rehabilitation rate of progress 
 ZIP 
 Rate of building rehabilitations 
per year in relation to the number 
of proposed buildings 
 Number of 
rehabilitation 
of buildings 
 Total number of 
buildings in need 
of rehabilitation 
 Source 
 2005 
 0.0% 
 0 
 677 
 Porto Vivo  2005b ; 
strategic doc 
 2006 
 0.1% 
 1 
 676 
 Porto Vivo  2006 ; 
strategic doc 
 2007 
 0.0% 
 0 
 676 
 Porto Vivo  2007 ; 
strategic doc 
 2008 
 1.8% 
 12 
 676 
 Porto Vivo  2008 ; 
strategic doc 
 2009 
 2.7% 
 18 
 664 
 Porto Vivo  2009 ; 
strategic doc 

173
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
 Table 10.5  Attribute social capital building and indicators for the formulation and implementation 
phase 
 Attributes of 
resilience/criteria 
 Dimensions 
of resilience  Indicators 
 Sources 
 Capital building 
 Social 
 Formulation 
of PPPP 
 Population growth rate 
 SRU, INE 
 Implementation 
of PPPP 
 Population growth rate 
(urban block) 
 INE, 
inquiries 
 Dependency index 
 INE, 
inquiries 
 Levels of education 
 INE, 
inquiries 
 Income disparity 
 INE, 
inquiries 
 Percentage of inhabitants 
living on a social support 
programme 
 INE, 
inquiries 
 Occupation rate of progress 
(new inhabitants per year 
versus total number of 
expected inhabitants) 
 INE, 
inquiries 
 Sources : INE [National Statistic Institute]  ( 1991 , 2001) 
concentrated in the inner ring (Breda-Vázquez et al.  2004 ) ; however, it should be 
pointed out that even after the population losses, the population density in the ACRRU 
is still high when compared to the rest of the metropolitan area, with a population 
density in 2001 of approximately 10,000 inhabitants per km 2 in the historical centre. 
 The relationship between younger and older demographics of the population, 
translated into the total dependency index of 2001, is highly signi ﬁ cant in Oporto 
(CMP  2008 ) . The dependency index (68.7) is signi ﬁ cantly higher in the historical 
centre and the intervention area of SRU when compared to the national average 
(48.7) (Pinho et al .  2010 ). The area of intervention is characterised by a high per-
centage of older people and a low percentage of young and active people, creating a 
considerable vulnerable area in social terms. 
 The percentage of retired population in the central areas is also higher than the 
average for the whole municipality. The weight of this group of population is higher 
in the historical nucleus, also re ﬂ ecting an ageing structure of the population. 
According to the last census (2001), more than 24% of the population of the historic 
centre of Oporto    was over 65 (a number which exceeds the amount of people under 14); 
the average age of the residents was 43 (in 1991 the average was 38), the percentage 
of young people was about 20% and the active population represented 64% of the 
population of the historic centre of Oporto. 
 The education level of the residents in Oporto in relation to national and regional 
averages is high. However, the levels of education of the population living in the 
historical nucleus and in the inner ring are very different. In the historical nucleus 
the population has a low level of education (52.6% of the population has never studied 
or has only a primary education); in the inner ring, around a quarter of the popula-
tion has a degree, which is higher than the average for the municipality. 

174
V. Oliveira et al.
 These different patterns can be rati ﬁ ed through an analysis of the professional 
structure of the employed population. In the historical nucleus, the population is, 
clearly, less quali ﬁ ed than in the inner ring. 
 The indicator “income disparity” (the analysis of incomes, by gender) reveals a 
slight but positive evolution in 1999–2002 (diminishing from 15.1% to 12.3%). 
Nevertheless, it continues to present a rather negative scenario in relation to the rest 
of the country. The  ﬁ gures of 2003 and the inquiries show that the tendency is not 
evolving in a positive way. 
 The percentage of inhabitants living with social aid is signi ﬁ cantly high, with 9% 
of the total population living in the city receiving bene ﬁ ts (CMP  2008 ) . These 
inhabitants, in general, are living in less central areas. The unemployment rate is 
also higher in the historical area, indicating the social vulnerability of the centre. In 
comparison with the rest of the city, less than 37% of the population in the historic 
centre of Oporto depends on income from their work, while 66% of historic centre 
of Porto residents depend on social aid and not only retirement bene ﬁ ts and pen-
sions (28%) but also subsidies, social integration subsidies, and disability and 
unemployment bene ﬁ t (5% of the historic centre of Oporto) (Silva  2010 ) . 
 In face of such a social scenario, the  Porto Vivo SRU has proposed, as explained 
in the presentation of the policies, different types of buildings in order to attract dif-
ferent demographic groups. The low number of rehabilitated buildings and the little 
information garnered from the inquiries make it dif ﬁ cult to conclude to what extent 
this policy has accomplished its main objective. In the near future, it is hoped that 
the blocks designated in different documents undergo a process of rehabilitation so 
that this critical area of the city can witness a brighter social scenario in the future. 
Diverse groups of individuals in a society truly contribute to enhancing social resil-
ience in urban areas. 
 It can be concluded that, in relation to the social capital building in the formula-
tion phase of policies, plans and related measures, there has been a gradual decline 
of the resident population, while in the implementation phase, there has been an 
increase in the demand for dwellings in the historical centre, a better balance 
between young and old people, a maintenance of the weight of the active popula-
tion, a tendency for the higher educated population to live in the historical centre, a 
diminishing of the differences in gender incomes and low concentrations of 
bene ﬁ ciaries of social aid in the centre of Oporto . 
 Although there is insuf ﬁ cient data to estimate accurately the occupation rate, 
there is evidence of increasing interest in the area based on a rise in the demand for 
housing. The current international  ﬁ nancial crisis may, however, affect the goals of 
 Porto Vivo SRU or, at minimum, slow down the rehabilitation process. 
 10.6  Findings and Conclusions 
 From the analysis of the case study of Oporto  Baixa,  based on the application of the 
evaluation    methodology, it can be seen that the model of urban rehabilitation followed 
in the SRU programme has some important aspects that are worthy of mention. 

175
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
 The intervention model emphasises the need for the physical rehabilitation of the 
central area of the city to the detriment of the social dimension, although it combines 
physical rehabilitation goals with social and economic goals, trying to promote the 
sustainability of the recovering process. 
 The attraction of a variety of new residents seems to be not possible, because the 
re-dynamics of the real estate market targets only the settling of the medium-high/
high social classes, given the higher prices of dwellings. A rise in demand leads to 
a rising in prices, leading to the gentri ﬁ cation of the centre. 
 There is a tendency for the old-established social classes to move away from the 
historical centre. This dimension of the revalorisation of buildings also re ﬂ ects a 
real devaluation of the immaterial vectors of identity, culture and authenticity, even 
though the SRU programme intended to bring more opportunities for different 
social classes to mix by, for example, supplying housing for a variety of new resi-
dents, with different typologies, promoting a more welcoming atmosphere, reduc-
ing crime and the exclusion phenomenon. The interventions are still very scarce and 
have been strategically made along some of the structural axes in the historic centre 
of the city. 
 The disinvestment problems in the built heritage are created because the SRU 
model needs to be partially supported by private funds, making public entities mere 
agents in the regulation of the physical rehabilitation process, due to a lack of public 
 ﬁ nancing for the recovery of buildings; however,  Porto Vivo SRU/CM Porto, in con-
nection with the state, has the intention to encourage rehabilitation through  ﬁ scal 
and municipal bene ﬁ ts, as well as through governmental funds. 
 The  ﬁ nancial incentives may be considered as only having a weak contribution 
to the recovery of dwellings, in the case of private interventions by the owners them-
selves, because, in practice, the owners are asked to invest when, in most cases, they 
cannot afford to. Only the owners with higher incomes are able to invest. 
 The model is presented as a partnership between public and private entities, 
because it is accepted that the making of these partnerships is an important con-
tribution for its implementation. Public bodies lead the process by managing the 
administrative procedures and by undertaking interventions with the help of some 
special tools, in particular the expropriation mechanisms. This is one of the 
best ways to counterbalance the lack of public funds and to attract private 
investments. 
 Expropriations made during interventions put the owners under pressure but also 
provide a guarantee that the rehabilitation process will not be delayed. In this way, 
the Expropriation Authority can be seen as boosting the real estate market. In some 
cases, owners sell their buildings to new investors even before the physical rehabilita-
tion is programmed, which may create speculative situations, improving property 
values. 
 The urban rehabilitation of  Baixa is an attempt to improve the dynamics of the 
real estate market. The recovery of degraded areas through private investments, sup-
ported by bene ﬁ cial administrative procedures and  ﬁ nancial incentives, has resulted 
in a rise in occupation levels. This model of intervention can be understood as being 
mainly oriented towards stimulating competitiveness and sustainability . 

176
V. Oliveira et al.
 In the centre of Oporto   , the problems go beyond the physical dimension, also 
having a social aspect; however, social problems can only be tackled when all 
dimensions are considered. Programmes like  Porto Vivo SRU are making a valuable 
contribution to integrate the physical regeneration with other dimensions, but the 
results are still not visible. Only through a combination of the different dimensions 
can the regeneration of the area be sustained and urban resilience achieved. 
 The research undertaken in the  Baixa District of Oporto allowed some prelimi-
nary conclusions to be drawn. First, the resilience concept is useful in allowing an 
understanding of the ongoing urban transformation and for evaluating the urban poli-
cies and their economic, social and environmental impacts. In this case, only two 
dimensions have been focused upon – recovery    and social capital building   . Second, 
from a methodological perspective, the resilience concept offers a set of operational 
tools that enhance the analysis and understanding of the studied cases in relation to 
natural, built, social and human capital. Third, the attribute   s of resilience – in our 
case, recovery and social capital building – can be used as part of a new approach for 
the integration of a wider analysis that considers ecological, socio-economic and 
planning perspectives. Finally, urban policies need to be prepared to provide guid-
ance for resilience in dealing with changes and thus enhancing sustainability   . Thus, 
it can be concluded that in the context of a complex evaluation    exercise, the concept 
of resilience constitutes a highly pertinent point of focus and a useful “mindset”.  
 References 
 Breda-Vázquez, I., Conceição, P., Marques, T., Móia, P., & Sá, F. (2004).  Estudo estratégico para 
o enquadramento das intervenções de reabilitação urbana na Baixa do Porto [Strategic study 
for the framework of urban rehabilitation interventions in the Oporto downtown]. Porto: 
Laboratório de Planeamento do Território e Ambiente, Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade 
do Porto (FEUP). 
 CMP. (2008).  Rede Social do Porto: Relatório Pré-Diagnóstico . Porto: Câmara Municipal do 
Porto (CMP). [Social Network of Oporto : Pre-Diagnostic Report].   http://www.cm-porto.pt/
users/0/56/PdRSP_Relatorio_09c0809544420e60917983c1262080f.pdf  . Accessed 28 January 
2010 
 Dalziell, E., & McManus, S. (2004). Resilience, vulnerability and adaptive capacity: Implications 
for systems performance, international forum for engineering decision making, Switzerland. 
  http://www.ifed.ethz.ch/events/Forum04/Erica_paper.pdf  . Accessed 18 Nov 2009. 
 INE [National Statistic Institute]. (1991, 2001).  População residente. Porto [Resident population. 
Oporto]: Instituto Nacional de Estatística – Direcção Regional do Norte. 
 Pinho, P., Santos Cruz, S., Oliveira, V., Sousa, S., & Martins, A. (2010). Super-cities report. 
Oporto: Research centre for territory, transports and environment, faculty of engineering of the 
University of Oporto (FEUP). 
 Porto Vivo. (2005a).  Masterplan. Porto: Porto Vivo SRU [Masterplan. Oporto :  Porto Vivo SRU]. 
  http://www.portovivosru.pt/sub_menu_2_2.php  . Accessed 28 Jan 2010. 
 Porto Vivo. (2005b).  Relatório de gestão 2005 . [Management Report 2005]. Porto:  Porto Vivo  SRU.  
 Porto Vivo. (2006 ). Relatório de gestão 2006 . [Management Report 2006]. Porto:  Porto Vivo SRU. 
 Porto Vivo. (2007).  Relatório de gestão 2007 . [Management Report 2007]. Porto:  Porto Vivo SRU. 
 Porto Vivo. (2008).  Relatório de gestão 2008 [Management Report 2008]. Porto:  Porto Vivo SRU. 
  http://www.portovivosru.pt/sub_menu_1_8.php  . Accessed 28 Jan 2010. 

177
10 Evaluating Urban Policies from a Resilience Perspective…
 Porto Vivo. (2009).  Relatório de gestão 2009 [Management Report 2009]. Porto:  Porto Vivo SRU. 
  http://www.portovivosru.pt/sub_menu_1_8.php  . Accessed 28 Jan 2010. 
 Porto Vivo. (2010).  Relatório de gestão 2010 [Management Report 2009]. Porto Vivo: Sociedade 
de reabilitação urbana da Baixa Portuense S.A.   http://www.eib.org/attachments/general/events/
j4c_porto_vivo_delgado.pdf  . Accessed 13 Feb 2010. 
 Potapchuck, W., Crocker, J., Schechter, W., & Boogaard, D. (1997).  Building community: Exploring 
the role of social capital and local government . Washington, DC: Program for Community 
Problem Solving. 
 Resilience Alliance. (2007). Urban resilience research prospectus.   http://www.resalliance.or/1610.
php  . Accessed 07 Sept 2009. 
 RSRU. (2004).  Regulamento das sociedades de reabilitação urbana DL No. 104/2004, de 7 de 
Maio , Diário da República, Portugal. [Urban Regeneration Societies Code, Law-decree 
104/2004, of the 7 May]. 
  Silva, A. T. (2010).  The sustainability of urban heritage preservation: The case of Oporto , inter-
American, institutional capacity and  ﬁ nance sector . Development Bank.   http://www.iadb.org/
document.cfm?id=35345756  . Accessed 1 Sept 2010. 

179
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_11, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 11.1  Introduction 
 There are increasing concerns related to the neoliberalisation of social, economic 
and political processes, which are pushing the recently introduced spatial policies 
and new policy instruments in more market-oriented directions, to the detriment of 
the built environment. In many cities of the world, owing to the complex dynamics 
associated with the increasing global and local pressures, urban change takes different 
forms, with important implications on the resilience of cities. Istanbul is one of the 
best examples of this, where the different types of urban dynamics that can be expe-
rienced simultaneously are being illustrated. This makes Istanbul a good study area 
for de ﬁ ning how the policies and plans adopted to meet the increasing needs and 
demands can affect a city’s resilience. 
 This chapter aims to evaluate Istanbul ’s changing urban dynamics, with special 
emphasis on the policies and plans that have supported urban sprawl and the urban 
land market dynamics that have intensi ﬁ ed the compactness of the urban core, 
which will be evaluated from the perspective of resilience. The discussion of whether 
 resilience thinking allows a new understanding of the policies, plans and practices 
of Istanbul is based on two case study areas, offering guidance on how the economic, 
social and environmental changes in Istanbul may be addressed (See Fig.  11.1 ). 
 A.  Eraydin ,  Ph.D. (*)
 Department of City and Regional Planning, Faculty of Architecture ,  
Middle East Technical University ,  Universiteler Mah. Dumlupinar Bulv. No: 1 , 
 06800  Ankara ,  Turkey 
e-mail:  ayda@metu.edu.tr 
 A.  Türel •  D. A.  Kaya ,  Ph.D. 
 Department of City and Regional Planning ,  Middle East Technical University ,
 06800  Ankara ,  Turkey 
e-mail:  a.turel@metu.edu.tr ;  denizaltay@gmail.com 
 Chapter 11 
 The Evaluation of Different Processes 
of Spatial Development from a Resilience 
Perspective in Istanbul 
 Ayda  Eraydin,  Ali  Türel , and  Deniz  Altay  Kaya   

180
A. Eraydin et al.
The  ﬁ rst case study area, the Büyükdere-Maslak axis, has been the focus of one 
particular set of inner city intensi ﬁ cation policies, plans and projects, with the inten-
tion being to transform a former industrial site into a new urban core with global 
functions. The second case study area, that of Bahçeşehir, offers a good example of 
how mass housing projects developed for the upper middle-income groups have 
accelerated the sprawl of the metropolitan area towards the west and north-west. 
 11.2  The Changing Urban Form of Istanbul : Intensi ﬁ cation 
of Already Built-Up Areas Together with Escalating 
Urban Sprawl 
 Istanbul had an almost compact form prior to the 1980s, containing already built-up 
areas (according to existing land-use plans), surrounded by areas of informal housing. 
To satisfy the increasing demand for new housing and areas for other activities, the 
density of the existing planned urban settlements was increased. The 1980s were a 
turning point for the urban dynamics in the city, with very distinct impacts on the 
urban form  that included the sprawl of the metropolitan area and intensi ﬁ cation in 
the inner core areas. The changes to the urban dynamics were triggered by shifts in 
the development ideology and the advent of new major economic policies – from 
the interventionist/protectionist attitudes of the government following Keynesian 
policies , to an increasing reliance on market forces under the neoliberal agenda. 
 However, the most important change was the discovery by the government that 
urban development instruments and projects could be used as a tool for economic 
development, as well as for sociopolitical regulation, which de ﬁ ned a “new urban 
regime” in Turkey (Eraydin  2011 ) . As de ﬁ ned in Chaps.   5 and   7 , the new urban 
regime could be considered as the driver of a radical change in the way central and 
local governments perceived urban areas and the way they handled urban development, 
namely, through the increasing dominance of the project-based approach. Projects 
have played a signi ﬁ cant role in shaping the urban form in different ways. Firstly, 
 Fig. 11.1   Case study areas 
 

181
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
some projects have caused an intensi ﬁ cation of the reuse of land in the inner parts 
of the metropolitan area leading to an increase in density in the existing built-up 
areas, although this was not one of the predetermined targets of urban plans or 
policies. Secondly, urban sprawl was accelerated as a result of several projects, 
aimed at meeting the rising demand of the rapidly growing population, that were 
either totally market-led or were launched in collaboration with the state. 
 11.3  Case Studies 
 The  Büyükdere-Maslak axis development is illustrative of how market pressures 
have become important in shaping urban form , accelerated by the need for new 
spaces for new functions within the metropolitan area over the last 15 years (Özus 
 2009 ) . This area, located in the north-west part of the traditional urban core, was 
designated as a high-income residential area in the 1950s, resulting in the Levent 
Housing Development Project and the arrival of different types of manufacturing 
 ﬁ rms, especially those involved in the pharmaceutical and automotive sectors. The 
most radical change, however, took place after the construction of the  ﬁ rst Istanbul 
bridge in 1973, which increased accessibility from the Asian part of the city and 
attracted the interest of large enterprises that were in search of new of ﬁ ce spaces. 
While the plans prepared for Istanbul restricted development along this axis and 
de ﬁ ned a new CBD close to the existing one, under pressure from large capital 
groups, developments have since been made along the Büyükdere axis, including 
the headquarters of some of Turkey ’s largest companies (Tokatli and Erkip  1998 ) . 
Moreover, the availability of large industrial land parcels has turned this area into 
just the kind of place being sought by large-scale enterprises; and today, the axis is 
home to the headquarters of many prestigious banks; holding companies; research 
and development facilities; advertisement, real estate and insurance of ﬁ ces; shopping 
malls and hotels. Consequently, the surrounding areas have come under pressure 
to follow suit (Özus  2009 : 624). At present, the zone still hosts some residential 
and commercial activities that exist in the shadows of the surrounding skyscrapers 
(Zone 1). Besides this new modern business core, the immediate surrounding 
areas, which include three zones with different characteristics, are under pressure to 
restructure: the high-income residential area (Zone 3), an industrial site for SMEs, 
and the squatter housing neighbourhoods (Zone 2) (Fig .  11.2 ). 
 11.3.1  Zones with Different Characteristics and Transformation 
Potential in the Büyükdere-Maslak Axis 
 Bahçeşehir , the second case study area, contains one of Istanbul ’s largest mass 
housing projects. Initiated and  ﬁ nanced by a public bank, the Emlak Bank, in coop-
eration with private construction  ﬁ rms, it represents a good example of how projects 

182
A. Eraydin et al.
aimed at providing housing for the increasing population has resulted in increasing 
the sprawl of this huge metropolitan area and accelerating the invasion of areas of 
ecological importance. Bahçeşehir is located on the European side of the metropolitan 
area to the north-west of Küçük Çekmece Lake, 25 km from the metropolitan core. 
The Bahçeşehir project site, which was formerly farmland, covers an area of around 
470 ha (Güvenç and Işık  1999 ) . By 2003, 8,000 housing units had been built, which 
were home to approximately 24,000 residents; however, the plan was to build 15,500 
housing units for approximately 50,000 residents. Bahçeşehir has been the area of 
choice mainly for middle- and high-income groups, and in fact was promoted as 
offering a “privileged” and distinct quality of life, distant from all of the negativities 
of the city, and as a preferable place to live (Kurtuluş  2005 : 100–102). The demand 
for housing in Bahçeşehir was low in the beginning (1994–1995), however, after 
winning the “Best Practice” award at the Habitat-II Human Settlements Conference 
in Istanbul in 1996, it became an exemplary model for new developments in Istanbul. 
The Bahçeşehir project, and similar developments, became synonymous with a new 
lifestyle and triggered more housing projects and production and business zones in 
the outer parts of the city. At the same time, the surrounding areas of Bahçeşehir 
were developed with new projects launched by the State Housing Development 
Authority and other mass housing projects initiated by private enterprises. The area 
also features squatter housing districts, residential areas developed by individual 
owners or developers, a very large industrial site, some rural settlements and a 
considerable quantity of unplanned land, some of which is still used for agriculture 
(Fig.  11.3 ). 
 Fig. 11.2   Zones with different characteristics and transformation potential in the Büyükdere-
Maslak axis 
 

183
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
 Fig. 11.3   Bahçeşehir Housing Estate and its surroundings 
 

184
A. Eraydin et al.
 11.4  Methodology 
 How did these two major projects and similar urban development programmes affect 
the resilience of this huge metropolitan area? The methodology followed in attempting 
to answer this question, as described in Chap.   8 , comprises six stages. In the  ﬁ rst stage 
of the research, the major disturbances exogenous to the existing urban system were 
de ﬁ ned, including the changes in the global economy and the impact of new labour and 
property regimes under the in ﬂ uence of globalisation . The second stage identi ﬁ es the 
urban subsystems in which the impact has been signi ﬁ cant in Istanbul    with respect to 
three dimensions of resilience, namely economic, social and spatial/ecological. In the 
third stage, the main territorial issues under threat are identi ﬁ ed. These issues stand out 
from the normal trend of small adjustments to the urban system and are referred to as 
“changes” or “reactions” to the recently emerging dynamics. A de ﬁ nition of the issues 
to be evaluated under the framework of resilience is provided in the fourth stage of the 
study, including a detailed analysis of the most signi ﬁ cant changes/reactions that have 
taken place in the research area, and thus allowing a critical assessment of the existing 
plans, policies and projects. In the  ﬁ fth stage, before the  ﬁ nal evaluation , the indicators 
of resilience on selected issues are de ﬁ ned in order to test how far resilience attributes 
have been taken into account in the different plans, policies and projects. Following 
the above  ﬁ ve steps of analysis, in Stage 6 the  ﬁ ndings drawn from the indicators are 
evaluated with respect to the different dimensions of resilience. 
 The data required to carry out the evaluation has been collected from different 
institutions and from questionnaire surveys. Firstly, the data necessary for the 
identi ﬁ cation of indicators was obtained from different public departments, especially 
the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality and district municipalities. Second, the maps 
and plans obtained from different public organisations are analysed with the help of 
GIS software to create a database of certain indicators. Third, a questionnaire survey 
was carried out of 250 households in the Büyükdere-Maslak case study area and 
100 households in the Bahçeşehir case study area, as well as 50 private  ﬁ rms/enter-
prises and 50 tradesman and small manufacturing entrepreneurs located along the 
Büyükdere-Maslak axis. 
 11.5  Findings 
 The  ﬁ ndings on the two case study areas are organised in such a way that the 
reaction of the urban system to major disturbances/impacts can be easily under-
stood, while the outcomes are measured with the help of indicators. 
 11.5.1  Büyükdere-Maslak Axis 
 As discussed earlier, the Büyükdere-Maslak area is still undergoing a process of 
transformation. The most signi ﬁ cant changes are taking place along Büyükdere 
Avenue, which now contains many high-rise buildings (90 buildings of more than 

185
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
eight stories) that house the headquarters of many prominent domestic  ﬁ rms and 
banks alongside of ﬁ ce buildings constructed by either foreign or domestic real 
estate development companies. 
 From the case study, it can be seen that almost 10.4% of the area (152.3 ha) has 
already been transformed into of ﬁ ce space on the former sites of pharmaceutical 
factories and residential areas. The transformation of the study area to date has been 
on derelict land and land that previously occupied by medium-sized industrial 
companies. The availability of large plots of land on the major axis connecting the 
existing business centre with the second Bosphorous Bridge has attracted interest 
from real estate developers and large-scale enterprises with global functions, resulting 
in rising land prices, especially for the larger plots of land. Although there are still 
many low-density and low-quality areas with the potential for transformation adjacent 
to the recently developed high-rise of ﬁ ce towers, the dominance of a small ownership 
pattern makes transformation dif ﬁ cult due to problems experienced in merging the 
individual plots. For this reason, some enterprises have chosen to locate in the high-
income residential area to the east of the major axis. However, this area was registered 
as an urban historical site in 2008, and since then, the municipality has been trying to 
renovate the existing buildings and return them to their original forms and functions, 
as planned in 1945. 1     Today it can be described as a chaotic-built environment, 
featuring a high-quality urban core surrounded by squatter housing units, middle- to 
high-income residential areas and small manufacturing units (Table  11.1 ).  
 The change in the built environment and consequently the economic structure 
has naturally triggered changes in the social structure of the study area. The data 
drawn from the indicators enables a discussion of the nature of changes and the 
implications of the urban dynamics of the recent past. The sets of changes de ﬁ ned 
in the analytical studies, veri ﬁ ed by the large set of indicators given in Table  11.2 , 
are grouped under three headings: 
 1  Planned in 1945 by architects Kemal Ahmet Aru and Rebi Gordon. Construction was completed 
in 1947. 
 Table 11.1  The land-use pattern and transformation areas in the Büyükdere-Maslak axis case 
study area 
 Land use 
 Size of area (ha) 
 % of total 
 Potential redevelopment areas 
 16 
 1.09 
 Intensi ﬁ ed residential areas 
 54.4 
 3.71 
 New developments 
 104 
 7.09 
 Former squatter areas (limited transformation) 
 336.6 
 22.93 
 Existing residential (limited transformation) 
 391.6 
 26.68 
 Transformed into central business activities 
 152.3 
 10.38 
 Industrial areas 
 93.8 
 6.39 
 Military zones 
 262 
 17.85 
 Sports facilities 
 43 
 2.93 
 Public services 
 14 
 0.95 
 Total 
 1467.7 
 100.00 

186
A. Eraydin et al.
 Table 11.2  The impact of external dynamics on urban systems and the indicators used to verify 
them 
 Major impacts 
 Impacts on urban systems 
 Indicators of resilience 
 Functional transforma-
tion of the study 
area and increasing 
global activities 
 Increasing demand for of ﬁ ce 
space in the urban core 
 Change in urban landscape 
 Increasing number of new buildings 
 Level of increase in  ﬂ oor area ratios 
 Transformation of industrial 
sites and residential 
buildings to CBD functions 
 Ratio of land transformed for 
commercial real estate develop-
ments to total area 
 Decrease in the residential 
population of the area 
 Decline in the open space per capita 
 Changes in the composition of 
activities creating pressure 
on some of the existing 
activities such as small 
manufacturing to leave 
the study area 
 Increasing number of foreign  ﬁ rms 
in producer services 
 Change in the share of working 
population and its distribution by 
economic sectors 
 Increasing differences in the value 
added by different production 
sectors 
 Change in the sectoral distribution 
of activities in the study area 
 Displacement of activities 
 Transformation of 
social structure, 
triggered by local 
market conditions 
 Changes in physical and 
economic structure of the 
area, leading to social change 
and different opportunities 
for diverse social groups 
 Share of areas with changing 
economic activities 
 Share of areas to be transformed in 
the future 
 Differences in levels of education of 
working population 
 Residential segregation of groups 
with different levels of education 
and occupation 
 Negative change in the socioeco-
nomic status of residents 
 Weakening social connectedness, 
trust and collaboration 
 Level of population turnover 
 Outgoing and incoming social 
groups to the area 
 Changing mobility 
patterns and 
increasing volume 
of traf ﬁ c creating 
negative environ-
mental outcomes 
 Increasing traf ﬁ c load and 
congestion 
 Decrease in the ef ﬁ ciency in 
transportation systems 
 Increase in volume of traf ﬁ c 
 Ratio of private car use in total trips 
 Speed of traf ﬁ c  ﬂ ow 
 Average commuting distance and 
journey time 
 Modal distribution of trips by 
purpose 
 Increasing energy use and air 
pollution 
 Increasing emissions from traf ﬁ c 
 Increase in carbon emissions in the 
last decade 

187
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
 11.5.1.1  Functional Transformation of the Case Study Area 
and Increasing Global Activities 
 The Büyükdere-Maslak axis and the areas in close proximity have proven to be very 
attractive for foreign capital  ﬁ rms. According to the  ﬁ gures of the General 
Undersecretary of the Treasury, in 2005 there were 518 foreign capital  ﬁ rms located 
in the case study area, constituting 10% of total  ﬁ rms in Istanbul and almost 5% of 
the foreign capital  ﬁ rms in Turkey (11,707 in 2005). Among these  ﬁ rms, 24.7% are 
engaged in commercial activities, 20.4% in foreign trade, 14.8% in different types 
of producer services and 9.7% in other sectors with lower shares. More than half of 
the foreign capital  ﬁ rms are joint ventures with European  ﬁ rms, or are branches of 
European companies, whereas the share of Middle Eastern countries is 20% and the 
United States is about 10%. 
 The change in land-use pattern has had diverse impacts on the existing enter-
prises located in this area. According to the  ﬁ ndings of the questionnaire survey, the 
existing large-scale enterprises have been positively affected in terms of attracting 
new functions (41.2% positively affected, 31.2% stayed the same and 27.6% nega-
tively affected). For small enterprises, however, the new conditions have been less 
favourable, with only 22% witnessing an increase in income, while income levels of 
the remaining 78% either stayed the same or decreased from the 1990 levels. 
 The transformation of the area has a positive impact on the competitiveness of 
Istanbul and supported Istanbul to be able to adapt to the new conditions imposed 
by globalisation, which enhanced the resilience of the large metropolitan region. 
However, increasing global functions have put pressure on companies to move their 
existing activities, and therefore labour, while providing favourable working condi-
tions for skilled people working in new global activities, which has led to increased 
socio-spatial segmentation. On the other hand, the intensi ﬁ cation of core functions 
within a limited area has had a number of impacts on the urban ecosystem . The 
increases in building density and the transformation of industrial sites and residential 
areas to CBD functions on the Büyükdere-Maslak axis have resulted in an escalation 
of traf ﬁ c loads, congestion and energy use, thus contributing to a rise in air pollution 
levels and loss of the resilience of the urban system. 
 11.5.1.2  The Impact of the Core Functions on the Labour Market 
and Consequent Transformations to the Social Structure 
 While the case study area has undergone a transformation to accommodate business 
functions, the characteristics of the neighbourhoods have also changed. According 
to the  ﬁ ndings of the questionnaire survey, almost two-thirds of the residents moved 
to the area from somewhere else, while the rest either were born within this district 
or have been living there for more than 30 years. Most of those that moved to the 
area after 1990 came from other provinces of Turkey rather than from other districts 
of Istanbul . In Zone 1, where the transformation is actually taking place, 23.8% of 
those surveyed have been living in the same housing unit for more than 20 years, 

188
A. Eraydin et al.
while this  ﬁ gure is slightly lower in the surrounding areas that have undergone only 
limited transformation. 
 Many of the households believe that the area still offers advantages as a residential 
area, since half of the tenants had sought new rental properties within the same district; 
although those living in the primary transformation zone (Zone 1) complain about 
decreasing social relations and trust. Besides this, more than half of the households 
living in rental housing are unhappy with the increasing rents that came with the 
transformation of the district into a business core. 
 In the case study area, still it is possible to de ﬁ ne the existence of social capital 
(with the help of connectedness, trust and collaboration of the existing residents), 
although this varies by zones. Especially in the squatter housing areas, more than 
two-thirds of households had relatives living in the same neighbourhood, as well as 
friends and compatriots. While these residents emphasised the importance of social 
connectedness, in the other zones, the levels of social connectedness and social 
networking were relatively lower. 
 11.5.1.3  The Substantial Impacts on Travel Patterns and Traf ﬁ c 
Flows in the Metropolitan System due to the Transformation 
of the Case Study Area 
 The transformation process on the Büyükdere-Maslak axis has had obvious impacts 
on employment and population structures:  ﬁ rstly, by creating employment opportu-
nities and increasing the number of people commuting to the area and secondly, by 
attracting a new working population that wants to be close to the new core functions. 
 The results of the questionnaire survey showed that a small share of the work-
force lives in the surrounding neighbourhoods, while the rest commute in from 
other areas. While 60.4% of the workforce comes from neighbourhoods on the same 
(European) side of the city, 36.6% commute from the Anatolian side of the city, 
meaning that they have to cross one of the two Bosphorous bridges. The second 
bridge over the Bosphorous (Fatih Bridge) offers a relatively easy connection 
between the Büyükdere-Maslak axis and the other side of the metropolitan area, 
which is one of the reasons why the area is considered attractive for urban core 
functions. However, this has increased the amount of traf ﬁ c, and both bridges are 
currently overloaded, leading to decreased traf ﬁ c speeds and congestion on the 
connecting roads to the bridges. 
 The questionnaire  ﬁ ndings indicate that of those commuting to work from the 
case study area, 75.7% are travelling only a short distance, 8.8% are travelling to 
places relatively further away from the case study area, 9% are travelling a consider-
able distance from their place of residence and 7.5% are commuting to areas outside 
Istanbul . The  ﬁ ndings also show that 85% of students attend schools outside the 
case study area but travel only short distances to reach their schools, whereas 5% of 
the students have to cross to the Anatolian side of the city. The modal share of 
private cars in commuting journeys is 28.04%, which is close to the estimated ratio 
for Istanbul. 

189
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
 Obviously, the origin of the trips made by customers to this new urban core is 
even more important. The questionnaire survey  ﬁ ndings show that about one-third 
(30.5%) of people come from the immediate surroundings, while 33.2% have busi-
nesses in the existing urban core and 6.6% commute from the peripheral areas of the 
metropolitan area. Additionally, the  ﬁ gures indicate that 20.1% of the main customers 
of the new producer services located on this axis are from different cities in Turkey , 
and 9.6% are from abroad. 
 Both the incoming and the outgoing traf ﬁ c in the area create considerable 
amounts of traf ﬁ c load and congestion. Although the recently built metro system 
has connected this area with Istanbul ’s traditional CBD, as well as with some of the 
residential quarters on the European side of the city, it has not been enough to solve 
the traf ﬁ c problems. Of the outgoing trips, journeys by metro account for only 5.8% 
of the total trips, with an even lower for the incoming trips. The results of the inter-
view survey show that creating an urban core in this area has generated more long-
distance intra-urban trips than short-distance ones. 
 The incoming and outgoing traf ﬁ c, combined with the transit traf ﬁ c, generates a 
signi ﬁ cant traf ﬁ c congestion problem, especially during rush hours. According to 
the  ﬁ gures provided by the Traf ﬁ c Department of the Greater Istanbul Municipality, 
the average weekday speed of traf ﬁ c on the Büyükdere Avenue falls down to 5.6 kph 
during the morning peak hours and to 11.2 kph in the evenings. The Transport 
Department of the Istanbul Greater Municipality claims that at the Zincirlikuyu 
Junction, which marks the start point of the traf ﬁ c congestion along the Büyükdere 
Avenue, traf ﬁ c speed is measured as 34 kph in the morning off-peak hours and 
36 kph in the afternoon off-peak hours. 2 Traf ﬁ c congestion is one of Istanbul’s main 
problems, negatively affecting the quality of life in the city, as the questionnaire 
survey on the foreign enterprises in Istanbul has depicted (Eraydin et al.  2008 ) . 
 The increasing volume of traf ﬁ c and the large number of long-distance trips are 
major sources of pollution in Istanbul . The stations measuring air quality close to 
the project area provide evidence of the increasing levels of pollution, particularly 
during rush hours, negatively affecting the sustainability of the Istanbul metropolitan 
area. The  ﬁ ndings of the study of Istanbul (Eraydin  2010 ) show that increasing 
pollution due to traf ﬁ c exceeds the carbon uptake levels of forests, green areas and 
the sea. Moreover, the sprawl of the city, which is another facet of metropolitan 
growth, also has a marked effect on natural resources, especially forestry, which is 
vital for controlling air pollution levels. 
 11.5.2  Bahçeşehir Case Study Area 
 While the main actors in the housing market were previously developers and coop-
eratives, after the 1980s, the government became a key actor in housing provision. 
Neoliberal principles adopted in the  ﬁ eld of urban development after the 1980s 
 2  The  ﬁ gures refer to weekdays in September 2010. 

190
A. Eraydin et al.
de ﬁ ned the housing sector and construction as being at the core of the policies, plans 
and projects (Türel and Koç  2008 ) , but unfortunately little attention was paid to 
urban form and the distribution of urban living and working areas. Criticisms have 
been centred around the increasing travel distances and journey times, as well as on 
their negative environmental effects, which have resulted in the loss of agricultural 
land, forestry and the ecosystem . 
 The Bahçeşehir Housing Development Project, which is located on a former 
agricultural area, stimulated development on the western periphery of the city. It 
triggered a population explosion in the small villages that existed in this part of the 
metropolitan area and motivated the transformation of a substantial amount of 
agricultural land for different urban functions. The existing land-use pattern, after 
experiencing substantial transformation, is given in Table  11.3 . 
 The transformations taking place have important implications on the urban 
systems that can be summarised under three headings, namely, impacts on environ-
ment resources, increasing commuting distances and traf ﬁ c  ﬂ ows and structural 
changes in the remote periphery. The indicators used to de ﬁ ne the impacts of the 
Bahçeşehir project on urban resilience are listed in Table  11.4 . 
 11.5.2.1  Urban Sprawl and Its Impacts on Environment Resources 
 Various negative effects of urban sprawl were initiated with the Bahçeşehir housing 
project in the north-west part of the metropolitan area. Firstly, not only was there a 
loss of agricultural land, but the environment was also compromised as a result of 
the excessive demand for environmental resources and ecological services. The loss 
 Table 11.3  The land-use patterns in Bahçeşehir and its surroundings 
 Different land-use development types 
 Size of the area 
(hectares) 
 % of the total 
 Mass housing areas (already completed) 
 352 
 2.9 
 Mass housing area (under construction) 
 951 
 7.9 
 Urban land stock transferred to HDA 
 287 
 2.4 
 Squatter housing area (not transformed) 
 273 
 2.3 
 Residential area 
 690 
 5.7 
 Industrial zone 
 865 
 7.1 
 Mass housing areas developed by cooperatives 
 461 
 3.8 
 Military zone (within the case study area) 
 1,274 
 10.5 
 Olympic village 
 149 
 1.2 
 Urban green areas 
 750 
 6.2 
 Total built-up or planned areas 
 6,052 
 50.0 
 Total area 
 11,500 
 100.0 
 Agricultural or unused areas 
 5,448 
 Areas transformed from forests 
 1,974 

191
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
 Table 11.4  The indicators used to verify the impact of different dynamics on urban systems 
 Major changes 
 Impacts on the urban systems 
 Indicators of resilience 
 Urban sprawl and loss 
of environmental resources 
 New residential projects 
on agricultural land 
 Increase in water demand for the projected population 
 Urban sprawl 
 Loss of agricultural land over the last 30 years 
 Green areas converted to built-up areas 
 Population growth in the periphery 
 Loss of carbon uptake capacity of green areas 
 Loss of endemic  ﬂ ora and fauna 
 Increasing commuting distance 
and volume of traf ﬁ c leading 
to rising pollution levels 
 Increasing housing 
on earthquake-risk areas 
 Share of building resistant to earthquake in total 
 Increased commuting distance 
and travel time 
 Increase in average commuting distance and journey time 
 Change in modal distribution of trips in favour 
of car ownership 
 Increasing trips using private modes of transportation 
 Long-distance trips to workplaces of residents 
 Increase in the share of transport costs in household 
budgets 
 Increasing air pollution 
 Levels of carbon emissions due to volume of traf ﬁ c 
 Transformation of the social, 
economic and spatial pattern 
of the periphery 
 Increasing diversity among 
social groups 
 Residential segregation among groups with different 
education levels and occupations 
 The socio-spatial segmentation 
 Increasing differences in the levels of education 
of population 
 High-quality housing supplied 
for upper socioeconomic group 
pressures on lower income 
groups to leave the area 
 Number of dwelling units by the quality levels 
 Change in the socioeconomic status of residents 
 Change in social connectedness, trust and collaboration 
 Level of population turnover 
 The difference between outgoing and incoming groups 
to the area 

192
A. Eraydin et al.
of agricultural land over the last 30 years obviously represents a serious economic 
loss; however, the transformation of the nonagricultural land is also important due 
to the loss of  ﬂ ora and fauna. For the Istanbul region, being one of the richest parts 
of Turkey in terms of endemic  ﬂ ora and fauna, this issue is important, but what is 
also important is the amount of green areas lost to development without planning 
permission in the vicinity of the case study area, which grew considerably with the 
arrival of the housing projects. 
 Secondly, the sprawl of the urban population in this part of the city constituted a 
major threat to the already-scarce water resources of Istanbul . Some reservoirs can 
no longer be used to supply drinking water due to residential development in the 
watershed areas and the subsequent discharge of insuf ﬁ ciently treated waste water 
into the existing tributaries. In the case of Bahçeşehir, the lake downstream from the 
area (Küçük Çekmece) exceeded the pollution levels of potable water, and so a new 
reservoir upstream from the area was required, which has been already undertaken 
by the Istanbul Greater City Municipality. 
 Thirdly, not only the Bahçeşehir housing development project but also other new 
urban growth in this part of the metropolitan area brought about a depletion of 
forests, which are vital for environmental sustainability in Istanbul . The forestry 
area converted for residential use and other urban functions from 1990 to 2000 
reached 26,740 ha, which is equal to 10.2% of the 2,000 total (Aksakal et al.  2009 ) . 
Obviously, the loss of green areas will negatively affect the carbon budget of the 
city, since subsistence of forests on the northern part of the metropolitan are very 
important for the air quality of Istanbul. 
 Fourthly, the sprawl of the city to the north-west of Istanbul , where Bahçeşehir 
acted as a pull factor, has accelerated the construction of buildings in earthquake-risk 
zones. The legislation to ensure the construction of earthquake-resistant buildings 
is rather new, and so there are doubts whether the new developments, even those 
constructed by the public sector, conform to the required standards. 
 11.5.2.2  Increasing Commuting Distances and Traf ﬁ c Flows 
 One of the negative effects of these projects and the associated urban sprawl has 
been an increase in traf ﬁ c  ﬂ ows. Commuting to and from this area is either by 
private car or by other road-based public transport, since the development and its 
surroundings are not connected to the city by rail or subway, which is a major draw-
back of the area. The  ﬁ ndings of the household questionnaire survey showed that 
only 22.9% of the household heads worked within the same district, with the remaining 
percentage having to commute to work. Of these, 53.7% travel by car, 28.3% use 
shuttle services provided by the  ﬁ rms or public organisations for which they work 
and only 14.4% use public transport. The data on the location of workplaces of 
households living in Bahçeşehir showed that almost half of the people have journeys 
lasting over half an hour, with around 15% having to travel for more than 1 h to their 
place of work. 

193
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
 11.5.2.3  The Structural Change in the Periphery: Transformation 
of Remote Residential Areas in the Periphery 
into New Urban Nodes 
 According to the 2007  ﬁ gures provided by the Turkish Statistical Institute, the pop-
ulation living in Bahçeşehir is 15,027; however, the total population living in the 
surrounding areas, where the construction of housing estates was accelerated by 
partial plans, was 209,686 in the same year. Most of the people (83.2%) have been 
living in this area for less than 10 years, having moved from different districts of 
Istanbul , in particular from the European side, as well as from other cities (17%). 
Those that moved from the Anatolian side of Istanbul constitute only 5%, while the 
share of households that moved from the immediate surroundings constitute 20.9% 
of the total. The rest moved from different neighbourhoods close to the urban core. 
As expected, 31.7% of the respondents to the questionnaire indicated proximity to 
work as an important factor in their choice of location. This indicates that not only 
has there been a sprawl of the residential area but also that increasing numbers of 
workplaces and industrial establishments have been moving to the outer periphery 
of the metropolitan area. 
 The  ﬁ ndings of the survey indicate that more than 90% of households are happy 
living in the area and have no desire to move. Those that consider traf ﬁ c congestion 
and their distance from the urban core as problems constitute only 3% of the total. 
It is apparent that those people that did not consider their distance from the city to 
be a problem had different activity patterns. According to the survey  ﬁ ndings, the 
lifestyles of people living in the area are restricted to a limited territory that does not 
extend far from their place of residence. Almost 90% of the population claimed they 
did not attend social events, while only 6% attend events only in close proximity. 
Only 4% of the respondents claimed to have attended events in the urban core during 
the last month, which is similar to the  ﬁ gure for last year. 
 The respondents claim to have close friends (87.3%), compatriots (53.7%) and 
relatives (42.6%) living in the same housing estate, which encourages dense social 
relations and supports closed interaction patterns among the households. These 
 ﬁ ndings mean that for most of the households the place in which they live provides 
opportunities for social interaction, although some feel that the interaction pattern is 
quite restricted. 
 11.6  The Evaluation of the Case Studies as the Outcomes 
of Policies and Plans of the Recent Past 
 In recent years, two major policies have brought considerable changes to the Istanbul 
metropolitan region. First, the policies and projects de ﬁ ned by the Istanbul 
Metropolitan Municipality, which, with strong support from the central government 
under the banner of “ supporting Istanbul to become a leading global city ”, aimed to 
create new spaces of attraction for foreign enterprises and major domestic companies. 

194
A. Eraydin et al.
Beginning in the 1980s, the most prominent domestic  ﬁ rms, while searching for 
land on which to build commercial real estate, were unable to  ﬁ nd available land in 
the traditional urban core. This, in part, led to the start of the development of the 
Büyükdere-Maslak axis. Later, the area became attractive to foreign enterprises, 
creating demand for transformation and intensi ﬁ cation in the adjacent zones. The 
second policy that accelerated urban growth was launched in the early 1980s and 
brought about a rapid increase in available housing as a result of mass housing 
projects in different parts of the metropolitan area. Although the number of dwelling 
units built by small-capital producers was remarkable, the government was keen to 
encourage the development of housing estates with new amenities that would not 
be available in the inner city neighbourhoods. The case of Bahçeşehir is a good 
indicator of how changes in land and housing development policies paved the way 
for urban sprawl. 
 It is possible to trace these policies on the three plans of Istanbul since 1980. 
 The  ﬁ rst plan, prepared by the Istanbul Metropolitan Planning Bureau, was 
drawn up in 1966 by the Ministry of Reconstruction and Resettlement and was 
approved by the same Ministry in 1980. The proposed urban form in the plan was a 
mixture of compact and linear forms, since it designated the revitalisation of the 
CBD and pushed for the expansion of the urban core functions towards the immediate 
surroundings. The other objective in the plan was the creation of subcentres to minimise 
average commuting distances. However, the construction of the second Bosphorus 
Bridge (1988) and the Trans-European Motorway (TEM) encouraged urban sprawl 
by making high-speed commuting by motor vehicle possible, thus changing the 
geography of the city. 
 In 1984, the Greater Istanbul Municipality formed a new City Planning Directorate 
to replace the Istanbul Metropolitan Planning Bureau. The new directorate prepared 
a new master plan at 1/50 000 scale, which was approved by the Council of Greater 
Istanbul Municipality in 1995. This plan aimed to retain the importance of the CBD 
and proposed its expansion towards adjacent areas. The relocation of industry from 
central locations, particularly of those causing pollution, to the fringe and the trans-
formation of former industrial sites for of ﬁ ce and other commercial functions were 
expected to create the required space for the enlargement of the CBD. This plan also 
designated new housing areas at the fringe, such as in Bahçeşehir, to serve the 
increasing population and to relieve pressure on the land and housing prices in the 
inner city. Regularisation schemes for most of the former unauthorised housing 
areas and improvement plans for such settlements were prepared and approved in 
accordance to the Building Amnesty Law (rati ﬁ ed in 1984). In summary, compactness 
was preferred to sprawl in the location of service sector activities, and of industry to 
some extent, while tolerating the expansion of residential areas towards the fringe, 
thus clearing the way for sprawl. 
 The third plan, at 1/100,000 scale, was prepared by the Istanbul Metropolitan 
Planning Of ﬁ ce (IMP) of the Istanbul Greater City Municipality, following the 
enlargement of the municipal boundaries to the boundaries of the province in 2004. 
During the preparation of this plan, it was calculated that Istanbul could accommodate 
a maximum of 16 million inhabitants based on its ecological thresholds – constituted 

195
11 The Evaluation of Different Processes of Spatial Development…
by the existing preservation zones, water catchment areas and forestry land; however, 
the indications are that the population will reach 22 billion by 2020. The plan 
proposed a change in the composition of certain activities in the metropolitan areas, 
such as a reduction in the share of industry in total employment to 20% and a rise in 
the service sector’s share to 80% by 2020. The plan proposed to retain the CBD in 
its existing location but to develop two subcentres and one “attraction centre” on the 
European side, along with three subcentres and one “attraction centre” on the 
Anatolian side. The aim was to enhance the decentralisation of some of the service 
activities to subcentres due to physical limitations preventing the expansion of the 
CBD. The development of new residential areas, on the other hand, was proposed at 
the fringe in the form of large estates with many shared services and amenities. 
From this it can be seen that the decentralisation (and sprawl) of housing was ahead 
of the decentralisation of service activities at this stage. 
 In addition to these strategic master plans, several local plans have been pre-
pared, de ﬁ ning building rights that will lead to different physical outcomes. For 
example, although the 1980 Master Development Plan was against the development 
of the city towards the north, local plans such as 1988 Büyükdere Avenue 
Implementation Plan increased the  ﬂ oor area ratio (built-up area/total size of the 
parcel) to 4.5 for parcels located on Büyükdere Avenue. The changes in building 
rights, contrary to the decision of the master plan, had been a driving force in the 
development of an international business centre along the Büyükdere-Maslak axis. 
Similarly, in the Bahçeşehir case, although the plan for this area was to provide a 
certain quality of life, due to the partial planning practices and the increasing num-
ber of housing estates built by housing cooperatives and private developers, the area 
has taken on a rather chaotic structure. 
 This brief evaluation of policies and plans shows that, although environmental 
concerns were expressed at different levels, the concerns for environmental sustain-
ability became a residual issue under the pressures of economic motivations and the 
rapidly increasing demand for housing, workplaces and other facilities. In Istanbul , 
being the major centre of attraction in population movements both from different 
regions of Turkey and abroad, planners were forced to open up new areas for differ-
ent uses to meet demand, although ecological limits were evident. Moreover, it can 
be said that the existing plans failed to control and guide urban development. The 
decisions to protect natural resources, which are vital for this huge urban settlement, 
were not effective enough to control the growth of new housing and other urban 
functions in protected areas, particularly those in the water basins and forests to the 
north of the metropolitan area. 
 11.7  The Contribution of the Resilience Concept 
to Understanding Urban Processes 
 In the last stage of this project, the urban processes represented by the case studies 
with reference to the economic, social and environmental dimensions were explored 
with the help of a set of indicators. The indicators denoted to what extent the built 

196
A. Eraydin et al.
environment had transformed to meet the new conditions de ﬁ ned by the global 
process and the transformability of the economic structure under global market 
pressures. The selected indicators show that the capacity of the urban system to 
respond and adapt to changing conditions has been rather successful. New condi-
tions trigger changes in the built environment, as well as in social and economic 
structures. Transformation projects, new urban built-up areas and changes in the 
composition of activities are positive indicators of adaptability , although the cost of 
adaptation has been on the back of the labour market s in the form of increasing 
income differential, leading to increasing residential segregation. 
 In answer to the question of whether the city is prepared for change or not varies 
among the different social groups, as can be seen from the analysis of the Büyükdere-
Maslak axis, while same can be said also for the built environment. The indicators 
show that while some areas are able to adapt to global pressures, the adaptive capacity 
of certain areas is, in contrast, rather limited. The reason for this is the limited 
 ﬂ exibility of certain built-up areas and the dif ﬁ culty faced in meeting the increasing 
demand generated by the transformation of activities within the area. Moreover, 
adaptation creates problems in terms of connectivity. Flows within the metropolitan 
area have become dif ﬁ cult, indicating a decreasing resilience of the urban system; 
however, the most important issue is the limited recovery experienced in terms of 
the degradation of environmental quality. 
 References 
 Aksakal, N., Altay, E., Genç, S., & Sinangil, Z. G. (2009).  The concept of resilience: The case of 
Istanbul  city region (Working Paper). Ankara: METU. 
 Eraydin, A. (2010, July 7–10).  Resilient thinking in urban planning and practice . Paper presented 
at 24th AESOP Annual Conference, Finland. 
 Eraydin, A. (2011). Changing Istanbul city region dynamics: Re-regulations to challenge the 
consequences of uneven development and inequality.  European Planning Studies, 19 (5), 
813–837. 
 Eraydin, A., Gedikli, B., Babalık-Sutcliffe, E., & Türel, A. (2008). Yabancı sermaye ve İstanbul: 
Istanbul’daki yabancı sermayeli  ﬁ rmalar ve bu  ﬁ rmaların kentle ilgili değerlendirmeleri. In 
T. Kayasü, O. Işık, N. Uzun, & E. Kamacı (Eds.),  Gecekondu, Dönüşüm ve Kent (pp. 353–378). 
Ankara: MMF. 
 Güvenç, M., & Işık, O. (1999).  Emlak Bankası 1926–1998 . Istanbul: Emlak Bankası, Türkiye 
Ekonomik ve Toplumsal Tarih Vakfı. 
 Kurtuluş, H. (2005). Bir Ütopya Olarak Bahçeşehir. In H. Kurtuluş (Ed.),  İstanbul’da Kentsel 
Ayrışma (pp. 77–126). Istanbul: Bağlam. 
 Özus, E. (2009). Determinants of of ﬁ ce rents in the Istanbul Metropolitan Area.  European Planning 
Studies, 17 (4), 621–33. 
 Tokatli, N., & Erkip, F. (1998). Foreign investment in producer services.  Third World Planning 
Review, 20 (1), 87–106. 
 Türel, A., & Koç, H. (2008). The relationship between the variation of housing output and land 
supply in Turkish Provinces. In S. Kayasü, O. Işık, N. Uzun, & E. Kamacı (Eds.),  Gecekondu, 
Dönüşüm ve Kent (pp. 243–262). Ankara: MMF. 

197
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_12, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 12.1  Introduction 
 This chapter explores the practices of implementing a polycentric strategy in the 
Stockholm urban agglomeration. The Stockholm case has been chosen to illustrate 
the need for a broadening of the understanding of resilience in actual land-use plan-
ning to a state in which the governance system can be viewed as a resilient structure 
that is  ﬂ exible and adaptable to rapid changes at the city-regional level. 
 It is argued that when changing the scale of inquiry, it is bene ﬁ cial to have a 
different empirical focus, that is, when evaluating resilience on a city-regional scale, 
it is more useful to grasp the resilience of such structures and their inherent dynamics 
and processes than the individual instruments applied to improve the resilience at a 
local level. This is partly based on the claim that a well-functioning territorial gov-
ernance system is a prerequisite for actual resilient land-use planning for the whole 
city-region (in this case, the urban agglomeration of Stockholm ) but also that the 
structure of the governance system should itself contain attributes that characterise 
urban resilience in a more dynamic and process-related way, namely, adaptability , 
transformability and connectivity. Thus, this case study analyses the resilience of a 
governance system at a city-regional level, and not the resilience of actual land-use 
changes at a local level. 
 P.  Schmitt ,  Ph.D. (*) •  L. G.  Harbo ,  M.Sc. •  A. T.  Diş 
 Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial Development ,  Box 1658,  111 86  Stockholm ,  Sweden 
e-mail:  peter.schmitt@nordregio.se ;  lisbeth.greve.harbo@nordregio.se ; 
 asli.tepecik.dis@nordregio.se 
 A.  Henriksson 
 The University of Tampere, School of Management ,  33014  Tampere ,  Finland 
e-mail:  anu.henriksson@uta. ﬁ 
 Chapter 12 
 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case 
of the Stockholm Urban Agglomeration 
 Peter  Schmitt,  Lisbeth  Greve  Harbo,  Asli  Tepecik  Diş , and  Anu  Henriksson   

198
P. Schmitt et al.
 Urban resilience is de ﬁ ned here as an established type of operating governance 
regime (with various modes and mechanisms) that integrates a high degree of adap-
tive and strategic capacity to manage different socio-economic, ecological and spa-
tial dynamics in a sustainable manner. In this light, this chapter discusses the 
experiences and learning processes of planners at a local and regional level when 
applying and following up on the strategic concept of polycentricity in the Stockholm 
region since the idea was  ﬁ rst introduced in 2001. It is argued that the application of 
this concept can be considered as a major response to sustainable planning to man-
age, from a European perspective, notable high growth dynamics in the Stockholm 
urban agglomeration. 
 12.2  Visiting Stockholm City Region 
 When discussing spatial planning and development in the Stockholm urban agglom-
eration, one needs to mention the 26 municipalities and their individual municipal 
plans , drawn up by the so-called Stockholm County and the Of ﬁ ce of Regional 
Growth, Environment and Planning (up to January 2011 named the Of ﬁ ce of 
Regional Planning). The of ﬁ ce has the mandate to develop nonbinding regional 
plans that are to be adopted by the County Council (see details in Chap.   7 ). These 
plans are based on several stages of negotiations with the participation of all munici-
palities and other relevant stakeholders and thus are consensual in regard to speci ﬁ c 
city-regional development goals. This kind of indicative regional planning is unique 
to Sweden – nevertheless, one should bear in mind that there are only a few exam-
ples of a “regional planning approach” throughout the country (Hårsman and Rader 
Olsson  2003 ) . In the current plan for 2010, several long-term strategies for land use, 
infrastructure , economic development and environmental protection are incorpo-
rated, which makes it a real cross-sectoral comprehensive development programme 
for the Stockholm region. However, the municipalities are by far the strongest player 
in Swedish spatial planning, since their “planning monopoly” is relatively far-
reaching when compared to other countries in Europe. 
 Stockholm’s urban fabric has spread outwards over the centuries from the Old 
Town, at a ridge between the Lake Mälaren and the Baltic Sea, with clearly 
identi ﬁ able “annual rings” where development has jumped over to the “next island” 
and/or next municipality. Nevertheless, the Stockholm urban agglomeration is still 
marked, both morphologically and functionally, by a rather monocentric territorial 
layout, which is basically shaped by the inner city of Stockholm and a number of 
neighbouring dense urban areas with a relatively high centrality in terms of work-
places, such as Solna, Sundbyberg and Nacka (Fig .  12.1 ). 
 As the  ﬁ gure above highlights, the urban agglomeration’s topography is made up 
of several islands and the bodies of water between them. This speci ﬁ c morphology 
of the physical environment is thus one major reason for both the concentration of 
population and the transport challenges, since distances are simply longer and the 
basic transport infrastructure is extremely costly to build, having to scale the rocks. 
In addition, it is very sensitive to disturbances such as climate change . 

199
12 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case of the Stockholm...
 12.2.1  A Fast Growing City Region 
 Although the net migration between the city of Stockholm and the rest of Sweden 
was negative at the beginning of the 1990s, its development has turned around so 
that the population has increased by 13% from 1990 to 2002 (compared to 4% for 
the whole country), which corresponds to a total of 200,000 people. If it were not 
for foreign immigrants, however, the number of inhabitants would have decreased 
in this period (Hermelin  2004 ) . 
 Since then, the population has increased relatively quickly not only in the city of 
Stockholm but also in particular in the entire Stockholm County, with an annual 
growth rate of 30,000 inhabitants per year – 3.5% higher than the rest of the country. 
At the end of 2010, the population of Stockholm County was 2.054 million, while 
the city of Stockholm counted 847,000 inhabitants. The latest forecasts predict that 
in 2030 the population will reach 2.4 million inhabitants (maybe even higher at the 
current rate of growth). Besides the ongoing (in-)migration to Stockholm County 
(from other parts of Sweden , but also from abroad), a further reason for this popula-
tion gain is the current baby boom (around 2.1 children per woman in Stockholm 
County) (Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning  2010 ) . 
 12.2.2  The Planning Response: Polycentricity 
and Densiﬁ cation 
 The future ambitions in terms of land development planning for the urban agglomera-
tion of Stockholm    can be easily read from the recently adopted regional plan, as well 
as the 2010 adopted comprehensive plan of the Stockholm Municipality as the 
 Fig. 12.1   A rough sketch of Stockholm ’s urban fabric 1945, 1975 and 2004 (Source: Lantmäteriet 
2011 ) 
 

200
P. Schmitt et al.
uncontested main centre and,  ﬁ nally, at least to some extent, from Vision Stockholm 
2030, elaborated also by the city of Stockholm (see Chap.   7  ). For many decades, the inter-
play between the enlarging housing and labour market   s and the improvement of the 
regional transport system have been the most central issues in the regional planning 
discourse . According to the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment and Planning, the 
transport system in the Stockholm region is operating close to its capacity, road traf ﬁ c 
having increased by 80% since 1970, while the road surface area has only increased by 
between 10 and 20% (Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning and Urban Transportation  2001 ). 
Examples of improvements to the transport infrastructure currently being debated are 
an extension of the fast tramways in the near future and a third track for the north–south 
light railway through the city, which is currently under construction (Stahre  2007 ) . 
 The credo of the Stockholm municipal plan (also adopted in 2010) is to further 
increase the density of the urban landscape in order to cope with the high demand 
for, for example, new of ﬁ ces, hotels and other facilities in the city centre, and for 
housing in the nearby areas and suburbs while at the same time maintaining the 
urban qualities and the city’s attractiveness (Stockholm Stad  2010 ) . In recent years, 
this has inspired local debate on the pros and cons of high-rise buildings in the city 
centre. The densi ﬁ cation goal has raised arguments related to the use of the green 
wedges. It will be interesting to see how this will be carried out in practice, being a 
modest collision with the city plan of 1999, which emphasised that non-built land in 
the city should be conserved (Stockholm Stad  1999 ) . 
 The new Stockholm    regional plan of 2010 underlines the approach of its fore-
runner, the Regional Development Plan from 2001, which introduced for the very 
 ﬁ rst time the concept of polycentricity at a city-regional level. The emerging 
polycentric shape is to be structured by eight so-called regional urban cores located 
within a 15–40 km radius of the central core (i.e. the inner city of Stockholm and 
some adjacent central urban areas). Such “cores” shall serve as “territorial anchors” 
to concentrate land developments, as well as to accommodate distinct urban functions 
(see Fig.  12.2 ). In the latest regional plan, this normative concept has been renewed 
to follow up the intended gradual transformation of a rather monocentric urban 
con ﬁ guration into a polycentric one. 
 The major rationale behind this can be described as follows: The central core has 
to be released from the strong pressure within a growing urban agglomeration. Hence, 
these eight (formerly seven in the regional plan of 2001) “regional urban cores” shall help 
to create a robust polycentric structure supported by a corresponding transport system 
until 2030. The development of the selected regional urban cores shall be promoted by 
distinct investments into the transport system, by increasing the density and compact-
ness of energy ef ﬁ cient settlements, by improving the urban environment, by creating 
competitive milieus and,  ﬁ nally, by providing them with distinct urban functions (such 
as homes for more diversi ﬁ ed work places, higher education and health-care facilities, 
better urban  ﬂ air through cultural and gastronomic provisions) (Of ﬁ ce of Regional 
Planning and Urban Transportation  2009 ; Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning  2010 ) . It remains 
to be seen if such a planning concept helps to combat urban sprawl,    as it is claimed that 
these regional urban cores have also potential for further intensi ﬁ cation . 
 In summary, the strong dynamics of future urban development, and thus land 
consumption, are well re ﬂ ected in these policy documents , as also discussed in 

201
12 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case of the Stockholm...
 Fig. 12.2   The intended polycentric territorial layout in Stockholm County: one ‘central’ and eight 
‘regional’ urban cores (Source: By courtesy of the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment and 
Planning) 
 

202
P. Schmitt et al.
Chap.   7 . It is obvious that the pace of growth in the Stockholm urban agglomeration 
necessitates a wide regional perspective to land-use development, as well as coop-
eration beyond the administrative borders, if a robust response to such challenges is 
to be found. It became clear from the case study analysis that the intended creation 
of a (modest) polycentric urban structure at the level of the Stockholm urban 
agglomeration was a key concept, offering a clear understanding of the pressure on 
land use on the one hand, and the high degree of adaptive and strategic capacity to 
manage socio-economic, ecological and spatial dynamics in a sustainable manner in 
the Stockholm region on the other. 
 12.3  Urban Resilience and Polycentricity : Setting 
the Scene for the Empirical Study 
 This study aims to explore the practices and capacities of the polycentric develop-
ment strategy being developed for the Stockholm urban agglomeration since 2001. 
 As discussed in Chap.   3 , the “urban resilience” approach conceptualises cities 
(or city regions) as complex adaptive social-ecological systems and develops ways 
of assessing urban vulnerability and identifying principles and opportunities so as 
to contribute to resilience in “urban” systems. Here, the level of adaptability and 
transformability is inevitably dependent on the ability to self-organise and learn, as 
major social components within such socioecological/urban systems (Carpenter 
et al.  2001 ) . In this sense, according to Gupta et al.  ( 2010 ) , “adaptive institutions” 
can encourage learning among the actors by questioning the socially embedded 
ideologies, frames, assumptions, roles, rules and procedures that dominate problem-
solving efforts. Maru  ( 2010  )  notes in this context while the capacity to self-organise 
and adapt are shared properties of social (and ecological) systems, “learning” is an 
essential human (and thus individual) capability. 
 Having emphasised this, in this case study, urban resilience is considered to be an 
established type of operating governance regime (with various modes and mecha-
nisms) that integrates a high degree of adaptive and strategic capacity to manage dif-
ferent socio-economic, ecological and spatial dynamics in a sustainable manner. More 
concretely, the intention has been to explore to what extent the normative concept of 
polycentricity at the regional level, as introduced in 2001 and followed up in 2010, can 
be considered as a useful tool for establishing a spatial system that is less vulnerable 
to future disturbances, and that is better equipped to manage urban dynamics. 
 As already touched upon in Chap.   4 , it is argued that, based on further investiga-
tions, the concept of polycentricity demands a high level of systemic understanding, 
in that one needs to delve deeper into the character of such urban con ﬁ gurations 
today and the logics and inherent processes of spatial planning of the urban agglom-
eration and its different “cores”/“centres” in particular (Schmitt  2010 ) . Therefore, 
this analysis is focused upon the understandings, challenges and disconnections of 
this strategic policy approach (to promote and even create a more polycentric urban 
agglomeration) since 2001, as perceived by urban planners. 

203
12 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case of the Stockholm...
 This research addresses three dimensions of urban resilience. The  ﬁ rst one is the 
dimension of  transformability , or the extent to which planners perceive physical 
changes in the land-use structure, that is, in making the Stockholm urban agglom-
eration more polycentric (here in particular regarding its morphological territorial 
layout). However, in contrast to  Walker et al. ( 2004 ), the intention here is not to talk 
about the creation of a fundamentally new system, as the current urban system is 
still tenable (even though coming increasingly under pressure) and could certainly 
not be replaced entirely as can be the case in ecological systems . 
 Secondly, the dimension of  connectivity  is addressed, which is the degree to which 
nodes of a network are directly linked with each other. In this study, such nodes are 
represented by the case areas (the six regional urban cores and the central one) and 
the linkages of their (potentially improved) accessibility, based on the observations 
of urban planners. From a more functional polycentric perspective, another issue 
would be how far these cores are able to develop complementary pro ﬁ les in order to 
develop synergies at the city-regional level (Meijers  2007 ) . In implementing this, not 
only is the physical dimension decisive but also, from a more resilient perspective, 
the relationships between actors and organisations. In the case study, the tension 
between cooperation and competition among the regional urban cores that are in 
focus here (see below) has been discussed, with particular attention paid to the fact 
that most of the regional urban cores cover more than one municipality. 
 In addition, the “adaptive capacity ” of the existing governance regime (dimen-
sion  adaptability ) at the local and city-regional level within the Stockholm urban 
agglomeration has been analysed. Here, the focus is on the factual organisational 
and institutional changes (i.e. in terms of new routines, patterns of [inter]action, 
involvement and participation ) as well as individual appraisals (in terms of learning 
curves, perception and awareness) by applying the concept of polycentricity in the 
urban agglomeration of Stockholm. Also addressed is the need for understanding 
among the six regional urban cores in focus here, as an emergent system that requires 
multilevel coordination, which is another attribute of the required adaptive capacity. 
This is particularly relevant between the local and the city-regional authorities, as 
well as at the inter-municipal level, since, as stated above, a number of cores are 
“owned” by more than one municipality. 
 The empirical research has been directed at the closest six out of the eight desig-
nated regional urban cores and, at least to some extent, their relationship to the 
central core (see Fig.  12.2 ). The remaining two regional urban cores, Södertälje to 
the south and Arlanda-Märsta to the north, were not covered, since the latter has 
been only designated in the 2010 regional plan and is thus at a very early stage in its 
planning and implementation phase; and Södertälje, on the other hand, can be con-
sidered as an independent city in the greater Stockholm region with rather different 
characteristics and needs in the planning process. 
 In summary, these seven case areas help to analyse ex post the applicability of 
the concept of polycentricity since 2001 and may help in making speculations for 
the future in this respect. The case areas and their criss-cross relationships were 
assessed in terms of their conformance with the underlying objectives of the regional 
development plan of 2001 and the recently adopted plan of 2010. 

204
P. Schmitt et al.
 The empirical research has been conducted in two stages: First, the regional and 
municipal plans    were analysed to assess whether there is coherence between the inten-
tions of the regional plan and those at the municipal level, and second, a number of 
interviews were conducted with planners responsible for the development of the “cores” 
in the municipalities and with planners responsible for the overall polycentric develop-
ment of Stockholm at the city-regional level, from which it can be deduced how far 
they see resilience as an integral dimension of their planning approach. Since most of 
the regional urban cores cross municipal borders and thus are to be planned between 
two and even three municipalities, a total of 12 planners have been interviewed.  
 12.4  Findings of the Empirical Research 
 From the outset, the concept of polycentricity was received positively by our inter-
viewees as it, unsurprisingly, brings those municipalities that own a regional urban 
core to an advanced position when compared to others that do not. However, during 
the course of the research, it became clear that not much has happened in the 
Stockholm region in regard to physical changes ((Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning and 
Urban Transportation  2009 ), interviews held in 2010). The most concrete results 
were rather to be found in changes of perceptions and routines. Generally speaking, 
the designation of regional urban cores in the regional plan of 2001 (Of ﬁ ce of 
Regional Planning and Urban Transportation  2001 ) has to some extent been a driver 
of planning practices and their understandings. In other words, the interviewees 
were hesitant to judge to what extent the planning concept had helped guide the 
material outcomes of urban development since 2001. 
 First to be mentioned is that the concept has been integrated formally into most 
of the municipal plans , and some municipalities have even deepened their planning 
ambitions with additional development plans for their own particular areas. Also, it 
has resulted in many innovations regarding the self-image of the municipalities con-
cerned, their awareness of the “city-regional” dimension and how far “their” regional 
urban cores are related to others. In addition, it has helped to mobilise some “infor-
mal planning practices ” such as inter-municipal cooperation and the development of 
professional networks within the Stockholm region. How far the governance system 
is able to create an adaptive and strategic capacity to manage existing and unex-
pected socio-economic, ecological and spatial dynamics (viz., a resilient governance 
regime) is explored, as mentioned above, with the help of three attributes of resil-
ience in the coming sections of this chapter. 
 12.4.1  Adaptability 
 Working together with other municipalities in the regional urban core is a novel 
approach in the Stockholm urban agglomeration that is considered by planners as 
providing a valuable opportunity to adapt to the current changes and dynamics . 

205
12 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case of the Stockholm...
Cooperation with other cores is based on informal meetings and discussions, which 
are mainly facilitated by the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment and Planning; 
however, the need for a more formal platform to increase the intensity of coopera-
tion has been emphasised. Concerning new tasks or the need for new individual 
capacities, two of the regional urban cores have employed planners specialised in 
city-regional issues, while another has employed a co-coordinator to work with the 
two involved municipalities as well as the private sector in the wider region, and a 
third has employed a development director, which can in part be seen as a conse-
quence of the application of this concept. The remaining municipalities feel that 
they have suf ﬁ ciently dealt with the new tasks within the existing planning of ﬁ ces; 
however, most of them state that now there is a lot more cross-sectoral cooperation 
within the municipality. 
 In addition, the concept of polycentricity has strengthened a systemic understand-
ing of the urban agglomeration of Stockholm    through an extension and deepening of 
the municipal planners’ mental maps of the region. Here it has been assessed posi-
tively by the interviewed urban planners that the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, 
Environment and Planning has acted like a spider in a web, providing inspiring anal-
yses and background material, but has also, maybe even more importantly, organised 
forums at which the issues at hand can be discussed with planners from other cores. 
The Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment and Planning itself considers this work 
with polycentricity as an eye-opener for their work in general, since they have recog-
nised the need for an active backing of the objectives indicated in the regional plan. 
In former times, there was rather a tendency to sit back once a regional plan had been 
approved – but now the focus has changed to become more actively involved as an 
informant, but also partly as a moderator, in the application process. 
 Since it is a long-term strategy, there have been indications that it has also affected 
the interplay between professional planners and politicians, as the latter are not used 
to thinking in periods of 20 years or so. Moreover, it has emphasised the need to coor-
dinate communication processes carefully, as the concept is rather challenging and 
necessitates more effort to depict the inherent objectives that are associated with it.  
 12.4.2  Transformability 
 As indicated above, the polycentric structure has been incorporated widely into the 
municipal plans for each of the regional urban cores. However, given the recent 
implementation of these plans, few physical changes are evident at this point. One 
main obstacle, which has been mentioned several times, is the lack of  ﬁ nancial 
resources for corresponding urban projects. Besides this, the process of implement-
ing new ideas within the factual practices of municipal planning also takes time. A 
general line of argument is that the regional plan from 2001 paved the way for think-
ing in terms of being a regional urban core, getting the politicians on board and 
expressing the idea accordingly in strategic municipal plans. As a consequence of 
the process to develop the latest regional plan (see Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning  2010 ) 
and the more speci ﬁ c ideas expressed within it, the “physical work” can now begin. 

206
P. Schmitt et al.
Although this might be delayed due to the latest economic crisis, the planning 
framework is prepared for further utilisation once private and public investments 
become possible again. 
 In this light, the concept of polycentricity has been applied so far in terms of 
handful concrete local strategies with the main emphasis being on mixed land-use 
development, combinations of work places and quality of life and the building of 
shops close to commuter railway stations. Additionally, the local population should 
have access to educational facilities and be able to make use of other services 
that are speci ﬁ c for each area (medical, IT etc.). In terms of the social dimension, 
the regional urban cores are planned to offer different types of housing for differ-
ent groups/classes of society (i.e. different apartments for students and families). 
In other words, the aim has been to diversify the housing types, which is believed 
will help diversify social groups and thus combat segregation. 
 12.4.3  Connectivity 
 Although in terms of physical connectivity the regional urban cores are in general 
considered as having good accessibility (both in regard to public and individual 
transport means), addressing the weak connectivity between them seems to be the 
biggest challenge. The urban agglomeration of Stockholm is still characterised by a 
radial structure with a clear lack of robust criss-cross connections between the des-
ignated regional urban cores, meaning that the private car is the most dominant 
means of transport. Secondly, there is a clear mismatch between the planning ambi-
tions raised in the regional plan (and advocated by the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, 
Environment and Planning) and the regional public transport agency (Storstockholms 
Lokaltra ﬁ k, SL). Criticisms have been raised that the latter focuses too strongly on 
improving its services for accessibility to the city of Stockholm and its close neigh-
bourhoods, instead of recognising the growing demand and potentials of the regional 
urban cores, which are considered “further outside” in this respect. In other words, 
it is argued that the regional public transport agency is still rooted in a more tradi-
tional way of thinking, with particular focus on linking the city centre with its 
nearby suburbs instead of strengthening the “emerging nodes” (as represented by 
the regional urban cores concept) at a larger geographic scale. 
 With regard to the complementarities of the functional and economic pro ﬁ les 
within this emerging polycentric system, one can say that all cores are perceived as 
having speci ﬁ c pro ﬁ les. However, if they are all successful in developing mixed 
housing, good accessibility, diverse labour market s, education opportunities and 
distinct urban qualities (e.g. as regards so-called “evening economies”), the planners 
admit that the cores may become very similar, resulting in greater inter-competition. 
Again, the need for inter-municipal cooperation and coordination has been empha-
sised here, although admitting that there is already strong competition among 
the regional urban cores to increase the demand for further housing constructions. 
It has been declared that informal networking  – in particular through the use of the 

207
12 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case of the Stockholm...
Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment and Planning as a platform – is far from 
suf ﬁ cient for developing any mutually agreed concepts, for instance, due to the lack 
of political backing for such strategic arrangements at the level of the Stockholm 
urban agglomeration. 
 12.5  Concluding Remarks 
 The process to develop the new regional development plan for 2010 was, according 
to the interviewed planners, felt to be more interactive and dialogue oriented than 
the regional development plan adopted in 2001. Obviously the process has ensured 
that the new plan’s objectives have been further anchored in the application of the 
concept of polycentricity at the municipal level. The further implementation of the 
aims of the regional development plan, in terms, for instance, of more essential 
land-use changes, is, however, a longer process. 
 Most municipalities that own a so-called regional urban core share the opinion 
that the 2001 regional development plan was primarily useful in introducing this 
concept to the municipal politicians and in convincing them that these cores should 
be perceived from a more city-regional perspective. However, the 2001 regional 
development plan was also useful, as noted by the interviewees, in that it kick-
started inter-sectoral thinking in the planning departments and launched the estab-
lishment of the planners’ networks needed to develop the regional cores across 
municipal borders. 
 Another conclusion to be drawn when comparing the re ﬂ ected practices of the 
interviewed municipal planners is that the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment 
and Planning has become increasingly more aware of what is expected of them in 
terms of how the regional urban cores should develop, taking into account socio-
economic functions, accessibility, business pro ﬁ les or attractive locations for hous-
ing. In this respect, the Of ﬁ ce of Regional Growth, Environment and Planning has 
been quite ef ﬁ cient, providing analyses on central themes, conducting workshops 
and seminars, and as a kind of sounding board for the municipal planners. However, 
this sense of support is not unambiguous since a number of municipal planners still 
seem to be a little confused as to how they are supposed to develop their core. 
 One general criticism of the new regional plan has been that the number of cores 
is too high; however, such criticisms may actually be a symptom of the global eco-
nomic crisis and the resulting lack of investments, signi ﬁ cantly curtailing their abil-
ity to develop the regional cores as desired. Another criterion for the development 
of the cores is the expansion or establishment of new infrastructure , particularly 
improvements to public transport to and from the cores. All planners state that this 
is essential if the regional cores are to become more attractive on a regional scale, 
for commuters, as it would allow them to access new work places, and also for the 
existing residents and businesses. This argument, however, highlights a problem 
with the implementation of the regional plan’s vision of a polycentric Stockholm 
region. The regional transportation agency does not feel obliged to support the 

208
P. Schmitt et al.
polycentric regional development, which is due to the lack of any formal power in 
the regional development plan to direct such powerful stakeholders in terms of 
physical planning. 
 As regards a resilient perspective, it can be concluded that the concept of polycen-
tricity demands a high level of systemic understanding of the Stockholm city region 
in general, and its different regional urban cores in particular. Cooperation and coor-
dination seem to be the key issues here (between municipalities and between munic-
ipalities and the city-regional level, which is represented by the Of ﬁ ce of Regional 
Growth, Environment and Planning and the County Council). The concept is tied to 
advances in particular in public transport facilities, which would improve the attrac-
tiveness of the regional urban cores. Internally, in some of the municipalities, the 
concept is used as a tool to gain the attention of politicians by advocating the idea 
of developing the municipality in line with this concept within their own adminis-
tration. With regard to the governance structures of the Stockholm urban agglom-
eration, it has been argued that the work carried out within the regional urban cores 
has raised awareness among planners and politicians of the bene ﬁ ts and potentials 
of cooperating with neighbouring municipalities. However, this has resulted in very 
different expressions, with some regional urban cores developing common plans, 
while others maintain the concept within individual municipal plans that are then 
coordinated within so-called inter-municipal core working groups. 
 Nevertheless, the application of the concept of polycentricity by developing so-
called regional urban cores has been highly appreciated by the interviewed municipal 
planners, in that it allows them to cope with the current and future anticipated growth 
dynamics. This seems to have been a meaningful response, reconciling the expected 
tensions in terms of the economic and social, but also environmental changes asso-
ciated with urban growth in the urban agglomeration of Stockholm . In this vein, 
it has been argued that the concept can help to increase the city region’s robustness 
to contemporary, but also to such future challenges as economic crises , the dying 
out of speci ﬁ c sectors, urban sprawl , social segregation, climate change mitigation 
or further environmental degradation. Apparently, the concept is being seen as a 
blueprint for many issues that are linked to urban change . On the other hand, it has 
been acknowledged that the concept of polycentricity requires some considerable 
learning on the side of the urban planners and other stakeholders. In particular, the 
adaptability of the current governance regime is challenged, since the further appli-
cation of the concept demands a high level of individual and institutional capacity, 
cooperation and coordination between different, and partly changing, stakeholders 
within, and beyond, the municipality. 
 As a methodological re ﬂ ection, it should be noted that the concept of urban resil-
ience has been particularly helpful in enriching this analysis, based on its focus on 
the institutional responses and individual re ﬂ ections related to this (until 2001) hith-
erto unknown planning concept of polycentricity . The concept requires a more sys-
tematic understanding of spatial planning and its inherent dynamics and logics in the 
Stockholm    region, since it challenges in a very pronounced way the interplay between 
the six regional urban cores and the central core while also revealing the agendas and 
rationales of different planners and their ability to learn and adapt accordingly.  

209
12 Urban Resilience and Polycentricity: The Case of the Stockholm...
 References 
 Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Anderies, J. M., & Abel, N. (2001). From metaphor to measurement: 
Resilience of what to what?  Ecosystems, 4 (8), 765–781. 
 Gupta, J., Termeer, C., Klostermann, J., Meijerink, S., van den Brink, M., Jong, P., Nooteboom, S., 
& Bergsma, E. (2010). The adaptive capacity wheel: A method to assess the inherent charac-
teristics of institutions to enable the adaptive capacity of society.  Environmental Science & 
Policy, 13 (6), 459–471. 
 Hårsman, B., & Rader Olsson, A. (2003). The Stockholm region. Metropolitan governance and 
spatial policy. In W. G. M. Salet, A. Kreukels, & A. Thornley (Eds.),  Metropolitan governance 
and spatial planning: Comparative case studies of European city-regions (pp. 91–110). 
London/New York: Taylor & Francis. 
 Hermelin, B. (2004).  Tillväxtens urbana geogra ﬁ . En studie av sysselsättningsförändringar i 
Sveriges storstadsregioner . Stockholm: Stockholm, Kulturgeogra ﬁ ska institutionen, Stockholms 
universitet.  
 Maru, Y. (2010).  Resilient regions: Clarity of concepts and challenges to systemic measurement, 
no 2010–04, Socio-Economics and the Environment in Discussion (SEED) (Working Paper 
Series from CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems). Last accessed 5 Apr 2011 at:  http://econpapers.
repec.org/scripts/redir.plex?u = http%3A%2 F%2Fwww.csiro.au%2F ﬁ les%2F ﬁ les%2Fpw5h.p
df;h = repec:cse:wpaper:2010–04 . 
 Meijers, E. (2007).  Synergy in polycentric urban regions. Complementarity, organising capacity 
and critical mass . Delft: Delft University Press. 
 Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning. (2010).  RUFS 2010 – Regional Utvecklingsplan för Stockhol-
msregionen 2010 . Rapport 1:2010, Stockholm.  
 Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning and Urban Transportation, Stockholm County Council. (2009). 
 Regionala stadskärnor . Rapport 1:2009, Stockholm. 
 Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning and Urban Transportation. (2001).  Regional utvecklingsplan 2001 för 
Stockholmsregionen . Stockholm: The Of ﬁ ce of Regional Planning and Urban Transportation. 
 Schmitt, P. (Ed.). (2010).  Intra-metropolitan polycentricity  in practice – Re ﬂ ections, challenges 
and conclusions from 12 European metropolitan areas . Final report of the METREX – Expert 
Group on Intra-Metropolitan Polycentricity. 101p. Last accessed 5 Apr 2011 at:   http://www.
eurometrex.org/Docs/Expert_Groups/Polycentricity/METREX_IMP_ ﬁ nal_version.pdf  . 
 Stahre, U. (2007).  Den globala staden. Stockholms nutida stadsomvandling och sociala rörelser . 
Stockholm: Bokförlaget Atlas. 
 Stockholm Stad. (1999).  Översiktsplan . Stockholm: Stockholm Stad. 
 Stockholm Stad. (2010).  Promenadstaden . Översiktsplan för Stockholm. Stockholm: Stockholm 
Stad. 
 Walker, B. H., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R., & Kinzig, A. (2004). Resilience, adaptability and 
transformability in social-ecological systems.  Ecology and Society, 9 (2), 5. Last accessed 5 Apr 
2011 at:   http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/  . 

211
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_13, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 13.1  Introduction 
 “The very features that make cities feasible and desirable – their architectural structures, popu-
lation concentrations, places of assembly, and interconnected infrastructure systems – also 
put them at high risk to  ﬂ oods, earthquakes, hurricanes and terrorist attacks (Godschalk 
 2003: p.136 ) ”. 
 The general concept of resilience, and more speci ﬁ cally, urban resilience, is 
becoming increasingly prevalent in academic and policy discourses. Moreover, 
social, economic and environmental crises  and challenges created under the dynamics 
of urban development re ﬂ ect an increasing sense of complexity , uncertainty and 
insecurity about cities and highlight a need to identify new adaptation and survival 
strategies. However, the contradictions created by market-led tendencies, privatisa-
tion and self-responsibility in different levels of urban governance have made con-
temporary planning practices all the more complex ( Taşan-Kok and Beaten  2011 ), 
requiring adaptation strategies that are designed to address not only dif ﬁ cult social, 
economic or environmental issues but also policy contexts driven by market forces. 
The Dutch planning and urban governance  system is an interesting case in this respect, 
since the Netherlands    is one of the few welfare states that retains active central control 
 D.  Stead ,  Ph.D. (*)
 OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft University of Technology ,
 Jaffalaan 9 ,  2628 BX ,  Delft ,  The Netherlands 
e-mail:  d.stead@tudelft.nl 
 T.  Taşan-Kok ,  Ph.D. 
 OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft University of Technology ,
 Jaffalaan 9 ,  2628 BX ,  Delft ,  The Netherlands   
e-mail:  m.t.tasan-kok@tudelft.nl 
 Chapter 13 
 Urban Resilience, Climate Change 
and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
 Dominic  Stead  and  Tuna  Taşan-Kok   

212
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
mechanisms in the development and control of land and property. In this respect, it 
is little surprise that resilience thinking in urban planning has already made its way 
into the Dutch urban policy framework. 
 As indicated in earlier Chaps. (  1  and   2 ), de ﬁ nitions and interpretations of 
resilience vary, and the concept remains relatively fuzzy. Nevertheless, two com-
mon dimensions of resilience can often be identi ﬁ ed: (1) robustness, or strength    
(i.e. the ability to withstand an external shock), and (2) rapidity, or  ﬂ exibility of 
response (i.e. the ability to bounce back). These two dimensions can be enhanced by 
mitigation and adaptation strategies, as mitigation can primarily increase the robust-
ness of the system, while adaptation can increase the speed of recovery . On this 
basis, it can be argued that mitigation and adaptation activities are central to urban 
resilience strategies (see also Leichenko  2011 ) . This chapter investigates the ways 
in which mitigation and adaptation activities form part of planning policy in 
Rotterdam , a city that faces signi ﬁ cant threats to its long-term resilience, particu-
larly due to its vulnerability to the impacts of climate change . Indeed, the value of 
Rotterdam’s urban infrastructure (buildings, transport infrastructure, utility infra-
structure and other long-lived development) that is exposed to coastal  ﬂ ooding is 
higher than most other cities across the globe (Nicholls et al.  2007 ) . Not only is 
climate change a very important issue for the city (as will be described in more 
detail later), it is an issue that has become a metaphor for the environmental problé-
matique at large (Hajer  1995 ) . 
 The case of Rotterdam is highly relevant for research into the issue of urban 
resilience because, not only does the city have a high value of urban assets that are 
exposed to coastal  ﬂ ooding, it is also extremely vulnerable to river  ﬂ ooding. Indeed, 
the 2008 Delta Commission refers to the city of Rotterdam as one of the “critical 
locations” for climate change policy. Rotterdam’s vulnerability to  ﬂ ooding is made 
all the more severe by the fact that parts of the city lie outside its protective dikes 
and are therefore unprotected against very high water levels. This has resulted in a 
number of initiatives to develop more climate-proof policies in the city, particularly 
in the  ﬁ elds of water management and spatial planning. Various activities under the 
Rotterdam Climate Initiative, for example, are geared towards anticipating and 
re ﬂ ecting future climate developments in future spatial plans, implementation proj-
ects and management activities from 2012 onwards. As a consequence of Rotterdam’s 
critical location, the city has become a pioneer in the  ﬁ elds of planning, climate 
change and spatial planning (van den Berg  2010 ) . What is evident from a number of 
policy documents is that attempts to deal with urban resilience, climate change, 
adaptation and mitigation are more advanced in Rotterdam than in most other Dutch 
municipalities. 
 The methodology followed in this chapter slightly differs from the other case 
study chapters. As a research focus, the Dutch team has primarily focused on the 
emergence of resilience thinking    in the study of Rotterdam    in relation to mitigation 
and adaptation activities. Living for centuries under the threat of  ﬂ ooding in 
Rotterdam has resulted in the relatively rapid introduction of the term “resilience” 
into Dutch spatial planning, although the concept is still too vague to be of practi-
cal use. As a methodology, the researchers followed a discourse analysis    approach 

213
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
by analysing policy documents at diverse levels of governance to understand how 
resilience is being interpreted and adopted. In addition, the diverse adaptation and 
mitigation strategies contained in these documents have also been analysed. Before 
examining urban mitigation and adaptation activities and policies for the case of 
Rotterdam, the relation between these two types of activities and policies is  ﬁ rst 
discussed. Although mitigation and adaptation would both seem necessary for 
enhancing urban resilience (according to the brief analysis of de ﬁ nitions presented 
above), they have until recently been developed and implemented quite separately 
and have sometimes even been in direct competition for the same resources.  
 13.2  A Short History of the Climate Change , Adaptation 
and Mitigation Agendas in the Netherlands 
 Responding to the issues of climate change in a low-lying country like the 
Netherlands is a huge challenge, especially in relation to sea-level rise. According 
to two sets of scenarios developed by the Dutch meteorological of ﬁ ce (KNMI) and 
the Delta Commission, sea levels could rise by between 0.20 and 0.40 m by 2050 
and by as much as 1.30 m by 2100. Climate change is also expected to result in 
longer periods of increased precipitation in the winter months and heavier peak 
rainfall during the summers. This would result in a greater likelihood of  ﬂ ooding in 
urban and rural areas in the lower parts of the Netherlands, where the storage capacity 
of the soil, polders and storage basins is limited. A further impact of climate change 
may be higher air and water temperatures and longer growing seasons, making the 
Netherlands more suited to certain plants and animals and less suited to others, with 
implications for agriculture, horticulture, biodiversity and the landscape. However, 
it is the impact of water, in all its natural forms, that is most important for the 
Netherlands: water from the sea due to sea-level rise, water from the rivers because 
of heavier rainfall and water from the ground because of greater variations in 
groundwater levels. 
 Climate change has become an important policy issue in the Netherlands for the 
simple reason that 60% of the country lies below sea level and 70% of the gross 
national product is earned in these  ﬂ ood-prone areas (Kabat et al.  2005 ) . Without its 
dikes and other protective measures, almost two thirds of the country would be 
under water (Wolsink  2006 ) , making  ﬂ ooding the most signi ﬁ cant threat from climate 
change for the Netherlands. The government currently categorises this risk as “low 
probability, high impact” (van den Berg et al.  2010 ) . 
 Adaptation did not initially attract much attention in policy-making, due in part 
to the fear that it may distract the governments’ attention from mitigation (Swart 
and Raes  2007 ) . However, adaptation is now climbing in the planning agenda and 
contributing to various new vocabularies in environmental discourses across Europe. 
A key feature of the adaptation narrative is the view that the environment is a natural 
hazard ( Davoudi  2012 ) , and the language of adaptation suggests a future character-
ised by the inevitability of climate risks and insecurities. Within this narrative, 

214
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
unpredictability and uncertainty replaces the sense of certainty and the overrated 
belief in human ingenuity and technology (Davoudi  2012 ) . 
 While the arrival of climate change   , adaptation, mitigation and resilience to the 
planning agenda have all been quite recent, certain elements are not new, especially 
in the Netherlands , where certain activities to minimise and prevent  ﬂ ooding have 
been part of the planning agenda since planning began. The management of land 
and water has a very long tradition in the Netherlands due to the natural location of 
coastal zones below sea level. For centuries, the Dutch have been constructing 
waterways, earthworks and barriers to water, including polders, canals, dikes, dams, 
locks, windmills and sluices. Floods and storms over the centuries have tested the 
durability of the Dutch system of water management, and not all have withstood 
these tests, sometimes with disastrous consequences. 
 For example, serious  ﬂ oods in the south of the Netherlands in 1906 led to changes 
in the construction methods of dikes, but less than 50 years later, these adjustments 
proved to be inadequate during the  ﬂ oods of 1953. The dikes in the south-western 
parts of the country were unable to protect the country against the combination of a 
high spring tide and a north-westerly storm, resulting in over 1,800 deaths (compa-
rable to the death toll from Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans in 2005). The events 
of 1953 prompted immediate action by the national government. The Delta 
Commission was established and was tasked with suggesting measures to prevent 
future  ﬂ ooding. Following the advice of the Delta Commission, huge coastal engi-
neering works were launched to reduce the threats from the sea, including the con-
struction of the Eastern Scheldt and the Maeslant storm surge barriers at the entrance 
to the port of Rotterdam   . More recently, in 1993 and again in 1995, extremely high 
water levels in the Maas and Rhine Rivers tested the integrity of the dikes in the 
southern and central parts of the country. Thousands of people were evacuated as a 
precaution in the largest post-war evacuation ever to take place in the country. 
However, the dikes were able to withstand the high water levels on both occasions. 
The reaction to these near disasters of 1993 and 1995 was a traditional Dutch one 
– a mobilisation of all necessary resources to strengthen and enlarge the dikes and 
dams. By the late 1990s, the political climate had changed and anxiety about pos-
sible  ﬂ ooding had somewhat waned. Around the same time, the issue of climate 
change emerged. Some doubts were expressed about the appropriateness of tradi-
tional approaches to water management, and questions were raised about whether 
raising the height of the dikes and other traditional engineering approaches, such as 
pumping water out of low-lying areas, would be suf ﬁ cient to counter the effects of 
climate change. A government commission was established to advise on water man-
agement issues in the twenty- ﬁ rst century, known as the Commission on Water 
Management Twenty-First Century ( Commissie Waterbeheer 21e eeuw ). 
 One of the core conclusions of the commission was that there was a need to 
develop a closer relationship between water management and spatial planning. Two 
key recommendations were made. First, the maintenance of the water system should 
provide the preconditions for planning. The underlying assumption of this recom-
mendation was that spatial development had had a negative impact in the past on the 
capacity of water systems to handle large  ﬂ uctuations in water and that this needed 

215
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
to be changed. Second, the Netherlands had become more vulnerable to  ﬂ ooding 
because the majority of development had taken place in the low-lying areas that are 
the most susceptible to  ﬂ ooding, and consequently, the commission recommended 
that all land-use decisions needed to take into account the effects of development on 
the water system. In 2003, the “water test” was made a statutory requirement for 
assessing planning documents, providing an important mechanism for integrating 
water concerns into the planning process and consultations between the planning 
authorities and water authorities. However, such an approach proved to be compli-
cated in the institutional context, as the water boards occupy a separate functional 
tier of government with their own elected councils. 
 While the governance of adaptation and mitigation to climate change is relatively 
new, certain elements have been in place in the Netherlands for centuries under the 
long-established arrangements for water management, with administrative coopera-
tion between local communities to manage water evident even in the Middle Ages. 
The precursors to the contemporary Dutch water boards ( waterschappen ) were 
formed in the thirteenth century, and before the end of the eighteenth century (in 
1798), the national water agency ( Rijkswaterstaat ) had been established, which is 
now an executive agency of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment, primar-
ily responsible for managing national waterways and coastal defence. 
 13.3  Rotterdam’s Vulnerability to the Impacts 
of Climate Change 
 Rotterdam is one of the leading cities in the Netherlands in the  ﬁ eld of climate 
change adaptation initiatives (van den Berg  2010 ) . As the second city in the 
Netherlands with a population over 500,000, Rotterdam is one of the most highly 
urbanised parts of the country. It also contains the port of Rotterdam, situated at the 
con ﬂ uence of the River Maas and the North Sea, which is not just of major regional 
and national importance as the largest port in Europe, but as one of the largest ports 
in the world, it has also European and global signi ﬁ cance. 
 Much of the city region of Rotterdam lies at an altitude not much higher than the 
mean sea level. 1 Since climate change is predicted to increase both the severity and 
number of  ﬂ oods, huge investments are planned for development in the low-lying 
parts of the region. Rotterdam’s “city vision” for 2030, for example, identi ﬁ es sev-
eral areas for substantial new development in the low-lying parts of the city that are 
currently unprotected by dikes. 
 Climate change is expected to affect this urban coastal delta in numerous ways. 
Sea-level rise is expected to be a major disturbance, particularly if combined with 
 1  The average elevation of the area is approximately +3.25 m above Amsterdam Ordnance Datum 
(NAP) with some parts as low as +2.50 m NAP, which results in limited  ﬂ ooding typically once or 
twice a year. 

216
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
possible changes in storm surge conditions. These can increase the frequency of 
 ﬂ ooding and risks in these already  ﬂ ood-prone neighbourhoods. Other disturbances 
include higher temperatures in the summer and lower river levels, which may lead 
to problems related to electricity and drinking water supplies, and water and air 
quality. According to scenario studies, the strength of the heaviest storms is pro-
jected to increase, which will increase  ﬂ ood risks, during which port activities may 
need to be halted. Higher sea levels will mean that the Maeslant storm surge barrier 
will need to be closed more often, and as a result, river discharges into the sea will 
be blocked more frequently and additional capacity may be needed to retain extra 
river water temporarily. Occurrences of heavy rainfall are also projected to increase, 
which could result in  ﬂ ooding if the capacity of the drainage system is exceeded. 
 13.4  Manifestations of Resilience in Rotterdam ’s Planning 
Policies 
 Before examining for the presence of resilience concepts in planning policies in 
Rotterdam , this section begins by outlining the national policy, which has experi-
enced signi ﬁ cant change over recent years with a  ﬂ urry of interrelated policy docu-
ments on spatial planning, climate change and water management since 2006. There 
is of course also an important international context to resilience (both European and 
global), especially in relation to water management, climate change, and adaptation 
and mitigation issues. The supranational context is, however, excluded from the 
account below for the simple reason of brevity and simplicity. 
 13.4.1  The National Context 
 In the 5-year period between 2006 and 2010, a series of national policy documents 
with features of resilience were published in close succession, signalling a signi ﬁ cant 
shift in the direction and emphasis of Dutch policy on planning, water management 
and climate change . The beginning of this period (2006) was marked by the approval 
of a new national spatial planning strategy ( Nota Ruimte ) as well as a new Spatial 
Planning Act ( Wro ). 2 
 In January 2006, the National Spatial Strategy was approved by the Senate, setting 
out the government’s vision for spatial development in the Netherlands and the 
framework for national planning policy up to 2020. The document identi ﬁ ed the 
issue of water as one of the main guiding principles for spatial development (i.e. one 
of the essential starting points in the process of spatial planning). A similar approach 
 2  The new National Spatial Planning Act came into effect on 1 July 2008, replacing the previous act 
from 1965. 

217
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
had been proposed in the Fifth Note on Spatial Planning (published in 2001), but 
this never entered into force due to changes in the national political landscape 
(Priemus  2004 ) . On the issue of climate change , the National Spatial Strategy had 
signi ﬁ cantly more to say than preceding spatial planning policy documents . The 
2006 strategy recognised “major implications for the spatial development of the 
Netherlands” as a result of climate change, including the impacts of  ﬂ ooding and 
water shortage. According to the strategy, radical changes in water management 
were necessary under the threat of rising sea levels and greater extremes in rainfall 
and drought periods, especially in combination with ground subsidence and urbani-
sation in the low-lying western part of the country. These new approaches to water 
management have presented some important implications for spatial development, 
such as the ways in which new urban areas are developed in the future. 
 The 2007 Programme on Climate Adaptation and Spatial Planning underlined 
the importance of planning as a means of addressing climate change issues, calling 
for more attention to be given to the consequences of climate change, such as rising 
sea levels and greater river discharge volumes. Adaptation to climate change is 
largely a spatial issue, according to the programme, and climate proo ﬁ ng in the 
Netherlands represents one of the most important spatial challenges of the current 
century. Highlighting the need for mitigation alongside adaptation measures, the 
programme argued for solutions that  “combine mitigation and adaptation as effec-
tively as possible” . The programme recognised that, while mitigation relies on a 
global approach with global effects, adaptation is predominantly local or regional in 
scale. The concept of resilience also appeared several times in the programme; one 
example being the need for  “resistance, resilience and adaptive capacity ” to pro-
mote climate-proof planning – resistance in order to withstand extreme conditions; 
resilience in order to recover quickly once conditions return to normal; and adaptive 
capacity to cope with uncertainties, particularly related to the extent and pace of 
climate change. Resilience was thus considered in this programme to be about 
recovery and the speed at which it occurs. The Dutch coastal defence system, 
according to the document, provides an example of high resistance and low resil-
ience – it is able to withstand storm tides and heavy storms, but if the system fails, 
it will take a long time to restore it to its former state. 
 In September 2007, the national vision for water management ( Watervisie ) was 
published, in which long-term “climate-proof” policy guidelines (to increase capac-
ity to “withstand the effects of climate change ”) were set out, de ﬁ ning both adapta-
tion and mitigation measures as central pillars. The vision argued that greater efforts 
were needed to cope with the effects of climate change (i.e. adaptation) in addition to 
government efforts to make the energy economy    of the Netherlands    more sustainable 
and to reduce CO 2 emissions (i.e. mitigation). In line with the 2006 National Spatial 
Strategy, the national vision for water management highlighted the importance of 
water issues in planning, arguing that water must be a more decisive factor in deci-
sion-making on major issues in the  ﬁ elds of urbanisation, economic development, 
industry, nature, landscape and recreation. Physical infrastructure investments, such 
as for roads, urban networks and ports, also need to be climate proof, the vision 
argued, so as to reduce the vulnerability    of the Netherlands. The document also 

218
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
announced actions to identify new principles for climate-proof development as well 
as a set of criteria to ensure that the effects of climate change are factored into deci-
sions on major development projects and investment programmes. 
 In parallel with the development of the national vision for water management 
(see above), the National Adaptation Strategy was also developed in 2007, involv-
ing collaboration  between four ministries (Housing, Spatial Planning and the 
Environment; Transport, Public Works & Water Management; Agriculture, Nature 
and Food Quality; and Economic Affairs) as well as umbrella organisations repre-
senting the provinces (Association of Provincial Authorities), municipalities 
(Association of Netherlands Municipalities) and water boards (Association of Water 
Boards). Approved in November 2007, months after the national vision for water 
management, the programme closely echoed various messages contained within the 
water vision. The rationale for the programme was that even dramatic reductions in 
current emissions are insuf ﬁ cient to prevent climate change , as adaptation mea-
sures, in parallel with mitigation actions, are also required. According to the docu-
ment, even if the emissions policy achieves the desired result in the short term, 
adaptation measures will still be needed. 
 In the same month as the publication of the national vision for water manage-
ment, the Cabinet appointed an expert committee, the “Delta Commission”, with a 
mandate to formulate a vision for the long-term protection of the Dutch coast and 
its hinterland. The severe  ﬂ ooding in 1953 prompted the appointment of the  ﬁ rst 
Delta Committee to advise the government on how to protect the country against 
 ﬂ ooding (see above). The appointment of the second Delta Commission in 2007, on 
the other hand, was not in response to a serious disaster , but rather to address the 
serious threats originating from climate change . The mandate of the new Delta 
Commission was therefore broader than that of its predecessor. While the 1953 
Commission was primarily concerned with engineering solutions to address an 
acute threat, the 2007 Commission was tasked with making recommendations on 
how to protect the Dutch coast and the low-lying hinterland against the conse-
quences of climate change or, in other words, how to make the Netherlands “climate 
proof” in the long term: in short, providing protection against  ﬂ ooding while keep-
ing the country an attractive place to live, reside and work. The Commission was 
asked to look beyond water safety alone, and consequently it also examined the 
links between water and residential, employment and recreational activities, as well 
as agriculture, the natural environment, infrastructure and energy. A year after being 
formed, the Commission published its recommendations in September 2008. The 
Commission’s report stated that climate change poses some major adaptation prob-
lems for the Netherlands and has implications for the organisation of the entire 
country. As a consequence, spatial planning will have to adapt, the Commission 
argued, implying that land uses have to be better integrated and that water needs to 
be a guiding principle for development. In other words, planning and development 
need to be organised as far as possible in accordance with natural processes. The 
Commission recommended that  ﬂ ooding should be managed by a combination of 
measures that either lower the risk (such as higher and stronger  ﬂ ood defences) or 
reduce the impact of  ﬂ ooding (such as the regulation or zoning of land uses, the 

219
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
compartmentalisation or containment of areas liable to  ﬂ ooding and the development 
of early warning systems). It was also recommended that all development decisions 
should be based on a full cost-bene ﬁ t analysis that includes the present and future 
costs for all parties involved. The view of the Commission was that passing on the 
costs of local decisions to another administrative level or to society as a whole 
would be unacceptable, stating that the costs must be borne by those who bene ﬁ t the 
most. The Commission’s report (known as the  Delta Report ) also highlighted the 
speci ﬁ c case of Rotterdam where issues of  ﬂ ood protection and spatial planning are 
particularly important, “[h]igher discharges combined with sea level rise have con-
sequences for  ﬂ ood protection at ‘critical’ locations, such as Rotterdam and other 
towns in the Rhine delta area, as well as for the land use and spatial planning” (p. 29). 
 In September 2008, a “structural vision” for the Randstad (entitled  Randstad 
2040 ) was adopted as part of the government’s “Randstad Urgency Programme”, 
aimed at speeding up decisions on priority investment projects (van der Burg and 
Vink  2008 ) . Randstad 2040 was developed according to the 2006 Spatial Planning 
Act, requiring all governments (national, regional and local) to present spatial poli-
cies for their territories in their structural visions to outline the future spatial devel-
opment of their area and to explain how the development is to be achieved. According 
to van der Burg and Vink  ( 2008 ) , there were two main reasons behind the prepara-
tion of Randstad 2040. The  ﬁ rst reason was to add regional detail to the 2006 
National Spatial Strategy (described above). The second was to look beyond the 
time horizon of the National Spatial Strategy, since investment decisions about 
large infrastructure and new housing development can easily extend beyond 2020. 
The plans presented in the Randstad 2040 structural vision were based on four guid-
ing “principles”, one of which concerned safety and climate resilience. According 
to the document, climate proo ﬁ ng and water management principles should guide 
the location, design and/or construction of urban locations, critical infrastructure 
and vulnerable developments. Recognising that the future, especially the long term, 
is uncertain, the vision highlighted the desire to make choices that are robust and 
 ﬂ exible: robust in the sense that the choices will be useful even in the event of 
unforeseen circumstances and developments and  ﬂ exible in the sense that the 
choices should allow room for adaptation to new ideas, knowledge and innovations 
on the way to 2040. In terms of water security, the vision identi ﬁ ed a range of mea-
sures, including continued investment in both existing and new barriers (reinforce-
ment of dikes), more space for the drainage and disposal of water and improving 
public awareness of water and its risks. 
 The National Water Plan, adopted by the Cabinet in December 2009, outlined the 
government’s water management policies to be implemented in the period from 2009 
to 2015. As the successor to the Fourth National Policy Memorandum on Water 
Management of 1998, the plan elaborated the recommendations of the 2008 Delta 
Commission (see above), mainly focusing on  ﬂ ood protection and water supply 
issues. Echoing similar statements from the Delta Commission’s 2008 report and the 
Randstad 2040 structural vision (see above), the National Water Plan called for 
greater attention to water in decisions concerning urbanisation, commerce, industry 
and agriculture, nature, landscape and leisure activities in order to achieve more 

220
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
sustainable and climate-proof development. Providing more space for water was 
one of the key proposals for withstanding the consequences of climate change   . 
Spatial reservation, according to the report, can play a key role in the maintenance of 
the water system, and this must be re ﬂ ected in local planning policies. The water plan 
highlighted the fact that areas outside the dikes (unlike the areas inside the dikes) are 
not subject to legal standards for protection against water, with the basic assumption 
being that the inhabitants and users themselves are primarily responsible for taking 
mitigating measures and should bear the risk of any water damage, which is of 
speci ﬁ c relevance to many parts of Rotterdam    (see below). Explicit reference to the 
issue of resilience can be found in the document, which contends that a water system 
 “is more robust when it makes use of or gives room to natural processes, as natural 
systems offer resistance to disruptions themselves and possess a degree of resilience 
that allows them to continue to function after a disruption and to either recover or 
adapt to altered circumstances”  (pp. 75–76). Climate mitigation and adaptation 
issues can also be found in the plan. According to the document,  “there is broad 
international recognition of the fact that, apart from counteracting climate change 
[mitigation], it is also very important for sustainable development to adapt and move 
along with it in order to limit the consequences for society [adaptation]. Solving 
water issues will be central to global adaptation to climate change”  (p. 242).  
 13.4.2  Resilience in Local Plans 
 The local level of planning (performed by different local organisations such as 
municipalities, semipublic organisations and public corporations) is closely linked 
to national planning strategies. Towns and cities bear primary responsibility for the 
implementation of urban policy in collaboration with central government. Cities are 
expected to formulate their own goals in a long-term development programme, 
while central government awards special-purpose grants to the cities, providing 
substantial  ﬁ nancial resources. Cities can spend the money freely within designated 
sectors and can tailor these to local conditions. In this respect, the central govern-
ment plays a crucial role in Dutch urban policy (Taşan-Kok 2010). 
 Rotterdam ’s Port Vision, produced by the city of Rotterdam in cooperation 
with the port of Rotterdam and the Rijnmond Environmental Protection Agency, 
was adopted in 2004 and set out a framework for future spatial and economic 
development in the port of Rotterdam, an area that covers approximately 10,500 ha 
and extends almost 40 km along the River Maas from the city centre of Rotterdam 
to the North Sea. The vision was developed around three objectives: (1) to rein-
force the international competitive position of the port and industrial complex, (2) 
to strengthen the economic structure of the city and region, and (3) to contribute 
to a better residential and living environment in the region. While general envi-
ronmental issues clearly form part of the third objective, more speci ﬁ c references 
to issues such as climate change   , resilience, adaptation or mitigation are absent 
from the document. The main environmental issues considered in the Port Vision 

221
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
were noise, nuisance, hazardous substances and water quality. Protecting the port 
against  ﬂ ooding was mentioned in the document but only as a subject for future 
investigation. 
 In 2005, the Regional Spatial Plan for Rotterdam (2005–2020) was adopted and 
covered both the city of Rotterdam as well as its adjoining municipalities. The docu-
ment had three main policy goals: (1) to improve the quality of residential environ-
ments, (2) to strengthen and diversify the economic structure of the city, and (3) to 
increase social cohesion. In contrast to Rotterdam’s Port Vision (adopted in 2004), 
the Regional Spatial Plan contained several direct references to climate change , 
mainly in relation to water management issues. The plan noted, for example, that 
climate change  “requires exceptional responses in order to keep the region pro-
tected against  ﬂ ooding and water shortages” with the consequence that, in some 
areas,  “waterways will need to be widened and polders will need to be adapted for 
the temporary storage of excess rainwater (peak storage)” (p. 48). 
 In 2007, the Urban Vision for Rotterdam    up to 2030 was adopted, in which the 
future direction of desirable development for the city was presented. The document 
set out plans for future spatial development in the city, targeting a strong economy    
with more jobs and an attractive environment for living and working. Climate 
change received little attention (being mentioned just once) in this document of 
more than 160 pages, noting only that a large number of areas in Rotterdam inside 
the dikes are facing a serious shortfall in water storage capacity and that this prob-
lem will only be increased by climate change and further urbanisation in the city. 
No references to adaptation or mitigation issues (or resilience) were contained in 
the vision. 
 The Rotterdam Water Plan ( Rotterdam 2 Waterplan ), also adopted in 2007, 
described how the city of Rotterdam and the water board would deal with water in 
the city in the future. The issue of climate change    was substantially more prominent 
in this report than the Urban Vision for Rotterdam. According to the report, climate 
change is becoming increasingly evident, and this is likely to have some major con-
sequences for Rotterdam. The plan distinguished between two broad types of mea-
sures to respond to climate change. The  ﬁ rst (termed “hardware”) concerns  ﬂ ood 
protection and includes modi ﬁ cations to dikes, barriers and other water protection 
structures, while the second concerns  ﬂ ood resistance (termed “software”) and 
includes “waterproof” design and construction processes for development. The latter 
(making the city more “waterproof”), according to the report, will require new 
approaches to water storage, water quality and water protection, paying speci ﬁ c 
attention to development in Rotterdam outside the dikes (i.e. areas not protected from 
higher river water levels), noting that these areas present an important development 
opportunity for attractive new residential areas on the river. However, the location of 
these developments (and their vulnerability    to higher river water levels) requires that 
designs will need to closely consider adaptation options, such as raising the ground 
level for development or more innovative methods, such as  ﬂ oating structures. 
 The year 2007 also saw the establishment of the Rotterdam Climate Initiative 
(RCI), which involves collaboration on the issue of climate change    between the 
port of Rotterdam, the city of Rotterdam, the Rijnmond Environmental Protection 

222
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
Agency (DCMR) and a group of local employers (Deltalinqs). The initiative arose 
in response to agreements to reduce carbon emissions and increase energy 
ef ﬁ ciency in large cities across the world, supported by the Clinton Climate 
Initiative and the Large Cities Climate Leadership Group (since renamed C40). 
Alongside a climate reduction target (50% reduction of CO 2 emissions by 2025 
compared to 1990 levels), the RCI also has the ambition of increasing the city’s 
resilience to climate change and becoming a leading city in water innovation. As 
part of the initiative, various activities aimed at making Rotterdam more “climate 
proof” have been implemented, which are itemised in the RCI’s annual pro-
gramme, entitled “Rotterdam Climate Proof”. The top priority in this regard, 
according to the 2009  Rotterdam Climate Proof  report, is protecting the city and 
port against  ﬂ ooding, both inside and outside the dikes. The report announced the 
intention to ensure that all future climate developments are anticipated and 
re ﬂ ected in future spatial plans, implementation projects and management activi-
ties from 2012 onwards. The  Stadshavens area of Rotterdam, which mainly con-
sists of industrial harbour areas that are entirely outside the dikes (see below), 
received special attention in the Rotterdam Climate Proof programme due to its 
location and the fact that the area offers substantial potential for new development 
in the city. According to the report, climate resilience and sustainability are essen-
tial preconditions of any development. 
 Produced in 2010 for the Rotterdam Climate Initiative and the Rotterdam Climate 
Proof programme, the  Rotterdam Sustainability Guide ( Rotterdam Duurzaam 
Wijzer ) was aimed at assisting designers, project managers and policymakers in 
translating sustainable concepts into practice in the speci ﬁ c areas of climate adapta-
tion, energy use, transport and mobility, rainwater, the use of materials and green 
space. For each of these six areas, the sustainability guide identi ﬁ ed practical exam-
ples of development options at regional, urban, neighbourhood and building scales 
that might contribute to sustainable urban development. On the issue of climate 
adaptation, the guide identi ﬁ ed three ways in which development can contribute to 
more climate-proof development: (1) measures that minimise the  probability of 
 ﬂ ooding, (2) measures that minimise the  consequences of  ﬂ ooding, and (3) mea-
sures that stimulate recovery from  ﬂ oods (Table  13.1 ).  
 In the speci ﬁ c case of the  Stadshavens  area of Rotterdam   , recent plans from 
2011 have been produced that refer directly to the issues of climate change    and 
resilience. This is perhaps unsurprising given the area’s location entirely outside 
the protective dikes, making it much more vulnerable to  ﬂ ooding than other parts 
of the city. The structural vision for the  Stadshavens area ( Ontwerp Structuurvisie 
Stadshavens Rotterdam ) was approved in 2011 and is a mandatory plan that 
describes general planning policies for the area up to 2025 while also considering 
certain development issues up to 2040. Climate-proof development accounted for 
one of the ten development principles for the area, which, according to the struc-
tural vision document, is an important prerequisite for a sustainable business and 
residential environment. The key focus, it argues, must be on measures that increase 
both  resistance (i.e. reducing impacts) and  resilience (i.e. reducing the effects of 
the impacts).   

223
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
 Table 13.1   Development options for climate change adaptation from Rotterdam Sustainability Guide 
 Minimising probability 
 Minimising consequences 
 Stimulating recovery 
 Region 
 Improved dikes 
 Compartmentalisation between dikes 
 Priority for recovery from social disorder 
 New Delta plan 
 Cool recreational opportunities 
 Flood risk maps 
 Emergency shelters 
 Early warning system 
 Evacuation plan 
 City 
 De-hardened and greened surfaces 
 Alleviated public infrastructure 
 Priority for recovery of public space 
 Public green and water zones 
 Adopted traf ﬁ c management during 
evacuations 
 Room for innovative storage 
 Heat stress plan 
 Accommodation of heat stress victims 
 Avoid vulnerable functions in vulnerable areas 
 Water nuisance fund 
 Backup energy and water systems 
 District 
 Buildings integrated into dykes 
 Safe havens 
 Passive water drains 
 Integrally heightened areas 
 Green walks 
 Collective green gardens 
 Elevated sidewalks 
 Rainwater in ﬁ ltration systems, wadis a 
 Building 
 Green frontages 
 Wetproof ground  ﬂ oors 
 Availability of pumps 
 Permanent cooling options 
 Dry-proof ground  ﬂ oors 
 Wetproof decorations 
 Buildings on mounds 
 Sun blinds 
 Self-reliance 
 Source: Adapted from Municipality of Rotterdam  ( 2010 ) 
 a Drainage channels 

224
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
 13.5  Discussion and Conclusions 
 This chapter has argued that urban resilience is concerned with both adaptation and 
mitigation, and it has been shown how Dutch climate change policy has experi-
enced a shift from one dimension of resilience to the other. The analysis of recent 
policies on spatial planning, water management and climate change (as well as 
discussions with policy of ﬁ cials at the national and subnational levels) reveals that 
the concept of resilience has recently begun to feature in policy-making not only at 
the national level but also at the local level, as illustrated in the case of Rotterdam . 
Nevertheless, a number of different interpretations of the concept are apparent 
within policy documents    (and between policy of ﬁ cials). In general, urban resil-
ience is often interpreted more heavily in terms of adaptation than mitigation, and 
this is true at both the national and local policy levels. At the local level, the greater 
emphasis on adaptation policy is not entirely surprising since mitigation is often 
considered to be a matter for national or international policy-making, whereas 
adaptation measures, on the other hand, are often seen as local (Biesbroek et al. 
 2009  ) . The greater emphasis on adaptation than mitigation at the national level is 
more surprising, but as can be seen in the analysis of recent policies, this is the situ-
ation that appears to have emerged. One    explanation for this is outlined by de Vries 
 ( 2006 :227), who argues that  “it is inherently more dif ﬁ cult to gain support for miti-
gating measures than for adaptive measures”  in a country like the Netherlands and 
that it is often  “easier to accept that climate change is unavoidable than to be 
convinced that changing your way of life in a small country will have a serious 
impact on global climate change”.  
 Although some policy documents can be found that refer directly to the concept 
of resilience, more of these documents discuss climate change , adaptation and/or 
mitigation without referring to resilience. Given that resilience is a relatively new 
policy concept, what is surprising is that the concept occurs as often as it does in 
current policy, both at the national and subnational levels. The term seems to have 
entered into policy relatively quickly in the Netherlands in comparison to many 
other countries, which may in part be due to the vulnerability of the country to cli-
mate change. Nevertheless, urban resilience remains a fuzzy concept both at home 
and abroad, which may of course be due to its relative immaturity, meaning that 
more clarity may emerge in the future. However, this is not to say that the concept 
is too vague to be of practical use. As Lagendijk  ( 2003 ) suggests, fuzzy concepts 
can be useful because they can provide focal points for internal debate and  “contrib-
ute to teaching and dialogue with other disciplines and policy making” (p. 726). 
 Changes in the political landscape of the Netherlands    at the turn of the twenty-
 ﬁ rst century provide one explanation for the emergence of so many policy docu-
ments on spatial planning, water and climate change over the last decade, with 
the increasing global interest in climate change issues providing another expla-
nation for changes in policy. Irrespective of the reasons behind the policy changes, 
several observations can be made about the nature of these changes. In short, issues 
of climate change (especially issues concerning  ﬂ ooding and water management) 

225
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
are increasingly being advocated as being central to spatial planning decisions. 
As a consequence, more attention is being given to water in Dutch planning. 
Dutch climate change mitigation policies and actions, many of which predate the 
turn of the twenty- ﬁ rst century, have recently been supplemented by the introduc-
tion of adaptation policies. The notion of resilience in an urban context (or urban 
resilience) can already be found in a number of policy documents in the 
Netherlands – sometimes explicitly, and elsewhere more implicitly. Differences 
in the way the term is used and construed in policy are apparent. According to 
interviews with policy of ﬁ cials carried out by the authors, there is a broad range 
of interpretations of the concept among public of ﬁ cials dealing with spatial plan-
ning, climate change, and adaptation and mitigation issues. 
 The importance of climate change for spatial planning in the Netherlands has 
been elevated since the turn of the twenty- ﬁ rst century, notably since the publication 
of the National Spatial Strategy in 2006. Although the status of water in planning 
may have been elevated, there is of course no guarantee that this has in ﬂ uenced 
development patterns. Wolsink  ( 2006 ) , for example, contends that  “water is 
[of ﬁ cially] proclaimed as an ordering element, yet actual spatial developments still 
follow lines of economic and social priorities” (p. 473). 
 Several recent national policy documents make explicit reference to resilience, 
although differences in the interpretation of the concept are apparent. The 2007 
Programme on Climate Adaptation and Spatial Planning, for example, refers to the 
concept of resilience several times, including references to the need for  “resistance, 
resilience and adaptive capacity ” to promote climate-proof planning. Resistance is 
used here as a synonym for the ability to withstand extreme conditions, while resil-
ience refers to the speed of recovery . It bears close similarity to the second of the 
two main dimensions of urban resilience discussed above. 3 Resistance is considered 
to be important for climate-proof (or resilient) planning, but does not appear to be 
considered as part of the concept of urban resilience. The 2009 National Water Plan 
also makes explicit reference to the concept of resilience, where it is again seen in 
terms of the ability to recover from disruption, while resistance is considered as 
complementary to resilience but somewhat separate from it. References to resil-
ience can also be found in some local policy documents for the city of Rotterdam 
from 2005 onwards. In common with the way in which it is de ﬁ ned in national 
policy, resilience is frequently considered as being primarily concerned with adap-
tation, while mitigation and resistance (i.e. reducing impacts), on the other hand, are 
rarely considered in policy to be part of the concept of urban resilience. This is evident, 
for example, in the structural vision for the  Stadshavens area, which distinguishes 
between policy measures that increase  resistance  to disruption and those that promote 
 resilience . 
 3  The two main dimensions of urban resilience discussed above are (1) the system’s robustness (or 
its strength to withstand disturbance) and (2) the speed with which this recovery of function is 
achieved (or  ﬂ exibility of response). 

226
D. Stead and T. Taşan-Kok
 Although not explicit in policy, the development of no-regret measures (i.e. measures 
that are effective under a range of possible future conditions) is a crucial part of 
resilient decision-making. After all, the whole thrust of the concept of resilience is 
that systems (whether ecosystems, individuals, organisations, cities or regions) need 
to be able to cope with change, both in terms of minimising disruption and maximising 
the rapidity of response. An interesting example illustrating the importance of 
implementing no-regret measures is highlighted in the structural vision for the 
 Stadshavens area. Preparations for a climate adaptation programme in the Rijnmond-
Drechtsteden Delta 4 (which encompasses the  Stadshavens area) may have signi ﬁ cant 
potential implications for future development choices. A variety of different options 
is being considered for water management in this delta area, ranging from a fully 
open water system to one which is completely closed. The various options under 
consideration will have different implications for water levels (and their  ﬂ uctuation), 
and by consequence, these water management options will also have implications 
for the layout of development and the required height of dikes. Because a  ﬁ nal deci-
sion on the preferred water management strategy for the delta area will probably not 
be made before 2014, the structural vision highlights the importance of implement-
ing no-regret measures. 
 The  ﬂ exibility in decision-making in cities also forms a crucial part of urban 
resilience. This point can also be illustrated using the case of the  Stadshavens area, 
where most development decisions are made by the municipality (the competences 
for development decisions in areas outside the river dikes are currently under debate 
in the Netherlands ). The current development policy in the city of Rotterdam pre-
scribes minimum standards for the height of the ground relative to high water levels 
on which development can take place. If the ground level is too low, the area cannot 
be developed unless the ground is  ﬁ rst raised. This process can be very costly and 
does not differentiate between land uses and the different levels of protection they 
require. In response to this, the structural vision proposes new guidelines for devel-
opment, including a differentiation between building types, where vulnerable build-
ings and land uses (e.g. residential development) are given more protection against 
 ﬂ ooding than less sensitive buildings and land uses (e.g. parks or industrial storage). 
In other words, acceptable  ﬂ ood risks are higher in some places than in others. In 
addition, because  ﬂ ooding is only likely to occur at high tide and will never last 
more than a few hours, various development options are proposed that may be able 
to cope with these risks. Examples cited in the structural vision include “dry-proof” 
development, where public spaces can be  ﬂ ooded without damage and allow build-
ings to stay dry, and “wetproof” building techniques, where water cannot easily 
penetrate buildings. 
 Spatial planning has the potential to combine adaptation and mitigation mea-
sures and to ensure that these measures are complementary, and this is where atten-
tion needs to be focused in spatial planning in the future. Having said this, it is also 
 4  Preparations for a climate adaptation programme in the Rijnmond-Drechtsteden Delta involve 
cooperation between national and regional governments. 

227
13 Urban Resilience, Climate Change and Land-Use Planning in Rotterdam 
important to recognise that resilience is not just about planning and land use, as it 
also needs to take people, and how they act in urban areas, into account. In other 
words, urban resilience should be concerned with the physical environment but also 
with social and behavioural dimensions. After all, the ability of cities to respond and 
change to threats and disruptions has a strong social component (related to the idea 
of social capital) in addition to the form and layout of cities. 
 References 
 Biesbroek, R., Swart, R. J., & van der Knaap, W. M. J. (2009). The mitigation-adaptation dichotomy 
and the role of spatial planning.  Habitat International, 33 (3), 230–237. 
 Davoudi, S. (2012). Climate risk, resilience and security: New ways of seeing ‘the environment’ in 
the English planning system.  European Planning Studies, 20 (1), 49–69. 
  de Vries, J. (2006). Climate change and spatial planning below sea-level: Water, water and more 
water.  Planning Theory and Practice, 7 (2), 223–227. 
 Godschalk, D. R. (2003). Urban hazard mitigation: Creating resilient cities.  Natural Hazards 
Review, 4 (3), 136–143. 
 Hajer, M. A. (1995).  The politics of environmental discourse . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Kabat, P., Vellinga, P., Aerts, J., Veraart, J. A., & van Vierssen, W. (2005). Climate proo ﬁ ng the 
Netherlands.  Nature, 438 , 283–284. 
 Lagendijk, A. (2003). Towards conceptual quality in regional studies: The need for subtle critique 
– A response to Markusen.  Regional Studies, 37 (6/7), 719–727. 
 Leichenko, R. (2011). Climate change and urban resilience.  Current Opinion in Environmental 
Sustainability, 3 (3), 164–168  . 
 Municipality of Rotterdam. (2010).  Rotterdam sustainability guide . Rotterdam: Department of 
Public Works, Municipality of Rotterdam. 
 Nicholls, R. J., Hanson, S., Herweijer, C., Patmore, N., Hallegatte, S., Corfee-Morlot, J., Chateau, 
J., & Muir-Wood, R. (2007).  Ranking of the world’s cities most exposed to coastal  ﬂ ooding 
today and in the future (OECD Environment Working Paper No. 1) (ENV/WKP(2007)1). 
Paris: OECD. 
 Priemus, H. (2004). Spatial memorandum 2004: A turning point in the Netherlands’ spatial devel-
opment policy.  Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geogra ﬁ e, 95 (5), 578–583. 
 Swart, R. J., & Raes, F. (2007). Making integration of adaptation and mitigation work: 
Mainstreaming into sustainable development policies?  Climate Policy, 7 (4), 288–303. 
 Taşan-Kok, T., & Baeten, G. (Eds.). (2011).  Contradictions of Neoliberal Planning: Cities, policies, 
and politics. Dordrecht: Springer. 
 van den Berg, M. (2010).  Climate change adaptation in Dutch local communities risk perception, 
institutional capacity and the role of local government (CSTM Report). Enschede: University 
of Twente,   www.utwente.nl/mb/cstm/reports  . Accessed 05 Feb 2011. 
 van den Berg, M., Lafferty, W. M., & Coenen, F. J. H. M. (2010). Adaptation to climate change 
induced  ﬂ ooding in Dutch municipalities. In P. Martens & C. Chang (Eds.),  The social and 
behavioural aspects of climate change. Linking vulnerability, adaptation and mitigation 
(pp. 130–156). Shef ﬁ eld: Greenleaf Publishing. 
 van der Burg, A. J., & Vink, B. L. (2008, September 19–23).  Randstad Holland 2040 . Paper presented 
at the 44th ISOCARP Congress, Dalian, China. 
 Wolsink, M. (2006). River basin approach and integrated water management: Governance pitfalls 
for the Dutch space-water-adjustment management principle.  Geoforum, 37 (4), 473–487. 

229
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8_14, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 14.1  Introduction 
 The mission of the planner has never been as frustrating as it is today. While 
planning practice is littered with such terms as democratisation, participation and 
collaborative decision making, most planners have strong doubts as to whether they 
are ful ﬁ lling their primary mission, that is, to prepare cities for the future. Their role 
today has rather become one of solving daily problems to satisfy the interests of the 
dominant actors in the urban system. 
 In the 1970s, sustainable development was a new approach that reminded 
planners of their responsibilities – to target economic and social development while 
also recognising the needs of all living organisms and the earth. The excitement and 
enthusiasm brought by the sustainability concept, however, has faded since the 
1980s under the increasing dominance of the neoliberal ideology, neoliberalisation 
and market-friendly policies having affected the way cities develop and function 
since the late 1970s. Competitiveness , globalisation , networking , innovativeness 
and creativity    formed the bases of the new practices, bringing legitimacy to a number 
of urban projects that in previous periods had been frowned upon. Serving the real 
 A.  Eraydin ,  Ph.D. (*)
 Department of City and Regional Planning, Faculty of Architecture ,  Middle East Technical 
University ,  Universiteler Mah. Dumlupinar Bulv. No: 1 ,  06800  Ankara ,  Turkey 
e-mail:  ayda@metu.edu.tr 
 T.  Taşan-Kok ,  Ph.D. 
 OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment ,  Delft University of Technology ,
 2628 BX  Delft ,  The Netherlands 
 e-mail:  m.t.tasan-kok@tudelft.nl 
 Chapter 14 
 The Evaluation of Findings and Future 
of Resilience Thinking in Planning 
 Ayda  Eraydin  and  Tuna  Taşan-Kok   

230
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
estate market became the core area of interest in planning, and short-range fragmented 
projects dominated planning practice . In an increasingly competitive world econ-
omy , marketing cities and creating global cities as nodes of the global economic 
system became a target all over the world, inspired by the exaggerated experience 
of a small number of cities, with little regard as to whether such an approach was 
relevant for them or not. The bene ﬁ ts have been widely discussed with only scant 
regard for costs and the social and environmental consequences; recently, however, 
several criticisms have been raised on the ideology of neoliberalism and the plan-
ning representing this ideology (Harvey  2005 ; McGuirk  2005 ; Peck et al.  2009 ; 
Purcell  2009 ; Taşan-Kok and Baeten  2011 ) . 
 The increasing criticisms found strong support in the increasing number of eco-
nomic and ecological crises that have been experienced in recent years, which were 
accepted as signals that the market mechanism that dominated policymaking and 
planning practices was failing to prepare cities to tackle unforeseen disturbances . 
The aftermath of the crises    showed that even places that were thought to be very 
robust were in fact not, increasing the frustration with the ongoing policies and 
planning practices . 
 The emergence of the concept of resilience at this time fostered a second wave of 
enthusiasm among academicians and some policymakers, emphasising “new adap-
tive strategies to manage and cope with change while sustaining their main func-
tions”. This was seen as an attractive solution and was quickly joined by “not only 
sustaining their main functions, but adopting new innovative strategies and becom-
ing even stronger after the crisis”. In other words, “gaining from the crisis” became 
the new way of perceiving the “resilience” concept. This change showed that the 
term resilience, which originated in the ecological sciences  ﬁ eld, had now found a 
home also in the  ﬁ eld of urban studies . Resilience is still not well established and is 
rather a fuzzy concept in urban studies since it has been adopted from other  ﬁ elds. 
However, as indicated in Chap.   3 of this book, it may become more de ﬁ ned when 
used not only in theoretical debates but also in research, especially in case studies . 
 This book attempts to decode this concept and to explore how it can help plan-
ners to overcome their agitation and frustration about the future. It would be unreal-
istic to claim that the book provides all the necessary answers for the creation of a 
new planning approach based on resilience; however, what can be suggested is how 
this new conceptual construct can be used in planning practice. 
 What the resilience approach offers is not completely new, as emphasis is on the 
instinct that has always been at the heart of planning, that is, to follow a systematic 
approach by contemplating the interactions between the components of the urban 
system. What can be considered new here is its suggested use as a “mind frame” 
when analysing existing systems and understanding that an impetus of change can 
result in different outcomes depending on a series of interactive impacts. 
 As de ﬁ ned in Chap.   2 , urban land-use planning is traditionally more concerned 
with attempting to minimise disturbance and reduce the risks and the negative 
effects of possible disturbances. Resilience thinking  ﬁ rst extends the remit of plan-
ning to include disturbance as an integral part of the planning process and suggests 
a shift in priority from those that aspire to  control the change to those that increase 

231
14 The Evaluation of Findings and Future of Resilience Thinking in Planning
the  capacity of the system to cope with, adapt to and shape change. The idea is to 
accept the fact that changes are going to take place, and while taking steps to reduce 
the risks, urban systems should be prepared to absorb these changes, reorganise 
themselves and develop new adaptive strategies to manage and cope with the change 
while improving their capacities. 
 It has taken some time for the resilience concept to become integrated into plan-
ning debates. As summarised in Chap.   3 , the evolution of the de ﬁ nition of resilience 
in urban planning literature has followed a three-stage path: Firstly,  system resil-
ience appeared as a concept in social sciences; secondly, the  resilience of cities as 
urban (ecological, social and economic) systems came under scrutiny, and a wide 
body of literature on social, economic and ecological resilience of urban systems 
began to accumulate; and  ﬁ nally, urban planning literature began to seek  principles 
to plan for a resilient city , while the emphasis shifted from coping with environmen-
tal hazards towards a more comprehensive approach that looked at the resilience of 
the urban system as a whole, considering economic, social and ecological distur-
bances as integrated parts of the system. 
 The  disturbance concept plays an important role in de ﬁ ning the resilience of a 
system. Although radical disturbances are mainly associated with environmental 
disasters and natural hazards, for urban systems , political, social and economic dis-
turbances ( ﬁ nancial crisis, political turbulence or public unrest) can be the main 
source of vulnerabilities. For this reason, economic and social resilience has also 
appeared as an important dimension in the sustainability of cities. Social resilience 
is about building institutions for social reorganisation and collective action, robust 
governance systems and a diversity of livelihood choices (Adger et al.  2005 ) , while 
economic resilience is connected to coping with the slow and/or radical changes 
that result from the interaction of endogenous and exogenous economic and other 
related processes. 
 Within the evolution of debates, it is the attribute of resilience that has received 
the most attention. Previous literature has de ﬁ ned several attribute s of resilience 
with the intention being to identify the measurable characteristics of resilient cities 
and the capacity of urban systems . According to Godschalk  ( 2003 ) , these attributes 
include  redundancy , diversity , ef ﬁ ciency , autonomy , strength , interdependence , 
adaptability and  collaboration . A resilient city is expected to be able to adapt to 
uncertainties through combinations of these attributes (Godschalk  2003 ; Fleischhauer 
 2008 ) . Walker and Salt  ( 2006 ) refer to these characteristics as “qualities”, adding to 
them a social dimension. According to them, the main qualities include  diversity, 
ecological variability, modularity, acknowledging slow variables, tight feedbacks, 
social capital, innovation, overlap in governance and ecosystem  services . 
 The cases presented in this book (see Chaps.   9 ,  10 ,   11 ,   12 , and   13  ) illustrate that 
some of these qualities can actually increase the resilience of cities against a wide 
range of vulnerabilities and include  recovery , connectivity, capital building, adapt-
ability , robustness,  ﬂ exibility , self-organisation  and transformability , which are 
de ﬁ ned in Chap.   3  and also tackled in the case study chapters. These attributes enable 
an urban system to be resilient in response to changes and retain its advantage, 
although for some of them, there is no such consensus, such as for connectivity. 

232
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
 Although most of resilience attributes have been inherited from the sustainability 
debate, as argued in Chap.   4 , resilience attributes are different to the attributes of 
sustainability, as some new features are considered and may have different interpre-
tations and assumptions. Moreover, sustainability and resilience do not always work 
in the same direction. For example, policies promoting high-density mixed-use set-
tlements and compact cities can reduce energy demand and transport emissions, 
although they may intensify the urban heat island effect and may pose problems for 
urban drainage (McEvoy et al.  2006 ) . Furthermore, the intensi ﬁ cation of the core 
areas of cities aiming at energy ef ﬁ ciency can inhibit natural indoor and outdoor 
ventilation (e.g. due to insuf ﬁ cient space between buildings) and is likely to lead to 
an increase in demand for ventilation and air conditioning, with additional impacts 
on climate change (Pizarro  2009 ) . There may also be indirect effects as a result of 
people escaping uncomfortable conditions in cities, leading to increased transport 
emissions (McEvoy et al.  2006 ) . 
 The main paradigm shift from sustainability to resilience lies in the consider-
ation of urban areas as complex adaptive systems. Furthermore, studying urban sys-
tems means bringing the linkage between ecology and planning into the spotlight 
and investigating the most adequate spatial patterns or forms for dealing with adver-
sities. However, one should keep in mind the complexity and variability of urban 
systems and recognise that there are different stages of equilibrium. Accordingly, 
what is considered as the best type of urban development or the best response to 
sudden environmental changes may evolve over time. 
 The studies included in this book represent one of the  ﬁ rst attempts to discuss 
and integrate the resilience concept into research with respect to urban planning 
following a methodological approach that is tested on different case studies . 
Although an outcome of an international project, this book is not merely a collec-
tion of different papers with different perspectives; instead, it introduces a search for 
a new understanding of the dynamics of cities in the contemporary world and evalu-
ates the planning practices that have been adopted and implemented in the recent 
past with a common perspective of “resilience thinking ” by drawing upon the expe-
riences of different case studies. This practice enables a discussion of resilience as 
a mind frame as well as a tool for planning with respect to the conceptual, method-
ological and contextual dimensions of such thinking. 
 14.2  Conceptual Contributions of Resilience in Planning: 
Resilience as a Mind Frame 
 The study introduced in Chap.   10 claims that urban policies should be prepared to 
provide guidance in resilience to deal with changes. If not, reaching a sustained 
level of development will be dif ﬁ cult, even if the policy instruments are imple-
mented in detail. In this respect, the resilience concept provides a point of focus and 
a useful framework. 

233
14 The Evaluation of Findings and Future of Resilience Thinking in Planning
 One of the main features of this framework is  treating urban areas as systems. 
Is this a new approach? Not exactly. During the quantitative revolution in planning 
in the 1960s, system thinking was very popular (see Forrester  1969,  1987 ; Chadwick 
 1971 ) . The main difference was that the 1970s system approach was focused on 
internal dynamics, taking certain subsystems and their relations into consideration, 
while the resilience approach shows that the external factors may be even more 
important than the components of the system. In fact, the novelty of resilience thinking 
lies in the importance of external dynamics that bring about important changes 
within the urban systems . 
 Planners, policymakers and the general public are all aware that cities are whole 
systems that constitute more than merely the sum of their parts. Cities can be seen as 
interconnected systems which may result in optimal or suboptimal outcomes. 
Moreover, external disturbances disseminated throughout the system may have a 
series of indirect impacts on each subsystem, some of which may be dif ﬁ cult to pre-
dict due to the multiplier effects of certain changes; and the nature of the existing 
resources may lead to different outcomes. The urban metabolism perspective is quite 
useful in the systematisation of the interconnections and in de ﬁ ning not only direct 
and indirect effects but also those that are induced (Resilience Alliance  2007 ) . The 
urban metabolism concept is de ﬁ ned as “the sum total of the technical and socioeco-
nomic processes that occur in cities, resulting in growth, production of energy, and 
elimination of waste” (Kennedy et al.  2007 : 44). There are some studies that look at 
the sustainability    of cities from this perspective and search for evidence of how the 
metabolism of an urban system may be disturbed, for instance, through a change in 
ground water levels, exhaustion of local materials, accumulation of toxic waste, sum-
mer heat islands, irregular accumulation of nutrients, etc. (Kennedy et al.  2007 ) . 
 For this reason, there is a need for systemic thinking, taking the interactive pro-
cesses among the subsystems and also the different subdivisions of an urban area 
into account. In Chap.   11 , Eraydin, Türel and Altay Kaya claim that even between 
small parts of the metropolitan area, the level of adaptive capacity may vary consid-
erably and that the adaptive capacity of one area may easily deteriorate the adaptive 
capacity of its neighbouring areas or even the metropolitan area as whole. This is 
true not only for environmental issues, but also for economic and social ones too. 
 These  ﬁ ndings are important to show,  ﬁ rstly, that the scale of analysis is very 
important; secondly, that the relationships between the parts and the whole need to 
be carefully de ﬁ ned (Chap.   12     by Schmitt, Greve-Harbo, Tepecik-Diş and Henriksson 
provides a good illustration of this way of thinking, showing that the concept of 
polycentricity    demands a high level of systemic understanding of the Stockholm city 
region in general, and its different regional urban cores in particular, with the help of 
a resilient perspective); and  ﬁ nally, how the impacts of a disturbance on one area may 
disseminate, which needs to be assessed carefully. Traditional planning mainly con-
siders the  ﬁ rst round of impacts, without taking the indirect affects into account. 
 The most important peculiarity of resilience thinking , however , is long-term 
future simulation models . What is striking in literature is that short-term decisions 
may have devastating effects on urban systems in the long term. As explained by 

234
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
Taşan-Kok and Stead in Chap.   13 , in some of the case study cities, namely, Lisbon , 
 Oporto and Istanbul   , planning according to different motivations increased the vul-
nerability of the cities because they were unable to predict the long-term conse-
quences of their policies and plans, which was something that was addressed in the 
Dutch long-term planning perspective. 
 The  ﬁ ve case studies in this book indicate that each city has different priorities, 
depending on its experience and inherited structural characteristics, as well as its 
own problems, and  each city has de ﬁ ned its own means and priorities when facing 
unexpected changes. The most resilient cities are those that foster creative and 
innovative approaches to global challenges by designating their weaknesses and 
vulnerabilities. It is also important to de ﬁ ne  no-regret conditions and measures 
(i.e. measures that are effective under a range of possible future conditions) for resil-
ient decision making. Flexibility in decision making in cities also constitutes a 
crucial part of urban resilience. In Chap.   13 , this point is illustrated by Taşan-Kok 
and Stead using the case of the Stadshavens area in Rotterdam . The current develop-
ment policy in the city of Rotterdam prescribes minimum standards for the height 
of the ground relative to high water levels on which development can take place. 
Where the ground level is currently too low, it cannot be developed unless the 
ground level is  ﬁ rst raised. This process can be very costly and does not differentiate 
between land uses and the different levels of protection they require. In response to 
this, the Structural Vision (strategic plan of the city) proposes new guidelines for 
development, including a differentiation between building types, where vulnerable 
buildings and land uses (e.g. residential development) are given more protection 
against  ﬂ ooding than less sensitive buildings and land uses (e.g. parks or industrial 
storage). In other words, what is considered as an acceptable  ﬂ ood risk in one area 
may be completely different in another. In addition, because  ﬂ ooding is only likely 
to occur at high tide and never last more than a few hours, various development 
options are proposed that might be able to cope with these risks. 
 Achieving cities that are more resilient often requires a shift in infrastructure , 
investment and a  prioritising of public investment . This can be done by prioritising 
funding for public transport, instead of solutions based upon individual car owner-
ship, or improving rail transport within the urban system, as discussed in Chap.   9 by 
Dias, Morgado and Costa. They show that for the case of Oporto , public investment 
in transport development can increase the accessibility of a certain area; and 
increases in land values resulting from such public investment can often attract pri-
vate development investment. As well as increasing the economic value of an area, 
focused public investments can also improve local economic activities and amenity 
values for the community as a whole. This emphasis on public investment is very 
important since from 1980 onwards, public investments in cities have dropped in 
almost all parts of the world, with priority shifting to market reliance and private 
investment as the new core of the agenda. 
 Lastly, the book suggests several  innovative and  ﬂ exible solutions . In Chap.   9 , 
Dias, Morgado and Costa show that the intensi ﬁ cation    of connectivity of the Alcantra 
neighbourhood, as designated in the urban plans, increased the resilience of this 
urban region. In Chap.   10 , where policy initiatives to address central Oporto ’s 

235
14 The Evaluation of Findings and Future of Resilience Thinking in Planning
declining urban population and increasing vacancy are presented by Oliveira, 
Martins and Cruz, urban rehabilitation instruments , such as lowering taxes in the 
intervention area (Baxia district) or providing different types of buildings, have 
been implemented to attract different demographic groups. In Chap.   11 , Eraydin, 
Türel and Altay show that a  ﬂ exible approach in encouraging foreign enterprises to 
locate in the case study area (Büyükdere Avenue) has led to the creation of new and 
diverse employment opportunities, making it possible to sustain the existing diver-
sity of the resident population in a rapidly changing urban core. In Chap.   12 , the 
 indicative regional planning  approach is investigated by Schmitt, Greve Harbo, 
Tepecik Diş and Henriksson, involving negotiations between municipalities and rel-
evant stakeholders as a means of resilient governance. In Chap.  13 , Taşan-Kok and 
Stead provide examples of  “dryproof” development, where public spaces can be 
 ﬂ ooded without damage and allow buildings to stay dry, and  “wetproof” building 
techniques, by which water cannot easily penetrate buildings. 
 14.3  Methodological Issues 
 It has been emphasised that an analysis of spatial dynamics is important for de ﬁ ning 
the attributes of resilience. The different spatial dynamics that may occur in urban 
development can be related to the concept of urban resilience, as we have seen in 
Chap.   4 . There is evidence that some attributes of resilience are related to urban pat-
terns and dynamics, although the context and local speci ﬁ cities may play an important 
role. It should be noted that most analyses of sustainable land use are also valid 
for the concept of resilience; however, the focus should be on the capacity to cope 
with disturbances, problems and adversities, which is essential when introducing a 
new perspective to the traditional paradigm of sustainable development. 
 The methodological framework introduced in Chap.   8 by Pinho, Oliviera and 
Martins allows an understanding of how far policies and plans can help to strengthen 
the resilience of urban systems . In Chap.   12 , by Schmitt, Greve-Harbo, Tepecik-Diş 
and Henriksson, it is noted that the concept of urban resilience has particularly 
helped to enrich this analysis by focusing on the institutional responses and individual 
re ﬂ ections on the hitherto unknown (until 2001) planning concept of polycentricity . 
In this context, attributes of resilience have special importance. In the case studies 
introduced in Chaps.   9 ,   10 ,   11 ,  12 , and   13 , the attribute s of resilience of an urban 
system are explored with the help of a set of indicators, which allow an understanding 
of to what extent the built environment is transformed to meet the new conditions 
de ﬁ ned by global processes, together with the transformability of the economic 
structure under global market pressures.  As the case study in Chap.   9 by Dias, 
Morgado and Costa exempli ﬁ es, the methodology highlights both the merits and the 
negative outcomes of the planning process. Dias, Morgado and Costa propose that 
 adaptability can be achieved through intensi ﬁ ed connectivity within the urban plans. 
In Chap.   10  , Oliveira, Martins, and Cruz analyse  recovery and  capital building as 
important attributes in making the Baxia area of Oporto resilient to a decline in 

236
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
population and the deprivation of the built environment. In Chap.   11 , Eraydin, Türel 
and Altay Kaya show through a detailed study of selected indicators that it is 
possible to de ﬁ ne the  adaptive capacity of an urban system to respond to changing 
conditions. Transformation projects, new urban built-up areas and changes in the 
composition of activities are positive indicators of adaptability, although the cost 
of adaptation is clear on the labour market s and increasing income differentials, 
leading to increasing residential segregation. In Chap.   12 ,  adaptability, transform-
ability and  connectivity  were analysed by Schmitt, Greve Harbo, Tepecik Diş, 
and Henriksson, who concluded that polycentricity can help to increase a city 
region’s robustness in the face of economic crises , the demise of speci ﬁ c sectors, 
urban sprawl,    social segregation, climate change and environmental degradation. 
As Taşan-Kok and Stead showed in Chap.   13 ,  adaptation can be achieved with 
long-term planning. 
 14.4  Contextual Issues 
 In the book, several contextual issues of resilience are highlighted, the  ﬁ rst being 
related to urban form . It is dif ﬁ cult to claim that one form of city is superior to 
another, since especially in the major cities of Europe (at least in the case study cit-
ies), different spatial dynamics leading to different urban forms can exist at the 
same time (see Chap.   5 ). De ﬁ ning a certain  urban form as more resilient means an 
overgeneralisation of the simplistic relations, which may be dif ﬁ cult to observe in 
major global cities. In previous literature, cities have been recognised as sustainable 
if they have a compact form as opposed to a sprawling form; a high level of con-
nectivity within their transport networks; a land use pattern that is well integrated 
with public transport, with options for walking and cycling; and de ﬁ ned areas of 
growth, or “town centres” that contain a mix of residential, commercial and recre-
ational land uses. Internationally, there has been a resurgence of interest in the more 
compact urban form, while in contrast some recent documents, such as the European 
Spatial Development Perspective (European Commission  1999 ) , advocate polycen-
tric urban development as a more  ﬂ exible and adaptive formulation of the built 
environment, and social relationships in the large urban regions with less environ-
mental impacts. 
 These types of generalisations may be misleading not only due to the speci ﬁ cities 
of each case but also due to the danger of assessment at a general level, which fails 
to take into account the iterative processes. For example, Chap.   11 shows that how 
people travel within the urban system is more important than the urban form itself, 
given the vital relationship between transport and the economic, physical and social 
aspects of the city. 
 Travel demand management is a widely used tool for changing people’s behav-
iour towards more sustainable forms of transport (Davis et al.  2007 ) . The measures 
used are commonly divided into two types: “hard” measures, such as high-occupancy 
vehicle and bus-only lanes, tolls, road pricing, congestion charges, parking pricing 

237
14 The Evaluation of Findings and Future of Resilience Thinking in Planning
and fuel taxes, and “soft” measures, including land-use planning, parking policies, 
travel marketing and organisational travel planning. Because of the way individual 
urban areas vary in shape, and the varying cost and effectiveness of different measures, 
an integrated range of measures can be tailored to the speci ﬁ c region or city. 
 Resilient infrastructure is important for creating robustness and adaptability , 
which in turn help cities to become more resilient. As mentioned earlier, the robustness 
or strength of an urban system allows it to withstand stress and disturbance, while 
adaptability in an urban system allows it to respond to changing conditions and 
objectives. Resilient infrastructure makes greater use of more localised and diverse 
ways of providing different services (electricity, drinking water, storm water 
amelioration and wastewater disposal) while also building capacity to cope with the 
different risks and crises (R&D, academic institutions, research facilities, etc.). 
Chapter   9 by Luis, Morgado and Costa clari ﬁ es how important the infrastructure is 
for increasing the resilience of certain areas. There are other examples of this, such 
as the use of solar technology, giving homeowners the ability to generate their own 
electricity. This sort of infrastructure can reduce the scale of damage from extreme 
events to more localised levels, such as in the event of a power failure, resilient 
infrastructure design can restrict the outage to a few suburbs rather than across the 
whole city (Ministry of Environment-New Zealand  2008 ) . 
 Improvements in urban quality support the adaptive capacity of urban areas. 
Chapter   10 by Oliveira, Martins and Santos Cruz provides an illustrative case of 
how rehabilitation can be important in creating positive impacts on urban areas. 
Quality urban planning and design results in places with a high level of use and 
value while also determining the nature of the spaces in which people interact within 
an urban form . 
 14.5  Towards a Research Agenda on Planning for Resilience 
 Despite the growing number of studies on urban resilience analysing how and under 
what conditions urban subsystems, institutions and other components of urban eco-
systems adapt to and develop innovative solution in response to (un)expected threats, 
how resilience planning may be integrated into planning is an area that has received 
little coverage in academic circles. 
 This book has introduced the major principles of the resilience planning para-
digm and has made a comparison with rational and communicative planning paradigms. 
Some exemplary case studies have been presented to introduce the diverse ways 
resilience thinking may be integrated into planning so as to ensure ideas and think-
ing is converted into  ﬁ rm action. Also, the different examples introduced in the book 
have shown the bene ﬁ ts in following an analytical approach, namely, identifying 
vulnerabilities and taking them as the focal point in an analysis of the adaptive 
capacity of urban subsystems, thus helping to de ﬁ ne both the priorities and red tape 
in the decision-making process. These explanatory studies, which make an evaluation 
of the planning practices    conducted in geographically delimited areas, raise questions 

238
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok
for future research and highlight several major challenges to adopting the resilience 
approach in planning. It is possible to de ﬁ ne the major challenges under  ﬁ ve 
headings: 
 First, there is a need for further research into the bene ﬁ ts of adopting a systems 
thinking, which focuses on the whole, not the parts, of a complex urban system and 
de ﬁ nes the impacts of interactive relations, interfaces and arrangements among the 
components of the urban subsystems. As urban planning not only deals with eco-
logical but also economic and social subsystems and metabolic  ﬂ ows, this is not an 
easy task. Still, understanding the co-evolutionary dynamics of urban systems and 
de ﬁ ning the substance of planning accordingly are vital for resilience planning   . 
This research shows that different urban systems have different organisational 
capacities to adopt a systemic approach, meaning that some systems with a high 
organisational capacity will adapt to the new situations and cope with the threats 
much faster and more effectively than others. For some systems, using a systems 
approach requires changing the basic construct of organisational and institutional 
bodies before making future plans. In such complex systems, is it possible to 
understand the existing relationships among the components of the urban systems 
and de ﬁ ne how they will evolve in the future? And how can such an understanding 
be enhanced? 
 Second, there is need to de ﬁ ne the critical nodes of urban systems when adapting 
to change and building transformative capacity, which also necessitates systemic 
and long-term thinking. However, the identi ﬁ cation of the critical issues and the 
priorities among them needs further clari ﬁ cation. How are planners able to de ﬁ ne 
the critical issues; and are they, in fact, in a position to de ﬁ ne critical issues or priori-
ties in the complex  ﬁ eld of political decision making? How far do the critical issues 
de ﬁ ned by studies of technical departments lead to planning decisions? Do we really 
need societal perception types of studies to de ﬁ ne critical issues and vulnerabilities? 
 Third, there is need to  ﬁ nd ways to de ﬁ ne short- and long-term priorities. This 
requires a multilevel governance approach in which the roles and responsibilities of 
decision-making bodies are clari ﬁ ed. This research has shown that, especially in the 
public sector, if the tasks and responsibilities are not made clear, each public organi-
sation tends to make its own plans and programmes according to its own priorities. 
In times of need, a lack of coordination in ideas will be an obstacle in the way of 
making a clear decision on how to address the threat. Moreover, how economic, 
social and ecological priorities can be matched with those that are technical and 
social in nature is one of the questions that are important in transforming resilience 
thinking into practice. 
 Fourth, introducing a value system is important when setting principles for the 
creation of resilient urban areas; however, this is not an easy task and raises several 
new questions. Is it possible to change the value systems imposed under the market-
dominated approaches and introduce new value systems that are more sensitive to 
the future needs of society? Is there a possibility to de ﬁ ne new planning ethics that 
will be based upon the concept of resilient urban areas? 
 Finally, how can resilience thinking be brought to the level of each individual 
and community, thus increasing awareness as part of the resilience strategy so that 

239
14 The Evaluation of Findings and Future of Resilience Thinking in Planning
it does not become just another fashionable policy term that appears in every policy 
document without real meaning for practice? The authors believe that the  ﬁ rst step 
is to increase awareness among the social scientists and planning scholars who 
think, write and carry out research to come up with convincing arguments for urban 
policy makers about the urgent need to change the way we understand just what 
planning is all about and how it should be practised. This book intends to contribute 
to the initial steps towards increasing the awareness of planners and thus changing 
the way we think. 
 References 
 Adger, W. N., Hughes, T. P., Folke, K., Carpenter, S. R., & Rockström, J. (2005). Social-ecological 
resilience to coastal disasters.  Science, 309 (5737), 1036–1039. 
 Chadwick, G. F. (1971).  A system view of planning . New York: Pergamon Press. 
 Davis, A., Valsecchi, C., & Fergusson, M. (2007).  Un ﬁ t for purpose: How car use fuels climate 
change and obesity . London: Institute for European Environmental Policy. 
 European Commission. (1999).  European Spatial Development Perspective (ESDP) .  http://ec.
europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docof ﬁ c/of ﬁ cial/reports/som_en.htm 
    Fleischhauer, M. (2008). The role of spatial planning in strengthening urban resilience. In H. 
J. Pasman & I. A. Kirillov (Eds.),  Resilience of cities to terrorist and other threats. Learning 
from 9/11 and further research issues (pp. 273–298). Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Forrester, J. W. (1969).  Urban dynamics . Cambridge, MA: M. I. T. Press. 
 Forrester, J. (1987). Lessons from system dynamics modelling.  System Dynamics Review, 3 (2), 136–149. 
 Godschalk, D. R. (2003). Urban hazard mitigation: Creating resilient cities.  Natural Hazards 
Review, 4 (3), 136–143. 
 Harvey, D. (2005).  A brief history of neoliberalism . Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Kennedy, C., Cuddihy, J., & Engel-Yan, J. (2007). The changing metabolism of cities.  Journal of 
Industrial Ecology, 11 (2), 43–59. 
 McEvoy, D., Lindley, S., & Handley, J. (2006). Adaption and mitigation in urban areas: Synergies 
and con ﬂ icts.  Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers Municipal Engineer, 159 (4), 
185–191. 
 McGuirk, P. (2005). Neoliberalist planning? Rethinking and re-casting Sydney’s metropolitan 
planning.  Geographical Research, 43 (11), 59–70. 
 Ministry of Environment-New Zealand. (2008).  Characteristics of sustainable and successful urban 
areas .   http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/urban/sustainable-development/characteristics-areas.html  . 
Accessed 10 Dec 2008. 
 Peck, J., Theodore, N., & Brenner, N. (2009). Neoliberal urbanism: Models, moments, mutations. 
 SAIS Review, XXIX (1), 49–66. 
 Pizarro, R. E. (2009). Urban form and climate change: Towards appropriate development patterns 
to mitigate and adapt to climate change. In S. Davoudi & J. Crawford (Eds.),  Planning for climate 
change . London: Earthscan. 
 Purcell, M. (2009). Resisting neoliberalization: Communicative planning or counter-hegemonic 
movements?  Planning Theory, 8 (2), 140–165. 
 Resilience Alliance. (2007).  Assessing resilience in social-ecological systems —a workbook for 
scientists . Available online at:   http://www.resalliance.org/3871.php  
 Taşan-Kok, T., & Baeten, G. (Eds.). (2011).  Contradictions of neoliberal planning: Contradictions 
of neoliberal planning: Cities, policies, and politics . Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Walker, B., & Salt, D. (2006).  Resilience thinking: Sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing 
world . Washington, DC: Island Press. 

241
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
 João Pedro T.A. Costa is an Architect, has Masters Degree on Contemporary 
Architectonic Culture (TU Lisbon), and a Ph.D. on Urbanism (TU Catalonia, 
Barcelona). He is Assistant Professor of Urbanism at the School of Architecture, 
TU Lisbon, where he develops his teaching, research and expertise activity, Visiting 
Professor at the Barcelona University (Ph.D. Programme), and the director of the 
Portuguese professional journal  Arquitecturas . Maintaining a general interest in 
urban and territorial planning issues, his current areas of research are waterfronts, 
climate change adaptation and urban regeneration. 
 Sara Santos Cruz  is Assistant Professor at the University of Oporto, Faculty of 
Engineering. She holds a Ph.D. in Civil Engineering from the Faculty of Engineering, 
the University of Porto. She has been working in several European and Portuguese 
research projects and studies, mainly in the  ﬁ elds of Urban Planning and Environmental 
Assessment. On-going research projects focus on the urban resilience and the impact 
of urban forms in the urban metabolism of cities. Her main scienti ﬁ c interests are 
Urban Planning and Environmental Impact Assessment. Her research focuses on the 
analysis of the impact of new urban products in contemporary cities, namely on the 
emergence of new forms of residential developments, creating profound transforma-
tions in the relation between the private and public spaces. 
 Luís F. Dias is a researcher in the Faculty of Architecture, TU Lisbon and Faculty 
of Sciences, University of Lisbon on the Climate Change Impacts, Adaptation and 
Mitigation Research Group. He has been involved in several National and European 
research projects and previous positions include research in the e-Geo/Centre for 
Geographical and Regional Planning Studies, New University of Lisbon. He gradu-
ated in Geography and Regional Planning (New University of Lisbon) specialized 
in Regional Planning, holds a postgraduate diploma in Geographical Information 
Systems (IST, School of Engineering, TU, Lisbon) and a Master Degree in Land 
Management. He is a Ph.D. student in Urbanism (Faculty of Architecture, TU Lisbon). 
The areas of his research interest are urban policies, climate change adaptation, 
urban  ﬂ oods, geographic information systems and remote sensing. 
 About the Authors 

242
About the Authors
 Ayda Eraydin is Professor in the Department of Urban and Regional Planning at 
Middle East Technical University, Turkey. She has Ph.D. in Istanbul Technical 
University, M.Sc. and BA in Urban and Regional Planning from the Middle East 
Technical University, Turkey. She had post-graduate study at London School of 
Economics, Department of Geography and served as visiting scholar in INTAN 
(Malaysia) and Institute of Developing Economies (Japan). Her research interests 
are local economic development, socio-spatial dynamics of cities and regions and 
planning theory and practice. She has been involved in several international projects 
and published on various aspects of development including innovation, networking 
and clustering and the socio-spatial implications of economic restructuring on 
urban areas. 
 Lisbeth Greve Harbo is a Research Fellow at Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial 
Development, Stockholm, Sweden. Lisbeth Greve Harbo holds an M.Sc. degree in 
Geography and Geoinformatics from the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Following her degree, she has been working as a research fellow at Nordregio – 
Nordic Centre for Spatial Development, Sweden. Her areas of interest are economic 
geography, urban and regional development, and quantitative methodology. 
 Anu Henriksson has been working as a research assistant at Nordregio since 2008. 
Before that she held a project researcher position at the University of Tampere, 
Finland, where she specialised in urban and regional development questions. Within 
her current Ph.D. studies she focuses on urban regeneration and local management 
in Malmö (Sweden). At Nordregio she has been involved in several research 
and evaluation projects dealing with urban development and transport, safety and 
sustainable issues. 
 Deniz Altay Kaya is a Lecturer in City Planning Department in Çankaya Üniversity, 
Ankara. She completed her Ph.D. in 2011 (City and Regional Planning, METU). 
Her areas of interest are the (re)structuring of socio-economic urban geography; the 
idea of urban mechanisms; urban resilience; informal economy and street vending; 
production of space, social space and everyday practices. 
 Peiwen Lu is a Ph.D. student at the Faculty of Architecture, Department of 
Urbanism. She has an M.Sc. in Architecture from National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan. Her ongoing Ph.D. research is on the relevance of urban resilience 
for strategic planning in coastal metropolitan regions. 
 Ana Martins is a young researcher working at CITTA Research Centre for Territory, 
Transports and Environment, at the Faculty of Engineering, University of Oporto. 
She has graduated in Architecture and obtained an M.Sc. in Methods of Intervention 
in the Architectural Heritage, at the Faculty of Architecture, University of Oporto. 
 So ﬁ a Morgado is Assistant Professor for Urbanism at the Faculty of Architecture, 
Technical University of Lisbon. She is an Architect, holding an M.Sc. in 
Contemporary Architectonic Culture (FA, TU Lisbon) and a Ph.D. in Urbanism 
(TU Catalonia, Barcelona). She is involved in several European and National funded 
research projects. Current research topics re ﬂ ect on the condition of the contemporary 
city, its morphogenesis, planning and design. In 2010, she was awarded the Technical 
University of Lisbon/Santander Science Prize. 

243
About the Authors
 Vitor Oliveira is a Post-Doctoral Researcher at CITTA Research Centre for 
Territory, Transports and Environment, Faculty of Engineering, University of Oporto. 
He graduated in Architecture, gaining an M.Sc. in Planning and Design of the Built 
Environment, and a Ph.D. in Civil Engineering from the University of Oporto. 
He has already worked as an architect and as a teaching assistant in the Faculty 
of Architecture. His recent research focuses on a triangle built around three main 
subjects, Planning, Evaluation and Urban Morphology. He has published work in 
some of the leading international journals in these  ﬁ elds. 
 Paulo Pinho is Professor of Spatial Planning at the Faculty of Engineering, 
University of Oporto (FEUP), founder and Director of CITTA – the Research Centre 
for Territory, Transports and Environment and Director of the Environmental 
Planning Division (FEUP). Graduated in Civil Engineering in Oporto, got a post-
graduate diploma in Urban and Regional Planning and a Ph.D. in Environmental 
Planning from Strathclyde University, Glasgow. His recent research focuses on 
planning evaluation, urban and metropolitan morphologies and dynamics, new 
forms of urban space production, urban resilience and urban metabolism, and on 
planning policies for a low carbon built environment. 
 Sílvia Ávila de Sousa , Graduate in Urban and Regional Planning (University of 
Aveiro, Portugal), specialized in European Spatial Planning (Royal Institute of 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden), M.Sc. in Environment, Planning and Urban 
Project (University of Oporto, Portugal), is currently a Researcher at the Research 
Centre for Territory, Transports and Environment – CITTA and a Civil Engineering-
Planning and Environment Ph.D. candidate at the University of Oporto, Portugal. 
The topic of her Ph.D. dissertation is planning for shrinkage in Portugal. She has 
professional experience as a team member, project manager, and co-author of sev-
eral urban development plans, detailed local plans, urban regeneration projects, 
sector studies, urban design projects and urban architecture projects in Portugal. 
Her scienti ﬁ c activity has included research and work in different  ﬁ elds, such as 
urban regeneration, historic centres management, low carbon urban environments, 
shrinking cities and, more recently, sustainable land use policies for resilient cities. 
She is a member of the Spatial Planners Portuguese Association (APPLA) and a 
Certi ﬁ ed Trainer. 
 Peter Schmitt is Senior Research Fellow at Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial 
Development, Stockholm, Sweden and currently Guest Lecturer at Stockholm 
University (Department of Human Geography) in the Master Programme Urban 
and Regional Planning. Peter Schmitt holds a Master in Human Geography (Diplom-
Geograph) from the University of Münster and a Ph.D. in Spatial Planning (Dr. rer. 
pol. in Raumplanung) from the Technical University of Dortmund. Since 2006 he 
has been working at Nordregio and is co-leader of Nordregio’s Theme Group on 
‘Territorial development – Policy and Planning’. Before that he has worked as a 
Research Fellow at the Faculty of Spatial Planning, Technical University of 
Dortmund, at the Department of Economic and Social Geography, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, and at the Institute for Urban and Regional Development of the 
Federal State of North Rhine-Westphalia (ILS) in Dortmund. His current research is 

244
About the Authors
focused on the institutional and discursive dimension of spatial planning and territorial 
policy as well as on strategic planning in European metropolitan areas from a 
comparative perspective. 
 Dominic Stead is an associate professor at Delft University of Technology. He holds 
a Masters degree (M.Sc.) in Environmental Science from Imperial College, London, 
a Masters degree (M.A.) in Town and Country Planning from the University of the 
West of England, Bristol and a doctorate (Ph.D.) from University College London. 
Dominic has published widely in various books and international journals including 
Built Environment, Cities, Environment and Planning B, Innovation – the European 
Journal of Social Science Research, International Social Science Journal, Local 
Environment, Planning Practice and Research, Planning Theory and Practice, Town 
Planning Review, Transport Policy, Transport Reviews and Transportation Planning 
and Technology. He is currently a member of the editorial board of two peer-
reviewed journals: ‘European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research’ and 
‘Planning Practice and Research’. 
 Tuna Taşan-Kok is Senior Researcher at Delft University of Technology, OTB 
Research Institute for the Built Environment. She is also Associate Professor in 
Human Geography and coordinator of the Human Geography Track at University of 
Utrecht, Roosevelt Academy. She holds a PhD in Urban Geography (Utrecht 
University, The Netherlands) and a M.Sc. in Regional Planning (Middle East 
Technical University, Turkey). Her main research interests are institutional and 
spatial transformations within the framework of globalization and neoliberalization; 
property-led urban development dynamics; urban governance; urban regeneration 
issues; and impact of single European market regulations in urban development. 
 Aslı Tepecik Diş is a Research Assistant at Nordregio, Nordic Centre for Spatial 
Development, Stockholm, Sweden. Her background is in the  ﬁ eld of sustainable 
development in a Nordic-Baltic European perspective. She holds two Master 
Degrees in Geological Engineering and European Spatial Planning and worked on 
an educational project in co-operation with the Finnish National Board of Education 
in Helsinki and Tampere in 2007. In the same year, she held an assistant’s position 
at the Baltic 21 Unit of the Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS). She has also 
worked as a guest researcher at the Leibniz Institute of Ecological and Regional 
Development (IÖR) in Dresden (GER). Since January 2009, she has been assisting 
projects at Nordregio focussing on the social dimensions of climate change, energy 
issues and gender studies in urban and regional planning. 
 Ali Türel is currently Professor in the Department of Urban and Regional Planning 
at the Middle East Technical University, Turkey. He taught as visiting professor at 
the Iowa State University in the USA in 1989 and served as the vice-chairperson of 
the Housing Development Administration of Turkey in 1994–1995. The areas of his 
research interest are housing economics and policy, urban transport, urban develop-
ment and planning issues. He teaches courses on housing, real estate, evaluation of 
projects and plans, and planning studios at graduate and undergraduate levels. 

Index
 A 
 Adaptability , 12, 13, 46, 47, 54, 55, 58–61, 
64, 89, 102, 137, 140, 145, 153, 196, 
197, 202, 203, 208, 231, 
235, 237 
 Adaptive capacity , 6, 19, 28, 47, 88, 149, 
151, 157, 158, 196, 203, 217, 
225, 233, 236, 237 
 Adger, W.N. , 42 
 Alberti, M. , 43, 65 
 Albrechts, L. , 60 
 Alexander, E.R. , 29, 30, 103, 132, 
135, 139 
 Alterman, R. , 134 
 Altes, W. , 136 
 Andersson, E. , 8 
 Angel, S. , 57 
 Armitage, D.R. , 6 
 Assessment , 12, 13, 103, 117, 126, 
131, 133, 135, 137–141, 
145, 147, 184, 236 
 Autonomy , 46, 55, 58, 117, 138, 231 
 B 
 Bae, C.-H. , 57 
 Baer, W. , 134 
 Banzhaf, E. , 61 
 Batten, D.F. , 59 
 Bauler, T. , 136 
 Bennett, E. , 137 
 Berke, P. , 136 
 Biesbroek, G.R. , 45 
 Birch, K. , 2 
 Bonnet, N. , 138 
 Booher , 22 
 Brand, F.S. , 5 
 Brody, S. , 134, 135 
 Brondizio, E.S. , 149 
 Brown ﬁ eld regeneration , 24 
 Burton, E. , 62 
 C 
 Calkins, H. , 134 
 Capello, R. , 59 
 Capital building , 140 
 Carpenter, S. , 137 
 Case studies , 3, 9, 10, 12, 13, 20, 23, 48, 78, 
84, 127, 128, 131, 137–139, 195, 230, 
232, 234, 237 
 Champion, A.G. , 59 
 Chapin, T. , 135 
 Christopherson, S. , 27 
 Climate change , 13, 19, 24, 28, 41, 44, 
45, 62, 65, 122, 138, 198, 208, 
212–218, 220–222, 224, 225, 
232, 236 
 Coaffee, J. , 42 
 Collaboration , 46, 55, 58, 61, 181, 186, 188, 
191, 218, 220, 221, 231 
 Collaborative planning , 26 
 Communicative action , 18, 26, 27 
 Habermasian , 18, 26 
 Communicative rationality , 26 
 Compactness , 11, 24, 55, 56, 63, 65, 80, 179, 
194, 200 
 Competitiveness , 20, 21, 59, 115, 119, 124, 
125, 128, 175, 229 
 Complexity , 7, 44, 48, 54, 59, 63, 66, 135, 
211, 232 
 Costa, J.P.T.A. , 12 
 Couch, C. , 57 
 Creativity , 32, 61, 63 
245
A. Eraydin and T. Taşan-Kok (eds.), Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning, 
GeoJournal Library 106, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5476-8, 
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

246
 Crises , 9, 230, 237 
 ecological , 230 
 economic , 8, 19, 208, 236 
 environmental , 18, 211 
 ﬁ nancial , 42 
 political , 42 
 social , 18 
 D 
 Dale, A. , 149 
 Davoudi, S. , 58 
 Day, J.C. , 27 
 De Roo, G. , 63 
 de Vries, J. , 45, 224 
 Democracy , 22, 23 
 democratic de ﬁ cit , 19, 22–23 
 Deyle, R. , 135 
 Dias, L.F. , 12 
 Diş, A.T. , 13 
 Disaster , 41, 42, 45, 47, 138, 218. 
See also Hazard 
 environmental , 42 
 Discourse analysis , 212 
 Diversity , 1, 42, 46, 54, 55, 59, 60, 63–65, 
106, 115, 145, 147, 149, 150, 157, 158, 
175, 191, 231, 235 
 Dovlen, S. , 136 
 E 
 Ecological systems , 5–7, 18, 42, 54, 61, 65, 
66, 136–138, 203 
 Ecology , 39, 42, 44, 65, 66, 136, 232 
 ecological system , 41, 44, 47 
 ecosystem , 7 
 ecosystem services , 7 
 Economic competitiveness , 59, 127 
 Economic regime , 3 
 Economy , 3, 32, 33, 76, 85, 87, 88, 106, 
123–125, 146, 154, 184, 217, 
221, 230 
 balanced , 64 
 declining , 60 
 economic growth , 2, 53, 61, 64, 77 
 economic regime , 3, 25, 71, 73 
 global , 19–21, 28 
 knowledge-based , 79 
 and society , 33 
 urban , 73 
 Ecosystem , 7, 8, 10, 23–25, 28, 31, 39, 46, 54, 
65, 82, 187, 190, 231 
 Ef ﬁ ciency , 30, 41, 45, 46, 55, 61–65, 102, 122, 
163, 222, 231, 232 
 Environment , 46, 56, 94, 132 
 built , 28, 45, 71 
 environmental concerns , 45 
 environmental con ﬂ icts , 63 
 environmental hazards , 58 ( see also 
Hazard) 
environmental impact assessments , 102, 
132, 133, 136 
 environmental management , 44 
 environmental management plans , 100 
 environmental movement , 82 
 environmental psychology , 42, 48 
 environmental rationality , 62 
 environmental resources , 57 
 environmental sustainability , 61 
 environmental systems , 54 
 physical , 77 ( see also Built environment) 
 Eraydin, A. , 86 
 Evaluation , 3, 9, 11–13, 30, 60, 131–136, 
136–141, 141, 145, 150, 152, 153, 
162, 167, 174, 176, 184, 195, 229–239 
 methodology , 137 
 Ewing, R. , 23, 57 
 F 
 Fainstein, S.S. , 25 
 Faludi, A. , 133–135, 139 
 Finco, A. , 138 
 Fleischhauer, M. , 45 
 Flexibility , 13, 41, 44, 46–48, 59, 60, 64, 105, 
138, 140, 196, 212, 226, 231 
 Flyvbjerg, B. , 27 
 Forester, J. , 18 
 Fudge, C. , 133 
 G 
 Gabi, S. , 59 
 Girard, L. , 136 
 Gleeson, B. , 44, 45 
 Globalisation , 11, 18–20, 23, 25–27, 44, 53, 
72, 73, 150, 184, 229 
 Godschalk, D.R. , 43, 46, 55 
 Gordon, P. , 62, 63 
 Governance , 2–4, 23, 27, 46, 59, 98, 106, 113, 
115, 136, 137, 140, 141, 146, 213 
 adaptive , 47, 48, 150, 215 
 entrepreneurial , 17, 22 
 mechanisms , 25 
 metropolitan , 21, 111 
 multi-level , 238 
 new modes of , 21 
 planning , 9 
Index

247
 problems of , 17 
 regime , 47, 127, 198, 202–204, 208 
 social mode of , 22 
 system , 13, 42, 197, 204, 208, 211, 231 
 urban , 4, 211 
 vulnerability in , 22–23 
 Green, N. , 59 
 Guevara, S. , 149 
 Gunderson, L. , 47 
 Gunton, T.I. , 27 
 Gupta, J. , 202 
 Guvenc, M. , 86 
 H 
 Hall, P. , 59 
 Harbo, L.G. , 13 
 Hartog J. , 87 
 Hazard , 39, 41, 42, 138, 213 
 environmental , 40 
 Healey, P. , 18, 27 
 Henriksson, A. , 13 
 Hill, M. , 134 
 Holling, C.S. , 5, 41, 136 
 Hudson, C.S. , 43, 44, 47 
 Hudson, R. , 32, 33 
 I 
 Infrastructure , 20, 21, 42, 56, 57, 64, 76, 77, 
79, 82, 100, 101, 112, 114, 120, 146, 
152, 198, 200, 207, 211, 212, 217, 219, 
234, 237 
 Innes, J.E. , 22 
 Innovativeness , 229 
 Insecurity , 7, 42, 44, 48, 163, 211 
 Institutional framework , 109 
 Instrumental rationality , 25, 26, 30, 31, 132 
 Instruments , 3, 9, 11, 21, 58, 105, 110, 115, 
117, 118, 120, 122, 125, 127, 128, 141, 
149, 172, 179, 180, 197, 232, 235 
 Intensi ﬁ cation , 13, 24, 56, 62, 63, 80–84, 89, 
157, 180, 181, 187, 200, 232, 234 
 and polycentricity , 199–202 
 Interdependence , 46, 54, 55, 81, 233 
 Istanbul , 9, 10, 12, 13, 56, 72, 75, 76, 78, 81, 
82, 85–86, 89, 109, 111–112, 119–121, 
127, 128, 131, 139, 179–181, 184, 
187–189, 192–195, 234 
 J 
 Jax, K. , 5 
 Johnson, D. , 6 
 K 
 Keynesian , 73 
 economic model , 25, 71 
 economics , 25 
 mode of regulation , 26 
 period , 25 
 policies , 180 
 welfare state , 4 
 Khakee, A. , 133 
 Knapp, W. , 59 
 Kötz, H. , 94 
 L 
 Laborde, J. , 149 
 Labour market , 72, 73, 83, 87, 187–188, 196, 
200, 206, 236 
 Lagendijk, A. , 5, 224 
 Lamson, C. , 42 
 Laurian, L. , 134 
 Lich ﬁ eld, N. , 132 
 Lifestyles , 19, 59, 78, 193 
 Lisbon , 9–12, 56, 76, 78, 79, 85, 89, 93, 
105, 109–111, 114–116, 127, 131, 
136, 139, 145–149, 152–154, 156, 
162, 234 
 Local economic activities , 234 
 M 
 Marcuse, P. , 32 
 Martin, R. , 12, 33 
 Maru, Y. , 202 
 Mastop, H. , 133 
 McAllister, D. , 132 
 McCay, B.J. , 42 
 McEvoy, D. , 45 
 McGuirk, P.M. , 2 
 Meijers, E. , 59, 60 
 Mela, A. , 59 
 Michie, J. , 27 
 Mitchel, J.K. , 41 
 Modernity , 25 
 Morgado, S. , 12 
 Municipal plans , 101, 113, 114, 127, 136, 
146, 198, 204, 205, 208 
 Mykhnenko , 2 
 N 
 Neoliberal economic restructuring , 11, 21, 
73–78 
 Neoliberal forms of urban development , 75 
 Neoliberalisation , 3, 4, 17, 22, 179, 229 
Index

248
 Neoliberalism , 1, 2, 22, 27, 73, 230 
 roiling , 2 
 roll-out , 2 
 The Netherlands , 10, 11, 72, 73, 77, 78, 83, 
87, 93, 95–97, 102, 113, 114, 211, 
213–215, 218, 224–226 
 Networking , 59, 84, 112, 188, 206, 229 
 Newman, P. , 94 
 Nijkamp, P. , 138 
 Nilsson, J.E. , 83, 102 
 O 
 Oliveira, V. , 12, 135, 138, 139 
 Oporto , 9, 11, 12, 53, 56, 72, 76, 78, 79, 81, 
85, 89, 109–111, 116–119, 127, 128, 
131, 136, 139, 161–164, 166–168, 
170–174, 176, 234, 235 
 Outhwaite, W. , 26 
 P 
 Pain, K. , 59 
 Participation , 22, 25–27, 61, 72, 87, 113, 135, 
138, 147, 149, 172, 198, 203, 229 
 Peck, J. , 2 
 Pelling, M. , 41, 42 
 Pendall, R. , 5 
 Peter, T. , 27 
 Pickett, S.T. , 54 
 Pimm, S.L. , 41 
 Pinho, P. , 12, 135, 139 
 Planning 
 advocacy , 26 
 collaborative , 27, 30 
 communicative , 2, 18, 26, 27, 29–31, 
135, 237 
 cultures , 5, 93, 101 
 discourse , 17, 25, 103, 200 
 forms of , 26 
 participatory , 26 
 practices , 1, 3–5, 9, 17, 29, 112, 135, 195, 
204, 211, 229, 230, 232, 237 
 theory , 1, 2, 9, 11, 19, 25–27, 33, 135 
 transactive , 26 
 Policy documents , 12, 83, 103, 109, 114, 
116, 124, 126, 128, 200, 212, 216, 
217, 224, 225 
 Polycentricism , 105 
 Polycentricity , 13, 58, 59, 80, 83, 116, 123, 
128, 198, 200, 202–208, 233, 235 
 Polycentrism , 11, 55, 59, 60, 62, 117 
 Portugal , 3, 10, 11, 53, 72–75, 78, 80, 84, 85, 
93, 95–98, 117, 161, 162 
 Poverty , 4, 85, 87, 163 
 Property market , 17, 22, 25, 73, 100, 165 
 Public-private partnerships , 22 
 Purcell, M. , 22, 26, 27 
 Putnam, R.D. , 46 
 R 
 Recovery , 12, 13, 46, 47, 140, 167–172, 175, 
176, 212, 217, 222, 223, 225, 231, 235 
 Redundancy , 46, 55, 58–60, 150, 231 
 Regional restructuring , 2 
 Resilience 
 attributes , 139 
 attributes of , 6, 9, 11–13, 30, 33, 46–47, 
53, 54, 58, 59, 61, 63, 149, 157, 167, 
176, 231, 232, 235 
 ecological , 6 
 economic , 231 
 infrastructure , 237 
 planning , 2, 9, 19, 28–31, 33, 237 
 social , 231 
 thinking , 2, 3, 6–9, 11, 12, 30, 31, 33, 40, 
106, 137, 179, 211, 212, 229–233, 239 
 urban , 145 
 Richardson, H. , 57, 62, 63 
 Rivolin, U. , 134 
 Robustness , 140 
 Romein, A. , 59, 60 
 Rotterdam , 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 56, 72, 78, 83, 
84, 87–89, 109, 113–114, 124–128, 
131, 212, 213, 215–226, 234 
 Rotterdam Climate Initiative , 221 
 S 
 Salt, D. , 42, 46 
 Santos Cruz , 12 
 Schmitt, P. , 12, 13 
 Self-organisation , 7, 13, 19, 28, 54, 66, 
72, 231 
 Shrinkage , 11, 12, 55, 60, 61, 76, 78, 79, 81, 
93, 117, 119, 147, 149, 154, 157 
 Simmie, J. , 33 
 Social capital building , 43, 172–174, 176 
 Social-ecological systems , 5, 6, 42, 66, 
137, 202 
 Social exclusion , 78, 122 
 Söderbaum, P. , 132, 133 
 Soja, E. , 88 
 Sonne, W. , 63 
 Spatial dynamics , 2, 3, 8, 10, 11, 40, 53, 55, 
56, 58, 62, 63, 109, 188, 201, 202, 204, 
235, 236 
Index

249
 Stame, N. , 134 
 Stead, D. , 11, 13 
 Stevens, M. , 138 
 Stockholm , 9, 10–13, 56, 72, 77, 78, 82, 
83, 86–87, 89, 101, 102, 109, 
112–113, 121–124, 127, 128, 131, 
197–208, 233 
 Strength , 23, 41, 43, 46, 55, 58, 147, 212, 
216, 231, 237 
 Sustainability , 18, 24, 44, 65, 66, 99, 105, 
136–138, 141, 150, 164, 174–176, 
189, 195, 222, 223, 229, 232 
 of cities , 42, 56, 231, 233 
 ecological , 82 
 social , 39 
 Sweden , 3, 10, 11, 72–76, 78, 80, 82–84, 
86, 93, 95–97, 101, 102, 112, 122, 
198, 199 
 System resilience , 40, 41, 43, 137, 231 
 T 
 Tanner, T. , 139 
 Tasan-Kok, T. , 12, 13 
 Territorial competitiveness , 21 
 Thornley, A. , 94 
 Timmerman, P. , 41 
 Tobin, G.A. , 42 
 Transformability , 13, 28, 46, 88, 140, 141, 
196, 197, 202, 203, 231, 235 
 Transport , 45, 57, 62, 64, 76 
 Turkey , 3, 10–12, 72–76, 78, 81–82, 84, 
95–97, 100, 111, 180, 181, 187, 189, 
192, 195 
 Tyler argue, P. , 27 
 U 
 Uncertainty , 7, 44–46, 48, 66, 135, 211, 213 
 Unemployment , 87, 119, 163, 174 
 Unforeseen disturbances , 19, 25–27, 230 
 Urban change , 11, 12, 44, 56–63, 109, 110, 
114, 121, 126, 179, 208 
 Urban form , 11, 24, 62, 63, 120, 180–181, 
190, 194, 236, 237 
 compact , 60 
 intensi ﬁ cation , 128, 158, 180–181, 194 
 polycentric , 60 
 polycentricism , 93 
 shrinkage , 60, 61, 75, 80, 93, 117, 128, 
146, 147, 154, 163 
 sprawl , 24, 55, 57, 60 
 Urban policy , 5, 48, 115, 212, 220, 239 
 Urban regeneration , 83–84, 88, 106, 119, 148, 
153, 164, 165 
 Urban sprawl , 64, 79, 200, 208, 236 
 Urban studies , 3, 230 
 Urban systems , 6–8, 18, 19, 25–28, 33, 40, 
42, 53, 54, 65, 66, 88, 186, 202, 
231–233, 238 
 capacity of , 2, 46–47, 231 
 contemporary , 6, 19 
 evaluating , 29 
 resilience of , 11, 40, 231, 235 
 resilient , 11 
 socio-economic dynamics of the , 31 
 vulnerabilities of , 8, 18, 20 
 V 
 Value systems , 2, 11, 33, 44, 238 
 socially constructed values , 30, 31 
 universal values , 30 
 van der Burg, A.J. , 103, 219 
 Vayda, A.P. , 42 
 Vink, B.L. , 103, 219 
 Vulnerability , 4, 7, 9, 11, 13, 18–20, 
22–24, 28, 42, 44, 47, 65, 71, 72, 
167, 212, 221 
 of cities , 71, 72, 88, 202, 234 
 to climate change , 224 
 reducing , 66, 138, 217 
 social , 88, 174 
 socio-spatial , 71, 72, 78–88 
 W 
 Walker, B.H. , 42, 46, 137, 203 
 Walker, B.S. , 5 
 Wardekker, J.A. , 43 
 Webster, C.J. , 22 
 Welfare state , 4, 73, 74 
 Wiechmann, T , 61 
 Wolsink, M. , 225 
 Z 
 Zimmerer, K.S. , 42 
 Zoning , 96, 98, 100, 127, 218 
 Zonneveld, W. , 103 
 Zorlu A. , 87 
 Zweigert, K. , 94 
Index

