Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
1
Respiratory System Physiology 
Mimi Jakoi, PhD 
Jennifer Carbrey, PhD 
 
The underlined headings correspond to the eight Respiratory System videos. 
 
1. Anatomy and Mechanics 
Introduction 
 
The respiratory system carries out several homeostatic functions, including:  
1. gas exchange between the atmosphere and the blood to provide an adequate supply of 
oxygen to tissues and to remove carbon dioxide (CO2) generated in oxidative metabolism.  
 
 
O2 + Food = CO2 + H2O + ATP  
 
2. regulation of body pH by either retaining or eliminating CO2 
3. conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II which acts to control blood pressure 
4. protection from inhaled particles.  
 
In the respiratory system, air flow occurs by bulk flow from regions of high pressure to lower 
pressure with the pressure differences generated by a muscular pump. Resistance to air flow is 
influenced primarily by the radius of the tube (1/r4) through which air is flowing.   
 
 
 
 
F = (P1 –P2)/R 
 
The movement of fresh air into the lung (inspired) or out of the lung (exhaled) is called ventilation. 
Both the rate and size of the breath (tidal volume) can change in response to needs of the body.   
 
Anatomy  
The respiratory system consists of structures 
involved in moving air into and out of the lungs 
(bulk flow) and in gas exchange (diffusion).  
 
LUNGS AND CHEST WALL act as a unit. Each 
lung is surrounded by a membranous sac 
(pleura) filled with a thin film of fluid (Fig. 1). This 
intrapleural fluid serves as a lubricant so the 
lungs can move freely within the chest wall and 
functionally connects the lungs to the chest wall 
such that expansion of the chest expands the 
lungs.  
 
CONDUCTING ZONE leads from the external 
environment to the gas exchange surfaces of the 
lungs (Fig. 1). This zone includes a series of 
tubes (nasal cavity, pharynx, trachea, bronchus, 
and bronchioles) with small radii and small 
surface areas. Their total volume is about 150 
ml. Since no gas exchange occurs in the 
conducting zone, it is often called the anatomical 
dead space.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Anatomy of the respiratory 
system. Image by OCAL, 
http://www.clker.com/clipart-12109.html, 
 
public domain 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
2
RESPIRATORY ZONE is the region of the lung where gas exchange occurs (Fig. 2). The 
respiratory zone is much larger than the conducting zone and has a volume of about 3 L. It 
consists of respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts and alveoli. The alveoli are small sac-like 
structures with very thin walls wrapped by capillaries (Fig. 2).  The 300 million alveoli provide a 
surface area of about 70 m2.  Here oxygen (O2) diffuses from the air space to the blood and 
carbon dioxide (CO2) diffuses from the blood to the air space. The distance that gas has to diffuse 
is very short, about 0.2 microns, making the alveolus-capillary unit ideally suited for gas exchange.  
 
 
TYPE I CELLS are thin epithelial cells that line 
about 90% of the surface area of the alveoli. 
Gases diffuse across the type I cells to and 
from the blood (Fig. 2).   
 
TYPE II CELLS are interspersed among the 
type I cells. Type II cells synthesize, secrete, 
and metabolize alveolar surfactant. Surfactant 
is a lipid-rich substance that lines the alveoli 
and helps keep lungs from collapsing.  
 
ALVEOLAR MACROPHAGES are the third 
type of cell found in alveoli. Macrophages 
engulf inspired particles such as bacteria. 
These cells are mobile and are attracted to 
areas of either infection or trauma.  
 
Pulmonary Function 
BREATHING is the process of inspiration (air flows into the lung) and exhalation (air flows out of 
the lung).  
 
Inspiration begins when the diaphragm and the 
intercostal muscles of the chest wall contract in 
response to neural impulses from the brain stem 
(Fig. 3). Contraction of the diaphragm causes it to 
descend and contraction of the intercostal muscles 
raises the ribs; the chest cavity expands. Because 
the lungs are functionally connected to the chest wall 
by the pleural sac, the lungs also expand (Fig. 3). 
This increase in lung volume reduces the air 
pressure in the alveolar ducts and alveoli. When the 
pressure in the alveoli (PA) becomes less than the 
pressure at the mouth, which is ordinarily 
atmospheric pressure (Patm), air flows in until PA = 
Patm (Fig. 3).  
 
Exhalation occurs when the muscles of inspiration 
relax. The lung returns passively to its pre-
inspiratory volume due to its elastic properties. This 
reduction in volume raises the pressure in the lung 
causing air to flow out. 
Figure 3. Expansion and contraction of 
the alveolar space alters the pressure of 
air within. Image by Mohamed Ibrahim, 
http://www.clker.com/clipart-49504.html, 
public domain  
Figure 2. Respiratory zone of the lung. Image 
by Mohamed Ibrahim , 
http://www.clker.com/clipart-49452.html, public 
domain  

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
3
VENTILATION CYCLE is one inspiration and exhalation. Ventilation rate (f) is in the range of 10-
18 breaths per min. Both the rate and depth can be changed by output from the respiratory centers 
in the brain stem (medulla oblongata).  During heavy exercise air flow can increase 20-fold and 
blood flow 3-fold. To expel such increased volumes, active exhalation is required in which 
abdominal muscles and external intercostals muscles contract. These actions actively decrease 
the size of the thorax (chest cavity).   
 
 
2. Lung volumes and compliance  
 
LUNG VOLUMES are determined by the interaction of the lung and chest wall. The lungs are 
elastic like a rubber band. They expand during inspiration and recoil passively during exhalation. 
Functional residual capacity (FRC) is the resting volume of the lung and chest wall. It occurs when 
the elastic recoil of the lung (pulling inward) balances the pressure of the chest wall to expand 
(pulling outward). When chest wall muscles are weak, FRC decreases.  
 
Lung volumes play a major role in gas exchange and in the work of breathing. They are measured 
under dynamic and static conditions. Dynamic volumes refer to measurements made when 
volumes are changing, i.e., during gas flow. Static volumes can be measured between two points 
where there is no flow, for example before and after inspiration.  
 
There are four standard lung volumes (Fig. 4). There are also four standard lung capacities, which 
consist of a combination of two or more volumes. A spirometer is used to measure lung volumes 
directly. All volumes except the residual volume (amount of air remaining in the lung at all times) 
can be measured with a spirometer.  
 
 
Figure 4. Lung volumes and capacities. image by Vihsadas (modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LungVolume.jpg, public domain  
 
Residual volume (RV): Amount of air in the lungs at the end of maximal exhalation (~ 1.5 L young 
men).  
 
Tidal volume (TV): Volume of air inhaled or exhaled with each breath (in adult males ~ 0.5L; in 
females usually about 20- 25% less).  
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
4
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV): Volume of air that can be inspired after a normal inspiration (~ 
3.0 L in males).  
 
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV): Maximal volume of air that can be expired (exhaled) from 
resting expiratory level (~1.0 L in males).  
 
Inspiratory capacity (IC=TV+IRV): Maximal volume of air that can be inspired from resting 
expiratory level (~3.5 L in males). 
 
Functional residual capacity: (FRC=RV+ERV): Volume of air in lungs at end of a normal 
exhalation. (~2.5 L in males) (see Fig. 4). 
 
Vital capacity (VC=ERV+TV+IRV): Volume of air that can be exhaled after maximal inspiration (~ 
4.5 L) 
 
Total lung capacity (TLC=RV+ERV+TV+IRV): Volume in lungs at end of maximal inspiration (~6 
L).  
 
Changes in lung volumes are some of the earliest indicators of lung disease. One of the most 
informative is the ratio of RV and TLC. Normally RV/TLC ratio is less than 0.25, that is the air 
trapped in the lung is ~25% of the total lung volume.  In obstructive lung diseases the amount of 
trapped air (RV) increases, hence RV/TLC increases. In restrictive lung disease in which the lung 
can not fill normally, RV/TLC also increases but in this case, total lung volume (TLC) is reduced 
disproportionate to residual volume.    
 
Elastic Recoil and Compliance 
LUNG COMPLIANCE is defined as the 
stretchability of the lung for any 1-cm change in 
pressure across the lung.  
 
 
 
CL =       VL/ (PA – Pip) 
 
The greater the compliance, the easier it is to 
expand the lungs at any given change in trans-
pulmonary pressure. Compliance is the 
inverse of elastic recoil or stiffness.  
 
The most common way to obtain a compliance 
curve is to have an individual inspire to total 
lung capacity and then exhale slowly in small 
increments. When airflow is temporarily stopped, 
volume and transpulmonary pressure are 
recorded. A pressure-volume curve is 
constructed (Fig. 5). The slope of the pressure 
- volume curve at any given point is lung 
compliance at that point.  
 
Note that the pressure-volume curve is not linear 
(Fig. 5). At high lung volumes, the lungs are 
almost maximally stretched and a large change 
in pressure produces only a small change in 
Figure 5. Pressure-volume relationship 
during inflation of isolated lungs. In the 
restrictive lung disease, fibrosis, the lung 
shows decreased compliance and reduced 
volume (vital capacity). The emphysema lung 
shows increased compliance and increased 
volume (vital capacity). Image by Rick 
Melges, Duke University. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
5
volume. Therefore, compliance is usually measured in the mid-range of the pressure - volume 
curve during tidal volume breathing. A normal value for lung compliance at this point is 0.2 liter/cm 
H2O.  
  
Lung compliance is determined in part by the elastic tissue of the lung. A lung with high 
compliance is easy to stretch. The disease emphysema destroys this elastic tissue and thus 
increases lung compliance. A lung with low compliance is stiff and hard to stretch and so is hard to 
fill with air. This is seen in the disease fibrosis (Fig. 5).   
 
Compliance of the lung is determined also by the surface tension generated at the air-water 
interfaces within the alveoli. The alveoli are air filled sacs lined with water. The attractive force 
between the water molecules (known as surface tension) resists stretching.  The surface tension 
of pure water is so great that were the alveoli lined by water alone, lung expansion would require 
exhausting muscular effort and the lungs would tend to collapse. The detergent-like substance, 
surfactant, markedly reduces this surface tension and thereby increases lung compliance.  
 
Lung surfactant is synthesized by the alveolar type II cell and secreted into the alveolar space by 
stretching the type II cells during breathing. The major component in surfactant is a phospholipid 
which is inserted perpendicularly into the gas-liquid interface so that its non-polar, hydrophobic 
fatty acids are pointed toward the gas and its polar end is in the liquid. The phospholipids form a 
monolayer that generates a film pressure opposing the surface tension. When this film is 
compressed (as the volume of the lungs is reduced) the film pressure rises and surface tension 
falls even further. This property stabilizes the lungs.  
 
The lungs of many premature babies are unable to produce adequate amounts of functional 
surfactant. Approximately 50% of babies born before the 31st week of gestation will suffer from 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome. Because of the lack of surfactant, the surface tension in their 
lungs is high, which increases the tendency of the lungs to collapse. Do these lungs have high or 
low compliance?   
 
Surfactant stabilizes the alveoli. The surface tension of the alveoli tends to pull inward creating 
a pressure. The relationship between surface tension and pressure is shown in Figure 6 and is 
defined by the law of Laplace.  
 
According to Laplace, transmural 
pressure is equal to twice the 
surface tension divided by the 
radius: 
 
Transmural Pressure = 2T/r  
 
If surface tension were equal in 
alveoli of different sizes, the 
pressure in the smaller alveolus 
would be greater than the 
pressure in the large alveolus 
and the smaller alveolus would 
collapse into the larger one. 
Alveolar collapse does not normally happen because the surface tension in a lung with surfactant 
is not constant. Instead surfactant reduces surface tension in a nonlinear fashion; i.e., as area 
is reduced, surface tension is reduced even further. By lowering surface tension proportionately 
Figure 6.  Stabilizing effect of surfactant on lung alveoli.  

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
6
more in smaller alveoli, surfactant makes it possible for alveoli of different radii to coexist and to be 
stable at low lung volumes.  
 
During normal tidal breathing, the surface area of the lung remains fairly constant and with time 
the surfactant becomes “inactivated” through poorly understood mechanisms. A deep sigh or a 
yawn will increase the surface area of the lungs and new surfactant will spread at the air-liquid 
interface.  
 
3. Pressure changes and resistance 
Pressure Changes Affect Lung Volumes 
In a normal lung, air flows in and out when a pressure gradient is created. Gas always flows from a 
higher to a lower pressure. During inspiration, expansion of the thorax causes the intrapleural and 
alveolar pressures to decrease, gas flows into the lung. During exhalation passive recoil of the 
lung causes the intrapleural pressure and alveolar pressure to increase; gas flows out of the lung. 
Note that during inspiration and exhalation the pleural pressure is always less than the 
pressure in the alveoli.  
 
The transpulmonary pressure (Fig. 7) also increases and decreases with lung volume. By 
convention, the transpulmonary pressure is always positive (Ptp = PA – Pip).   
 
At the end of an unforced exhalation when no air is flowing, then the following conditions exist:  
alveolar pressure = 0 mmHg 
intrapleural pressure (i.e., pressure in pleural cavity) = -5 mmHg  
transpulmonary pressure (PA- Pip) = +5mmHg.  
 
When there is no airflow in or out of the lungs, the transpulmonary pressure and intrapleural 
pressure are equal in magnitude but opposite in sign (Fig. 7).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. In ventilation, air flow is determined by the difference between atmospheric and alveolar 
pressures. Lung size is determined by the balance between the transpulmonary pressure and 
elastic recoil.  

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
7
At rest, the volume of the lung is a balance between the expansion of the chest wall and the 
inward elastic recoil of the lungs. The lung at rest is in a partially expanded state (stretched).    
A pneumothorax, can occur with trauma or surgery. In this instance, the chest wall is pierced 
without damaging the lung. Atmospheric air enters the intrapleural space raising its pressure to 0 
mmHg. This input of air causes the lung to collapse since its elastic recoil is no longer opposed. 
Concurrently the chest wall moves outward.   
 
Airway Resistance Determined by Driving Pressure & Flow  
Thus far we have discussed the changes in pressure that are required to overcome the elastic 
recoil tendencies of the respiratory system. An additional force that must be overcome during 
normal breathing is the resistance to airflow. Measurement of airway resistance is an extremely 
useful diagnostic tool because changes in airway resistance accompany aging and many lung 
diseases.   
 
Air flow (F) will depend upon the driving pressure (P) and the resistance (R) according to the 
equation:  
 
 
 
 
F = (Patm –PA)/R 
 
Factors that influence airway resistance include airway diameter, lung volume, and elastic recoil of 
the lung.   
 
1. AIRWAY DIAMETER: It is probably intuitive that the more narrow the airway, the higher the 
resistance in that individual airway. What may not be intuitive is that most of the resistance to air 
flow is found in the mouth, trachea and large bronchi. The reason for this is that as the airways 
divide and become narrower, they also become more numerous. The small airways divide more 
rapidly than their diameter decreases, therefore, the resistance of each individual airway is 
relatively high, but their total-cross sectional area is so great that their combined resistance is low.  
 
2. LUNG VOLUME: The diameter of the airway lumen is affected by lung volume. The airways are 
not rigid and are capable of being distended and compressed. At high lung volumes, the airways 
such as bronchi and bronchioles, are "pulled" open and their resistance is lower than at low lung 
volumes. Patients with increased airway resistance frequently have high lung volumes in an 
attempt to compensate.  
 
3. ELASTIC RECOIL: Airway diameter will be affected by the transmural pressure across them 
(Fig. 8). Although the airways are embedded in the lung, the pressure that they are exposed to on 
their outside wall is close to intrapleural pressure. If elastic recoil is reduced, then intrapleural 
pressure will be less negative than normal. The transmural pressure across the airways will be 
reduced, the airway diameter will be smaller than normal, and resistance will be higher than 
normal. Patients with emphysema often have destruction of lung tissue, decreased elastic recoil 
(increased compliance), and increased airway resistance. 
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
8
 At the equal pressure 
point, pressure inside the 
airway equals that in the 
pleural space. In normal 
lungs this occurs in the 
large airways which are 
surrounded by cartilage. 
However, in diseases 
associated with airway 
obstruction, resistance to 
flow is increased and the 
pressure gradient for flow is 
reduced. Consequently the 
equal pressure point 
moves into airways that do 
not contain cartilage 
causing these airways to 
close completely 
(premature airway collapse) 
(Fig. 8). This premature 
airway closure can be heard 
as crackles. 
 
4. MUSCLE TONE Constriction of bronchial smooth muscle will decrease the diameter of the 
airways and increase airway resistance.  Parasympathetic stimulation causes contraction of 
bronchial smooth muscle; sympathetic stimulation causes relaxation. Asthmatics often have 
hyper-reactive airways and smooth muscle contraction. Drugs which stimulate -adrenergic 
receptors (βAR) in the bronchioles cause relaxation and are often used to treat asthmatics.  
 
4. Pulmonary function tests and alveolar ventilation 
 
FORCED EXPIRATORY VITAL CAPACITY TEST provides 
an indirect assessment of airway resistance. In this 
pulmonary function test, the subject inhales to total lung 
capacity and then exhales into a spirometer as forcefully, 
rapidly, and as completely as possible. The volume expired 
under these conditions is called the forced vital capacity 
(FVC) (Fig. 9).   
 
The forced expiratory vital capacity test also measures the 
volume exhaled in 1 second, called the 1-second forced 
expiratory volume (FEV1). This value is often expressed 
as a % of FVC (i.e., FEV1/FVC %). Normally FEV1 is at 
least 80% of FVC (curve Y). Patients with restrictive lung 
disease will have a normal value of 80% (curve Z). In 
patients such as asthmatics, who have obstructed airways, 
this value will be reduced (<80%) (curve X).  
 
 
VOLUME
(LITERS)
TIME (SECONDS)
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Y
X
Z
Figure 9. Forced expiratory vital 
capacity curves generated by 
individuals X, Y and Z.   
Figure 8. Increased resistance in the airways (bronchi) can lead 
to airway compression. The movement of air through the 
narrowed opening can cause wheezing.   

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
9
Exchange of Gases in Alveoli & Tissues  
Respiration involves two processes:  
 
(1) Delivery of O2 to and removal of CO2 from the cells of the body.  
 
(2) Use of O2 in oxidative metabolism to generate ATP, water, and CO2.  
 
In a steady state, the amount of O2 that is consumed by the cells per unit time is equal to the 
amount of O2 added to the blood in the lungs during the same time period. Likewise the rate at 
which CO2 is generated by the cells is equal to the rate at which CO2 leaves the blood in the lungs 
and is exhaled.   
 
Gases move by diffusion from regions of high concentration to regions of low concentration. 
Therefore to provide adequate gradients for diffusion, the pulmonary system must increase the 
amount of oxygen in the alveoli above that found in the mixed venous (MV) blood of the lung. 
Additionally it must lower the carbon dioxide in the alveoli below that of mixed venous blood.  
 
A second set of gradients must exist at the tissue-blood interface. Here the amount of O2 
consumed by cells and CO2 produced are not necessarily identical and depend on the fuel source 
consumed. The ratio of CO2 produced to O2 consumed is called the respiratory quotient (RQ). 
For a mixed diet, 8 molecules of CO2 are produced for every 10 molecules of O2 consumed (i.e., 
RQ = 0.8). For a diet composed of carbohydrates, the RQ is 1.0. For a diet of fat, the RQ is 0.7.   
       
 
Minute & Alveolar Ventilation  
Minute ventilation (VE) is the total volume of gas entering (or leaving) the lung per minute. It is 
equal to the tidal volume (TV) multiplied by the respiratory rate (f).  
 
 
Minute ventilation = VE = TV x f 
 
At rest, a normal person moves ~450 ml/breath x 10 breath/min = 4500 ml/min.  
 
However, because of the anatomical dead space (VD), not all of this entering air is available for 
exchange with the blood (Fig. 10). Recall that the conducting airway (anatomical dead space) has 
a volume of ~150 ml. As illustrated in figure 10, 
when 450 ml of fresh air is inspired, the first gas 
to reach the respiratory zone comes from this 
anatomical dead space (150 ml). Then 300 ml of 
fresh gas reaches the respiratory zone and the 
last 150 ml of inspired gas remains in the dead 
space. Thus, the total amount of fresh air 
reaching the alveoli during each inspiration 
equals the tidal volume minus the volume of the 
anatomical dead space: 
 
 TV – VD = 450 - 150 ml = 300 ml.  
 
Alveolar ventilation (VA) is the total volume of 
fresh air entering the alveoli per minute. It is 
calculated as: 
 
Alveolar ventilation = VA = (TV – VD) x f 
 
 
Figure 10. Effect of anatomical dead space 
on alveolar ventilation. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
10
When evaluating the efficiency of ventilation, one should focus on the alveolar ventilation not 
minute ventilation.  
 
For example, in the table below, Subjects A and B have the same minute ventilation (VE = 6 L) but 
very different alveolar ventilations (VA).  Subject A has no alveolar ventilation and would be 
become unconscious in a few minutes but Subject B is breathing normally.  
 
Subject 
TV 
 
  f 
VE 
 
 
VD  
   
VA 
 
 
A 
 
150ml  
40 
6000ml 
 
150ml  
0 
B 
 
500ml  
12 
6000ml 
 
150ml  
4200ml 
 
One other important point shown in the table above is that the depth of breathing (TV) is far more 
effective in elevating the alveolar ventilation than an increase in ventilation rate (f). This is 
because for each tidal breath a fixed volume is dead space. As tidal volume decreases, the 
fraction going to dead space increases. The respiratory system will respond to O2 need (as in 
exercise) by reflexively increasing ventilation by increasing the depth of breathing.     
 
The anatomical dead space is not the only type of dead space in the lung. Some fresh air is not 
used for gas exchange even though it reaches the alveoli because some alveoli may have little or 
no blood supply (i.e., blood perfusion). This volume of air is called alveolar dead space. In normal 
individuals this is quite small but may be large in several kinds of lung disease. As we will discuss 
later, a mismatch in ventilation and blood perfusion is minimized by local mechanisms that 
match air and blood flow. The sum of the anatomical dead space and alveolar dead space is 
the physiologic dead space.  
 
Partial Pressure of Gases   
The amount of various gases can be measured by comparing the pressure they exert. Gas 
molecules behave like individual particles that are in a constant state of motion. When the particles 
collide with one another or the sides of the container they exert a pressure. The pressure exerted 
depends on the number of collisions. Two factors affect the number of collisions: the temperature 
of the gas and the number of gas molecules. Dalton's law states that in a mixture of gases, the 
pressure exerted by each gas is the same as it would be if that gas alone occupied the entire 
container. These individual pressures are called partial pressures and are denoted as P in front 
of the symbol for the gas.  
 
To calculate the partial pressure of gas "X": 
 
 
 PX = Patm x FX  
 
Where, Patm is the atmospheric pressure (at sea level = 760 mm Hg), and FX is the fractional 
concentration of gas X.  
 
Atmospheric air contains mostly nitrogen (79%) and oxygen (21% O2) with trace amounts of CO2 
and other gases. Air also contains water vapor. At sea level, water vapor is 47 mm Hg. For 
simplicity, respiratory physiologists and physicians generally assume that room air is always dry. 
Since 21% of dry room air is oxygen, the fraction of O2 in inspired air (FiO2) is: 
 
 
 
FiO2 x Patm = 0.21 X 760 mm Hg = 160 mm Hg.  
 
The concentration of carbon dioxide in room air is so low (0.04%), it is considered to be 0. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
11
When inspired, the room air is warmed to 37oC and becomes humidified as it passes through the 
nasal passages. The water vaporizes into the air until the PH2O= 47 mm Hg. What this means is 
that only 760 - 47 mm Hg or 713mm Hg is available for other gases besides water. Therefore, 
 
 
PO2 of inspired gas = 0.21 X (760mm Hg - 47 mm Hg) = 150 mmHg.  
 
5. Oxygen transport 
Partial Pressures of Alveolar Gases 
In the alveoli, the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide vary during the respiratory cycle. 
As gas exchange occurs, the alveolar partial pressure of carbon dioxide will rise and the alveolar 
partial pressure of oxygen will fall. Because these fluctuations are small (a few mm Hg) as 
compared with the 3000 ml present at the end of tidal exhalation, they are generally ignored and 
only mean values PO2 and PCO2 are considered.  
 
The relationship between PO2 and PCO2 in the alveoli is described by the alveolar gas equation:  
 
 
 
 PAO2 = (Patm- PH2O) x FiO2 – PACO2/RQ 
 
Because diffusion is so rapid and complete in the lung, the PACO2 and PAO2 in the alveoli 
normally determine these gas pressures in arterial blood (PaCO2 and PaO2). But there is a slight 
difference between alveolar and arterial gas pressures even in normal subjects such that PAO2 
and PaO2 differ by 5-15 mm Hg. This difference is due to anatomical shunting of blood (reduced 
perfusion) and to the mismatch between ventilation and perfusion that exists even in normal lungs. 
Both of these conditions will be discussed later in detail.  
 
Normal values for arterial PaO2 and PaCO2 are: 
 
 
PaO2 = 100 mm Hg  
 
PaCO2= 40 mm Hg.  
 
The PaO2 and PaCO2 can be measured directly from arterial blood draws. PAO2 is calculated by 
the alveolar gas equation. For a patient breathing room air at sea level, this equation simplifies to: 
 
 
 
PAO2 = 150 - PaCO2/0.8 
 
Notice that alveolar PO2 is determined by three factors:  
 
1. PO2 of atmospheric air  
 
2. Alveolar ventilation rate  
 
3. Rate of tissue O2 consumption (RQ).  
 
Each of these factors can change independent of another. For example, a decrease in either PO2 
of the atmospheric air (changes with altitude) or in alveolar ventilation (hypoventilation) will 
decrease the amount of fresh air entering the alveoli per unit time. Likewise, an increase in the 
rate of total body O2 consumption will decrease PO2 in the alveoli.  
 
Because there is essentially no PCO2 in inspired air, only the rate of ventilation and the rate of 
tissue metabolism affect the PCO2 levels in the alveoli. In this instance, hypoventilation (Fig. 11) 
and/or increased cellular metabolism will increase PCO2 in the alveoli.  
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
12
Hypoventilation exists when there is an increase in 
the ratio of CO2 production to alveolar ventilation. 
That is the alveolar ventilation cannot keep up with 
CO2 production resulting in a rise in alvelolar PACO2 > 
40 mm Hg (Fig. 11). Hypoventilation can be caused by 
drugs such as barbiturates that depress the part of the 
central nervous system that drives breathing, or by 
damage to the chest wall, lungs, or respiratory muscles 
and when the movement of the chest wall is limited 
(e.g., caused by arthritis or deformation of the thoracic 
cavity). 
 
 Hyperventilation exists when there is a decrease in 
the ratio of CO2 production to alveolar ventilation. 
That is the alveolar ventilation is too great for the CO2 
produced resulting in PACO2 < 40mmHg (Fig. 11). 
Hyperventilation will occur in response to hypoxia, high 
altitude, or some drugs such as cocaine which can 
cause anxiety attacks.  
 
***Notice that hyperventilation is not the increased 
ventilation that accompanies mild to moderate aerobic exercise. In aerobic exercise the increase 
in production of CO2 is matched to increased alveolar ventilation (depth and rate of breathing).  
 
Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide 
To enhance delivery and transport of O2 
and CO2 to and from tissues, 
specialized mechanisms (O2-
hemoglobin and bicarbonate transport of 
CO2) have evolved.  
 
OXYGEN TRANSPORT 
Oxygen is not very soluble in water and 
therefore requires the carrier, 
hemoglobin (Hb), for transport in blood. 
Blood normally contains about 15 g of 
Hb per 100 ml. This effectively raises 
the solubility of O2 from 3ml/L of plasma 
(blood minus the red blood cells) to 200 
ml/L plasma. Since oxygen consumption 
ranges from 250 to 1500 L/min, this 
extra O2 carrying capacity of Hb enables 
the heart and lungs to provide for the O2 
needs of the body.  
 
Hemoglobin binds up to 4 molecules of 
O2 tightly, cooperatively, and reversibly. 
Normally Hb is almost completely 
saturated (96%) when exposed to room 
air (FiO2 = 21%). This occurs because of 
Figure 12. Hemoglobin dissociation curve. image by 
Diberri (modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hb_saturation
_curve.png, Creative Commons Attribution-Share 
Alike 3.0 Unported license.  
Figure 11. Effect of ventilation rate on 
PAO2 and PACO2. As ventilation 
increases, PACO2 will decrease 
toward 0. As ventilation decreases, 
PACO2 will increase. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
13
the transit time (0.75 seconds) for the red blood cell through the alveolus-capillary unit and the 
rapid equilibration (0.3 seconds) for both carbon dioxide and oxygen within this region of the lung.  
 
This rapid equilibration reflects the driving pressure for diffusion and the solubility of the gas. The 
driving pressure for diffusion of CO2 in the alveolus-capillary unit is lower (PMVCO2-PaCO2 = 46 
mm Hg - 40mm Hg = 6 mm Hg) than that for O2 (PaO2 - PMVO2 = 100 - 40 = 60 mm Hg), but the 
solubility of CO2 in plasma is much greater. The net result is that the rates of diffusion for CO2 and 
O2 are approximately equal in the alveolus-capillary unit. This means that in normal lungs there is 
ALWAYS adequate time to saturate Hb with O2 regardless of ventilatory rate.  
 
Oxygen concentration in the blood is dependent on the Hb concentration in the red blood cells, 
the number of red blood cells (hematocrit), and on the adequacy of perfusion of the lungs rather 
than on diffusion rate itself.  
 
Not all of the O2 bound to Hb is released in the tissues. At rest only about 25% of the O2 in blood is 
released (Fig. 12). This provides a large driving force for diffusion and a large reservoir of O2 to be 
called upon when needed as in exercise.  
 
The Hb-O2 dissociation curve (Fig. 12) is S-shaped because the interaction of oxygen with 
hemoglobin is cooperative. That is, when one oxygen molecule binds, it increases the affinity of 
the hemoglobin for the next oxygen molecule. Each hemoglobin molecule can bind four oxygen 
molecules.  
 
The plateau of the Hb-O2 dissociation curve is called 
the “association part” of the curve, because oxygen 
is loaded in the lungs at relatively high partial 
pressures. Increasing the partial pressure above 100 
or down to about 80 mm Hg, does not result in a 
large change in the % saturation. This tends to 
stabilize arterial O2 content, making it relatively 
insensitive to moderate changes in breathing or 
altitude. 
 
The “dissociation part” of the curve is the steep part 
of the curve (Fig. 12). In this region a small change in 
PO2 results in a large change in % saturation which 
allows for large quantities of oxygen to be dumped in 
the tissues.  
 
The P50 is the partial pressure of oxygen required to 
saturate 50% of the hemoglobin. A normal P50 is 
about 26-27 mm Hg. This value is a useful measure 
of the affinity of hemoglobin for O2.  
 
Oxygen-Hb binding and association is affected by a 
number of parameters including temperature, the red 
blood cell metabolite 2,3 diphosphoglycerate (DPG), 
and pH.  Elevated temperature, low pH and increased 
2,3 DPG shift the curve to the right (decrease 
affinity) which enhances unloading of O2 from Hb 
(Fig. 13).  Note that these are conditions found within 
Figure 13. Shifted hemoglobin 
dissociation curve. image by Diberri 
(modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:
Hb_saturation_curve.png, Creative 
Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 
Unported license. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
14
the interstitial tissue surrounding actively contracting muscle. Hypoxic conditions also result in 
increased formation of 2,3-DPG by the red blood cells.   
 
Conversely, a decrease in temperature, high pH and a decrease in 2,3, DPG shifts the O2-Hb 
dissociation curve to the left (increase affinity) which promotes loading of O2 onto Hb (Fig. 13).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. CO2 transport and V/Q mismatch 
 
CARBON DIOXIDE TRANSPORT 
Carbon dioxide is a product of oxidative metabolism. Unlike O2, CO2 is very soluble in water and 
does not need a carrier for transport in the blood. Most (60%) of the carbon dioxide in blood is 
transported as bicarbonate (HCO3
-). The conversion of CO2 to bicarbonate is catalyzed by the 
enzyme carbonic anhydrase located inside red blood cells.  
 
 
 
CO2 + H2O = H2CO3 = HCO3
- + H+ 
 
Once formed, the HCO3
- is transported out of the RBC into the plasma in exchange for Cl-. 
 
About 10% of the total CO2 in blood is transported as dissolved CO2. The amount dissolved is 
proportional to the PCO2, and to the solubility coefficient for CO2. At PaCO2 = 40 mm Hg, there 
would be approximately 26.8 ml CO2/L of plasma.  
 
The remaining 30% of the CO2 combines with Hb to form carbamino-hemoglobin compounds. 
 
Because CO2 diffuses 20X more rapidly than O2, a rise in blood CO2 can be compensated by an 
increase in ventilatory rate. Hyperventilation increases the amount of CO2 removed from the 
body and increases the unloading of CO2 from the blood in the lung.     
 
Ventilation & Perfusion 
Ventilation is the process of bringing air in and out of the lungs. Perfusion is the process of 
bringing blood in and out of the lung capillary bed to allow for gas exchange. The right ventricle 
delivers blood to the lungs at relatively low pressures (mean pressure of 15 mmHg). However, 
lung perfusion pressure can increase for multiple reasons including obstruction of vessels (i.e., 
embolism) or increased resistance to flow (i.e., fibrosis). The lung will compensate for lowered 
blood flow (1) by recruiting other capillary beds within the lung and (2) by distention of small 
vessels. If these responses are inadequate, then pressure within the pulmonary artery will rise 
causing a rise in right ventricular pressure. This is called pulmonary hypertension.  
 
Under normal conditions, regulatory mechanisms within the lung match ventilation (V) to 
perfusion (Q) to optimize the oxygenation of the blood. V/Q mismatch can occur when 
ventilated alveoli are not perfused giving a V/Q ratio of infinity and conversely, when unventilated 
alveoli are perfused, giving a V/Q ratio of zero. This latter condition is equivalent to shunting 
venous blood from the right to the left side of the heart bypassing the lungs. Usually lung disease 
is progressive. It leads to a gradual worsening of either ventilation or perfusion and therefore the 
V/Q mismatch is intermediate between zero and infinity. Many believe that V/Q mismatching is 
the most common cause of low PaO2. 
 
In a normal individual at the level of the lung, alveolar ventilation is about 4.0 L/min and 
pulmonary blood flow is about 5.0 L/min. This gives a V/Q = 0.8 overall.   

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
15
Note that V/Q mismatch occurs within the 
normal lung because blood flow is never 
perfectly uniform in this organ. In a normal 
person while standing, gravitational pull 
causes the apex of the lung to be more 
expanded than within the base thereby 
compressing the capillaries and reducing 
perfusion; V/Q ratios are greater than 1 in 
the apex (Fig. 14). In contrast, perfusion is 
greater than ventilation at the base of the 
lung in an upright individual; V/Q ratios are 
less than 1 (Fig. 14).  
 
One mechanism that compensates for V/Q 
mismatch is the vasoconstriction of the 
lung vasculature in response to hypoxia 
(low O2). [Note that this is in contrast to the 
smooth muscle of the systemic vasculature 
which dilates in response to low O2 conditions.] Vasoconstriction of the lung vasculature to 
hypoxia enables the blood to be shunted away from poorly ventilated areas. This occurs without 
an increase in pulmonary artery perfusion pressure because of the large capacity of the pulmonary 
capillaries.  
 
 
A second compensation that compensates for V/Q mismatch occurs when PACO2 falls (e.g. when 
V/Q ratio increases). In this instance, the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+) in and around the 
smooth muscle of the airways (bronchioles) decreases. This reduction in H+ results in airway 
constriction and a shift of ventilation away from the areas which are over ventilated (i.e., not 
perfused).  
 
7. Regulation of breathing 
Control of Respiration 
Breathing is essentially automatic and can only be altered temporarily by voluntary efforts. You 
cannot consciously stop breathing for long. You breathe when you are asleep, awake, or even 
anesthetized. Breathing is finely tuned to meet metabolic demands, such that during exercise 
ventilation increases to maintain arterial PO2, PCO2 and pH within a narrow range. To achieve this 
tight regulation, peripheral receptors send information to a CNS respiratory center whose output 
adjusts initiation, duration, depth, and rate of breathing.   
 
The intercostal muscles and diaphragm are skeletal muscles that will not contract unless 
stimulated. Thus breathing depends on cyclical excitation of the motor neurons that innervate 
these muscles. Destruction of these nerves by the polio virus for example results in paralysis and 
death if the individual is not ventilated.   
 
The underlying respiratory rhythm is established by respiratory centers in the medulla of the 
brain stem. The general term for this integration center is the respiratory rhythm generator. 
Inspiratory neurons located in the respiratory center initiate respiratory rhythm by sending signals 
to the motor neurons that innervate the effector skeletal muscles (intercostals and diaphragm). 
This rhythm is modified by input from peripheral sensors (chemoreceptors and 
mechanoreceptors) located in blood vessel walls and by central receptors (chemoreceptors) in 
the brain.    
Figure 14. V/Q mismatch in a normal lung. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
16
Inspiration is limited by several inputs including stretch of the lungs and innate rhythm generators 
within the brain stem (medulla). The medullary inspiratory neurons are quite sensitive to drugs 
such as barbiturates and morphine. Death from an overdose of these drugs is often due to 
cessation of breathing.  
 
Inspiratory receptors in the lung include: 
 
 
1. Pulmonary stretch receptors located in the smooth muscle of the large and small 
airways of the lung are mechanoreceptors that fire with the inflation of the lung.  These receptors 
stop inspiration as part of the Hering-Breuer reflex. In the adult this reflex is evoked only under 
conditions of large tidal volumes as in rigorous exercise.  
 
 
2. J Receptors located in the walls of the pulmonary capillaries which are stimulated by 
pulmonary vascular congestion, edema, air emboli (air in the blood), and low lung volumes. 
Stimulation of these receptors can result in rapid breathing (hyperpnea), and or labored 
breathing (dyspnea). 
 
3. Pulmonary irritant receptors located in airway epithelium and the nasal mucosa. 
Mechanical or chemical irritation elicits a cough reflex and bronchoconstriction.  
 
Transport of Hydrogen Ions 
Metabolism generates protons (H+) which are extruded to the interstitial fluid surrounding cells and 
eventually enter the blood by diffusion. As blood flows through the tissues, a fraction of the oxy-
hemoglobin (O2-Hb) loses its oxygen to become deoxy-Hb. Deoxy-Hb has a much higher affinity 
for H+ and thus binds most of the newly generated H+. 
 
 
HbO2 + H+ = HbH + O2 
 
This effectively removes the H+ from the blood and thereby buffers the blood. As a consequence 
venous blood is slightly more acidic (pH of 7.36) than arterial blood (pH 7.4).   
 
As venous blood passes through the lungs, HbH is converted to HbO2 and H+ is released. The H+ 
reacts with the bicarbonate (HCO3-) in the blood to give carbonic acid (H2CO3) which dissociates 
to H2O + CO2. The CO2 diffuses into the alveoli to be expired. Normally all of the H+ will be 
removed by this process and none will appear in the arterial blood. 
 
 
H+ + HCO3- = H2CO3 = H2O + CO2  
 
However, if an individual is either hypoventilating or has a lung disease that prevents normal 
elimination of CO2, then the PaCO2 will rise and the arterial H+ concentration will rise (by mass 
action). Increased arterial H+ concentration due to CO2 retention is called respiratory acidosis.     
 
Conversely, if a person is hyperventilating, then PaCO2 and H+ concentration will decrease, 
producing respiratory alkalosis.  
 
Ventilation is Regulated by Chemoreceptors  
Respiratory rate and tidal volume can increase or decrease over a wide range. At rest, 
chemoreceptors located in the periphery and centrally within the CNS provide feedback to regulate 
these two factors.   
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
17
Peripheral chemoreceptors are the carotid receptors and aortic bodies. They are stimulated 
by: 
a. decrease in PaO2 (hypoxia) 
b. increase in PaCO2 (respiratory acidosis) 
c. decrease in pH within the arterial blood (metabolic acidosis). 
 
Of the two, the carotid receptor is the predominate input in controlling respiration. 
 
Central chemoreceptors are widely distributed throughout the brain stem. They respond to an 
increase in blood PCO2. These receptors actually sense H+ concentration in the interstitial 
fluid of the brain. They are not affected by changes in arterial pH because the blood brain-barrier 
is not permeable to H+ or HCO3-. Instead, CO2 equilibrates across this barrier, causing a change 
in the interstitial fluid pH. Because the interstitial fluid and the adjoining cerebrospinal fluid contain 
little protein, they are not well buffered. Hence small changes in PCO2 produce large changes 
in pH in this area.  
 
Ventilatory Response to Oxygen  
The ventilatory response to hypoxia is shown in the graph 
below (Fig.15). PaO2 must decrease to about 50-60 mm 
Hg before respiration is increased. It has been suggested 
that the carotid chemoreceptors (which respond to 
changes in PaO2), are designed to protect the organism 
against hypoxia rather than to regulate respiration. Note 
that the stimulation to hypoxia is arterial PO2 not arterial 
O2 content. That means that individuals with anemia do 
not have increased ventilation because their PaO2 is 
normal.  
 
Ventilatory Response to Carbon Dioxide 
A very small increase in PaCO2 (2-4 mm Hg) provides a 
powerful stimulus to increase respiration (doubles alveolar ventilation) 
(Fig. 16). What is the physiologic role of this response? Recall that 
changes in PaCO2 have profound effects on pH. Thus this tight 
regulation of PaCO2 allows for tight control of acid-base balance. For 
example, in emphysema patients retention of CO2 occurs because of 
the decrease in the elastic recoil. This raises their PaCO2 leading to 
increased minute ventilation (i.e, “blowing down” the CO2 in the blood).  
Of the two sets of receptors involved in this reflex response to elevated 
PaCO2, the central chemoreceptors are more important accounting for 
~70% of the increased ventilation.  
 
Hypoxia (low PO2) potentiates the effects of CO2. The response curve 
is shifted to the left and has a steeper slope. Thus a lower PaO2 will 
result in a stronger ventilatory response for the same arterial PCO2.  
 
Very high levels of carbon dioxide (greater than 70-80 mm Hg) can 
depress respiration, cause headaches, restlessness, faintness, and 
even unconsciousness or coma.  
 
 
Figure 16. Effects of 
arterial PCO2 on 
minute ventilation. 
Figure 15. Effect of low arterial O2 
pressures on ventilation  

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
18
Changes in pH without changes in PaCO2 
Excess retention or elimination of CO2 causes respiratory acidosis or alkalosis, respectively. 
However, many normal and pathological conditions can change arterial H+ levels in which the 
primary cause is not a change in PCO2. These conditions are called metabolic acidosis 
(increased H+ concentration) and metabolic alkalosis (decreased H+ concentration). Which 
chemoreceptors play a major role in these instances, central or peripheral? Why? 
 
For example, in strenuous exercise, lactic acid is released by the working muscle. The addition of 
lactic acid to the blood lowers the pH and causes hyperventilation almost entirely by stimulating 
the peripheral chemoreceptors.  Recall that H+ do not cross the blood brain barrier, but CO2 does 
and is converted in the interstitial fluid to H+ and HCO3-.   
 
Predict what happens when arterial H+ concentration is decreased by vomiting (loss of acid from 
the stomach). Is ventilation increased or decreased? Answer: The peripheral chemoreceptors will 
reflexively decrease ventilation to conserve CO2 in the blood.  
Thus the respiratory system compensates for metabolic acidosis by increasing ventilation 
(hyperventilation) and for metabolic alkalosis by decreasing ventilation (hypoventilation). Notice 
that maintenance of PCO2 levels is not as important as maintenance of H+ concentration in the 
blood. This is because most enzymes of the body function best at physiological pH (pH = 7.4).  
 
8. Exercise and hypoxia 
 
Exercise Affects Ventilation  
With moderate physical activity, both oxygen 
consumption and carbon dioxide production 
increase. Minute ventilation can increase up to 
25-fold. It would seem logical to guess that the 
increase in CO2 production increases PaCO2 
which would, in turn, stimulate ventilation. 
However, measurements of PaCO2 during 
moderate exercise show that it does not change 
appreciably (Fig. 17). In fact, neither does PaO2 
nor pH (Fig. 17). However, at near maximal 
exercise, arterial H+ concentration does rise and 
PaCO2 falls. Why does the H+ concentration 
increase while PaCO2 decreases?  
 
The mediators that cause increased ventilation in 
response to moderate exercise are likely to 
include increased body temperature, increased 
epinephrine level, reflex input from the 
mechanoreceptors of the joints and muscles, and 
conditioned behavior (feed forward).  
The deep breathing after exercise removes the 
oxygen debt restoring oxygen storing molecule 
(myoglobin) and energy storing (creatine 
phosphate) in the muscles, as well as removing 
lactic acid and H+.   
 
Figure 17. Effect of exercise on ventilation, 
arterial gas pressures and arterial H+ 
concentration. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
19
Hypoxia (Low PO2) & Ventilatory Control  
Hypoxia is defined as a deficiency of oxygen at the tissue level. There are many causes of hypoxia 
but they can be grouped into four classes. 
 
1. hypoxia- hypoxia in which arterial PO2 is reduced. 
 
2. anemic hypoxia in which arterial PO2 is normal but the content of O2 is reduced 
 
because of inadequate numbers of red blood cells or incompetent Hb or competition of 
 
carbon monoxide for Hb. 
 
3. ischemic hypoxia in which blood flow to the tissues is too low. 
 
4. histotoxic hypoxia in which the O2 content in the tissue is normal but the cell is unable 
 
to utilize it because a toxic agent (such as cyanide) interferes with oxidative metabolism.  
 
Individuals who reside at high altitudes (where O2 tension is reduced) or who have sleep apnea 
syndrome (that is, they stop breathing for prolonged periods during sleep) may have diminished 
hypoxia drive to breathe. This is due to the “resetting” of their chemoreceptors set point.   
 
The effects of O2 deprivation vary from individual to individual but most people who ascend rapidly 
to altitudes above 10,000 ft experience some degree of altitude sicknesss. The symptoms of 
altitude sickness are headache, nausea, vomiting, fatigue and possible mental confusion. In 
severe cases, life threatening pulmonary edema can occur due to pulmonary hypertension.  Over 
a course of a several days these symptoms will disappear due to acclimatization which includes 
increased hematocrit (more red blood cells), increased 2,3, DPG and a shift in the O2 dissociation 
curve to the right to facilitate unloading in the tissues.  
 
During sleep, breathing frequency and inspiratory flow rate are reduced and minute ventilation 
decreases. This is accompanied by a relaxation of the skeletal muscle tone throughout the body 
including those muscles associated with the larynx, pharynx and tongue. Relaxation of muscle 
tone in these areas can cause partial obstruction of the upper airways and snoring. However, in 
some individuals the airways are completely occluded which can lead to sleep apnea. In sleep 
apnea, respiration stops for long periods (30-60 sec) and PaCO2 rises; the respiratory center is 
stimulated. The individual reacts by gasping and often awakens.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

